
Osho
The	First	Principle
Talks	on	Zen
Talks	given	from	11/04/77	am	to	20/04/77	am
English	Discourse	series
10	Chapters
Year	published:	1979
1
Catching	the	First	Principle
2
2
Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
18
3
The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
37
4
Go	with	the	River
54
5
Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
73
6
The	Irrational	Rationalist
92
7
The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
109
8
The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
125
9
You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
144
10	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
162
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
1
Catching	the	First	Principle
11	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
ONCE	A	TYRO	ASKED	A	ZEN	MASTER,	"MASTER,	WHAT	IS	THE	FIRST
PRINCIPLE?"
WITHOUT	HESITATION	THE	MASTER	REPLIED,	 "IF	 I	WERE	TO	TELL
YOU,	IT
WOULD	BECOME	THE	SECOND	PRINCIPLE."
Yes.	The	first	principle	cannot	be	said.	The	most	important	thing	cannot	be	said,
and	 that	which	can	be	said	will	not	be	 the	 first	principle.	The	moment	 truth	 is
uttered	 it	becomes	a	 lie;	 the	very	utterance	 is	a	 falsification.	So	 the	Vedas,	 the
Bible,	and	 the	Koran,	 they	contain	 the	second	principle,	not	 the	 first	principle.
They	 contain	 lies,	 not	 the	 truth,	 because	 the	 truth	 cannot	 be	 contained	 by	 any
word	whatsoever.	The	truth	can	only	be	experienced	--	the	truth	can	be	lived	--
but	there	is	no	way	to	say	it.
The	word	is	a	far,	faraway	echo	of	the	real	experience;	and	it	is	so	far	away	from
the	 real	 that	 it	 is	 even	 worse	 than	 the	 unreal	 because	 it	 can	 give	 you	 a	 false
confidence.	 It	can	give	you	a	 false	promise.	You	can	believe	 it,	and	 that	 is	 the
problem.	If	you	start	believing	in	some	dogma,	you	will	go	on	missing	the	truth.
Truth	 has	 to	 be	 known	by	 experience.	No	belief	 can	help	 you	on	 the	way;	 all
beliefs	are	barriers.	All	religions	are	against	religion	--	it	has	to	be	so	by	the	very
nature	 of	 things.	 All	 churches	 are	 against	 God.	 Churches	 exist	 because	 they
fulfill	 a	 certain	need.	The	need	 is:	man	does	not	want	 to	make	any	efforts;	 he
wants	easy	shortcuts.
Belief	is	an	easy	shortcut.
The	way	to	truth	is	hard;	it	is	an	uphill	task.	One	has	to	go	through	total	death	--
one	has	to	destroy	oneself	utterly-only	then	is	the	new	born.	The	resurrection	is
only	after	the	crucifixion.
To	avoid	the	crucifixion	we	have	created	beliefs.	Beliefs	are	very	cheap.	You	can
believe	and	you	remain	the	same.	You	can	go	on	believing,	and	it	doesn't	require
any	 basic	 change	 in	 your	 life	 pattern.	 It	 does	 not	 require	 any	 change	 in	 your
consciousness,	 and	unless	 your	 consciousness	 changes,	 the	 belief	 is	 just	 a	 toy.
You	 can	 play	with	 it,	 you	 can	 deceive	 yourself	 with	 it,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to
nourish	you.
Visualize	 that	 a	 child	 is	 playing	 in	 the	 garden	 of	 his	 house,	 playing	 with
imaginary	 lions,	and	 then	suddenly	he	has	 to	 face	a	 real	 lion	who	has	escaped
from	the	zoo.	Now	he	does	not	know	what	to	do.	He	is	simply	scared	out	of	his
wits.	 He	 is	 paralyzed;	 he	 cannot	 even	 run.	 He	 was	 perfectly	 at	 ease	 with	 the
imaginary,	but	with	the	real	he	does	not	know	what	to	do.
That	is	the	situation	of	all	those	people	who	go	on	playing	with	beliefs,	concepts,
philosophies,	theologies.	They	ask	questions	just	to	ask	questions.	The	answer	is
the	 last	 thing	 they	 are	 interested	 in.	 They	 don't	 want	 the	 answer.	 They	 go	 on
playing	with	 questions,	 and	 each	 answer	 helps	 them	 to	 create	more	 questions.
Each	answer	is	nothing	but	a	jumping	board	for	more	questions.
The	truth	is	not	a	question.	It	is	a	quest!	It	is	not	intellectual;	it	is	existential.	The
inquiry	is	a	gamble,	a	gamble	with	your	life.	It	needs	tremendous	courage.	Belief
needs	no	courage.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
2
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
Belief	 is	 the	 way	 of	 the	 coward.	 If	 you	 are	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a
Mohammedan	you	are	a	coward.	You	are	avoiding	the	real	lion,	you	are	escaping
from	the	real	lion.	If	you	want	to	face	the	real,	then	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	any
church,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 to	 any	 priest,	 because	 the	 real	 surrounds	 you
within	and	without.	You	can	face	it	--	it	is	already	there.
I	have	heard:
A	Zen	Master,	Shou-shan,	was	asked	by	a	disciple,	"According	to	the	scriptures,
all	beings	possess	the	Buddha-nature;	why	is	it	that	they	do	not	know	it?"
Shou-shan	replied,	"They	know!"
This	 is	 a	 rare	 answer,	 very	 rare,	 a	 great	 answer.	Shou-shan	 said,	 "They	know!
But	they	are	avoiding	it."	It	is	not	a	question	of	how	to	know	the	truth.	The	truth
is	here,	you	are	part	of	it.
The	truth	is	now,	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	And	it	has	been	there	since	the
beginning,	if	there	was	any	beginning,	and	it	will	be	there	until	the	end,	if	there
is	going	to	be	any	end.
And	you	have	been	avoiding	it.	You	find	ways	to	avoid	it.	When	somebody	asks,
"What	is	 the	way	to	truth?"	in	fact	he	is	asking,	"What	is	 the	way	to	avoid	the
truth?"	He	is	asking,	"How	can	I	escape?"
You	may	not	have	heard:
Says	that	old	rascal	Bodhidharma:	"All	know	the	way,	few	walk	it,	and	the	ones
who	don't	walk	cry	regularly,	'Show	me	the	way!	Where	is	the	way?	Give	me	a
map!	Which	way	is	it?'	"
Those	who	don't	walk,	they	go	on	regularly	crying	and	shouting,	"Where	is	the
way?"	And	all	know	the	way	because	life	is	the	way,	experience	is	the	way.	To
be	alive	is	the	way,	to	be	conscious	is	the	way.	You	are	alive,	you	are	conscious.
This	is	the	first	principle.
But	it	cannot	be	said,	and	I	am	not	saying	it!
And	you	are	not	hearing	it.
The	 truth,	 by	 its	 very	nature,	 is	 a	 dumb	experience.	All	 experiences	 are	dumb
because	they	happen	only	in	deep	silence.	If	you	love	a	woman	the	love	happens
in	deep	silence.	 If	you	create	poetry	 it	descends	 in	you	 in	deep	silence.	 If	you
paint	 a	 picture	 you	 disappear.	 The	 painter	 is	NOT,	when	 the	 painting	 is	 born,
there	is	not	even	a	witness	to	it.	It	happens	in	utter	silence	and	utter	aloneness.	If
you	are	there	then	the	painting	cannot	be	of	any	value.	If	the	poet	is	there	then
the	poetry	will	be	nothing	but	a	technical	thing.	It	will	have	all	the	rules	fulfilled,
it	will	 follow	 the	grammar,	 the	 rules	of	melody,	but	 there	will	be	no	poetry.	 It
will	be	a	dead	corpse.	It	will	not	be	a	real	woman;	it	will	be	a	nun.
I	have	heard:
At	an	isolated	part	of	the	beach	of	Cannes	a	beautiful	French	girl	threw	herself
into	the	sea.	A	young	man	off	at	a	distance	noticed	it	and	dashed	into	the	water
to	save	her,	but	it	was	too	late.	He	dragged	the	seminude	body	ashore	and	left	it
on	the	sand	while	he	went	in	search	of	some	official.	When	he	returned	he	was
horrified	to	see	a	man	making	love	to	the	corpse.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
3
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
"Monsieur!"	he	exclaimed,	"that	woman	is	dead!"
"Sacre	bleu!"	muttered	the	man,	jumping	up.	"I	thought	she	was	a	nun."
To	be	a	monk	or	to	be	a	nun	is	to	be	dead.	And	there	are	millions	of	ways	of	how
to	die	and	not	live.
Truth	surrounds	you.	It	is	in	the	air,	it	is	in	the	fragrance	of	the	flowers,	it	is	in
the	flow	of	the	river,	it	is	in	the	green	leaves,	it	is	in	the	stars,	it	is	in	the	dust,	it
is	in	you.	Only	truth	is!
But	you	go	on	avoiding	 it	 and	you	go	on	asking	questions	 --	How	 to	attain	 to
truth?	Where	is	the	map?	Which	way	is	it?	And	even	if	the	map	is	given	to	you,
the	map	does	not	help	you	in	any	way.	In	the	first	place	the	map	cannot	be	given,
because	 the	 truth	 goes	 on	 changing.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 stagnant	 phenomenon;	 it	 is
continuously	changing.	It	is	alive,	it	is	breathing.	It	is	never	the	same;	it	is	never
the	same	for	two	consecutive	moments.
Says	 old	 Heraclitus,	 "You	 cannot	 step	 in	 the	 same	 river	 twice."	 In	 fact,	 you
cannot	even	step	once;	the	river	is	flowing,	the	river	is	flowing	so	fast.	And	not
only	 is	 the	 river	 flowing,	 you	 are	 flowing.	You	 cannot	 step	 in	 the	 same	 river
twice:	the	river	changes.	You	cannot	step	in	the	same	river	twice:	because	YOU
change.
Truth	is	dynamic.	Truth	is	not	something	dead.	That's	why	it	cannot	be	contained
in	words.
The	moment	 you	 utter	 it,	 it	 has	 passed,	 it	 has	 gone	 beyond,	 it	 is	 no	more	 the
same.	The	moment	you	say	it	is	so,	it	is	no	more	so.	Words	lag	behind.
To	be	with	truth	there	is	only	one	possibility:	drop	words.	Language	lags	behind.
Language	is	lame.	Only	silence	can	go	with	truth,	hand	in	hand.	Only	silence	can
move	with	 truth.	Only	silence	can	be	so	fast,	because	silence	has	no	weight	 to
carry.	Words	 are	 loaded;	 they	 carry	weight.	 So	when	 you	 are	 carrying	words,
great	 theologies	 in	 your	 head,	 great	 abstractions,	 then	 you	 cannot	 walk	 with
truth.	To	walk	with	truth	one	has	to	be	weightless.	Silence	is	weightless;	 it	has
nothing	 to	carry.	Silence	has	wings.	So	only	 in	silence	 is	 the	 truth	known,	and
only	in	silence	is	the	truth	transferred,	transmitted.
The	tyro	asked	the	Master:
"MASTER,	WHAT	IS	THE	FIRST	PRINCIPLE?"
He	 must	 have	 been	 a	 tyro,	 a	 beginner;	 otherwise	 the	 question	 is	 foolish,	 the
question	 is	 stupid.	 Either	 a	 stupid	 person	 can	 ask	 it	 or	 a	 philosopher.	 The
question	is	meaningless	because
"first"	 means	 the	 most	 fundamental.	 The	 mind	 cannot	 contain	 it,	 because	 it
contains	the	mind!
The	 "first"	 means	 the	 basic;	 it	 was	 before	 the	 mind,	 so	 how	 can	 the	 mind
comprehend	it?
Mind	 came	 out	 of	 it,	 mind	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 it.	 The	 child	 cannot	 know	 the
father;	 the	 father	 can	 know	 child.	 The	 reality	 can	 know	 you,	 but	 you	 cannot
know	the	reality.	The	part	cannot	know	the	whole;	the	whole	can	know	the	part.
And	 the	 part	 cannot	 contain	 the	 whole.	 Now	 the	 mind	 is	 a	 very	 tiny	 part.	 It
cannot	contain	the	vastness	of	reality.	Yes,	the	person	who	asked	must	have	been
a	beginner.
"What	is	the	first	principle,	Master?"
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
4
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
And	the	Master	said:
"IF	 I	 WERE	 TO	 TELL	 YOU,	 IT	 WOULD	 BECOME	 THE	 SECOND
PRINCIPLE.	"
Then	it	will	be	an	echo,	it	will	be	a	reflection,	it	will	be	a	mirror	image.
Do	you	know	who	you	are?	You	don't	know,	but	you	know	a	mirror	image.	You
know	your	name,	you	know	your	address,	you	know	 the	name	of	your	 family,
the	country,	the	religion,	the	political	party	you	belong	to.	You	know	your	face
reflected	in	the	mirror.	You	don't	know	your	real	face.	You	have	not	encountered
your	 original	 face	 yet.	 The	 Zen	 Masters	 continuously	 persist,	 they	 go	 on
hammering	on	the	heads	of	 their	disciples,	"Look	into	your	original	face	--	 the
face	that	you	had	before	even	your	father	was	born,	the	face	that	you	will	have
when	you	are	dead,	 the	 face	 that	 is	yours,	originally	yours."	All	 that	we	know
about	our	face	is	not	really	about	our	face.	It	is	the	mask	of	the	body,	the	mask	of
the	mind.	We	don't	know	who	lives	in	the	body.	We	know	truth	as	secondhand,
borrowed.
Whenever	something	is	borrowed	it	becomes	ugly.	Only	the	firsthand	experience
is	 beautiful,	 because	 it	 liberates.	 The	 secondhand	 thing	 is	 ugly	 because	 it
becomes	 a	 bondage.	 If	 you	 become	 religious	 you	 will	 be	 liberated.	 If	 you
become	 a	Christian	 or	 a	Hindu	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 you	will	 be	 in	 a	 bondage.
Mohammed	was	liberated	because	for	him	Islam	was	a	firsthand	experience.	So
was	Jesus	liberated	because	for	him	his	experience	was	HIS
experience	 --	 authentically	 his.	 Buddha	 was	 liberated;	 he	 came	 upon	 the
experience.	It	was	not	handed	to	him	by	somebody	else	--	it	was	not	borrowed,	it
was	not	 thought	out,	 it	was	not	 a	 logical	 syllogism,	 it	was	not	 an	 inference.	 It
was	an	experience!
Beware	of	inference.	You	have	been	taught	inference	to	avoid	experience.	There
are	people	who	say,	"God	exists	because	if	God	is	not	there,	who	will	create	the
world?	God	must	exist	because	the	world	exists."
Just	 the	other	day	 I	was	 reading	a	 story	about	a	 rabbi.	Must	have	been	utterly
unenlightened.	Rabbis	are	like	that	--	priests.	A	man	came	to	the	rabbi.	The	man
was	 an	 atheist,	 and	 he	 said,	 "I	 don't	 believe	 in	God,	 and	 you	 talk	 about	God.
What	is	the	proof?"	And	the	rabbi	said,	"You	come	after	seven	days,	and	come
wearing	 a	 new	 suit."	 The	man	 said,	 "But	what	 does	 that	 have	 to	 do	with	my
question?"	The	rabbi	said,	"It	has	something	to	do	with	it.
You	just	go	to	the	tailor,	prepare	a	new	suit,	and	come	after	seven	days."
The	man	came,	 reluctantly,	because	he	could	not	 see	any	 relationship	between
his	 question	 and	 the	 answer	 that	 had	 been	 given.	 But	 he	 still	 came;	 he	 was
wearing	a	new	suit.	The	rabbi	said,	"Who	has	made	this	suit?"	And	the	man	said,
"Have	you	gone	mad?	What	 type	of	 a	question	are	you	asking?	Of	course	 the
tailor."	The	rabbi	said,	"The	suit	is	here;	it	proves	that	the	tailor	exists.	Without
the	 tailor	 the	 suit	 would	 not	 be	 here.	 And	 so	 is	 the	 case	with	 the	world.	 The
world	is	here:	there	must	be	a	tailor	to	it,	a	creator."
This	is	inference.
Change	the	scene.	In	a	small	Indian	village	a	mystic	is	sitting	with	his	disciples.
Silently	 they	 are	 sitting;	 there	 is	 tremendous	 silence.	 It	 is	 a	 SATSANG	 --	 the
disciples	are	drinking	the	presence	of	the	Master.	And	there	comes	an	atheist,	a
scholar,	a	well-known	logician,	and	he	says,	"I	have	come	to	ask	one	question.
What	 is	 the	 proof	 of	 God?"	 The	 mystic	 opens	 his	 eyes,	 Osho	 -	 The	 First
Principle
5
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
and	he	says,	"If	you	want	the	proof	of	God,	look	into	the	eyes	of	the	devotees.
There	is	no	other	proof."
God	exists	in	the	eyes	of	the	devotees.	God	exists	in	the	vision	of	the	lovers.	It	is
an	 experience	 of	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	 your	 being,	 the	 heart.	 There	 is	 no	 other
proof.	God	 is	not	 a	 concept.	God	 is	 a	 reality,	 an	experience,	 a	deep	 subjective
experience,	the	deepest	there	is.	All	else	is	peripheral.	God	is	the	experience	of
your	innermost	center.	When	you	are	centered	you	know.
But	you	have	been	 taught	 to	believe	 in	 the	God	of	 the	philosophers.	That	 is	 a
way	 to	 avoid	 the	 real	 God!	 The	 real	 God	 is	 very	wild!	 The	 real	 God	 is	 very
crazy!	The	real	God	is	very	unknown	and	unknowable.	And	the	real	God	cannot
be	controlled.	The	real	God	can	possess	you;	you	cannot	possess	the	real.	That	is
the	fear:	the	mind	is	always	afraid	of	anything	that	can	possess	it.	The	mind	goes
on	 playing	 games	 with	 words,	 ideas,	 philosophies.	 It	 can	 remain	 the	 master
there.	With	the	false,	the	mind	is	the	master;	with	the	real,	the	mind	becomes	a
slave,	and	the	mind	does	not	want	to	become	a	slave.	So	the	mind	is	completely
contented	with	the	secondhand.
Your	 God	 is	 secondhand.	 Your	 love	 too	 is	 secondhand.	 Your	 poetry	 is
secondhand.	 Your	 dance	 is	 secondhand.	 Your	 singing	 is	 secondhand.	 And	 of
course	 all	 these	 secondhand	 things	make	YOU	 secondhand;	 then	 you	 lose	 all
originality.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	logic.	Religion	has	something	to	do	with	the	first
principle.	Logic	deals	with	 the	secondhand.	Logic	deals	with	 the	 junkyard,	 the
used	 --	used	by	many	people.	Logic	deals	with	 inference.	And	 remember,	 it	 is
good	as	far	as	the	human	world	of	intellectual	garbage	is	concerned;	the	moment
you	go	beyond	that	boundary	logic	fails	utterly,	it	falls	flat	on	the	ground.
I	have	heard	a	very	beautiful	anecdote:
The	safari	had	struck	camp	in	dangerous	territory	and	to	protect	themselves	from
wild	animals	they	built	a	high	fence	around	the	camp.	To	be	really	sure,	they	dug
a	deep	ditch	around	the	fence.	One	evening	a	member	of	the	group,	who	was	a
professor	of	philosophy	and	a	world-known	logician,	carelessly	went	out	for	an
evening	 stroll	without	 his	 gun	 and	 got	 attacked	 by	 a	 lion.	He	 ran	 back	 to	 the
camp	with	 the	 lion	 after	 him	 and	 fell	 down	 into	 the	 ditch.	 His	 friends	 inside
heard	 a	 terrible	yelling	 and	 screaming	 from	outside,	 and	when	 they	 ran	out	 to
look	they	saw	the	poor	man	--	the	poor	philosopher	--	running	round	and	round
in	 the	ditch	 closely	 followed	by	 the	 lion.	 "Watch	out,	 he	 is	 right	 behind	you,"
they	yelled	down	to	him.
"That's	all	right,"	the	philosopher	yelled	back.	"I	am	one	round	ahead	of	him."
Logic	is	meaningless	as	far	as	life	is	concerned.	Life	is	not	logical	at	all;	life	is
illogical.
Logic	is	man-made,	manufactured	by	the	human	mind.	Life	is	absurd.
So	if	you	go	through	inference	you	will	reach	the	secondhand.	If	you	go	through
experience	you	will	reach	the	firsthand.
And	 religion	 is	 radical.	 Churches	 are	 not	 radical.	 The	 word	 "radical"	 means
"belonging	to	the	roots".	Religious	is	radical,	religion	is	rebellion.	And	churches
are	not	rebellious;	they	are	orthodox.	Hence,	I	will	repeat	again,	all	churches	are
against	religion.	All	so-called	religious	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
6
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
people	are	against	religion.	They	deal	in	a	false	entity;	they	deal	in	pseudo	coins,
counterfeit	coins.	That's	why	so	many	people	look	religious	and	there	is	not	even
a	trace	of	religion	on	the	earth.	So	many	people	talk	about	God,	but	it	remains	an
empty	talk.
Have	you	ever	 felt	God?	You	have	heard	 the	word	again	and	again	and	again.
You	are	bored	with	the	word.	It	has	almost	become	a	dirty	word.	From	the	very
childhood	people	have	been	conditioning	you	for	the	word.	Have	you	ever	had
any	glimpse	of	God?
This	is	something	very	strange.	How	can	we	miss	him?	If	he	is	the	totality,	if	he
is	all	over	the	place,	how	can	we	miss	him?	How	did	it	ever	become	possible	for
us	to	miss	him?	We	must	have	been	doing	great	work	to	miss	him.	We	must	be
doing	much	work	 to	miss	 him.	We	must	 be	 really	 avoiding	 him.	We	must	 be
creating	many	barriers	and	hindrances	and	obstacles	so	that	he	cannot	reach	us.
And	then	these	empty	words:	God,	love,	peace,	prayer.	All	beautiful	words	have
become	 empty.	 All	 ugly	 things	 are	 very	 real.	 War	 is	 very	 real;	 love	 is	 very
unreal.	Madness	is	very	real;	meditation	is	very	unreal.	Beauty	is	not	there	at	all;
ugliness,	everywhere.	You	can	come	across	 the	ugly	any	moment.	And	God	 is
beauty,	God	is	truth,	God	is	love.
So	what	 has	 happened?	We	 have	 been	 trained	 for	 empty	words,	 and	we	 have
become	contented	with	these	empty	words.
Drop	this	contentment!	If	you	really	want	to	know	what	is,	become	discontented
with	all	 that	you	have	been	taught,	become	discontented	with	all	 that	you	have
been	educated	for!
Become	 discontented	 with	 your	 education,	 with	 your	 society,	 with	 the	 power
structures	around	you,	the	churches,	the	priests.	Become	discontented!	Become
discontented	 with	 your	 own	 mind.	 Only	 in	 that	 discontent	 comes	 a	 moment
when	you	become	capable	of	dropping	all	this	mind	and	all	this	nonsense	with	it
...	and	suddenly	God	is	there,	the	first	principle	is	there.
A	naive	young	man	who	had	lived	a	sheltered	life	finally	decided	he	could	not
take	any	more.	He	arranged	an	appointment	with	his	doctor	and	poured	out	the
whole	story.
"It	is	this	girl	I	have	been	going	with,"	he	said.	"I	suspected	she	was	fast,	but	I
never	dreamed	she	was	a	sex	maniac.	Every	night	now	for	weeks	and	weeks	on
end,	 I	 keep	 trying	 to	 break	 off	 the	 romance,	 but	 I	 haven't	 got	 the	will	 power.
What	can	I	do?	My	health	just	can't	stand	the	pace."
"I	see,"	said	the	doctor	grimly.	"Tell	me	just	what	happens;	you	can	trust	me."
"Well,	every	night	I	take	her	driving	in	my	car.	We	park	in	some	secluded	street.
Then	she	asks	me	to	put	my	arms	around	her.	And	then,	every	night,	she	reaches
over	and	holds	my	hand."
"And	then?"
"What	do	you	mean	'and	then'?"	gasped	the	youth.	"Is	there	more?"
That's	what	has	happened	to	religion.	The	moment	the	word	"religion"	is	uttered
you	 remember	 the	 serious	 long	 faces	 in	 the	 churches,	 the	 very	 sad-looking
priests,	 the	 very	 serious	 theologians,	 trying	 to	 split	 hairs,	 chopping	 abstract
words,	nobody	knows	why,	for	what.
Religion	is	broke.	The	religion	of	the	philosophers	is	bankrupt.	The	religion	of
the	intellectuals	is	relevant	no	more;	it	has	lost	all	relevance.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
7
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
The	old	religion	is	dead!	And	it	is	good	that	it	is	dead.	The	old	God	is	dead!	And
it	is	good	that	it	is	dead	because	now	the	door	opens	and	we	can	search	for	a	new
God,	a	God	more	real,	not	conceptual,	more	existential,	not	philosophical,	a	God
who	can	be	seen,	loved,	lived,	a	God	who	can	transform	your	life,	a	God	who	is
really	life	and	nothing	else.
A	totally	different	kind	of	religion	is	needed	in	the	world,	a	gut-level	religion,	a
religion	which	has	blood,	life,	a	religion	whose	heart	still	beats.	The	old	religion
is	simply	dead,	and	people	are	worshiping	the	corpse.	And	people	carrying	the
corpse,	by	and	by,	become	just	like	the	corpse	they	are	carrying.
The	first	principle	means	a	gut-level	religion,	a	religion	that	you	can	experience
in	your	innermost	core,	in	the	interiority	of	your	being.	You	are	the	shrine	for	the
first	 principle.	 No	 Bible,	 no	 Koran,	 no	 Veda.	 You	 are	 the	 shrine	 for	 the	 first
principle.	So	the	only	way	to	reach	to	the	real	is	to	go	within,	is	to	go	in.	Turn	in.
That's	 what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about.	 That's	 why	 Zen	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 any
dogmas.	It	is	interested	in	helping	you	to	contract	your	own	being.
When	the	fifth	patriarch	of	Zen,	Hung-jen,	was	asked	why	he	had	chosen	Hui-
neng	as	his	successor	out	of	the	five	hundred	monks	in	his	monastery,	he	replied:
"Four	hundred	and	ninety-nine	of	my	disciples	understood	Buddhism	very	well,
and	only	Hui-neng	had	no	understanding	of	it	whatsoever.	He	is	not	a	man	to	be
measured	by	any	ordinary	standard.
Hence,	the	robe	of	authentic	transmission	was	given	to	him."
Because	 he	 has	 "no	 understanding	 of	 it	 whatsoever".	 An	 intellectual
understanding	is	not	an	understanding.	It	 is	a	deception,	 it	 is	an	illusion,	 it	 is	a
dream,	it	 is	a	substitute.	Because	you	are	missing	the	real	and	because	you	are
not	 courageous	 enough	 to	 accept	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 are	 missing	 the	 real,	 you
substitute	 it.	 It	 is	a	plastic	 flower.	You	substitute	 it	with	a	 false	 thing	and	 then
you	feel	very	good.	You	start	 thinking	that	you	have	it.	And	you	don't	have	it!
Your	hands	are	empty.
Those	 four	 hundred	 ninety-nine	 disciples	 of	 Hung-jen	 were	 all	 scholars.	 For
years	 they	 had	 studied,	 they	 had	 studied	 all	 the	 scriptures.	 They	 had	 all	 the
scriptures	on	their	tongue.	And	he	had	chosen	a	man	who	has	no	understanding
whatsoever.	 The	 man	 he	 had	 chosen,	 Hui-neng,	 was	 not	 known	 at	 all	 in	 the
monastery.	Nobody	even	was	aware	that	he	existed	there.
When	Hui-neng	had	come	 to	 the	Master,	 the	Master	had	asked	him	one	 thing:
"Do	you	really	want	to	know?	Do	you?	Do	you	want	to	know	about	truth,	or	do
you	want	to	know	truth	itself?"	And	Hui-neng	said,	"What	will	I	do	by	knowing
ABOUT	the	truth?	Give	me	the	real	thing."	And	the	Master	said,	"Then	go	to	the
kitchen	and	clean	the	rice	for	the	mess	--	and	never	come	again	to	me.	Whenever
the	right	moment	has	come	I	will	call	you."
Twelve	 years	 passed,	 and	Hui-neng	was	 simply	working	 in	 the	 kitchen,	 at	 the
back.	 People	 did	 not	 even	 know	 about	 him.	 Nobody	 knew	 his	 name.	 Who
bothers	 to	 think	about	a	man	who	simply	goes	on	working	in	 the	kitchen	from
the	morning	 till	 late	 in	 the	 night?	 The	monastery	 was	 not	 aware.	 There	 were
great	scholars,	 famous	people;	all	over	China	 their	names	were	known	--	 there
were	celebrities	in	the	ashram.	Who	bothered	about	Hui-neng?
Twelve	years	passed,	and	then	one	day	the	Master	declared,	"My	time	has	come
and	I	will	be	leaving	this	world,	so	I	have	to	choose	a	disciple	as	my	successor.
Anybody	who	thinks	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
8
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
himself	 ready,	 capable	 of	 becoming	 my	 successor,	 should	 write	 four	 lines	 in
front	of	my	door	to	show	his	understanding.	The	greatest	scholar	went	there	in
the	night	and	wrote	four	lines,	beautiful	lines,	really	beautiful	the	very	essence	of
the	SECOND	principle.	You	cannot	reach	higher	through	the	mind	than	that.	He
wrote:	"The	mind	is	like	a	mirror.	Dust	gathers	on	it.
Clean	 the	 dust,	 and	 you	 know	what	 is."	 Perfectly	 true,	 absolutely	 okay.	What
more	can	there	be?
The	whole	monastery	was	agog.	People	were	discussing,	debating	whether	 the
Master	 would	 choose	 this	 man	 as	 the	 successor	 or	 not.	 And	 everybody	 was
trying	to	improve	upon	it,	but	nobody	could	find	anything	wrong	in	it.	There	was
nothing	wrong	...
That	 is	one	of	 the	most	difficult	 things	about	 the	 intellect.	What	 is	wrong	 in	a
plastic	flower?	Nothing	is	wrong.	In	a	way	--	in	many	ways	--	it	may	be	better
than	a	real	flower.	A	real	flower	is	born	in	the	morning	and	by	the	evening	it	is
gone.	A	plastic	 flower	 is	more	 stable,	more	permanent	 --	gives	 the	 idea	of	 the
eternal!	The	real	flower	is	momentary.	The	real	flower	is	born	and	dies,	and	the
plastic	flower	knows	no	death.	It	is	the	closest	that	you	come	to	the	eternal.	And
what	is	wrong	in	it?	It	can	have	as	much	color	as	the	real	--	can	have	more	color
because	 it	 is	 in	your	hands	 to	make	 it	 so.	And	you	can	make	 it	perfumed	 too;
there	is	no	problem	about	it.	But	something	basic	is	missing;	it	is	dead.
Nobody	could	find	anything	wrong.	And	people	were	 trying	 to	 improve	 it,	but
they	were	 all	 intellectuals.	You	cannot	 improve	more	 than	 that;	 this	 is	 the	 last
point	the	mind	can	reach.
And	it	seems	logical:	"The	mind	is	like	a	mirror.	Dust	gathers	on	the	mirror,	and
then	it	cannot	reflect"	--	that's	what	has	happened	to	the	mind.
Then	 two,	 four	monks	were	discussing	 it,	 and	 they	passed	Hui-neng,	who	was
doing	 his	 work	 in	 the	 kitchen.	 He	 heard	 it	 --	 they	 were	 talking	 about	 these
beautiful	 lines,	 the	essential	of	all	 the	scriptures	 --	and	he	 laughed.	For	 twelve
years	nobody	had	even	seen	him	laughing.
He	 laughed.	Those	monks	 looked	 at	 him,	 and	 they	 said,	 "What?	Why	are	you
laughing?"	And	he	said,	"It	is	all	nonsense.	It	is	not	true."	They	could	not	believe
their	 ears.	 This	 man,	 the	 rice	 cleaner,	 for	 twelve	 years	 just	 cleaning	 rice	 ...
Nobody	had	ever	seen	him	even	meditating.
How	can	you	see	Deeksha	meditating?	Impossible.
And	one	never	 knows	 ...	This	man,	 has	 he	become	enlightened	or	 something?
But	 they	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	And	 they	were	 scholars,	 so	 they	 laughed	 at	 the
absurdity	of	 it,	and	 they	said,	"All	 the	great	scholars	are	 there,	and	you,	a	 rice
cleaner,	 for	 twelve	 years	 nobody	 has	 seen	 you	 reading	 scripture,	 studying	 --
nobody	 has	 ever	 seen	 you	 sitting	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 Master,	 inquiring	 about
anything	--	can	you	improve	upon	it?"	He	said,	"I	can,	but	there	is	one	problem.	I
cannot	write.	 I	 knew	 twelve	 years	 ago,	 I	 used	 to	write	 a	 little	 bit,	 but	 I	 have
forgotten."
This	 happens,	 this	 unlearning	happens.	Unlearning	 is	 the	process	 of	 becoming
enlightened.
Because	you	have	learned	wrong	ways,	and	those	wrong	ways	are	the	barriers,
they	 have	 to	 be	 unlearned.	You	 are	 born	 enlightened,	 and	 then	 you	 are	 forced
into	unenlightenment.	Then	you	are	conditioned	for	an	insane	society.	Then	you
are	 forced	 to	 adjust	 to	 an	 insane	 society.	 If	 you	 remain	miserable	 there	 is	 no
wonder	in	it.	You	will	remain	miserable	because	this	is	not	your	real	nature.	This
is	not	the	flowering	of	your	being.
So	he	said,	"I	cannot	write.	I	have	completely	forgotten.	If	you	can	write,	I	can
say	something;	you	go	and	write	it."	And	he	didn't	go	there;	he	simply	said,	"The
mind	is	not	a	mirror	at	all.	Where	can	the	dust	gather?	One	who	knows	it	knows
it."
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
9
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
The	mind	is	not	a	mirror.	Where	can	the	dust	gather?	One	who	comes	to	know
this	has	known,	has	become	enlightened,	has	looked	into	the	deepest	core	of	his
being.
And	 when	 these	 words	 were	 written	 on	 the	 door	 of	 the	 Master,	 the	 Master
became	 very	 angry.	 Listen	 carefully.	 The	Master	 became	 very	 angry.	He	 said,
"Bring	this	Hui-neng	immediately,	and	I	am	going	to	beat	him."	And	the	scholars
were	very	happy;	they	said,
"That's	how	it	should	be.	Bring	that	fellow."
The	 guy	was	 brought,	 and	 the	Master	 took	 him	 inside	 and	 told	 him,	 "So	 you
have	got	it!
Now	you	 escape	 from	 this	monastery.	This	 is	my	 robe,	 you	 are	my	 successor.
But	if	I	tell	it	to	people,	they	will	kill	you.	It	will	be	too	much	against	their	egos
to	accept	a	rice	cleaner	as	the	head	of	the	monastery.	You	simply	escape.	That's
why	I	was	angry,	excuse	me.	I	had	to	be.
You	 simply	 escape	 from	 this	 monastery	 as	 far	 away	 as	 possible.	 You	 are	my
successor,	but	these	people	will	kill	you."
Scholars	are	very,	very	ambitious	and	political.	You	can	go	to	any	university	and
you	can	see.	You	can	go	 to	any	academy	and	you	can	see.	You	will	never	 see
men	anywhere	else	backbiting	so	much	as	in	a	university.	Each	professor	against
all,	and	each	trying	to	pull	everybody	else	down,	and	each	thinks	he	is	the	only
one	capable	of	being	the	vice-chancellor	or	the	chancellor.	And	all	are	fools.
This	 Hui-neng	 escaped.	 Within	 two,	 three	 days	 people	 got	 the	 idea	 that
something	has	happened.	Hui-neng	is	missing,	and	the	Master's	robe	is	missing.
They	started	 searching	 for	him.	The	greatest	 scholar,	who	had	written	 the	 first
lines,	 went	 in	 search.	 Hui-neng	 was	 caught	 in	 a	 forest,	 and	 Hui-neng	 when
caught	said,	"You	can	take	this	robe.	I	am	not	interested	in	this	robe	at	all;	this	is
absolutely	unnecessary.	 I	was	happy	 cleaning	 rice.	Now	 I	 am	 trying	 to	 escape
and	hide	for	no	reason.	You	take	this	robe."
He	dropped	the	robe	on	the	ground,	and	the	scholar	tried	to	pick	it	up,	but	it	was
to	heavy.
He	could	not	pick	 it	up.	He	 fell	on	 the	ground	perspiring,	 and	he	 said	 to	Hui-
neng,	"Excuse	me.	I	had	come	for	the	robe,	but	even	the	robe	is	not	ready	to	go
with	me.	 I	 am	 incapable.	And	 I	know	 it	 that	 I	 am	 incapable	because	 all	 that	 I
know	are	words	and	words	and	words.	Excuse	me	...	and	teach	me	something."
And	Hui-neng	 said,	 "Teaching	 is	 your	 problem;	 you	 have	 taught	 yourself	 too
much.	Now	unteach,	unlearn.	Now	drop	all	 that	you	know.	Knowledge	 is	your
barrier	in	knowing."
That's	why	 the	Master	 says	 "...	 and	 only	Hui-neng	 had	 no	 understanding	 of	 it
whatsoever."
When	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 intellectual	 understanding	 there	 arises	 a	 great
understanding	 which	 is	 not	 of	 the	 mind,	 which	 is	 of	 your	 total	 being.	 That
understanding	gives	you	the	first	principle,	the	first	taste	of	tao.
I	have	heard:
A	wealthy	horse-owner	died	and	left	a	large	fortune	to	a	university.	A	provision
in	 the	 will,	 however,	 was	 that	 the	 school	 must	 confer	 a	 degree	 of	 Doctor	 of
Divinity	upon	his	favorite	horse.	Since	the	university	was	anxious	to	receive	the
money	--	it	was	a	really	big	sum	--	the	Dean	set	a	date	for	the	animal	to	receive	a
degree	of	D.D.
This	unusual	occasion	was	attended	by	the	press,	and	one	of	the	reporters	asked
the	Dean,
"What	is	your	reaction	to	this	strange	arrangement?"
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
10
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
"Well,"	 replied	 the	 Dean,	 "in	 my	 experience	 I	 have	 awarded	 many	 degrees.
However,	 I	must	 admit	 that	 this	 is	 the	 first	 time	 I	have	awarded	a	degree	 to	 a
WHOLE	horse."
All	others	were	donkeys,	not	whole	horses.
The	mind	cannot	have	any	contact	with	reality.	To	live	in	the	mind	is	to	live	like
an	idiot.
To	 live	 with	 the	mind,	 in	 the	mind,	 as	 the	mind,	 is	 to	 live	 a	 stupid	 life.	 The
moment	you	become	a	little	 loosened	from	the	mind:	celebration.	The	moment
you	become	a	little	 loosened	from	the	mind:	joy.	A	little	you	become	loosened
from	 the	mind:	 and	God.	And	 suddenly	 the	 doors	 are	 open.	 They	 have	 never
been	closed;	only	your	mind	was	blocking	the	way.
The	mind	can	give	you	the	second	principle.	The	first	principle	is	possible	only
through	 no-mind.	 Meditation	 means	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	 Meditation	 does	 not
mean	"to	think	about".
Meditation	means	not	to	think	at	all.	It	does	not	mean,	of	course,	to	fall	asleep.	It
means	 to	 fall	 AWAKE.	 It	 means	 thoughts	 should	 disappear	 and	 only	 pure
consciousness	should	be	there,	a	presence,	a	luminous	presence:	you	see;	there	is
clarity,	transparency.
Thoughts	 don't	 allow	 you	 to	 see.	Or,	 even	 if	 they	 allow,	 they	 distort.	Or	 they
interpret.
They	never	allow	the	reality	to	come	to	you	raw.	They	decorate	it,	they	change
it,	they	color	it.
They	make	 it	 digestible	 to	 you.	 They	make	 it	 according	 to	 you.	And	 you	 are
false,	you	are	a	mask,	so	when	reality	is	cut	according	to	you	it	becomes	unreal.
That's	why	 the	Master	 said,	 "If	 I	 tell	you	 the	 first	Principle	 it	will	become	 the
second	principle.	You	are	asking	the	question	from	the	head."	The	disciple	was
asking	the	question	from	the	head.	It	was	an	intellectual	question:	"What	is	the
first	principle?	"	If	the	Master	answers	it,	the	head	will	take	the	answer	--	and	the
head	will	spin	philosophy	around	it	and	it	will	become	the	second	principle.
The	real,	the	true	cannot	be	conveyed	through	words.	It	can	be	conveyed	--	yes,
it	 can	 be	 conveyed	 --	 but	 the	 way	 to	 convey	 it	 is	 totally	 different.	 It	 is	 like
measles:	you	catch	them.
Nobody	can	give	them	to	you,	but	you	can	catch	them.	Truth	cannot	be	taught
but	can	be	caught.
Look	at	me.	 I	 have	 the	measles.	Now,	 if	 you	don't	 resist,	 you	will	 catch	 it,	 so
lower	 your	 resistance.	 If	 you	 resist,	 you	 may	 not	 catch	 it.	 If	 you	 are	 really
stubborn	 and	 hard	 and	 you	 close	 your	 being	 utterly,	 totally,	 if	 you	 are	 not
vulnerable	at	all,	you	will	not	catch	it.	But	I	cannot	give	it	to	you.	You	can	catch
it,	or	you	can	not	catch	it,	but	I	cannot	give	it	to	you.
It	cannot	be	given,	but	it	can	be	taken,	and	that	is	the	whole	art	of	being	with	a
Master:	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 take.	 Because	 he	 will	 not	 give.	 He	 cannot	 give.	 He
makes	it	available.	A	Master	is	a	catalytic	agent,	he	is	a	presence.	Something	is
possible	around	him.	You	have	to	be	vulnerable,	you	have	to	be	in	an	attitude	of
surrender,	you	have	to	be	in	an	attitude	of	receptivity:	you	have	to	be	feminine.
Hui-k'o,	 another	 Zen	Master,	made	 his	way	 northward	 to	H'sin-yeh,	where	 he
began	 teaching,	 and	 among	 those	who	 came	 to	 hear	 him	was	Tao-ho,	 a	 noted
teacher,	a	very	well-known	author,	a	famous	scholar	on	Buddhist	philosophy.
But	Hui-k'o's	teaching	was	not	like	that	of	any	other	Buddhist	school's,	and	Tao-
ho	was	very	much	disturbed	...
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
11
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
The	teaching	was	absurd,	almost	sacrilegious,	because	Hui-k'o	used	to	say,	"Kill
your	 parents."	A	 beautiful	 saying	 --	 but	 don't	 take	 it	 literally.	 The	 parents	 are
within	you.	You	can	ask	 the	T.A.	people	--	Transactional	Analysis	people.	The
parents	are	within	you.	The	mother,	the	father	--	their	conditioning	is	within	you.
They	go	on	controlling	you	from	within	you.	So	when	Hui-k'o	said,	"Kill	your
parents;	only	then	come	to	me,"	he	was	uttering	a	great	insight.
That's	what	Jesus	says.	Christians	have	not	yet	been	able	to	explain	it.	He	says,
"Unless	you	hate	your	mother,	unless	you	hate	your	father,	you	cannot	come	to
me."	Hate?	And	the	utterance	is	coming	from	the	man	who	says,	"God	is	love"?
And	 Hui-k'o	 used	 to	 say,	 "If	 you	 meet	 the	 Buddha	 on	 the	 way,	 kill	 him
immediately!"
Because	when	you	start	meditating	you	will	meet	your	parents,	you	will	meet	all
the	people	who	have	been	 related	 to	you.	You	will	have	 to	kill	 them,	you	will
have	to	disassociate	yourself	from	them;	you	will	have	to	learn	aloneness.	And
finally	you	will	meet	the	Buddha,	your	Master,	and	you	have	to	kill	the	Master
too.
But	 these	are	dangerous	 things	 to	 say.	And	 the	way	he	used	 to	 say	 them.	This
scholar	Tao-ho	became	very	angry.	He	said,	"This	man	will	destroy	all	religion."
That's	what	people	say	about	me.
...	 He	 determined	 to	 destroy	 this	 unholy	 doctrine	 and	 to	 that	 end	 dispatched
several	of	his	best	students	to	dispute	with	Hui-k'o	...
Hui-k'o	 is	 the	 successor	 of	 Bodhidharma,	 and	 of	 course	 he	 was	 a	 worthy
successor,	of	 a	great	Master.	He	was	a	great	disciple.	Hui-k'o	was	attacked	by
this	man	Tao-ho	in	many	ways,	and	he	used	to	send	his	disciples	to	dispute	with
and	to	defeat	this	man.
...	Tao-ho	 awaited	 their	 return	with	 high	 expectations	 of	 hearing	 that	 they	 had
won	a	notable	victory	over	the	hated	interloper,	but	they	did	not	come	back	...
Not	 a	 single	 person	 ever	 came	 back.	 Whosoever	 went	 to	 Hui-k'o	 simply
disappeared.
These	people	are	dangerous	people.	One	should	avoid	them	if	one	really	wants
to	avoid	them.
Sometimes	you	may	go	as	 an	antagonist,	 and	you	may	 fall	 in	 love	with	 them.
And	these	people	are	like	dragons;	once	you	are	close	to	them	they	will	suck	you
in.
...	He	sent	out	other	emissaries,	and	still	others,	but	none	came	back	to	report	the
expected	victory.	It	was	only	after	some	time	had	passed	that	he	met	some	of	his
messengers	and	said	to	them:	"I	had	opened	your	eyes	to	the	Tao;	why	were	you
such	faithless	emissaries?"
One	of	them	spoke	up	for	the	rest:	"The	original	eye	is	perfect	in	itself,	but	your
teaching	has	rendered	us	half	blind."
"The	original	eye	is	perfect	in	itself."	Each	child	is	born	with	that	original	eye	--
it	is	perfect	--	that	innocent	eye.	It	is	perfect!	It	needs	no	improvement!	And	the
whole	effort	of	all	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
12
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
the	Masters	 down	 through	 the	 ages	 has	 been	 one;	 whatsoever	 the	 society	 has
done,	 they	have	 to	undo.	Whatsoever	 the	 society	has	put	 into	your	mind,	 they
have	 to	 take	 it	 away.	They	have	 to	dehypnotize	you,	 they	have	 to	uncondition
you.	They	have	to	make	your	childhood	again	available	to	you.
But	remember,	religion	is	not	a	teaching,	is	not	a	learning.	You	can	catch	it.	Yes,
it	is	like	measles.	And	you	have	to	be	in	a	mood	to	catch	it.	That	mood	is	what	is
meant	by	being	a	disciple.	A	disciple	simply	shows	a	gesture,	a	great	gesture,	a
MAHAMUDRA,	 that	 "I	 am	 ready,	Master,"	 that	 "I	 am	 open,"	 that	 "I	will	 not
resist.	If	you	are	going	to	kill	me,	I	am	ready.
Whatsoever	you	are	going	to	do	to	me,	I	am	available	--	my	availability	is	total."
That's	all	a	disciple	has	to	do.	And	the	Master	has	to	do	nothing;	he	has	just	to	be
there.
The	Master	there	--	the	one	who	has	become	enlightened,	the	one	who	has	come
to	know	his	real	nature	--	his	presence,	and	the	availability	of	the	disciple,	and
something	catches	fire,	something	simply	happens.	And	that	is	the	first	principle.
It	 cannot	 be	 asked,	 it	 cannot	 be	 answered.	 That	 which	 can	 be	 asked	 and	 that
which	can	be	answered	will	be	the	second	principle;	it	will	be	a	carbon	copy,	an
echo.
Of	 course,	 the	 priests	 won't	 like	 such	 a	 rebellious	 meaning	 to	 be	 given	 to
religion.	They	will	not	like	people	to	become	awake.	Neither	will	the	politicians
like	it.	The	politician	and	the	priest	is	the	very,	very	ancient	conspiracy	against
the	innocence	of	man.	They	corrupt.
Their	whole	business	depends	on	this:	 that	man	remains	unconscious,	 that	man
does	not	become	aware.	Because	the	moment	a	man	is	aware,	he	is	freedom	--
freedom	from	all	politics	and	freedom	from	all	religions.	He	is	religious,	but	free
from	all	religions.	You	cannot	say	that	he	is	a	Mohammedan,	you	cannot	say	that
he	is	a	Hindu.
To	 call	 Zen	 people	 Buddhist	 is	 wrong.	 It	 is	 as	 wrong	 as	 to	 call	 Sufis
Mohammedans.	 It	 is	 as	 wrong	 as	 to	 call	 Hassidim	 Jews.	 The	 real	 people	 are
simply	 real	 people.	 Zen,	 Sufi,	 or	 Hassid,	 there	 is	 neither	 Buddhist	 nor
Mohammedan	nor	Jew.
But	the	priest	will	not	like	it.	It	will	be	destroying	his	whole	business.	It	will	be
dismantling	his	whole	shop,	his	whole	market.
Two	waiters	were	 standing	at	 a	 table	over	which	a	 loaded	customer	had	 fallen
asleep.	 Said	 one,	 "I	 have	 already	 awakened	 him	 twice.	 Now	 I	 am	 going	 to
awaken	him	for	the	third	time."
"Why	don't	you	chuck	him	out?"	asked	the	other	waiter.
"The	devil	I	will,"	said	the	first	waiter.	"I	got	a	good	thing	going	for	me.	Every
time	I	wake	him	up	he	pays	his	bill."
If	 humanity	 remains	 asleep,	 if	 humanity	 remains	 unconscious	 and	 hypnotized,
then	the	politician	can	remain	in	power	and	the	priest	can	go	on	exploiting	you.
If	 humanity	 becomes	 awake,	 then	 there	 will	 be	 no	 need	 for	 these	 priests	 and
politicians.	There	will	not	be	any	need	for	any	country,	state,	and	there	will	not
be	any	need	for	any	church,	any	Vatican,	any	pope.
The	 need	 will	 disappear.	 There	 will	 be	 a	 totally	 different	 quality	 to	 human
consciousness.
That	quality	needs	 to	be	born.	We	have	come	 to	 that	point	 in	 the	evolution	of
human	 consciousness	 where	 this	 new	 consciousness	 is	 tremendously	 needed,
desperately	needed	--
this	 new	 consciousness	 which	 makes	 man	 free	 from	 politics	 and	 free	 from
religion.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
13
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
And	 let	me	 remind	you	again	and	again,	 that	will	be	 the	only	 religious	world:
free	from	religions,	but	not	free	from	religion;	free	from	churches,	dogmas,	but
not	free	from	the	first	principle;	free	from	all	the	second	principles.
A	girl	told	her	friend	she	had	just	become	engaged	to	a	traveling	salesman.
"Is	he	good	looking?"	asked	the	friend.
"Look,	he	would	never	stand	out	in	a	crowd."
"Does	he	have	money?"	continued	the	friend.
"If	he	does,	he	won't	spend	it."
"What	about	his	bad	habits.	Does	he	have	any?"
"Well,	he	drinks	an	awful	lot,"	said	the	future	bride.
"I	don't	understand	you,"	 said	 the	 friend.	 "If	you	can't	 say	anything	nice	about
him,	then	why	are	you	marrying	him?	"
"He	is	on	the	road	all	the	time,"	she	replied,	"and	I	will	never	see	him."
That's	the	only	good	thing	about	it	--	and	that	is	the	good	thing	about	the	god	of
the	priests:	you	will	never	see	him.	That's	why	you	go	on	following	the	priest.	To
avoid	God	you	follow	the	priest.	To	avoid	God	you	read	the	Bible.	To	avoid	God
you	 chant	Vedas.	To	 avoid	God	 you	 become	 scholars,	 thinkers.	To	 avoid	God
you	are	doing	everything	that	is	possible.
But	why	do	you	want	to	avoid	God?	Why	in	the	first	place	do	you	want	to	avoid
God?
There	are	 reasons.	The	very	 idea	of	God	creates	 tremendous	 fear	because	God
will	mean	death	to	your	ego.	You	will	not	exist	if	God	is	there.
The	great	 Indian	mystic	Kabir	has	 said,	 "Look	at	 the	 irony	of	 it.	When	 I	was,
God	was	 not;	 now	God	 is,	 I	 am	not.	Anyway	 the	meeting	 has	 not	 happened."
Because	for	the	meeting,	two	are	needed.	"When	I	was,	God	was	not;	now	God
is,	I	am	not."
The	fear	is	that	you	will	have	to	lose	yourself.	You	are	afraid	of	death;	that's	why
you	are	afraid	of	God.	And	that's	why	you	are	afraid	of	love,	and	that's	why	you
are	afraid	of	all	that	is	great.
You	are	too	attached	to	this	false	ego	--	which	never	gives	anything	but	misery,
but	pain,	but	at	least	gives	you	a	feeling	that	you	are.	Just	watch.	Meditate	over
it.
If	you	want	to	be,	then	you	will	always	fall	into	the	trap	of	the	priest.	In	fact	you
are	not.
The	whole	 idea	 is	 a	 false	 notion.	How	 can	 you	 be?	 The	waves	 exist,	 but	 not
separate	 from	 the	 ocean.	 So	 exist	 we:	 not	 separate	 from	 the	 ocean	 of
consciousness.	That's	what	God	 is.	The	 leaves	exist,	 but	not	 separate	 from	 the
tree.	Everything	exists,	but	nothing	exists	separately.
No	 man	 is	 an	 island,	 and	 no	 part	 can	 exist	 independently.	 We	 exist	 in	 deep
interdependence.
We	 are	members	 of	 one	 another,	 of	 each	 other.	We	 penetrate	 each	 other.	 This
whole	 existence	 is	 a	 great	 penetration.	 Trees	 penetrate	 you;	 you	 penetrate	 the
trees.	Stars	penetrate	you;	you	penetrate	 the	 stars.	You	penetrate	 the	 earth;	 the
earth	penetrates	you.	Everything	is	penetrated.
God	is	this	totality.	You	cannot	exist	separately.	If	you	want	to	exist	separately,
then	you	are	a	politician.	All	politics	is	nothing	but	the	shadow	of	the	ego.	Then
you	will	live	in	misery	and	in	madness.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
14
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
But	if	you	look,	if	you	watch	deeply,	you	will	be	surprised.	You	are	not!	Not	that
you	have	to	dissolve!	Simply	you	are	not.	It	is	just	a	false	notion	that	you	have
been	 carrying,	 the	 notion	 that	 you	 are.	 Any	 moment	 of	 silence	 and	 you	 will
suddenly	see	there	is	emptiness	within	you,	nothingness	within	you.	Buddha	has
called	this	nothingness	ANATTA,	nonbeing,	SHUNYA,	nothingness.	If	you	look
within,	you	will	not	find	yourself.	That's	why	people	don't	look	within;	they	are
afraid.
Once	 it	 happened	 I	 was	 travelling	 with	Mulla	 Nasrudin	 in	 a	 train.	 Came	 the
ticket	collector	and	Nasrudin	became	very	hectic.	He	looked	in	his	suitcase,	he
turned	 over	 all	 the	 things,	 he	 looked	 in	 the	 bed,	 turned	 over	 everything,	 he
looked	in	his	many	pockets,	and	he	started	perspiring	and	he	could	not	find	the
ticket.	I	saw	that	he	had	not	looked	in	one	pocket,	so	I	told	him,	"Nasrudin,	you
have	not	looked	in	that	pocket."	He	said,	"Don't	mention	that."	I	said,	"But	why?
The	ticket	may	be	there."	He	said,	"Don't	mention	it	at	all.	If	I	look	in	it	and	the
ticket	is	not	found,	I	will	fall	dead.	I	will	drop	dead!	I	cannot	look	in	that!	If	the
ticket	is	not	there,	then	finished.	There	is	a	hope	that	it	may	be	there."
That's	why	people	don't	look	inside:	a	hope	one	may	be	there.	The	day	you	look
in,	you	are	not.	The	day	you	look	in,	suddenly	there	is	vast	emptiness	...	and	it	is
tremendously	 blissful,	 beautiful,	 peaceful.	 You	 are	 not	 there;	 then	 there	 is	 no
noise.
That's	 what	 Hui-neng	means	 when	 he	 says,	 "There	 is	 no	mirror	 of	 the	mind.
Where	can	the	dust	gather?	To	know	this	is	to	know	all."
Look	within.	 People	 think	 "We	 are	 bad"	 but	 you	 are	 not,	 so	 how	can	 badness
gather?
People	think	"We	are	good,"	but	how	is	it	possible?	You	are	not	there;	how	can
you	be	good?
People	think	"We	are	moral	and	immoral	and	this	and	that,"	but	everything	hangs
on	 the	 idea	of	 "I".	To	be	good	 the	 "I"	 is	needed	 first,	 to	be	virtuous	 the	 "I"	 is
needed	first.	To	be	a	sinner	or	to	be	a	saint	the	"I"	is	needed	first.	Without	the	"I"
you	will	 not	have	 anything	 to	hang	anything	upon.	Where	will	 you	hang	your
goodness,	your	sin	or	your	saintliness?
That's	why	Zen	goes	on	 insisting	 there	 is	nobody	who	 is	 a	 sinner	 and	 there	 is
nobody	who	is	a	saint,	nothing	is	good	and	nothing	is	bad.	All	distinctions	are
ego	 created.	 Distinctions	 are	 created	 so	 that	 the	 ego	 can	 exist	 through	 the
distinctions.	When	you	look	within	there	is	neither	saint	nor	sinner,	neither	good
nor	bad	--	neither	life	nor	death.	All	distinctions	disappear.
In	that	nothingness	one	becomes	one	with	God.	One	IS	one	with	God	--	one	has
been	from	the	very	beginning.
So	the	fear	is	that	if	you	want	to	know	God	you	will	have	to	disappear;	so	you
don't	look	into	your	own	being.	The	fear	is	that	if	you	look	within	yourself	you
may	become	happy	...
People	go	on	saying	that	they	want	to	become	happy,	but	I	rarely	come	across	a
person	who	 really	wants	 to	 be	 happy.	 People	 cling	 to	 their	misery.	 Again	 the
same	game.	With	the	misery	you	have	something	to	do.	With	the	misery,	some
occupation.	With	the	misery	you	can	avoid	yourself,	you	are	engaged.	With	joy
there	 is	nothing	with	which	 to	be	engaged,	 there	 is	nowhere	 to	go.	 In	 joy	you
again	disperse	and	disappear.	In	misery	you	are	there	--	you	are	very	much	there.
Misery	gives	you	a	very	solid	experience	that	you	are.	When	you	are	happy,	you
start	disappearing.	When	you	are	really	happy,	you	are	not,	again	you	are	not.	In
a	state	of	bliss,	again	you	disappear.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
15
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
You	talk	about	heaven,	but	you	go	on	creating	hell	because	only	in	hell	can	you
exist.	You	cannot	exist	in	heaven.	George	Bernard	Shaw	is	reported	to	have	said,
"If	I	am	not	going	to	be	the	first	in	heaven,	then	I	would	not	like	to	go	to	heaven.
I	would	like	to	be	in	hell,	but	I	would	like	to	be	first;	I	don't	want	to	be	second."
Hell	 is	 okay,	 but	 the	 ego	 says,	 "Be	 first,	 be	 a	 leader."	Hell	 is	 okay	 if	 the	 ego
remains;	heaven	is	not	okay	if	the	ego	has	to	be	dropped.
You	would	 like	 to	be	 in	heaven	with	your	ego.	You	are	asking	 the	 impossible.
That	cannot	happen.
The	religion	that	exists	on	the	earth	is	false,	it	is	a	make-believe,	it	is	just	for	the
name's	 sake,	 but	 it	 fulfills	 your	 demand.	 It	 fulfills	 a	 certain	 demand,	 that	 you
want	 to	pretend	 that	you	are	 religious.	You	don't	want	 to	become	religious	but
you	want	to	pretend.	And	you	want	to	pretend	in	such	a	way	that	not	even	you
yourself	can	catch	yourself	pretending.	You	want	to	pretend	in	such	a	way	that
you	don't	ever	come	across	your	pretensions,	so	a	great	structure	is	created.	And
that	 great	 structure	 is	 the	 church.	 Avoid	 that	 structure	 if	 you	 really	 want	 to
become	religious.	And	unless	you	are	religious	you	are	not!
Now	let	me	tell	you	this	paradox;	You	are	only	when	you	are	not,	because	you
are	 only	 when	 the	 ego	 has	 disappeared	 and	 you	 are	 God.	 That	 is	 the	 first
principle.	I	am	not	telling	it	to	you,	and	you	are	not	hearing	it	from	me.
It	happened:
The	car	suddenly	broke	down	in	the	middle	of	nowhere.	He	crawled	underneath
to	see	what	the	trouble	was.	She	crawled	underneath	to	hold	the	torch	for	him.	It
was	 quite	 cozy	 under	 there	 and,	 after	 a	 while,	 they	 forgot	 about	 car	 repairs.
Suddenly	a	voice	said,	"And	just	what	do	you	two	think	you	are	doing?"
Looking	up	they	saw	the	local	village	constable.
"Why	we	are	--	er	--	repairing	the	back	axle,"	the	young	man	stammered.
"Well,	 while	 you	 are	 down	 there,	 you	 had	 better	 look	 at	 the	 brakes	 as	 well,"
replied	 the	 law.	 "Your	 car	 has	 been	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 hill	 for	 the	 past	 half
hour."
That's	what	has	happened	to	churches.	Jesus	is	not	there,	the	Buddha	is	not	there.
People	are	doing	something	else	 in	 the	name	of	Jesus,	 in	 the	name	of	Buddha,
and	 they	are	 thinking	Buddha	 is	 there.	Church	 is	 the	 last	place	where	you	can
meet	Jesus,	and	the	temple,	the	Buddhist	temple,	is	the	last	place	where	you	can
meet	a	Buddha.	But	you	go	to	the	church,	you	go	to	the	temple	...	and	you	think
you	are	going	to	Buddha	and	to	Jesus.
You	are	great	pretenders.	You	want	to	pretend.	You	want	to	be	respectable.	You
want	to	show	to	everybody	that	"We	are	religious	people."	So	we	have	created	a
Sunday	religion;	every	Sunday	you	go.	Six	days	for	the	world;	one	day	--	not	the
whole	day	--	one	or	two	hours
--	for	God.	Just	in	case	something	goes	wrong	or	maybe	really	God	is	or	maybe
one	 survives	 death.	 These	 are	 all	 perhapses.	 And	 a	 perhaps	 never	 changes
anybody's	life;	only	a	certainty	changes	somebody's	life.
Hence	my	 insistence,	 if	 you	 cannot	 find	 an	 alive	Master,	 go	 on	 searching	 and
searching.
There	are	always	alive	Masters	somewhere	or	other;	the	earth	is	never	empty	of
them.	But	never	go	to	the	places	where	conventionally	you	expect	them.	There
they	 are	 not.	 Jesus	 was	 not	 in	 the	 synagogue.	 Buddha	 was	 not	 in	 any	 Hindu
temple;	he	was	born	a	Hindu,	but	he	was	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
16
Chapter	1	-	Catching	the	First	Principle
not	in	any	Hindu	temple.	Jesus	was	a	Jew,	but	he	was	not	in	the	synagogue.	And
so	has	been	the	case	always.	Don't	go	on	worshiping	ideas.	Find	a	living	reality.
And	the	moment	you	find	a	living	reality,	become	vulnerable,	become	open.	And
you	will	have	the	first	principle,	which	cannot	be	said,	but	you	can	get	it.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
17
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
2
Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
12	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Question
IS	GOD	REALLY	DEAD?
If	not	dead,	then	seriously	ill,	on	his	deathbed.	Which	is	far	worse.
I	have	heard:
There	 was	 a	 small	 synagogue	 somewhere	 in	 some	 obscure	 village	 in	 central
Poland.	 One	 night	 when	 making	 his	 rounds,	 the	 rabbi	 entered	 and	 saw	 God
sitting	in	a	dark	corner.	He	fell	upon	his	face	and	cried	out,	"Lord	God,	what	art
thou	doing	here?"
God	answered	him	with	a	small	voice,	"I	am	tired,	Rabbi.	I	am	tired	to	death."
God	 is	 tired	 of	 man's	 inhumanity	 to	 man.	 God	 is	 tired	 of	 man's	 immense
stupidity.	God	is	tired	of	man's	unawareness.	Only	man	seems	somehow	to	be	a
misfit.	 The	 whole	 existence	 goes	 on	 harmoniously;	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 a
dance.	Man	is	out	of	step.	And	the	reason	is	 that	only	man	is	free	 to	be	out	of
step.	 The	 glory	 of	 man	 is	 that	 he	 is	 free?	 totally	 free.	 Nobody	 else	 has	 that
freedom.	Because	of	 the	freedom,	man	can	choose.	He	can	choose	either	 to	be
with	God	or	he	can	choose	 to	be	against	 --	and	man	has	chosen	 to	be	against.
There	is	a	reason	for	it.
Each	child	has	to	choose	to	be	against	his	parents.	That	is	the	only	way	for	the
child	 to	attain	his	ego.	 If	 the	child	goes	on	saying	yes	 to	 the	 father,	yes	 to	 the
mother,	and	says	always	yes	and	never	says	no,	then	the	child	will	not	have	any
backbone.	Then	the	child	will	not	have	any	soul.	Then	the	child	will	be	just	an
extension	of	the	parent.	That	hurts,	that	humiliates.
And	 it	 is	not	 just	 accidental	 that	we	have	called	God	 the	 father.	 It	 is	 the	 same
drama	played	on	a	more	cosmic	scale.
Man	is	still	childish.	To	be,	he	still	needs	to	say	no.	A	man	is	mature	when	he
can	be	 and	can	 say	yes	 too.	Try	 to	understand	 it.	A	child	has	 to	 say	no	 to	 the
parents,	a	thousand	and	one	times	he	has	to	say	no,	because	that	is	the	only	way
he	 can	 feel	 "I	 am."	 Sometimes	 he	 has	 to	 say	 no	 against	 his	 own	 welfare;
sometimes	he	has	to	say	no	in	spite	of	himself.	Sometimes	he	wants	to	say	yes,
but	he	cannot	say	it,	because	to	say	yes	means	not	to	be.	And	each	moment	the
struggle:	to	be	or	not	to	be.	The	moment	he	says	yes,	he	is	not;	parents	are.	The
moment	he	says	no,	he	is.	So	the	child	has	to	say	no.	He	has	to	rebel,	he	has	to
go	against,	he	has	to	go	astray	to	be.
But	one	need	not	be	a	child	forever.	Adam	was	a	child;	Jesus	was	a	mature	man:
Adam	went	 out	 of	 paradise.	 In	 fact,	 he	was	not	 expelled,	 he	 expelled	himself.
That	was	the	only	way	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
18
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
to	have	individuality.	That	is	the	childish	way	to	have	individuality.	Now,	Jesus
was	so	certain	about	his	integrity	he	could	say	yes	and	yet	remain	himself.
Do	 you	 follow	 it?	When	 you	 can	 say	 yes	 and	 yet	 remain	 individual,	 you	 are
mature.	Then	there	is	no	necessity	of	saying	no,	because	if	you	say	no	and	then
you	become	individual,	your	individuality	has	a	negative	taste	to	it.	It	is	not	real
individuality;	 it	 is	not	yet	positive.	 It	 is	 just	a	no	deep	down,	a	wound,	a	hole.
And	 through	 the	no	you	can	become	an	 individual,	 but	your	 individuality	will
never	 be	 satisfying.	There	will	 be	no	 contentment	 in	 it,	 there	will	 be	 no	bliss,
because	bliss	flows	only	out	of	yes.	When	you	can	say	yes	to	existence,	you	start
flowing	 blissfully.	 No	 cripples,	 paralyzes.	 No	 makes	 you	 an	 enemy	 of	 the
existence;	 no	 gives	 resistance.	 Yes	 makes	 you	 nonresistant;	 yes	 makes	 you
vulnerable.
God	is	dead	or	dying	because	man	has	not	yet	grown.	There	have	been	millions
of	 Adams	 and	 Eves,	 and	 only	 very	 rarely	 Christs	 --	 a	 Buddha	 here,	 a	 Christ
there,	a	Lao	Tzu	--	only	few	and	far	between.	The	people	who	have	really	said
yes,	they	give	life	to	God.	By	saying	no,	you	give	life	to	yourself.	By	saying	yes,
you	give	life	to	the	total,	to	the	whole;	you	pour	your	life	into	the	whole.	So	if
you	really	want	God	to	be	alive,	you	have	to	say	yes.
Man	has	killed	God	--	almost	killed	him	--	by	saying	no,	continuously	saying	no.
I	 love	 this	 story.	The	 rabbi	asked,	 "Lord	God,	what	art	 thou	doing	here?"	God
answered	him	with	a	small	voice,	"I	am	tired,	Rabbi.	I	am	tired	to	death."	Yes.
God	 is	 tired.	 In	 fact,	 God	 cannot	 die.	 God	 can	 die	 in	 YOUR	 life.	 There	 are
millions	 of	 people	 in	 whose	 lives	 God	 is	 dead,	 in	 whose	 lives	 God	 has
disappeared.	 That	 is	 the	meaning	when	 I	 say	God	 is	 dead.	 Look	 into	 people's
eyes	and	you	will	not	find	God	alive	there.	And	where	else	can	God	be	alive?
Millions	and	millions	of	hearts	are	completely	empty	of	God.	That's	what	I	mean
when	I	say	God	is	dead.
God	 lives	 in	 a	 Jesus,	 in	 a	 Buddha,	 in	 a	 Krishna.	 Is	 God	 living	 in	 you?	 The
question	is	not	basically	about	God,	whether	God	is	dead	or	alive.	The	question
is	whether	God	is	alive	in	YOU!	If	he	is	not	alive	in	you,	then	what	difference
does	 it	 make	 if	 he	 is	 alive	 somewhere	 in	 heaven?	 It	 does	 not	 make	 any
difference.	For	you	it	is	practically	the	same:	God	is	dead.
Nietzsche	 is	 right	about	modern	humanity	when	he	says	God	 is	dead.	Not	 that
God	 is	dead!	How	can	God	be	dead?	God	means	 the	eternal	 element,	 the	 first
principle.	God	cannot	be	dead.	But	you	can	be	 so	against	God,	you	can	be	 so
empty	of	God,	that	for	you	he	is	dead.
You	have	to	pour	your	life	into	him,	you	have	to	make	God	alive	in	you,	so	he
can	beat	through	your	heart,	he	can	pulsate	in	you,	he	can	love	through	you,	he
can	BE	through	you.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	an	effort	to	allow	God	to	live	in	you,	an	effort
to	become	a	shrine	of	the	divine.
Look	into	your	own	being	and	search	there.	You	will	be	fortunate	if	you	can	find
in	a	dark	corner	of	your	being	somewhere	God	sitting,	tired	--	tired	to	death.	You
will	have	to	revive	him.	You	will	have	to	breathe	for	him,	live	for	him.	You	will
have	to	surrender	your	life	for	the	whole.	A	religious	person	is	one	in	whom	God
has	come	alive	again.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
19
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
Question
HOW	CAN	I	BE	NOTHING	AND	UNIQUE?
You	 can	 be	 unique	 only	when	you	 are	 nothing.	 If	 you	 are	 something,	 you	 are
comparable.
If	you	are	somebody	you	can	be	compared	with	others,	and	 that	which	can	be
compared	cannot	be	unique.	Unique	means	incomparable.	Unique	means	you	are
alone,	there	is	nobody	like	you.	So	if	you	are	somebody	...	If	you	are	a	man	there
are	millions	of	men;	you	are	comparable.	If	you	are	rich,	then	there	are	millions
of	rich	people;	you	are	comparable.	If	you	are	good	you	are	comparable.	If	you
are	bad	you	are	comparable.	If	you	are	a	painter	you	are	comparable.	If	you	are	a
singer	 you	 are	 comparable.	 If	 you	 are	 somebody	 you	 are	 comparable,	 and	 by
being	comparable	you	cease	to	be	unique.
The	moment	you	attain	 to	a	nothingness,	when	the	"I"	disappears	 ...	The	"I"	 is
comparable;	the	"no-I"	is	incomparable.	That's	why	I	say	if	you	become	nothing
you	 become	 unique.	 If	 you	 become	 nothing	 you	 become	 uncorruptible;	 the
nothing	cannot	be	corrupted.
You	 have	 heard	 Lord	 Acton's	 saying,	 "Power	 corrupts;	 and	 absolute	 power
corrupts	 absolutely."	 Why	 does	 power	 corrupt?	 Because	 power	 makes	 you
somebody.	 It	 gives	 you	 a	 definition.	 It	 says	 who	 you	 are	 --	 you	 are	 a	 prime
minister	of	a	country	or	a	president	of	a	country.	Power	gives	you	a	definition;	it
demarks	 who	 you	 are.	 If	 you	 have	money,	 it	 demarks	 you.	 If	 you	 don't	 have
money,	it	demarks	you.	If	you	are	a	musician	or	a	poet	or	a	singer,	it	shows	who
you	are.	The	moment	you	know	who	you	are,	you	are	limited,	you	are	finite	--
and	you	are	comparable.
But	 if	 you	 are	 nobody	 --	 just	 a	 pure	 nothingness,	 pure	 sky	 with	 not	 even	 a
particle	of	dust
--	then	how	can	you	be	compared.?
God	 is	unique	because	God	 is	nothing.	You	cannot	 find	God	anywhere.	Either
you	can	find	him	everywhere	or	nowhere,	but	you	cannot	find	him	somewhere.
Either	he	is	the	whole	or	he	is	nothing.
When	you	are	nothing	you	also	become	the	whole.	When	you	are	nothing	you
also	become	divine.	By	being	somebody	you	remain	human.	By	being	nobody
you	 attain	 to	 divinity,	 you	 become	divine.	Hence	 I	 have	 said	 that	 the	moment
nothingness	arises	in	you,	you	have	become	unique.
Buddha	is	unique	not	because	he	is	the	great	saint,	because	there	are	millions	of
saints.
Jesus	is	unique	not	because	he	is	the	most	virtuous	man.	That's	all	nonsense.	He
is	unique	because	he	is	nothing.	He	is	unique	because	he	is	ready	to	crucify	his
ego.	And	 the	moment	his	 ego	 is	 crucified,	he	 resurrects	 --	he	 resurrects	 as	 the
whole.	He	dies	 as	 the	part	 and	 resurrects	 as	 the	whole.	He	dies	 in	 time	and	 is
resurrected	in	eternity.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
20
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
Question
I	BELONG	TO	THE	 INTELLIGENTSIA;	 I	BELIEVE	 IN	 INTELLECT	AND
REASON.
IS	THERE	A	WAY	OUT	FOR	ME?
It	is	going	to	be	difficult.	The	intellect	has	no	why	out;	the	intellect	is	a	cul-de-
sac.	The	intellect	moves	in	a	vicious	circle.	It	creates	its	own	world	of	concepts,
words,	theories,	and	lives	there.	There	is	no	way	out	from	the	head.	The	way	out
is	from	the	heart,	because	the	heart	opens	--	so	the	way	out	is	possible.	Intellect
lives	 in	 a	 closed	 way.	 Intellect	 has	 no	 doors	 to	 go	 out	 from;	 it	 is	 a	 closed
existence,	encapsulated.
It	 is	very	difficult	 to	communicate	with	an	 intellectual,	almost	 impossible.	You
say	something;	he	hears	something	else.	You	show	something;	he	sees	something
else.	His	intellect	is	a	constant	interference.	It	is	very	difficult	to	communicate;
there	is	no	bridge.
Communication	 is	 possible	 only	 between	 two	 hearts,	 not	 between	 two	 heads.
Two	heads	simply	collide	with	each	other,	conflict	--	confusion,	but	no	meeting,
no	communion.	Only	hearts	meet.
But	 the	 intellect	 has	 been	 praised	 down	 the	 centuries	 because	 intellect	 is	 very
useful.	 The	 intellect	 is	 capable	 of	 exploitation.	 The	 intellect	 is	 capable	 of
domination.	 The	 intellect	 is	 capable	 of	 cheating	 nature,	 of	 oppression.	 The
intellect	is	very,	very	useful	as	far	as	the	world	of	things	is	concerned.	So	man
has	 cultivated	 his	 intellect	 and	 has	 denied	 his	 heart,	 because	 the	 heart	 is
dangerous.	 You	 cannot	 exploit	 if	 you	 are	 a	 heart	 man.	 You	 cannot	 use
somebody's	life	as	a	means	if	you	are	heart-oriented.	The	other	becomes	an	end
unto	himself.	You	cannot	become	a	politician	and	you	cannot	become	a	scientist.
The	 politician	 exploits	 other	 human	 beings,	 and	 the	 scientist	 exploits	 nature.
Both	are	destructive.	The	politician	has	destroyed	humanity,	and	the	scientist	has
destroyed	nature.
Now	 the	 whole	 of	 existence	 on	 this	 earth	 is	 collapsing	 --	 because	 of	 the
politician	and	the	scientist.	And	they	both	are	together.	The	atom	bomb	became
possible	 because	 Albert	 Einstein	 and	 Roosevelt	 joined	 together.	 It	 would	 not
have	 been	 possible	 if	 Roosevelt	 had	 wanted	 it	 alone.	 It	 would	 not	 have	 been
possible	 if	Albert	Einstein	had	wanted	 it	alone.	 It	becomes	possible	only	when
politics	and	science	meet.	Then	 there	 is	a	Hiroshima	and	a	Nagasaki,	and	 then
there	is	destruction.	And	the	politician	and	the	scientist	have	been	in	cooperation
down	the	ages.	They	have	been	helping	each	other.
The	heart-oriented	man	can	become	a	poet,	but	of	what	use	is	a	poet?	Of	what
use	is	poetry?	A	heart-oriented	man	can	become	a	musician,	but	of	what	use	is
music?	A	heart-oriented	person	can	become	a	lover,	but	the	world	does	not	need
lovers.	 It	 needs	 soldiers;	 it	 needs	 people	 to	 kill	 and	 to	 be	 killed.	 It	 needs
butchers.	It	needs	mad	people.	It	does	not	need	sane	people,	who	love,	who	live	-
-	who	live	peacefully	and	who	help	others	to	live	peacefully.	The	world	does	not
believe	in	rose	flowers.	It	believes	in	swords,	in	rifles	in	atom	bombs.
Intellect	 has	 been	 very	 destructive.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 that	 intellect	 has	 to	 be
dropped	completely.	That	will	be	foolish.	Intellect	has	to	be	used	--	but	not	as	a
master,	rather	as	a	slave.	The	mind	is	very	beautiful	as	a	slave,	but	 it	 is	a	very
lousy	 master.	 Never	 make	 the	 intellect	 your	 master.	 Use	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful
instrument,	 a	 biocomputer.	 No	 computer	 yet	 made	 by	 man	 is	 so	 delicate,	 so
evolved	 as	 the	 human	 mind.	 The	 human	 mind	 is	 such	 a	 beautiful,	 delicate
mechanism.	It	can	be	of	much	use,	but	it	should	be	in	the	service	of	love.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
21
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
The	head	 should	be	 in	 the	 service	of	 the	heart;	 then	you	 are	 really	 intelligent.
Remember	 the	 difference.	 I	 don't	 call	 an	 intellectual	 an	 intelligent	 person.	An
intelligent	person	is	one	whose	intellect	is	in	the	service	of	the	heart,	whose	logic
is	 in	 the	 service	of	 love,	whose	 reason	 is	 in	 the	 service	of	 life,	which	 is	more
than	reason.	Otherwise	your	so-called	intellectuals	are	just	stupid	people.
One	story:
Five	men	are	on	a	military	plane	crossing	the	North	Atlantic	--	President	Jimmy
Carter,	former	President	Ford,	Kissinger,	a	Catholic	priest,	and	a	hippie	...
Maybe	the	hippie	was	my	sannyasin.
...	The	plane	is	suddenly	buffeted	by	a	thunderstorm	and	the	pilot	rushes	into	the
passenger	 section.	 "We	 have	 just	 been	 hit	 by	 a	 lightning	 bolt.	 The	 co-pilot	 is
dead.	Our	power	is	gone.
Here	are	four	parachutes.	Decide	among	yourselves	who	will	use	them."	...
There	are	five	persons	and	four	parachutes.
...	With	that,	the	pilot	bails	out.
President	Carter	speaks	first:	"I	have	the	burden	of	the	whole	free	world	on	my
shoulder.	 I	 am	 sure	you	will	 agree	 I	must	 carry	on."	He	dons	 a	 parachute	 and
bails	out.
Ford	speaks	up:	"I	have	never	done	any	harm	to	anyone.	Besides,	I	have	a	golf
date."	And	he	bails	out.
Henry	Kissinger	declares:	"I	am	sure	you	will	agree	that	I	am	the	smartest	man
in	the	world.	Obviously	I	must	be	spared."	And	he	jumps.
The	priest	turns	to	the	hippie,	"I	have	led	a	full	life.	I	am	not	afraid	to	meet	my
maker.	Go	ahead,	my	son,	and	take	the	last	parachute."
"But	Father,"	says	the	hippie,	"there	are	two	parachutes	left.	The	 'smartest	man
in	the	world'	just	bailed	out	wearing	my	knapsack."
Please	 don't	 be	 the	 smartest	 man	 in	 the	 world.	 Intellectuals	 are	 not	 very
intelligent	people.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
22
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
Question
WHAT	 IS	 THE	 REASON	 THAT	 I	 FIND	 IT	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 ENFORCE
RULES?	PART
OF	 ME	 GETS	 ANGRY	 AND	 INSISTS	 THAT	 SANNYASINS	 FOLLOW
SIMPLE	RULES
LIKE	 NO	 SMOKING	 OR	 EATING	 IN	 THE	 GARDENS.	 TEERTHA	 HAS
CALLED	ME
"THE	 COMMANDANT	 OF	 THE	 GARDEN,"	 BUT	 DEEP	 DOWN	 I	 HATE
THE	WHOLE
AUTHORITY	TRIP;	IT	IS	THE	ONLY	PART	OF	MY	WORK	THAT	IS	NOT
ENJOYABLE.	 HOW	 CAN	 ONE	 BE	 A	 NOBODY	 WHEN	 PUT	 IN	 A
POSITION	OF
HAVING	TO	ENFORCE	RULES?
COULD	CHUANG	TZU	LAY	DOWN	HIS	FISHING	POLE	AND	COME	TO
POONA	TO	PLAY	LAXMI'S	ROLE?
The	question	is	asked	by	Nirgun.
Who	do	you	think	is	playing	Laxmi's	role?	It	is	Chuang	Tzu.
A	few	things	to	be	understood	about	the	question.	It's	certainly	difficult	to	play
an	authoritative	role,	but	the	difficulty	arises	not	because	of	the	role	but	because
of	the	unconscious	desire	to	dominate.	You	can	repress	the	desire,	you	can	avoid
any	authoritative	 role;	 the	desire	will	 remain	 there.	Whenever	 the	authoritative
role	is	given	to	you,	the	desire	hidden	in	the	unconscious,	the	repressed	desire,
becomes	alive,	jumps	on	the	role.
It	 is	 beautiful	 to	watch	 it	 and	 get	 rid	 of	 it;	 rather	 than	 getting	 rid	 of	 the	 role,
rather	than	trying	to	avoid	the	role	itself,	it	is	better	to	get	rid	of	the	desire	to	be
authoritative.	So	Nirgun,	it	is	good	that	you	are	placed	in	a	role	where	again	and
again	you	will	have	to	say	to	people,
"Don't	do	this."
But	 this	 can	 be	 said	 in	 a	 very	 nonauthoritative	 way.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be
authoritative	about	it.	Don't	make	it	a	trip.	And	then	the	situation	will	be	a	great
opportunity	 to	grow.	 I	have	put	many	people	 in	authoritative	 roles.	That	 is	 the
only	way	to	get	rid	of	any	repressed	desire.
When	 the	 situation	 is	 there	 and	 the	 opportunity	 is	 there,	 the	 desire	 comes	 up,
surfaces.
And	Nirgun	has	that	desire	deep	down;	hence	the	fear.	She	would	like	to	escape
from	the	situation.	She	would	like	some	work	where	there	is	no	need	to	say	to
anybody,	"Don't	do	this."
But	how	will	you	get	rid	of	the	desire?	It	is	easy	to	avoid	children,	but	it	is	very
difficult	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 parent	 role.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 never	 to	 be	 in	 a	 position
where	you	have	to	say	to	people,
"Do	 this.	 Don't	 do	 this."	 Very	 easy.	 But	 how	 will	 you	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 subtle
aggressive	energy	in	you?
I	would	like	you	to	use	these	situations.	And	this	ashram	has	to	be	a	constantly
ongoing	group.	Every	situation	has	 to	be	used	 in	such	a	way	that	 it	helps	your
spiritual	growth.
She	refers	to	Chuang	Tzu,	the	famous	story	that	Chuang	Tzu	was	asked	by	the
Emperor	 to	 come	 to	 the	 palace	 and	 to	 become	 his	 prime	 minister.	 I	 have
commented	on	the	story.	I	love	Chuang	Tzu.
Two	 messengers	 came	 from	 the	 Emperor.	 Chuang	 Tzu	 was	 fishing,	 and	 they
came	and	they	said,	"The	Emperor	wants	you	to	become	the	prime	minister	of
the	country."	Chuang	Tzu	said,	"Do	you	see	that	turtle	there,	wagging	its	tail	in
the	mud?"	They	said,	"Yes,	we	see."
"And	 do	 you	 see	 how	 happy	 he	 is?"	 They	 said,	 "Certainly.	 He	 looks
tremendously	happy."
And	 then	 Chuang	 Tzu	 said,	 "I	 have	 heard	 that	 in	 the	 king's	 palace	 there	 is	 a
turtle,	three	thousand	years	old,	dead,	encaged	in	gold,	decorated	with	diamonds,
and	he	is	worshiped.	If	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
23
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
you	 ask	 this	 turtle	 who	 is	 wagging	 his	 tail	 in	 the	 mud	 to	 change	 his	 role,	 to
become	 that	 turtle	 in	 the	 palace	 --	 dead,	 but	 encaged	 in	 gold,	 decorated	 with
diamonds,	and	worshiped	by	the	emperor	himself	--	will	 this	 turtle	be	ready	to
accept	that?"
The	messengers	said,	"Certainly	not.	This	turtle	will	not	be	ready."
So	Chuang	Tzu	said,	"Why	should	I	be	ready?	Then	be	gone!	I	am	happy	in	my
mud,	wagging	my	tail,	and	I	don't	want	to	come	to	the	emperor's	palace."
Now,	this	is	a	beautiful	story,	but	if	I	meet	Chuang	Tzu	I	will	say	that	he	is	still
afraid,	he	still	has	a	certain	 fear.	 If	 I	had	been	 in	Chuang	Tzu's	place,	 I	would
have	gone	to	the	palace.
You	can	wag	your	tail	in	the	palace	too,	and	it	will	be	fun.	But	Chuang	Tzu	must
have	been	a	little	afraid,	a	little	fear	that	maybe	he	will	become	imprisoned	there,
maybe	he	will	have	to	lose	his	freedom,	life,	aliveness,	maybe	he	will	start	going
on	 a	 power	 trip,	 ego	 trip.	 But	 that	 fear	 simply	 shows	 that	 something	 in	 the
unconscious	is	still	lingering	on.
A	man	should	be	so	free	that	if	the	situation	demands	him	to	be	in	a	power	role,
he	can	be	in	a	power	role	--	without	being	powerful.	If	the	situation	demands	it
of	 him,	 he	 can	 easily	 accommodate	 himself	 to	 the	 new	 situation	 without	 any
trouble.	A	man	should	not	have	a	fixed	role	in	life.	He	should	be	fluid.	And	the
question	is	not	of	roles;	the	question	is	of	consciousness.
So	 Nirgun,	 be	 more	 conscious,	 be	 more	 loving.	 Don't	 allow	 that	 urge	 to
dominate	 to	 become	 an	 unconscious	 trip,	 that's	 all.	 Become	 conscious	 of	 it.
Through	consciousness,	it	will	be	dropped.
Because	of	this	fear,	millions	of	people	down	the	ages	became	monks	and	nuns.
What	was	their	fear?	Why	were	they	afraid	of	the	world?	They	were	afraid	not
of	the	world,	they	were	afraid	of	their	unconscious	desires.	They	knew	well	that
if	opportunity	is	given	to	them	they	will	fall	from	their	pedestals.	But	what	type
of	awareness	is	this?	If	you	can	be	happy	only	in	the	forest	and	cannot	be	happy
in	 the	marketplace,	 your	 happiness	 is	 not	worth	much.	 If	 you	 can	 be	 celibate
only	when	there	 is	no	woman	available,	your	celibacy	 is	not	of	any	worth,	not
worth	much.	If	you	can	be	nonpossessive	when	there	is	nothing	to	possess,	then
what	is	the	point	of	your	being	nonpossessive?	When	you	have	the	whole	world
to	possess	and	you	remain	non-possessive,	this	is	attainment,	this	I	call	SIDDHI,
this	I	call	real	achievement.
So	my	sannyasins	are	not	 to	become	escapists.	They	have	 to	 live	 in	 the	world,
and	they	have	to	live	above	the	world	--	in	the	world	and	yet	above	it,	in	and	yet
not	in	it.	My	sannyasin	has	to	face	more	than	Mahavir's	sannyasin	or	Buddha's
sannyasin.	 My	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 remain	 liquid,	 flowing	 --	 and	 yet
uncontaminated.
Question
I	AM	NO	POLITICIAN,	NO	DIPLOMAT,	AND	 I	FEEL	LIKE	A	CLOWN.	 I
WANT	TO
DANCE	 ON	 THE	 DESK	 AND	 SING	 ON	 THE	 PHONE	 "HELLO-LUJAH"
RATHER	THAN
"HELLO".	MAY	I	SIGN	UP	FOR	THE	ASHRAM	FOOL?
The	question	is	from	Vani.
Vani,	it	is	too	early.	To	be	really	a	fool	one	needs	to	be	very	wise.	To	be	a	fool
one	 needs	 to	 be	 TRULY	wise.	 That's	 why	 all	 wise	 people	 have	 something	 of
foolishness	in	them.	Jesus	was	known	as	a	fool,	so	was	Buddha,	so	was	Francis
of	Assisi.	They	were	known	as	fools.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
24
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
There	is	a	certain	quality	of	foolishness	in	a	real	wise	man.	Why?	Because	a	real
wise	man	contains	the	opposite.	He	is	both	together.	He	is	more	comprehensive.
A	wise	man	who	has	no	foolishness	in	him	will	be	dry,	dead.	His	juice	will	not
be	flowing.	He	will	not	be	green.	He	will	not	be	able	to	laugh;	he	will	be	serious;
he	will	be	a	long	face.	A	wise	man	who	is	just	wise	and	in	whose	being	the	fool
has	not	been	integrated	will	be	very	heavy.	It	will	be	difficult	to	live	with	such	a
wise	man.	He	will	be	very	boring.	He	will	be	boring	to	you	and	he	will	be	boring
to	himself.	He	will	not	have	any	fun;	his	life	will	not	know	any	joy.	He	will	be
completely	unacquainted	with	 laughter.	And	when	 laughter	 is	missed,	much	 is
missed.
And	 one	 can	 never	 know	 God	 without	 laughter.	 One	 can	 never	 know	 God
without	joy.
One	can	never	know	reality	just	by	being	wise.
The	 fool	 has	 something	 to	 contribute	 too	 --	 the	 laughter,	 the	 joy,	 the
nonseriousness,	the	quality	of	fun,	delight.	The	fool	can	dance,	and	the	fool	can
dance	for	any	reason	whatsoever
--	 any	excuse	will	 do.	The	 fool	 can	 laugh.	And	 the	 fool	 can	 laugh	not	only	 at
others,	he	can	laugh	at	himself.
When	 the	 wise	 man	 and	 the	 fool	 meet	 together	 in	 a	 consciousness,	 then
something	of	tremendous	value	happens.	There	are	foolish	people	and	there	are
wise	 people.	 The	 fool	 is	 shallow;	 the	wise	man	 is	 serious.	 The	 fool	 does	 not
know	what	 truth	 is,	 and	 the	wise	man	does	not	know	what	 joy	 is.	And	a	 truth
without	 joy	 is	worse	 than	 a	 lie.	And	 a	 joy	without	 truth	 is	 not	 reliable.	A	 joy
without	truth	is	momentary,	cannot	be	of	the	eternal.
My	 approach	 is	 that	 of	 great	 balance.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 very,	 very	 balanced.
Delicate	 is	 the	 balance,	 difficult	 to	 achieve,	 but	 once	 achieved	 you	will	 know
that	there	is	a	quality	of	consciousness	which	can	absorb	wisdom	and	foolishness
together,	 and	 there	 is	no	contradiction.	They	both	become	 two	aspects	of	your
energy.
Then	 you	 are	 sincere,	 but	 not	 serious.	 Then	 you	 are	 truthful,	 but	 not	 joyless.
Then	you	have	joy,	but	the	joy	is	not	of	the	momentary,	it	is	of	the	eternal.	It	is
not	within	time;	it	is	beyond	time.
So	 Vani,	 it	 is	 too	 early.	 To	 really	 become	 the	 ashram	 fool,	 you	 will	 have	 to
become	almost	enlightened.	Don't	think	that	it	is	easy	to	become	a	fool.
I	am	not	talking	about	the	common	variety	of	fools.	Gurdjieff	used	to	talk	about
eighteen	 varieties	 of	 idiots;	 they	 come	 in	 all	 sizes	 and	 all	 shapes.	 But	 I	 am
talking	about	the	ultimate.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	God	is	the	ultimate	idiot.	Looks	very	profane.	The	ultimate
idiot,	God?
And	Gurdjieff	used	to	say	if	he	was	not	an	idiot,	why	should	he	have	created	you
all?	 Some	 idiocy,	 some	 trait	 of	 foolishness	must	 exist	 in	 him;	 otherwise	 why
man?	And	not	only	you.
Men	like	Adolf	Hitler,	Genghis	Khan,	Nadir	Shah;	men	like	Joseph	Stalin,	Mao
Tsetung.	Why	 in	 the	 first	 place?	God	must	 have	 some	 trait	 of	 foolishness.	He
must	 be	 fooling	 around;	 he	must	 be	 trying	 trial	 and	 error.	 Yes,	 sometimes	 he
turns	up	with	a	Buddha	too,	that's	okay	--	but	rarely,	very	rarely.
God	must	be	 a	 fool.	Otherwise	 there	 cannot	be	 so	much	 joy	 in	 existence.	 Just
think:	a	mahatma	ruling	 the	world.	All	 joy	will	be	simply	prohibited.	Can	you
laugh	 in	 a	Christian	 heaven.?	Have	 you	 asked	 this	 question	 to	 your	ministers,
priests?	 Can	 you	 laugh	 in	 a	 Christian	 heaven.?	 Can	 you	 have	 a	 belly	 laugh,
standing	in	front	of	God?	No,	that	doesn't	seem	proper.
But	I	 tell	you,	you	can	have.	And	if	you	don't	have,	God	will	have,	 looking	at
your	seriousness.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
25
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
Look	at	trees,	the	birds,	the	animals,	the	stars.	There	seems	to	be	tremendous	joy.
Life	is	not	serious.	Life	is	very,	very	playful.
So	when	I	say	become	a	fool	and	wise	together,	I	mean	don't	 think	of	life	as	a
duty,	but	as	a	play.	Always	remember,	if	your	prayer	is	without	laughter,	you	are
missing	 something.	 If	 your	 laughter	 is	 without	 prayer,	 you	 are	 again	 missing
something.	A	prayer	without	laughter	is	dead,	and	a	laughter	without	prayer	has
no	depth.	Can	you	pray	and	laugh	together?	Can	you	be	prayerful	and	dance	too?
Can	you	meditate	and	love	together?
That	is	the	synthesis	I	am	trying.	That	is	the	highest	possibility	a	man	can	arrive
at,	the	greatest	symphony,	when	you	can	love	and	meditate	together.	There	have
been	meditators,	 but	 they	 were	 against	 love,	 and	 there	 have	 been	 lovers	 who
were	against	meditation.	There	have	been	people	who	say	eat,	drink,	be	merry,
but	they	are	against	God.	The	Charvakas,	the	Epicureans	--	they	say	eat,	drink,
be	merry,	there	is	no	God.	They	help	you	to	be	joyful,	but	that	joy	cannot	be	very
deep.	Without	God	your	joy	cannot	go	very	deep.
Your	 joy	 --	 on	 your	 own	 --	 cannot	 be	 real	 joy.	 It	 will	 be	 very	 shallow	 and
superficial.	It	will	not	have	the	quality	of	the	ultimate	in	it.	It	will	not	throb	with
eternity.	And	you	will	get	fed	up	with	it	sooner	or	later.
That's	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 the	 West.	 The	 West	 has	 followed	 the	 Epicurean
tradition	--
eat,	 drink,	 be	merry.	 Now	 people	 are	 fed	 up,	 really	 fed	 up;	 nothing	 seems	 to
satisfy.	The	superficial	cannot	satisfy	long.	One	day	or	other	it	 is	exposed;	you
come	to	know	that	it	is	not	much	and	it	is	a	repetition.	The	West	is	fed	up	with
the	Epicurean	ideology,	the	ideology	that	says,	"Just	enjoy.	There	is	no	need	to
seek	and	search."
And	 the	East	 is	 fed	up	with	 the	opposite	 ideology,	 the	other	polarity	 that	 says,
"Don't	 enjoy,"	 that	 says,	 "'Eat,	 drink,	 be	merry'	 is	 the	 ideology	 of	 the	 sinners.
Wear	long	faces,	be	ascetics,	mahatmas.	Do	yoga.	Fast.	Destroy	the	body	and	the
senses.	 And	 be	 seriously	 after	 God:	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 is	 worth	 achieving	 is
God-realization;	everything	else	has	to	be	sacrificed."
The	East	is	fed	up,	tired.	The	West	is	fed	up	and	tired.	It	is	natural	because	both
have	chosen	one	aspect.	God	is	all	the	aspects	together.	God	means	totality.
My	 approach	 towards	 God	 is	 Epicurus	 plus	 Buddha.	 Be	 as	 Epicurean	 as
possible,	and	be	a	meditator,	a	seeker,	as	authentic	as	possible.	And	I	don't	see
that	there	is	any	conflict.	There	is	no	conflict	in	meditation	and	love.	In	fact,	the
more	you	meditate,	the	more	you	become	capable	of	love;	the	more	you	love,	the
more	you	become	capable	of	meditation.
And	 there	 is	no	conflict	between	being	a	 fool	and	being	wise.	 If	you	can	have
both,	that	is	the	best.	And	don't	settle	for	one;	otherwise	one	day	you	will	repent.
The	missing	one	will	take	its	revenge,	and	with	vengeance.
But	to	Vani	I	would	like	to	say	it	is	too	early.	Get	a	little	ready.
I	have	heard:
Once	there	was	a	fellow	who	was	too	forward.	He	would	meet	a	girl	and	within
two	 seconds	 say,	 "Honey,	 let	 us	 make	 love."	 His	 buddy	 took	 him	 aside	 and
explained	 that	 he	 should	 act	 suave	 and	 carry	 on	 a	 friendly	 conversation	 for	 a
while	 before	 he	 suggested	 such	 things.	 On	 his	 next	 date	 he	 remembered	 the
words	of	wisdom.	He	started	the	conversation	by	saying,	"Honey,	have	you	ever
been	to	Africa?"	just	to	create	a	conversation.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
26
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
She	said,	"No."	So	he	said,	"Well,	let	us	make	love."
Vani,	it	is	too	early.	Wait	a	little	more.	The	hello	has	to	become	hello-lujah,	but
wait	a	little	more.
Question
ONE	 BEAUTIFUL	 DAY	 WHEN	 LOVE	 WAS	 HUMMING	 IN	 THE	 AIR,
EVEN
WINNIE	THE	POOH	FORGOT	HIS	CONSTANT	FRUITLESS	SEARCH	FOR
A	POT	OF
HONEY	 AND	 JUST	 SAT	 DOWN.	 WHEN	 HIS	 EYES	 OPENED	 HE	 WAS
BOWLED	OVER
TO	SEE	ALL	AROUND	HIM	HUGE	POTS	OVERFLOWING	WITH	MORE
HONEY
THAN	HE	COULD	EVER	EAT.
WHEN	HE	ROLLED	INTO	EEYORE'S	LATER	THAT	NIGHT,	ALL	STICKY
AND
CONTENT	 AND	 FULL	 OF	 HIS	 DISCOVERY,	 EEYORE	 LOOKED	 WISE
AND	SAID,
"HONEY	 IS	 ALWAYS	 THERE	 --	 BUT	 YOU	 CAN	ONLY	 FIND	 IT	WHEN
YOU	ARE
NOT	LOOKING.	"
POOH	 BEAR	 THOUGHT	 HE	 UNDERSTOOD,	 BUT	 FOR	 DAYS	 AFTER
WHEN	HE
MADE	SUDDEN	SURREPTITIOUS	GLANCES	OUT	OF	THE	CORNER	OF
HIS	EYE	--
NO	 HONEY!	 HE	 EVEN	 TRIED	 SITTING	 DOWN	 AGAIN	 AND	 SAYING
VERY
LOUDLY,	"I	AM	NOT	LOOKING	FOR	HONEY!"	BUT	WHEN	HE	OPENED
HIS	EYES,	THE	HONEY	STILL	WAS	NOT	THERE.
DEAR	 EEYORE,	 HOW	 CAN	 I	 DROP	 MY	 GREED	 AND	 MY
EXPECTATIONS,	AND
JUST	BE?
The	question	is	from	Deva	Anando.
Yes,	it	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	questions.	When	you	are	not	looking,	the
honey	is	everywhere.	When	you	start	looking	for	it,	suddenly	it	disappears.	This
is	 a	 great	 truth.	 The	moment	 you	 start	 looking	 for	 it,	 you	 become	 tense.	 The
moment	 you	 start	 looking	 for	 it,	 you	 become	 very,	 very	 concentrated,	 you
become	closed	and	narrow.	And	the	honey	is	possible	only	when	you	are	open,
not	closed,	not	narrow.	The	honey	overflows	all	around	you	when	you	are	also
overflowing,	in	every	direction.
To	look	means	to	be	directed	in	one	direction.	Not	to	look,	not	to	seek,	then	you
are	available	to	all	directions	--	you	are	available	to	every	direction	possible,	you
are	available	to	the	whole	existence.
But	the	difficulty	is	that	if	I	tell	you	not	to	look	you	say,	"Okay,	we	will	not	try,"
but	an	unconscious	effort	goes	on.	You	even	try	not	to	look,	but	that	too	becomes
just	an	effort	to	look.
The	question	is	very	fundamental.	Buddha	says,	"If	you	are	desireless,	all	desires
will	be	fulfilled."	Now,	one	monk	asked	one	day,	"Since	you	have	said	 that	all
desires	will	be	fulfilled	if	you	become	desireless,	I	have	got	only	one	desire:	to
be	desireless.	Now	what	to	do	about	it?"	But	the	desire	to	be	desireless	is	still	a
desire;	it	is	on	the	same	plane.	Whether	you	desire	money	or	you	desire	power,
prestige,	or	you	desire	desirelessness,	it	makes	no	difference	at	Osho	-	The	First
Principle
27
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
all:	 only	 the	 object	 of	 desire	 changes;	 the	 desire	 remains	 the	 same.	 And	 the
desire	is	the	problem,	not	the	object.
If	 you	 desire	 money,	 people	 will	 call	 you	 very	 worldly,	 materialistic.	 If	 you
desire	God,	people	will	call	you	spiritual,	other	worldly,	religious.	But	those	who
know,	for	them,	there	is	no	difference	at	all:	you	are	still	worldly.	It	is	not	that	a
few	desires	are	worldly	and	a	 few	desires	are	otherworldly!	Desire,	as	such,	 is
worldly.	There	can	be	no	otherworldly	desire.
So	God	cannot	be	desired.	If	you	desire,	you	miss.	If	you	seek,	you	will	not	find.
The	more	you	seek,	the	more	miserable	you	will	become.	Don't	seek,	and	find.
Just	 be	 --	 in	 an	 attitude	 of	 nonseeking.	 Not	 that	 deep	 down	 you	 still	 go	 on
thinking	"Now	he	must	be	coming	because	I	am	not	seeking";	then	you	are	in	the
same	trap	again.
The	question	is	what	should	be	done:	"How	can	I	drop	my	greed	...?"	But	why
do	you	want	to	drop	you	greed?	Why	in	the	first	place	do	you	want	to	drop	your
greed?	There	must	 be	 some	 greed	 behind	 it	 --	 to	 attain	 to	God,	 to	 nirvana,	 to
enlightenment,	to	this	and	that,	all	sorts	of	rubbish	things,	all	nonsense.
Enlightenment	HAPPENS.	You	 cannot	 desire	 it.	When	 one	 day	 suddenly	 you
find	 all	 desires	 have	 disappeared,	 enlightenment	 is	 there.	 It	 has	 always	 been
there;	just	because	of	desires	you	could	not	see	it.	The	desire	becomes	a	curtain
on	your	eyes.	You	lose	clarity,	you	cannot	see	what	is.	How	can	you	see	what	is
when	 you	 want	 something	 to	 be	 there?	 When	 you	 expect	 something,	 the
expectation	does	not	 allow	you	 to	 see	 that	which	 is.	With	 the	 expectation	you
have	already	moved	into	the	future.
You	want	a	beautiful	woman,	and	you	have	a	 fantasy.	Because	of	 that	 fantasy,
you	will	miss	your	woman,	who	is	just	in	front	of	you,	but	because	of	the	fantasy
you	cannot	see	her.
The	fantasy	goes	on	driving	you	away.
You	ask,	"How	can	I	drop	my	greed?"	I	would	like	to	ask	why	in	the	first	place
you	want	to	drop	greed.	And	suddenly	you	will	find	some	greed	hidden	behind.
Greed	behind	greed	behind	greed.	This	is	not	going	to	help.
So	 I	will	 not	 tell	 you	 how	 to	 drop	 it.	 I	will	 tell	 you	 how	 to	 understand	 it.	 In
understanding,	it	drops	on	its	own	accord.	Not	that	you	drop	it.	You	cannot.	You
are	greed;	how	can	you	drop	greed?	You	are	desire;	how	can	you	drop	desire?
You	are	the	search;	how	can	you	drop	seeking	and	searching?	This	YOU	is	the
center	of	all	your	madnesses.	You	ask	how	to	drop	greed.	Who	is	asking?	The
"I".	Now	the	"I"	wants	even	God	to	be	possessed.	The	"I"	wants	enlightenment
to	be	possessed.	The	"I"	does	not	only	want	the	world,	it	wants	the	other	world
too.	The	"I"	is	getting	more	insane.
Just	understand.	There	is	no	need	to	drop	anything.	Man	cannot	drop	anything.
Just	 try	 to	understand.	Try	 to	understand	 the	ways	of	greed.	Try	 to	understand
how	greed	functions.	Try	to	understand	how	greed	brings	more	and	more	misery,
more	and	more	frustration,	how	greed	goes	on	creating	new	hells	for	you,	ahead
of	you,	goes	on	creating	new	hells	 so	when	you	are	 there,	 they	are	 ready.	 Just
look	into	the	very	phenomenon	of	greed	--	with	no	idea	of	dropping	it,	because	if
you	want	to	drop	it,	a	part	of	greed	will	remain	unobserved.	The	part	that	wants
to	drop	greed	will	remain	unobserved,	will	remain	in	the	dark.
There	is	no	need	to	think	in	these	terms.	Simply	try	to	understand.	That	is	what
Socrates	means	when	 he	ways,	 "Know	 thyself."	 It	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you	 sit
silently	and	repeat	"I	am	soul,'?	"I	am	God";	it	doesn't	mean	that.	"Know	thyself"
means	whatsoever	is	the	case,	go	into	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
28
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
it	deeply,	layer	by	layer.	Expose	it	to	your	understanding.	Go	to	the	very	bottom
of	it,	to	the	very	root	of	it.	Look	through	and	through.
And	the	day	you	have	looked	through	all	the	layers	...	The	layers	are	just	like	an
onion.
You	go	on	peeling	an	onion.	So	peel	your	being	 like	an	onion,	go	on	peeling.
Fresher	layers	you	will	find;	go	on	peeling,	go	on	peeling	...	One	day	suddenly
you	have	peeled	through	and	through	and	nothing	but	emptiness	 is	 left	 in	your
hand.	 In	 that	 emptiness	 greed	 has	 disappeared,	 and	 in	 that	 emptiness
enlightenment	has	happened.	In	that	emptiness	God	is.
That	emptiness	is	God.
So	 rather	 than	 asking	 how	 to	 drop	 greed,	 ask	 how	 to	 understand	 greed.	 The
whole	 thing	 hangs	 on	 one	 thing:	 understanding.	 When	 the	 understanding	 of
anything	is	perfect,	it	liberates.
That's	what	 Jesus	means	when	he	 says,	 "Truth	 liberates."	When	you	know	 the
truth	of	greed	you	are	liberated.	When	you	know	the	truth	of	sexuality	you	are
liberated.	When	 you	 know	 the	 truth	 of	 anything	whatsoever	 you	 are	 liberated
from	it.	To	know	is	to	be	free;	not	to	know	is	to	be	in	bondage.
So	don't	 ask	 how	 to	 drop.	There	 is	 no	 hurry.	 In	 fact,	 go	 deep	 into	 it,	watch	 it
deeply	before	it	drops;	otherwise	you	will	always	miss	that	understanding.	If	it
drops	before	understanding,	something	will	remain	missing.	That's	why	it	never
drops,	it	clings	to	you.	It	clings	up	to	the	last	moment,	when	you	understand	it,
when	you	have	looked	into	it	so	deeply	that	nothing	is	unrevealed,	you	have	seen
the	ways	of	greed,	the	subtle	ways	of	greed.
Now,	 this	 question	 is	 a	 subtle	 way	 of	 greed:	 how	 to	 drop	 it?	 That	 was	 the
problem	of	Pooh;	he	thought	he	understood:	"...	but	for	days	after	when	he	made
sudden	surreptitious	glances	out	of	the	corner	of	his	eye	--	no	honey!"	You	will
also	make	surreptitious	glances	from	the	corner	--	unless	you	understand	greed
totally.
"He	even	tried	sitting	down	again	and	saying	very	loudly,	 'I	am	not	looking	for
honey!"'
And	you	will	say	the	same	too.	You	have	said	it	already	many	times,	that	"I	am
not	looking	for	God	and	I	am	not	looking	for	enlightenment.	Osho	says	nirvana
is	the	last	nightmare.	I	am	not	looking	for	it"	--	and	then	surreptitiously,	from	the
corner	of	the	eye,	you	are	looking	for	it.
You	are	waiting	and	you	 say,	 "What	 is	 the	matter?	And	Osho	has	 said,	 'When
you	 drop	 all	 desire	 it	 happens,'	 and	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 yet."	 You	 have	 not
dropped	the	desire	yet.
But	you	CANNOT	drop	the	desire!	I	insist	on	it!	My	emphasis	is	absolute	on	it.
There	have	been	other	teachers	who	say,	"Drop	it!"	I	don't	say	drop	it,	because	I
know	you	cannot	drop	it.	Nobody	has	ever	dropped	it.	Not	even	a	Buddha	was
able	to	drop	it.	It	dropped	on	its	own	accord	one	day	--	when	Buddha	understood
it.
If	you	drop	something,	the	ego	now	feels	very	enhanced	"I	have	dropped	it"	--
and	the	ego	is	the	root	cause.	It	will	create	a	new	greed;	it	will	find	new	ways.	It
is	very	inventive.	Because	of	this	inventive	ego,	you	cannot	discover	that	which
is.	Because	of	 too	much	 inventiveness,	 the	 reality	 is	being	missed.	 It	will	 find
some	other	way;	from	the	back	door	it	will	come	back.
So	don't	ask	how	to	drop	it.	I	am	not	here	to	help	you	to	drop	it.	I	am	here	to	help
you	to	understand	it.	If	it	is	still	there,	it	simply	shows	one	thing:	that	you	have
not	understood	it.
You	have	not	done	your	homework	yet.	Do	the	homework.	Don't	be	in	a	hurry	to
drop	it.	Just	look,	watch.
Watch	in	small	things	of	life.	You	are	walking	on	the	road;	a	car	passes	by.	Just
look	 into	 yourself:	 some	 greed	 has	 arisen.	 The	 moment	 you	 say	 the	 car	 is
beautiful,	a	subtle	greed	has	arisen	to	possess	it.	A	beautiful	woman	passes	by,	or
a	man,	and	suddenly	a	desire	to	possess.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
29
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
I	have	heard:
A	woman	sat	in	her	doctor's	waiting	room	alongside	of	a	mother	and	her	child	of
five.	 The	 child	 sat	 very	 quietly	 while	 the	 woman	 and	 his	 mother	 exchanged
pleasantries.	The	woman	was	very	much	impressed	by	the	child's	good	behavior
...
He	was	really	graceful,	sitting	silently	like	a	small	Buddha.
...	"I	wish,"	she	said,	"I	had	a	little	boy	like	you."
"Well,"	countered	the	child	--	the	little	Buddha,	"why	don't	you	get	pregnant?"
The	moment	you	see	something	--	a	beautiful	child	--	and	a	deep	desire	arises:
you	should	have	a	child	 like	 this.	And	 the	child	 is	saying,	"Why	don't	you	get
pregnant?"	And	he	is	right.
In	fact,	if	you	look	deeply	in	your	desire,	you	will	find	that	the	desire	to	become
pregnant	has	arisen	in	you.	On	the	deepest	layer	it	 is	there.	On	the	surface	you
simply	 say,	 "How	beautiful	 a	 child.	 I	wish	 I	had	a	 little	boy	 like	 this."	On	 the
surface	it	is	very	simple,	as	if	you	have	simply	complimented	the	child,	but	deep
down	many	things	have	happened.
In	small	things	of	life	...	You	are	eating,	you	know	your	appetite	is	gone,	and	you
continue	 to	 eat.	Watch.	Greed	 is	 there.	Now	you	are	not	 eating	out	of	hunger;
you	are	eating	out	of	greed.	One	day	in	meditation	something	beautiful	happens	-
-	 a	 breeze	 comes	 into	 your	 being,	 suddenly	 there	 is	 light,	 suddenly	 there	 is
fragrance,	and	you	sway	with	that	fragrance	--	and	then	it	is	gone.	Now	you	want
every	 day	 in	 every	 meditation	 that	 that	 has	 to	 happen	 now.	 Now	 you	 are
frustrated;	and	the	more	you	are	frustrated,	 the	 less	 is	 the	possibility.	Now	that
window	will	never	open	again.	And	when	it	doesn't	open,	you	hanker	for	it	too
much;	then	you	become	very	miserable	--	"Why	is	it	not	happening?"
I	have	been	observing	 so	many	meditators,	 thousands.	When	 for	 the	 first	 time
meditation	 really	goes	deep,	 immediately,	 for	months,	 that	glimpse	disappears.
And	then	they	come	to	me,	saying,	"What	is	happening?	I	had	seen	something,
and	it	was	tremendously	beautiful.
Why	has	it	disappeared?	What	wrong	have	I	done?"	You	have	not	done	anything
wrong:	you	became	greedy.	When	 it	happened	 for	 the	 first	 time,	you	were	not
greedy,	because	you	had	not	 ever	known	 it.	How	could	you	have	been	greedy
about	it?	It	was	unknown;	it	came	from	out	of	the	blue.	It	simply	came;	you	were
caught	unaware.	Now	watch.	It	came	when	you	were	not	asking	for	it	--	you	had
not	known	it,	so	you	could	not	have	asked	for	it.	It	came	on	its	own.
Now	you	are	asking	for	it.	Now	you	are	asking	for	something	which	had	come
without	your	asking.	You	are	creating	the	whole	trouble	--	the	greed	has	entered.
Sometimes	it	has	happened	that	a	man	has	come	very	close	to	satori,	very	close,
and	then	he	went	astray	because	of	the	greed.
So	watch.	Eating,	watch.	 In	 the	morning,	you	know	 that	 the	 sleep	 is	over,	but
you	still	want	to	turn	over	and	have	a	little	nap.	Now	it	is	greed.	If	your	body	is
fresh	 and	 you	 are	 feeling	 good	 and	 the	 tiredness	 is	 gone,	 then	 watch.	 It	 is
everywhere.	Eating,	sleeping,	meditating	--	it	is	everywhere.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
30
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
One	day	you	make	love	to	your	woman	or	to	your	man,	and	it	is	ecstatic.	Now
you	hanker,	now	you	start	repeating,	but	that	ecstasy	never	happens	again.	You
are	miserable.	You	don't	know	what	has	happened,	what	has	gone	wrong,	"Why
am	 I	 not	 attaining	 that	 peak?"	You	will	 never	 attain	 it	 again,	 because	 you	 are
looking	for	it.	The	first	time	it	happened,	you	were	not	looking	for	it.
This	is	a	fundamental	law.	Things	happen	and	they	happen	on	their	own	accord;
you	 cannot	manage	 them	 to	 happen.	Great	 things	 cannot	 be	managed	 by	 you;
they	are	beyond	you.
You	 can,	 at	 the	most,	 allow	 them	 to	 happen.	At	 the	most,	 you	 can	 keep	 your
doors	open	so	that	they	can	happen,	but	you	cannot	force	them	to	happen.
If	 you	 force,	 then	 nothing	 happens.	 Then	 you	 can	 go	 on	 making	 love	 to	 the
woman	and	nothing	will	happen;	 in	 fact,	you	will	 start	 feeling	nauseous	about
the	whole	thing.	You	will	start	hating	the	woman,	you	will	start	hating	the	man;
you	 will	 think	 that	 the	 other	 is	 cheating	 you.	 And	 you	 will	 start	 looking	 for
another	woman,	for	another	man,	somewhere	else	to	go	--
"It	 is	 not	 happening	 here	 anymore."	 And	 you	 will	 become	 suspicious	 as	 to
whether	it	had	ever	happened	or	you	had	imagined.	How	can	it	happen	with	this
woman?	It	is	not	happening	now.
So	you	will	become	doubtful	even	about	the	experience	that	had	happened.
People	come	to	me	and	they	say,	"Now	for	months	nothing	is	happening	in	the
meditation,"	 and	 they	 say	 they	 have	 become	 doubtful.	Had	 they	 imagined	 the
first	time?	They	had	not	imagined;	it	had	happened.	Now	they	want	it	to	happen
and	they	are	imagining	and	they	are	creating	an	idea	around	themselves.
So	 what	 is	 to	 be	 done?	 You	 have	 to	 watch	 all	 the	 ways	 of	 the	 mind.	 Greed,
desire,	 ambition,	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 domination	 --	 you	 have	 to	 watch
everything.	And	they	are	all	interconnected,	remember.	If	greed	disappears,	then
anger	 will	 disappear.	 If	 anger	 disappears,	 jealousy	 will	 disappear.	 If	 jealousy
disappears,	 violence	will	 disappear.	 If	 violence	disappears,	 possessiveness	will
disappear.	They	are	all	 intertwined.	In	fact,	 they	are	spokes	of	the	same	wheel,
and	the	hub	that	supports	them	all	is	the	ego.	So	watch	the	ways	of	the	ego.
Watching,	 watching,	 watching	 ...	 one	 day	 suddenly	 it	 is	 not	 there.	 Only	 the
watcher	is	left.
That	moment	of	pure	watching	is	the	moment	of	transformation.
Question
MY	 PARENTS	 DECEIVED	ME	WITH	 FATHER	 CHRISTMAS.	 ARE	 YOU
REAL,	OR
WILL	I	BE	DISILLUSIONED	AGAIN?
The	question	is	from	Anand	Nitya.	Why	she	has	asked	has	to	be	understood.
Since	she	has	been	here	in	this	ashram,	she	has	not	been	able	to	become	part	of
the	family.
She	 has	 been	 resisting	 in	many	ways.	 I	 tolerate	 these	 things	 for	 a	 time,	 but	 I
cannot	 tolerate	 them	forever;	otherwise	 I	will	not	be	able	 to	help	you	at	all.	A
day	is	bound	to	come	when	I	will	start	hammering.	The	day	I	start	hammering,
you	start	feeling	negative,	you	start	feeling	against	me.	If	I	go	according	to	you,
then	everything	is	beautiful,	then	Osho	is	beautiful.	The	moment	I	start	going	in
some	other	direction	when	it	is	not	easy	for	you	to	go	with	me,	then	negativity
arises.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
31
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
And	I	have	to	go	against	all	of	you!	Because	I	love	you.	I	have	to	go	against	all
of	you;	otherwise	I	will	not	be	of	any	help	to	you.	If	I	simply	go	on	consoling
you	 and	 simply	 go	 on	 patting	 your	 heads	 and	 simply	 go	 on	 saying,	 "You	 are
good,	everything	is	good"	...
I	say	that	for	a	time.	In	the	beginning	I	say	that.	If	you	are	not	yet	a	sannyasin,	I
will	 continue	 saying,	 "Very	 good!"	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 a	 sannyasin	 things
change.	Then	 I	have	 to	be	more	 truthful	 to	you,	even	 if	 it	hurts.	 It	hurts,	 truth
hurts,	because	you	have	become	so	untrue.
So	the	day	I	started	hammering	on	Nitya,	she	must	have	started	thinking,	"Where
have	I	come	to?	Is	this	man	really	a	Osho	or	not?"
Hence	 the	question:	 "My	parents	deceived	me	with	Father	Christmas.	Are	you
real,	or	will	I	be	disillusioned	again?"
First	 thing:	 Father	 Christmas	 is	 far	 more	 real	 than	 I.	 I	 am	 absolutely	 unreal,
because	I	don't	exist	as	an	ego.	I	am	not	solid	at	all.	If	you	go	through	me,	you
can	pass	through	me	without	coming	across	anybody.	I	am	empty.
The	second	thing:	Because	of	this	emptiness,	I	can	function	as	a	screen	for	any
sort	of	projection.	You	can	project	anything	on	me.	There	are	people	who	think	I
am	a	saint,	and	there	are	people	who	think	I	am	a	rascal.	There	are	people	who
think	I	am	the	greatest	sinner	there	is,	and	there	are	people	who	think	I	am	the
greatest	Master	 there	 is.	And	both	are	 right	 and	both	are	wrong,	because	 I	 am
neither.	You	project.	There	are	some	people	who	come	and	they	say,	"Osho,	you
have	 such	 beautiful	 eyes."	And	 just	 the	 other	 day	 I	was	 reading	 an	 article	 by
Rahul	Singh	in	THE	ILLUSTRATED	WEEKLY	OF	INDIA,	and	he	says,	"This
man	has	hypnotic	and	sinister	eyes."	Good!
It	is	difficult	for	you	not	to	project,	that	I	know.	But	I	have	to	help	to	destroy	all
your	projections.	Once	your	projections	are	destroyed,	you	will	be	freed.
Father	 Christmas	 is	 far	 more	 real.	 If	 you	 look	 into	 him,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 real
person	there.	If	you	look	into	me,	there	is	no	person.	In	the	East	we	call	God	the
imperson.	There	is	no	personality.	I	am	just	a	window;	you	can	look	through	me.
There	is	not	even	a	glass;	there	is	nothing.	But	you	can	project.	So	it	is	very	easy
for	you	 to	project	because,	whatsoever	you	project,	 there	 is	nobody	 to	deny	 it.
There	is	nobody	to	say,	"No,	your	projection	is	wrong."
You	are	playing	the	game	alone.
You	will	know	my	reality	only	when	you	have	stopped	all	projections,	when	you
have	 become	 empty,	 when	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 meditative	 energy.	 The
meditative	 energy	 is	 a	 nonprojective	 energy.	 It	 does	 not	 project	 anything;	 it
simply	looks	at	things	as	they	are.
If	 a	meditator	 comes	 across	 a	 flower,	 he	will	 not	 even	 say	 it	 is	 a	 rose	 flower,
because	the	word	"rose"	becomes	a	projection.	With	the	word	"rose"	all	the	roses
that	 you	 have	 known	 before	 come	 between	 you	 and	 this	 rose.	With	 the	word
"rose"	all	that	you	have	heard	about	roses,	all	the	poetry	that	you	have	read	about
roses	--	all	that	arises	between	you	and	the	reality.	A	real	meditator	will	simply
look	at	the	rose	without	even	saying	the	word	"rose"
inside	his	being;	there	will	be	no	language.	There	will	be	no	idea	what	it	is.	He
will	simply	see	that	which	is,	the	nameless.	And	that	is	the	only	way	to	see	the
real	rose.
If	you	want	to	see	me,	my	reality	--	I	am	not	a	person,	but	if	you	want	to	see	my
nothingness	--	you	will	have	to	come	to	me	without	any	ideas.	And	that's	how,	if
you	come	closer	and	closer,	more	and	more	projections	will	fall.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
32
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
"Are	you	real,	or	will	 I	be	disillusioned	again?"	You	will	be	disillusioned,	and
this	 time	disillusioned	 forever.	That's	my	hope.	 If	you	cooperate	with	me,	you
will	be	disillusioned	forever.	Then	you	will	never	project	again.	And	that's	all	a
Master	can	do:	to	help	you	not	to	project	again.
I	have	heard:
Two	Martians	were	walking	along	Piccadilly.	One	of	them	nudged	the	other	and
pointing	to	a	traffic	light	said,	"How	would	you	like	her	for	a	girlfriend?"	...
A	traffic	light!	But	you	can	think	about	Martians	--	they	can	project	...	"Wow!"
said	his	friend.	"What	a	beauty!	I	think	I	will	go	over	and	chat	her	up."
After	about	ten	minutes	he	rejoined	his	companion,	who	asked,	"Well,	how	did
you	get	on?"
"Not	bad,"	 replied	 the	second	Martian.	 "She	did	not	actually	 say	anything,	but
she	keeps	winking	at	me."
A	traffic	light,	but	you	can	project.
All	your	projections	are	yours,	Nitya,	and	they	have	to	disappear.	You	have	to	be
disillusioned.	Only	in	that	moment	of	disillusionment	does	reality	explode.
Question
THE	ZEN	MASTERS	SAY,	"KILL	YOUR	PARENTS,	"	AND	EVEN,	"IF	YOU
MEET
THE	 BUDDHA	 ON	 THE	 WAY,	 KILL	 HIM	 IMMEDIATELY."	 IS	 IT	 NOT
SHOCKING?	IS
IT	NOT	IRREVERENT?
It	 is	 shocking,	but	precisely,	 that	 is	 the	purpose.	A	Master	has	 to	shock	you	 to
awake	you.
A	Master	is	not	a	lullaby.	A	Master	is	not	a	tranquilizer.	A	Master	has	to	be	like	a
sharp	knife	in	your	heart.	To	be	with	a	Master	is	painful.	And	the	Master	has	to
destroy	all	possibilities	of	projections.
First	the	child	learns	to	project	on	the	mother	and	the	father.	Then	for	the	whole
life	one	goes	on	projecting.	Have	you	watched	it	in	your	own	being?	Whenever
you	 are	 attracted	 by	 a	 woman,	 you	 may	 be	 again	 looking	 for	 your	 mother.
Whenever	you	are	attracted	by	a	man,	just	watch.	Are	you	again	looking	for	your
father?	Because	 the	 first	man	 the	 child	has	known	was	 the	 father	 and	 the	 first
woman	was	the	mother.	The	child	is	imprinted	with	the	first	form	of	the	woman
and	the	first	form	of	the	man.	That	imprint	is	very	deep.
You	 all	 know	 that	 suddenly	 one	 day	 you	 see	 a	 woman	 and	 something	 clicks.
What	clicks?
The	mother	in	you.	When	you	see	a	woman	and	something	reminds	you	deeply
of	your	mother	...	It	may	not	be	conscious,	you	may	not	be	aware	of	it,	you	may
not	be	able	to	figure	out	what	it	is,	you	may	not	be	able	to	put	your	finger	on	it,
but	if	you	go	deep	into	your	unconscious	you	will	find	that	the	way	the	woman
walks,	the	long	nose	of	the	woman,	or	the	black	eyes	of	the	woman	or	the	style
of	her	hair,	or	her	voice,	or	something,	suddenly	has	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
33
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
clicked	 your	 unconscious	 and	 the	 unconscious	 knows,	 "This	 is	 the	 woman."
People	fall	in	love	so	suddenly,	without	knowing	the	woman,	who	she	is	--	love
at	first	sight.	How	is	it	possible?
What	psychological	mechanism	is	functioning	there?	Your	mother.	And	so	it	 is
true	about	the	father.
When	 Zen	 Masters	 say,	 "Kill	 your	 parents,"	 they	 are	 saying,	 "Destroy	 the
imprint	of	your	mother	and	father	from	your	unconscious."	Once	that	imprint	is
destroyed	you	will	be	free.
Christianity,	Islam,	or	Judaism	or	Hinduism	are	not	as	perfect	religions	as	Zen,
because	 they	 still	 talk	 of	 the	 Father	God	 or	 the	Mother	Goddess.	 The	 imprint
continues.	Not	 only	 in	 this	world,	 it	 goes	 on	being	projected	 in	 the	 sky	 too	 --
God	the	Father	or	Kali	the	Mother.	You	are	still	looking	for	your	parents.	Now,
even	 in	 the	 ultimate	 reality	 you	 are	 looking	 for	 your	 parents.	When	 will	 you
become	adult?	When	will	you	become	mature?	Zen	is	a	process	of	maturity:	so
kill	the	parents.
There	is	a	saying	among	Zen	people	that	a	man	becomes	really	mature	when	his
father	 and	mother	 are	dead.	Have	you	not	watched?	 If	your	 father	 and	mother
have	died,	you	are	 shocked.	You	have	never	 thought	 that	 they	would	ever	die.
Although	many	 times	you	have	wished	 that	 they	 should	die	 --	 an	unconscious
wish	 --	 because	 they	 are	 heavy	 on	 you,	 because	 their	 very	 presence	 is	 a
restriction.
Have	you	watched,	whenever	you	go	to	 talk	 to	your	father	you	start	stuttering,
perspiring,	 you	 become	 nervous?	 Because	 he	 reminds	 you	 again	 that	 you	 are
helpless,	a	small	child,	and	he	is	a	powerful	man.	Have	you	watched,	when	you
go	 to	 your	 mother	 it	 is	 so	 difficult	 to	 communicate?	 It	 is	 so	 difficult	 to	 say
anything.	It	becomes	so	difficult	to	talk	to	a	mother,	to	sit	and	chitchat	is	almost
impossible.	What	to	say?	She	is	puzzled	and	you	are	also	puzzled.
Both	are	embarrassed.
So	deep	down	 sometimes	you	have	 thought,	 "They	 should	 die,	 so	 I	 should	be
free	of	them."	And	when	the	father	and	mother	die,	suddenly	you	feel	you	are	a
child	no	more.
But	 when	 Zen	 people	 say	 it,	 they	mean	 something	 else.	 They	 are	 not	 talking
about	 the	 father	 and	mother	 on	 the	 outside.	They	 are	 talking	 about	 the	 inside.
When	the	father	and	mother	in	the	inside	die,	you	become	mature,	you	become
free.
And	remember,	if	you	are	free	from	your	father	and	mother	in	the	unconscious,
you	will	be	capable	of	communing	with	your	father	and	mother	for	the	first	time,
because	then	there	will	be	no	barrier.	In	fact,	you	will	be	able	to	love	them	for
the	first	time.	You	will	be	able	to	forgive	them	for	the	first	time.	You	will	be	able
to	feel	compassion	for	them,	how	much	they	have	done	for	you.	When	you	are
mature,	 when	 you	 are	 free	 of	 them,	 when	 their	 presence	 is	 no	 more	 a	 heavy
weight	on	your	heart,	you	can	feel	them	for	the	first	time.	You	can	be	with	them
in	a	loving	space.
So	it	is	shocking,	but	it	is	not	irreverent,	one	thing.
The	 second	 thing:	 they	 say,	 "If	 you	 meet	 the	 Buddha	 on	 the	 way,	 kill	 him
immediately."
And	 these	 people	 who	 have	 said	 these	 things,	 they	 were	 worshiping	 Buddha
every	day	in	the	temple.	They	may	have	said	it	sitting	at	the	feet	of	the	statue	of
Buddha.
The	 man	 who	 said	 this	 was	 a	 priest	 in	 a	 temple.	 He	 lived	 in	 the	 temple,
worshiped	 in	 the	morning,	 evening,	 would	 bring	 flowers	 and	 incense,	 and	 he
said	 one	 day	 to	 his	 disciples,	 "If	 you	 meet	 the	 Buddha	 on	 the	 way,	 kill	 him
immediately!"	One	disciple	asked,	naturally,	"What	do	you	mean?	And	you	have
been	worshiping	Buddha."	And	the	man	said,	"Yes,	I	have	been	worshiping	him
because	he	has	helped	me.	Even	 to	kill	 him	he	has	been	helpful!	 It	 is	he	who
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
34
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
has	helped	me	 to	kill	him.	 It	 is	he	who	has	helped	me	 to	be	free	of	him."	The
ultimate	work	of	the	Master	is	to	make	you	free	of	himself.
Zarathustra	 is	 leaving	 his	 disciples	 and	 they	 ask	 him,	 "What	 is	 your	 last
message?"	 And	 he	 says,	 "Beware	 of	 Zarathustra."	 Without	 any	 comment	 he
escaped	 into	 the	 forest.	 "Beware	of	Zarathustra"	 --	 the	 last	message.	Beautiful.
Tremendously	Zen.	"Beware	of	me;	otherwise	you	may	become	a	slave	to	me"	--
that's	what	he	means.
The	same	I	say	to	you.	Forget	about	Buddha.	because	you	can	kill	Buddha	very
easily.	 Kill	 me.	 That	 will	 be	 far	 more	 difficult.	 With	 Buddha	 you	 have	 no
relationship	at	all,	so	you	can	take	it,	"Okay,	if	he	comes	on	the	way,	we	can	kill
him."	But	I	say	to	you,	kill	me	when	I	come	on	your	way.	And	I	will	come.
At	 the	 last	 moment,	 when	 everything	 has	 been	 cut	 off,	 the	 Master	 remains,
because	that	is	the	deepest	relationship.	You	can	cut	your	relationship	even	with
your	 mother	 because	 that	 is	 only	 biological,	 physical.	 You	 can	 cut	 your
relationship	 even	with	 your	 beloved	 because	 that	 is	 psychological.	 But	 to	 cut
your	 relationship	with	 the	Master	 is	 the	most	 difficult	 thing.	 You	will	 need	 a
really	sharp	sword,	a	really,	really	sharp	sword,	and	you	will	need	great	courage,
because	 the	 disciple-and-Master	 relationship	 is	 a	 spiritual	 relationship.	 It	 goes
deepest	in	your	being.	You	will	start	trembling.
When	 I	will	 stand	on	your	way	 ...	And	 that	 is	going	 to	be	 the	 last	barrier:	 the
Master	is	the	passage	to	God	and	the	last	barrier	too.	You	will	have	to	leave	the
Master	 also.	And	 these	 things	 are	 of	 the	 inward	 journey,	 remember	 again	 and
again.	At	 the	 last	moment	when	 you	 are	 disappearing	 into	 emptiness,	 the	 last
hand	that	you	will	have	to	leave	will	be	the	Master's	hand.
So	it	is	not	irreverent.	It	is	with	great	respect	that	it	has	been	said.
One	 thing	 more.	 The	 Zen	 people	 are	 totally	 different	 from	 Christians.	 You
cannot	 think	 of	 a	 Christian	 saying	 to	 another	 Christian,	 "Kill	 Jesus	 when	 he
comes	 on	 your	way.	Kill	 him	 immediately!'?	 That	will	 look	 very	 sacrilegious
because	Christians	have	not	yet	been	able	to	be	nonserious	about	their	religion.
Their	 religion	 is	 very	 serious.	 Hence	 it	 misses	 much.	 Zen	 has	 the	 quality	 of
laughter,	 it	 can	 laugh.	 And	 Zen	 has	 the	 quality	 of	 rebelliousness,
nonauthoritativeness.	 And	 Zen	 goes	 on	 keeping	 a	 balance:	 surrender	 to	 the
Master,	and	yet	remain	independent.	Very	difficult,	almost	impossible.	But	when
you	do	the	impossible,	only	then	does	the	ultimate	happen	to	you.	Surrender	to
the	Master,	and	yet	remain	independent.	Be	sincere	in	your	search,	but	don't	lose
your	laughter.	Become	wise,	but	let	foolishness	also	flower.	And	Zen	people	are
very,	very	absurd	in	that	way.	They	can	say	things	which	will	shock	you.
A	Zen	Master	is	weighing	flax,	and	a	man	comes,	a	seeker,	and	he	asks,	"What	is
Buddha?
What	is	Buddhahood?	What	is	Buddha-nature?"	The	Master	is	weighing	the	flax,
and	he	says,
"Three	pounds	of	flax.	That	is	what	Buddha	is."
Three	 pounds	 of	 flax!	 --	 and	 he	 is	 talking	 about	 Buddha?	 Looks	 very
sacrilegious.
A	Zen	Master,	on	a	cold	night,	burned	a	Buddha	statue,	a	wooden	statue,	because
he	 was	 feeling	 cold.	 No	 Christian	 can	 do	 that.	 No	 Hindu	 can	 do	 that.	 No
Mohammedan	can	do	that.
Hence	they	lag	behind.	In	the	night	he	burned	the	Buddha	statue	because	it	was
too	cold,	and	in	the	morning	he	was	worshiping	again.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
35
Chapter	2	-	Greed	Behind	Greed	Behind	Greed
This	 playfulness,	 this	 nonseriousness,	 is	 of	 tremendous	 value.	 With	 me	 also,
remember	that:	you	have	to	surrender	and	yet	you	have	to	remain	independent.
In	 fact,	 your	 surrender	 is	 needed	 so	 that	 I	 can	 make	 you	 independent.
Paradoxical	of	course,	but	this	is	how	one	grows.
I	 have	 heard	 one	 beautiful	 story	 --	 very	 shocking,	 but	 tremendously	 beautiful.
The	story	is	from	Sheldon	Kopp:
One	Sunday	 afternoon	 after	 church,	God	 and	St.	Peter	went	 to	play	golf.	God
teed	up	on	the	first	hole,	swung	his	driver	mightily,	and	sliced	the	ball	off	 into
the	 rough	 beside	 the	 fairway.	 Just	 as	 the	 ball	 hit	 the	 ground,	 a	 rabbit	 came
running	out	from	beneath	a	bush,	picked	up	God's	golf	ball	in	his	mouth,	and	ran
with	it	out	onto	the	fairway.	Down	from	the	sky	swooped	a	hawk	and	pounced
on	the	rabbit.	The	hawk	picked	up	the	rabbit	 in	its	claws	and	flew	with	it	over
the	green.	A	hunter	spotted	the	hawk,	took	aim	with	his	rifle,	and	shot	the	bird	in
midflight.	The	hawk	dropped	 the	rabbit	onto	 the	green.	The	golf	ball	 fell	 from
the	rabbit's	mouth	and	rolled	into	the	cup	for	a	hole	in	one.
St.	Peter	turned	to	God	with	exasperation,	saying,	"Come	on	now!	Do	you	want
to	play	golf,	or	do	you	want	to	fuck	around?"
This	is	perfect	Zen.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
36
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
3
The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
13	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
THE	PUPILS	OF	THE	TENDAI	SCHOOL	USED	TO	STUDY	MEDITATION
BEFORE
ZEN	 ENTERED	 JAPAN.	 FOUR	 OF	 THEM,	 WHO	 WERE	 INTIMATE
FRIENDS,	 PROMISED	ONE	ANOTHER	TO	OBSERVE	 SEVEN	DAYS	OF
SILENCE.
ON	THE	FIRST	DAY	ALL	WERE	SILENT,	BUT	WHEN	THE	NIGHT	CAME
AND
THE	OIL	LAMPS	WERE	GROWING	DIM,	ONE	OF	THE	PUPILS	COULD
NOT	HELP
EXCLAIMING	TO	A	SERVANT:	"FIX	THOSE	LAMPS.	"
THE	SECOND	PUPIL	WAS	SURPRISED	TO	HEAR	THE	FIRST	ONE	TALK.
"WE
ARE	NOT	SUPPOSED	TO	SAY	A	WORD,	"	HE	REMARKED.
"YOU	TWO	ARE	STUPID.	WHY	DID	YOU	TALK?"	ASKED	THE	THIRD.
"I	 AM	 THE	 ONLY	 ONE	 WHO	 HAS	 NOT	 TALKED	 --	 THANK	 GOD!"
CONCLUDED
THE	FOURTH.
In	 the	 search	 for	 the	 first	 principle	 silence	 is	 the	 door	 --	 the	 only	 door.	 And
except	it	there	is	no	way	to	approach	the	first	principle.	The	first	principle	can	be
known	only	when	you	move	 to	 the	primordial	state	of	your	being.	Thinking	 is
secondary.	Existence	precedes	thinking,	existence	comes	first.	First	you	are,	and
then	you	start	thinking.	Thinking	is	secondary.	Thinking	is	a	shadow	activity;	it
follows	you.	It	cannot	exist	without	you,	but	you	can	exist	without	it.	Through
thinking	you	can	know	secondary	things,	not	the	primary	things.
The	 most	 fundamental	 is	 not	 available	 to	 thinking;	 the	 most	 fundamental	 is
available	to	silence.
Silence	means	a	state	of	consciousness	where	no	thought	interferes.
The	 first	 principle	 is	 not	 far	 away,	 it	 is	 not	 distant.	 Never	 think	 for	 a	 single
moment	that	you	are	missing	it	because	it	is	very	far	away.	No,	not	at	all.	It	is	the
closest	 thing	 to	you.	 It	 is	 the	obvious	 thing.	 It	surrounds	you.	 It	surrounds	you
just	like	the	ocean	surrounds	a	fish.	You	are	in	it.	You	are	born	in	it	and	born	out
of	it.	You	live	in	it,	you	breathe	in	it,	and	one	day	you	disappear	in	it.	It	is	not	far
away,	not	that	you	have	to	travel	to	it.	It	is	there.	It	is	already	there	around	you,
within	and	without.	It	is	your	very	existence,	that	first	principle.
Zen	 people	 call	 it	 the	 first	 principle;	 other	 religions	 call	 it	 God.	 There	 is	 no
difference.	The	Zen	approach	is	far	better	because	with	the	word	"God,"	trouble
starts.	 The	 first	 principle	 becomes	 personified;	 then	 you	 can	 create	 an	 image.
You	cannot	make	an	image	of	the	first	principle,	but	that's	what	all	the	religions
do.	They	say,	"God	is	the	first	cause,	the	uncaused	cause,	the	most	fundamental,
the	 substantial,	 the	 substratum."	 Zen	 people	 call	 it	 the	 first	 principle.	 It	 is
beautiful	to	call	it	the	first	principle	because	nothing	preceded	it.	Everything	has
followed	it.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
37
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
So	 if	you	want	 to	have	a	communion	with	 the	 first	principle,	you	will	have	 to
seek	 and	 search	 for	 a	 reality	within	 yourself	which	 is	 original,	 which	 has	 not
been	preceded	by	anything	else.
Silence	 is	 primordial.	 Sound	 exists	 in	 silence.	 Sound	 comes	 and	 goes,	 silence
remains.
Sound	is	like	light,	and	silence	is	like	darkness.	Darkness	remains;	light	comes
and	goes.
Light	needs	some	cause	 to	be.	Darkness	needs	no	cause.	No	fuel	 is	needed	for
darkness;	 it	 simply	 exists	 without	 any	 fuel.	 It	 exists	 as	 primordial	 existence.
Darkness	is	eternal;	light	is	momentary.	In	the	morning	the	sun	rises	and	there	is
light.	 By	 the	 evening	 the	 sun	 is	 gone,	 the	 light	 is	 gone.	 Don't	 think	 that	 the
darkness	comes.	Darkness	never	comes;	it	is	always	there.
Light	comes	and	goes.	You	burn	a	lamp	and	there	is	light.	You	blow	out	the	lamp
and	light	is	gone.	Not	that	darkness	comes;	darkness	is	there.	Light	is	accidental;
darkness	is	existential.
Silence	 is	 there.	You	can	create	sound;	you	cannot	create	silence.	The	moment
sound	 is	 no	 more	 created	 there	 is	 silence.	 Thinking	 is	 sound;	 meditation	 is
silence.	So	all	the	religions	of	the	world	have	been	searching	for	and	seeking	in
one	way	or	another	that	silence	which	has	not	been	preceded	by	anything	else,
which	is	the	first.
Now	a	few	things	before	we	analyze	this	state	of	silence.
First	 thing.	Man	 is	missing	 this	 first	 principle	 not	 because	 he	 is	 not	 a	 skilled
thinker	but	because	he	is,	not	because	he	is	not	a	trained	logician	but	because	he
is.	Thinking	creates	a	screen	around	you,	a	screen	of	smoke,	and	because	of	that
smoke	the	obvious	is	lost.	To	see	the	obvious,	you	need	clarity,	not	thinking,	not
logic.	 You	 simply	 need	 clarity,	 you	 need	 transparency.	 Your	 eyes	 should	 be
completely	empty,	naked	 --	naked	of	all	 clothes,	naked	of	all	 concepts,	 empty,
empty	 of	 all	 thoughts.	 When	 the	 eyes	 are	 just	 empty,	 you	 can	 see	 the	 first
principle,	and	not	only	can	you	see	it	as	an	object	outside	you,	you	see	it	as	your
own	interiority,	as	your	own	subjectivity.
In	 fact,	 it	 is	 thinking	 that	 creates	 the	 distinction	 between	 the	 subject	 and	 the
object.	It	is	thinking	that	creates	division.	It	is	thinking	that	creates	a	split.	It	is
thinking	that	makes	things	separate.	Once	thinking	is	dropped,	existence	is	one,
it	 is	 one	 unity,	 it	 is	 one	 orgasmic	 experience	where	 duality	 is	 totally	 lost.	All
boundaries	lose	themselves	into	each	other,	merge	into	each	other.	Everything	is
joined	to	everything	else.	The	smallest	leaf	of	grass	is	joined	to	the	greatest	star.
And	then	there	is	nothing	high,	nothing	low,	nothing	good,	nothing	bad,	because
all	is	joined	together.	The	greatest	saint	is	joined	to	the	greatest	sinner;	they	are
not	separate.
Nothing	 is	 separate.	 With	 the	 disappearance	 of	 thinking,	 schizophrenia
disappears,	this	existential	schizophrenia	of	dividing	everything:	this	is	man,	this
is	woman,	this	is	good,	this	is	bad,	this	is	beautiful,	this	is	ugly,	this	is	mine,	this
is	thine.	All	distinctions	create	neuroses.
Man	is	mad	because	he	thinks	too	much,	and	he	goes	on	missing	the	obvious.
God	is	very	obvious.
I	have	heard	about	a	great	philosopher:
He	married	a	beautiful	girl	many	years	his	junior.	After	a	while	he	began	to	be
torn	by	doubts	as	to	her	faithfulness	...
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
38
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
Natural	 for	 a	 philosopher	 to	 be	 torn	 by	doubts.	A	philosopher	 lives	 in	 doubts;
doubt	is	his	trade.	He	doubts,	and	he	goes	on	doubting.	Through	doubt	he	creates
questions	and	then	answers,	and	through	doubt	he	makes	more	questions	out	of
the	answers.	His	whole	life	is	a	procession	of	doubts.	Naturally,	"he	began	to	be
torn	by	doubts	as	to	her	faithfulness."
...	 so	 he	 hired	 a	 private	 detective	 to	watch	 her	while	 he	 left	 on	 a	 trip.	On	 his
return	he	called	the	detective.
"Out	with	it,	out	with	it!"	shouted	the	philosopher.	"I	can	take	it.	It	is	the	element
of	doubt	that	is	driving	me	crazy."
"It	 looks	 bad,"	 said	 the	 detective.	 "As	 soon	 as	 you	 left	 the	 house	 a	 handsome
fellow	called	for	your	wife.	I	followed	them	to	a	night	dub.	They	had	four	or	five
drinks	and	then	danced	--
and	very	close.	Then	they	went	back	to	their	table	and	held	hands.	Finally	they
took	a	cab	back	to	your	house.	The	lights	were	on,	and	I	saw	them	walk	into	the
bedroom	and	embrace.	Then	the	light	went	out	and	I	could	not	see	any	more."
"What	did	I	tell	you?"	shouted	the	philosopher.	"That	damned	element	of	doubt!"
Now,	even	the	obvious	--	"That	damned	element	of	doubt!	"	Even	the	obvious	is
not	 obvious	 to	 a	 philosopher.	The	 greater	 the	 philosopher,	 the	more	 doubts	 he
has.	He	has	doubts	about	everything.	He	doubts	even	his	own	existence	--	which
in	 fact	 cannot	 be	 doubted.	 How	 can	 you	 doubt	 your	 own	 existence?	 Even	 to
doubt,	you	are	needed	to	be	there.	The	doubt	cannot	exist	in	the	air.	The	doubt
cannot	exist	without	you.	The	doubt	can	exist	only	if	YOU
are	 there,	but	philosophers	have	been	doubting	even	 their	own	existence:	Who
knows	whether	we	are	or	we	are	not?
Doubt	is	the	only	outcome	of	thinking.	Nonthinking	gives	you	trust,	nonthinking
gives	you	faith,	nonthinking	brings	you	closer	to	reality,	face	to	face	with	reality.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 to	be	understood:	 thinking	 is	not	a	way	 to	 the	 first	principle.
Not	 through	 philosophizing	 will	 you	 arrive	 at	 the	 first	 principle,	 because
philosophy	is	secondary.	You	can	know	secondary	things	through	the	secondary.
To	know	the	primary,	you	will	have	to	achieve	the	primary	within	yourself.	You
can	know	only	that	which	you	are.
If	you	live	in	thinking,	you	will	be	able	to	know	only	secondary	things.	You	will
be	able	to	know	the	shadow	world,	what	Hindus	call	the	world	of	maya.	Through
the	mind	you	can	know	only	the	world	of	maya,	the	shadow	world,	the	world	of
illusions.	You	will	be	surprised.
In	 Sanskrit	 we	 have	 two	 terms.	 One	 is	 VIDYA;	 VIDYA	means	 "knowledge".
Another	 is	 AVIDYA;	 AVIDYA	 means	 "nonknowledge".	 And	 you	 will	 be
surprised,	in	Sanskrit	"science"
is	called	AVIDYA	--	"nonknowledge".	Science	is	called	AVIDYA.	Why?	Science
knows	more	than	anything	else,	but	in	Sanskrit	they	call	science	AVIDYA.	Why?
Because	 science	 knows	 only	 the	 shadow	 world	 --	 knows	 the	 secondary,	 the
nonessential;	knows	 the	object,	misses	 the	subject;	knows	 the	body,	misses	 the
soul;	knows	the	world,	misses	God;	knows	the	secondary.
To	know	the	primary,	you	will	have	to	become	primary.	You	will	have	to	fall	into
that	wavelength	where	the	primary	pulsates,	that	silence.	That	is	the	state	of	no-
mind.	No-mind	preceded	your	mind.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
39
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
A	child	is	born.	He	comes	without	any	mind	whatsoever;	he	simply	exists.	His
existence	 is	pure,	unhampered	by	any	 thought,	unhindered	by	any	cloud.	Look
into	the	eyes	of	a	child.
They	are	so	innocent,	they	are	so	transparent,	so	crystal	clear.	From	where	comes
this	clarity?
This	clarity	comes	from	no-thought.	The	child	still	has	not	learned	how	to	think,
how	to	accumulate	thoughts.	He	looks,	but	he	cannot	classify.	If	he	looks	at	the
trees	he	cannot	say	 they	are	 trees,	he	cannot	say	 they	are	green,	he	cannot	say
they	are	beautiful.	He	sees	the	trees,	but	no	classification,	no	category.	He	has	no
language	yet	to	be	clouded	with.	He	simply	sees.
Color	is	there,	but	he	cannot	say	is	color;	green	is	there,	but	he	cannot	say	it	is
green.
Everything	 is	 purely	 clear,	 but	 he	 cannot	 label	 it.	Hence	 the	 innocence	 of	 the
eyes.
A	man	of	understanding	again	attains	the	same	eyes.	He	again	becomes	a	child,
as	far	as	the	clarity	is	concerned.	Jesus	is	right	when	he	says,	"Become	like	small
children;	only	then	will	you	be	able	to	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	God."	He	is	not
saying	become	foolish	like	children;	he	is	not	saying	become	childish;	he	is	not
saying	learn	tantrum	again;	he	is	not	saying	that	a	child	is	the	last	stage.	No,	he
is	saying	simply	one	thing.	He	is	not	saying	become	a	child;	he	is	saying	become
like	 a	 child.	How	 can	 you	 become	 a	 child	 again?	But	 you	 can	 become	 like	 a
child.	 If	 you	 can	 drop	 thinking,	 if	 this	 cloak	 of	 thinking	 is	 dropped	 and	 you
become	nude,	again	you	will	have	the	same	clarity.
It	 happens	 sometimes	 through	 drugs.	Not	 a	 very	 good	way	 to	 attain	 it	 --	 very
dangerous,	very	 costly,	 and	 illusory	 --	but	 it	 happens.	Hence	 the	 appeal	of	 the
drugs	down	the	ages.	Drugs	are	not	new	in	the	world;	even	in	the	Vedas	they	talk
about	 SOMA.	 SOMA	 seems	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	 most	 powerful	 drugs	 ever
discovered	by	man.	It	must	be	something	like	LSD.	Aldous	Huxley	has	said	that
in	the	future,	when	the	ultimate	drug	will	be	known,	we	will	call	it	SOMA.	From
the	Vedas,	the	ancientmost	book	in	the	world,	to	Timothy	Leary,	man	has	always
been	attracted	by	drugs	--	alcohol,	marijuana,	opium.	Why	this	attraction?	And
all	 the	moralists	have	been	against	 it,	and	all	 the	puritans	have	been	against	 it,
and	all	the	governments	have	tried	to	curb	and	control,	but	it	seems	beyond	any
government	to	control	it.
What	has	been	the	cause	of	it?	It	gives	something	...	it	gives	a	glimpse	into	the
innocent	mind	of	the	child	again.
Through	chemical	 impact,	 the	mind	becomes	loosened	for	a	few	moments	or	a
few	hours.
Under	the	impact	of	 the	drug	your	thinking	slips.	You	start	 looking	into	reality
without	 thinking;	 again	 the	world	 is	 colorful,	 as	 it	 is	 for	 the	 child;	 again	 in	 a
small	 pebble	 you	 can	 see	 the	 greatest	 diamond;	 ordinary	 grass	 looks	 so
extraordinary;	an	ordinary	 flower	 looks	so	 tremendously	beautiful;	an	ordinary
human	face	looks	so	divine.	Not	that	anything	has	changed.	The	whole	world	is
the	 same.	 Something	 has	 changed	 in	 you	 --	 and	 that	 too	 only	 temporarily.
Through	 the	 forceful	 drug	 your	 mind	 has	 slipped	 down.	 You	 don't	 have	 the
mask;	you	can	see	into	things	with	clarity.	That	is	the	appeal	of	the	drugs	down
the	ages.
And	unless	meditation	becomes	available	to	millions	of	people,	drugs	cannot	be
prevented.
Drugs	are	dangerous	because	they	can	destroy	your	body's	equilibrium,	they	can
destroy	 your	 nature,	 they	 can	 destroy	 your	 inner	 chemistry.	 You	 have	 a	 very
delicate	chemistry.	Those	strong	drugs	can	destroy	your	rhythm.	And	more	and
more	drugs	will	be	needed	and	you	will	become	addicted	--	and	less	and	less	will
be	 the	experience.	By	and	by,	 the	mind	will	 learn	how	to	cope	with	 the	drugs,
and	then,	even	under	the	drug,	you	will	not	attain	to	the	state	of	innocence.	Then
you	will	need	even	stronger	drugs.
So	this	is	not	a	way.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
40
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
The	mind	can	be	put	aside	very	easily.	There	is	no	need	to	depend	on	anything
chemical,	 on	 anything	artificial.	There	 is	 a	natural	possibility	 to	get	out	of	 the
mind,	because	we	were	born	without	minds.	Deep	down	we	are	still	no-minds.
The	mind	is	only	on	the	periphery.
That's	why	I	say	it	is	just	a	cloak,	a	dress	that	you	are	wearing.	You	can	slip	out
of	it.
And	one	moment	of	slipping	out	of	it	will	reveal	to	you	a	totally	different	world:
the	world	of	the	first	principle.
So	 the	 real	 fight	 in	 the	 future	 is	going	 to	be	between	meditation	and	drugs.	 In
fact,	 that	 has	 always	 been	 the	 case:	 the	 real	 fight	 is	 between	 drugs	 and
meditation,	either	drugs	or	meditation.
So	it	is	not	coincidental	that	when	you	start	meditating	by	and	by	the	pull	of	the
drug	becomes	less	and	less.	If	it	 is	not	becoming	less	and	less,	then	know	well
you	 are	 not	 meditating	 yet,	 because	 when	 you	 know	 the	 higher,	 the	 lower	 is
dropped	automatically.
But	one	thing	has	to	be	understood.	Drugs	do	something;	they	UNDO	something
in	you.
They	help	you	to	get	out	of	the	mind.	They	give	you	courage	to	look	into	reality
without	 thinking.	For	 a	moment	 the	 curtain	 slips,	 and	 suddenly	you	 are	 aware
that	the	world	has	a	splendor.	It	had	never	had	it	before.	You	had	passed	through
the	same	street	and	you	had	looked	through	the	same	trees	and	at	the	same	stars
and	 the	 same	 people,	 and	 today	 now	 everything	 suddenly	 is	 so	 luminous	 and
everybody	is	so	beautiful	and	everybody	is	afire	with	life,	with	love.	A	saint	--
one	who	has	attained	--	lives	in	that	state	continuously,	without	any	effort.
You	were	born	as	a	no-mind.	Let	this	sink	into	your	heart	as	deeply	as	possible
because	through	that	a	door	opens.	If	you	were	born	as	a	no-mind,	then	the	mind
is	 just	 a	 social	 product.	 It	 is	 nothing	 natural;	 it	 is	 cultivated.	 It	 has	 been	 put
together	on	top	of	you.	Deep	down	you	are	still	free;	you	can	get	out	of	it.	One
can	never	get	out	of	nature,	but	one	can	get	out	of	the	artificial	any	moment	one
decides	to.
Existence	 precedes	 thinking.	 So	 existence	 is	 not	 a	 state	 of	 mind;	 it	 is	 a	 state
beyond.	To	be	is	the	way	to	know	the	fundamental,	not	to	think.	Science	means
thinking,	 philosophy	 means	 thinking,	 theology	 means	 thinking.	 Religion	 does
not	mean	thinking.	The	religious	approach	is	a	nonthinking	approach.	It	is	more
intimate,	it	brings	you	closer	to	reality.	It	drops	all	that	hinders,	it	unblocks	you;
you	start	 flowing	 into	 life.	You	don't	 think	 that	you	are	 separate,	 looking.	You
don't	 think	that	you	are	a	watcher,	aloof,	distant.	You	meet,	mingle,	and	merge
into	reality.
And	there	is	a	different	kind	of	knowing.	It	cannot	be	called	"knowledge".	It	is
more	like	love,	less	like	knowledge.	It	is	so	intimate	that	the	word	"knowledge"
is	 not	 sufficient	 to	 express	 it.	 The	 word	 "love"	 is	 more	 adequate,	 more
expressive.
In	 the	history	of	human	consciousness,	 the	 first	 thing	 that	 evolved	was	magic.
Magic	was	a	combination	of	science	and	religion.	Magic	had	something	of	 the
mind	and	something	of	the	no-mind.	Then	out	of	magic	grew	philosophy.	Then
out	of	philosophy	grew	science.	Magic	was	both	no-mind	and	mind;	philosophy
was	only	mind;	and	then	mind	plus	experimentation	became	science.	Religion	is
a	state	of	no-mind.
Religion	 and	 science	 are	 the	 two	 approaches	 to	 reality.	 Science	 approaches
through	 the	 secondary;	 religion	 goes	 direct.	 Science	 is	 an	 indirect	 approach;
religion	 is	 an	 immediate	 approach.	 Science	 goes	 round	 and	 round;	 religion
simply	penetrates	to	the	heart	of	reality.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
41
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
A	few	more	things.	Thinking	can	only	think	about	the	known	--	it	can	chew	the
already	chewed.	Thinking	can	never	be	original.	How	can	you	 think	about	 the
unknown?	Whatsoever	you	CAN	manage	to	think	will	belong	to	the	known.	You
can	think	only	because	you	know.
At	the	most,	thinking	can	create	new	combinations.	You	can	think	about	a	horse
who	flies	in	the	sky,	who	is	made	of	gold;	but	nothing	is	new.	You	know	birds
who	 fly	 in	 the	 sky,	 you	 know	 gold,	 you	 know	 horses;	 you	 combine	 the	 three
together.	At	the	most,	 thinking	can	imagine	new	things,	but	it	cannot	know	the
unknown.	The	unknown	remains	beyond	it.	So	thinking	goes	in	a	circle,	goes	on
knowing	the	known	again	and	again	and	again.	It	goes	on	chewing	the	chewed
one.	Thinking	is	never	original.
And	the	first	principle	means	to	come	upon	reality	originally,	radically,	to	come
upon	 reality	without	 any	mediator,	 to	 come	upon	 reality	 as	 if	 you	are	 the	 first
person	to	exist	and	you	come	upon	reality.	That	is	liberating.	That	very	newness
of	it	liberates.
And	when	you	come	to	know	reality	directly,	it	is	never	reduced	to	the	known;
the	mystery	remains.	In	fact,	 it	becomes	a	deeper	mystery	than	ever.	The	more
you	know,	the	more	you	feel	that	you	don't	know.	The	more	you	know,	the	less
you	 feel	 you	 know.	 The	 more	 you	 know,	 the	 more	 vast	 is	 the	 mystery	 of	 it.
Religion	is	mysticism,	religion	is	magic,	because	religion	is	a	no-mind	approach.
Thinking	 can	 think	 only	 about	 the	 known;	 it	 is	 repetitive.	 Philosophy	 is
repetitive.	 You	 can	 go	 into	 the	 books	 of	 philosophy,	 into	 the	 history	 of
philosophy,	and	you	will	 see	 the	 same	 thing	being	 repeated	again	and	again	 --
new	 phraseology,	 new	 words;	 new	 terms,	 new	 definitions,	 but	 nothing
fundamentally	different.	From	Thales	to	Bertrand	Russell	you	can	go	on,	but	you
will	find	the	same	thing	being	repeated	again	and	again.	The	wheel	moving:	the
same	spokes	come	to	the	top	again	and	again.
Science	can	experiment	only	with	the	objective;	experimentation	is	possible	only
with	the	objective.	You	cannot	experiment	with	the	experimenter	himself;	there
is	 no	way.	 The	 subjective	 reality	 remains	 outside	 science.	 Einstein	may	 know
much	about	matter,	but	he	does	not	know	anything	about	himself.	Newton	may
know	much	 about	 gravitation,	 but	 he	 does	 not	 know	who	 he	 is.	 One	 goes	 on
accumulating	 knowledge	 about	 the	 objective	 world,	 and	 one	 remains	 in	 deep
darkness	within	one's	own	self.	One's	own	light	is	not	yet	there,	and	one	goes	on
groping,	experimenting.
Science	can	experiment	only	with	the	objective,	philosophy	can	think	only	about
the	known,	 and	 the	 reality	 is	 beyond	both.	The	 reality	 is	 unknown	 --	 not	 only
unknown,	but	unknowable	--	and	the	reality	contains	the	subjective	element.	So
the	 very	 methodology	 of	 philosophy	 and	 science	 prohibits	 coming	 to	 the
fundamental,	to	the	first	principle.	To	come	to	the	fundamental,	you	will	have	to
find	another	door,	a	door	other	than	science	and	philosophy.
That	door	is	religion.
And	religion	can	be	reduced	to	one	word,	and	that	word	is	"meditation,"	or	call	it
silence	--
to	be	in	such	a	silence	that	you	are	almost	not,	there	is	no	noise	within	you,	the
stillness	 is	absolute.	Only	 in	 that	stillness	something	stirs,	only	 in	 that	stillness
do	you	start	hearing	 the	still,	small	voice	of	 the	first	principle	--	call	 it	God	or
call	it	soul.	Only	then	life	calls	forth	life.
Only	 then	 the	 source	calls	 forth	 the	 source.	Only	 then	are	you	close	 to	 reality,
hand	in	hand	with	 the	fundamental.	And	that	 is	 the	search,	 that	 is	what	we	are
seeking;	 and	without	 knowing	 it,	 without	 realizing	 it,	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 no
fulfillment.
The	last	thing;	then	we	enter	into	this	small	parable.	When	thinking	disappears
you	are	left	with	the	first	principle.	It	has	always	been	there;	you	were	not	there
just	because	of	your	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
42
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
thinking.	Now	you	are	also	there:	two	presences	meet.	Ordinarily	you	are	absent,
you	are	somewhere	else.	In	your	thoughts	you	are	lost.	When	there	is	no	thought
you	are	herenow;	then	there	is	no	way	to	go	from	herenow.	Thought	functions	as
a	bridge	to	go	away	from	yourself.	The	moment	a	thought	has	come	in,	you	are
already	 far	 away	 from	yourself.	When	 there	 is	 no	 thought,	where	 can	you	go,
how	 can	 you	 go?	 When	 there	 is	 no	 thought	 you	 have	 to	 be	 in	 the	 present.
Thought	can	take	you	to	the	past,	thought	can	take	you	to	the	future;	no-thought
brings	you	to	the	present.	And	only	the	present	is.	This	moment	is	all	there	is.
When	you	are	herenow,	absolutely	herenow,	how	can	you	miss	the	real,	how	can
you	miss	God?	When	thinking	disappears	you	are	left	with	the	first	principle.
But	 when	 I	 say	 "when	 thinking	 disappears,"	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 "when	 you	 fall
asleep,"
because	 in	 deep	 sleep	 thinking	 does	 disappear.	 In	 the	 East	 we	 have	 divided
human	 consciousness	 into	 four	 phases.	 The	 first	 phase	 we	 call	 "waking",
JAGRAT.	Waking	means
"consciousness	plus	thinking";	you	are	conscious,	but	your	mind	is	crowded	with
thoughts.
The	second	state	we	have	called	"dreaming",	SWAPNA.	The	second	state	means
"unconsciousness	plus	 thinking";	you	 fall	 asleep,	but	 the	 thinking	continues	 so
there	is	dreaming.	Dreaming	is	a	way	of	thinking	in	sleep,	and	thinking	is	a	way
of	dreaming	while	awake.	Thinking	and	dreaming	are	not	 two	separate	 things.
Dreaming	 is	 only	 thinking	 in	 a	 very	 primitive	 language	 --	 the	 language	 of
images.	 Then	 the	 third	 state	we	 call	 SUSHUPTI:	 sleep,	 deep	 sleep,	 dreamless
deep	 sleep.	 The	 third	 state	 is	 "unconsciousness	 minus	 thinking";	 you	 are
unconscious	 --	you	don't	know	where	you	are,	who	you	are,	 all	 consciousness
has	disappeared,	you	are	at	 rest	 --	 and	with	 the	consciousness	has	disappeared
thinking	too,	dreaming	too.
These	three	are	ordinary	states:	waking,	dreaming,	sleeping.	We	all	know	these
three.	 The	 fourth	 is	 the	 state	 of	 meditation.	 The	 fourth	 is	 called	 SAMADHI,
TURIYA.	It	means
"consciousness	minus	thinking".
So	 four	 stages:	 consciousness	 plus	 thinking	 is	 waking,	 consciousness	 minus
thinking	 is	 SAMADHI,	 unconsciousness	 plus	 thinking	 is	 dreaming,
unconsciousness	minus	thinking	is	sleep.
So	SAMADHI	has	something	similar	to	waking	and	something	similar	to	sleep;
hence	Patanjali	has	defined	SAMADHI	as	 "waking	sleep"	 --	 sleep	and	yet	not
sleep.	 Sleep	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 there	 are	 no	 thoughts	 now,	 no	 dreams.	And	 not
sleep	in	the	sense	that	you	are	perfectly	aware,	that	the	light	of	your	awareness	is
there,	that	you	are	conscious,	that	you	know	that	there	is	no	knowledge	now,	that
you	 are	 aware	 that	 all	 thinking	 has	 disappeared,	 that	 you	 are	 aware	 that	 now
there	is	no	dream	lurking	in	your	field	of	consciousness,	that	you	are	absolutely
zero,	SHUNYAM.
This	is	the	state	that	the	East	has	been	trying	to	achieve.	The	West	has	been	too
involved	with	 science;	 hence	 it	 has	missed	 religion.	The	East's	 involvement	 is
with	SAMADHI:	hence	it	has	missed	science.
These	four	states	can	be	thought	of	in	some	other	ways	also.	Consciousness	plus
thinking	 means	 waking.	 Science	 is	 a	 waking	 activity,	 so	 is	 philosophy,	 so	 is
theology.	Second,	dreaming:	unconsciousness	plus	thinking.	That	is	what	art	is,
poetry,	painting,	music.	It	is	a	dream	activity,	so	it	is	not	just	accidental	that	we
call	the	poets	dreamers,	that	we	call	the	artists	dreamers,	that	we	don't	trust	them
much	 --	 they	 are	 not	 reliable,	 they	 cannot	 be	 the	 guides	 to	 reality.	We	 enjoy
them,	it	is	fun,	but	we	cannot	accept	them	as	guides	to	reality	--
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
43
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
they	are	not.	They	live	in	fantasy.	They	dream	while	awake.	Their	eyes	are	full
of	dreams.	So	waking	is	science,	philosophy,	theology,	logic;	and	art,	all	kinds	of
art,	is	dream	activity.
Unconsciousness	minus	 thinking	means	 sleep.	Of	 course	 all	 activity	 ceases	 in
sleep,	so	nothing	is	born	out	of	sleep	--	no	science,	no	art.
Consciousness	minus	thinking	is	SAMADHI.	SAMADHI	gives	birth	to	religion.
When	Jesus	attained	to	SAMADHI	Christianity	was	born.	When	Nanak	attained
to	 SAMADHI	 Sikhism	 was	 born.	 When	 Buddha	 attained	 to	 SAMADHI
Buddhism	was	born.	Religion	is	born	out	of	SAMADHI,	the	fourth	state.	What
is	SAMADHI?	If	you	can	stop	your	thinking	and	yet	remain	alert	and	don't	fall
asleep.	Difficult,	arduous,	one	of	the	most	difficult	things,	almost	impossible.	It
is	easy	 to	be	awake	and	 thinking,	 it	 is	easy	not	 to	 think	and	 fall	asleep,	but	 to
remain	awake	and	not	think	is	the	most	difficult	thing,	because	it	 is	not	part	of
evolution.	It	is	a	revolution.	It	is	not	given	by	nature	automatically.	You	have	to
attain	it.
That	is	the	task	man	has	to	solve.	That	is	the	challenge	given	to	man,	and	very
few	have	accepted	that	challenge.	And	those	who	have	accepted	it,	only	they	are
man;	others	are	man	only	for	the	name's	sake.	We	exist	as	potential	man,	not	as
actual	man.	It	is	our	potentiality.
We	can	become	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ,	but	 it	has	not	happened	yet.	We	are	just
seeds.	That's	our	misery	because	a	seed	can	never	be	satisfied	unless	it	becomes
a	tree	and	blooms.	A	seed	will	remain	miserable	because	there	is	a	feeling	deep
down	that	"I	am	not	yet	that	which	I	am	meant	to	be;	my	destiny	is	not	fulfilled."
Have	you	not	observed	this	in	you?	If	you	had	not	observed	it,	you	would	not	be
here.	 You	 are	 here	 only	 because	 you	 feel	 something	 is	missing.	 You	 are	 here
only	because	you	continuously	 feel	 that	 something	has	 to	happen	and	 it	 is	not
happening,	that	something	is	just	there	by	the	corner	and	yet	you	cannot	grasp	it,
seems	to	be	not	very	far	away,	yet	seems	to	be	beyond	reach.	The	tree	is	not	very
far	away	from	the	seed.	If	the	seed	finds	the	right	soil,	falls	into	the	soil,	relaxes,
surrenders	to	the	soil,	dissolves	into	the	soil,	dies	into	the	soil,	then	the	tree	is	not
very	 far	 away.	 In	 the	 right	 season	 the	 seed	will	 sprout,	 a	 tender	 plant	will	 be
born,	and	the	seed	will	be	able	to	see	the	light.
Only	when	the	seed	has	become	a	plant	will	it	be	able	to	feel	the	wind	and	the
ecstasy	that	the	wind	is	and	be	able	to	feel	the	sunrays	and	the	ecstasy	that	the
sun	 brings	 and	 be	 able	 to	 live	 and	 be	 able	 to	 accept	 the	 challenges	 and	 start
growing.	Come	storm,	come	wind,	come	rains,	and	the	small,	 tender	plant	will
become	 stronger	 and	 stronger.	 Every	 challenge	 will	 give	 it	 strength	 and
integration;	and	one	day	there	will	be	a	great	tree	whispering	to	the	skies,	it	will
bloom,	 and	 the	 fragrance	will	 be	 released	 to	 the	winds	 in	 all	 directions.	 Then
there	will	be	jubilation.
When	 Jesus	 says	 again	 and	 again	 to	 his	 children,	 to	 his	 disciples,	 "Rejoice!"
what	he	is	saying	is	true	because	he	has	become	a	tree	and	he	has	bloomed.	But
his	disciples	must	have	 looked	here	 and	 there,	 they	must	have	 thought,	 "What
does	he	mean?	Why	does	he	go	on	saying	again	and	again,	'Rejoice'?"	They	are
seeds;	how	can	they	rejoice?
When	I	say	to	you,	"Celebrate!"	you	start	thinking,	"For	what?	Why?	What	have
we	got	to	celebrate?"	You	cannot	celebrate	because	celebration	is	possible	only
when	you	bloom.	I	know	it!	But	I	go	on	saying,	"Celebrate!"	And	Jesus	knows	it
and	he	goes	on	saying,
"Rejoice!"	 In	 fact,	 he	 wants	 to	 create	 such	 a	 thirst	 in	 you	 to	 know	what	 this
rejoicing	 is	 that	 out	 of	 that	 thirst	 you	 start	 seeking	 and	 searching	 for	 the	 right
soil.
To	find	a	right	Master	is	to	find	a	right	soil	because	only	through	the	Master	will
you	be	able	to	dissolve,	only	through	the	Master	will	you	be	able	to	surrender.	A
seed	needs	to	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
44
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
surrender.	A	seed	has	to	die;	only	then	is	there	a	new	life	born	out	of	it.	Death
makes	 it	 possible.	Death	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful:	 it	makes	 it	 possible	 that	 a
man	can	be	new,	a	man	can	be	reborn.
SAMADHI	is	celebration,	SAMADHI	is	rejoicing.	SAMADHI	is	your	gratitude
towards	God,	your	thanksgiving.
How	can	you	thank	God	right	now?	You	have	nothing	to	thank	him	for.	You	can
complain,	you	cannot	thank	him;	so	your	prayers	are	more	of	complaints,	less	of
thanks.	You	cannot	say,	"Thank	you."	How	can	you?	For	what?	In	fact,	you	are
very	 angry	with	God.	Why	has	 he	 given	birth	 to	 you?	Why	has	 he	 created	 so
much	misery?	Why	has	he	put	you	in	such	anguish	and	turmoil?	Why	in	the	first
place?	What	wrong	have	you	done?	If	suddenly	you	come	across	God	you	will
jump	upon	him.	That's	why	he	goes	on	hiding.	You	will	kill	him.
You	will	 say,	 "What	 have	 you	 been	 doing?	 For	 what	 are	 we	 suffering?	What
wrong	have	we	done?	Why	did	you	make	us	in	the	first	place?	Not	to	be	would
have	 been	 better	 --	 no	 anxiety,	 no	 anguish.	 Not	 to	 be	would	 have	 been	more
peaceful.	Why	did	you	create	us?"
The	 whole	 existence	 seems	 to	 be	 mischievous.	 It	 seems	 as	 if	 somebody,	 a
sadistic	God,	is	sitting	there,	torturing	people,	creating	a	thousand	and	one	ways
to	torture	them.
Right	now	you	cannot	thank	him	because	right	now	you	are	not.	When	you	are,
you	will	be	able	 to	 thank	him.	And	the	way	to	be	goes	 through	death,	 through
surrender.	And	the	way	goes	through	silence.	But	it	is	not	easy	to	be	silent;	it	is
the	most	arduous	thing	to	be	silent.
Now	this	small	story:
THE	PUPILS	OF	THE	TENDAI	SCHOOL	USED	TO	STUDY	MEDITATION
BEFORE
ZEN	 ENTERED	 JAPAN.	 FOUR	 OF	 THEM,	 WHO	 WERE	 INTIMATE
FRIENDS,	 PROMISED	ONE	ANOTHER	TO	OBSERVE	 SEVEN	DAYS	OF
SILENCE.
ON	THE	FIRST	DAY	ALL	WERE	SILENT,	BUT	WHEN	THE	NIGHT	CAME
AND
THE	OIL	LAMPS	WERE	GROWING	DIM,	ONE	OF	THE	PUPILS	COULD
NOT	HELP
EXCLAIMING	TO	A	SERVANT:	"FIX	THOSE	LAMPS.	"
THE	SECOND	PUPIL	WAS	SURPRISED	TO	BEAR	THE	FIRST	ONE	TALK.
"WE
ARE	NOT	SUPPOSED	TO	SAY	A	WORD,	"	HE	REMARKED.
YOU	TWO	ARE	STUPID.	WHY	DID	YOU	TALK?"	ASKED	THE	THIRD.
I	 AM	 THE	 ONLY	 ONE	 WHO	 HAS	 NOT	 TALKED	 --	 THANK	 GOD!"
CONCLUDED
THE	FOURTH.
What	 happened?	 The	 Tendai	 school	 is	 a	 school	 of	 meditation.	 Before	 Zen
entered	 Japan,	 Tendai	was	 very	much	 prevalent.	 But	 that	 too	was	 a	 school	 of
meditation.	 In	 fact,	 because	 of	 Tendai	 and	 its	 roots	 in	 Japan,	 Zen	 could	 enter
Japan.	These	things	don't	happen	suddenly;	you	need	a	climate.	A	country	does
not	become	suddenly	interested	in	meditation.	It	needs	a	climate.	The	climate	is
born	out	of	long	tradition.
In	 the	 Tendai	 school	 a	 seven-day	 silence	 was	 ordinarily	 prescribed	 to	 every
disciple.	Why	a	seven-day	silence?	It	is	very	symbolic;	the	number	is	symbolic.
Man	has	seven	centers,	and	each	center	has	to	attain	silence.	You	may	not	have
looked	 at	 it	 in	 that	 way.	 When	 the	 sex	 center	 becomes	 silence	 it	 is
BRAHMACHARYA,	 it	 is	 celibacy.	 When	 the	 heart	 center	 Osho	 -	 The	 First
Principle
45
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
becomes	silence	it	is	compassion.	If	the	heart	center	is	in	turmoil	there	is	anger.
If	the	sex	center	is	in	turmoil,	shouting,	there	is	sexuality.	All	the	seven	centers
of	man	have	to	become	silent.	When	all	of	them	are	chained	in	silence,	then	this
whole	being	of	man	falls	silent.	 In	 that	silence	one	knows	 the	first	principle	 --
one	IS	the	first	principle.
So	 these	 disciples	must	 have	 been	 told	 by	 some	Master	 to	 be	 silent	 for	 seven
days.	 But	 man	 functions	 in	 a	 mechanical	 way.	 If	 you	 sit	 silently	 that	 doesn't
mean	 you	will	 Become	 silent.	 In	 fact,	 just	 the	 reverse	will	 happen:	 if	 you	 sit
silently	 you	 will	 find	 a	 rush	 of	 thoughts	 coming	 to	 you.	 You	 will	 be	 more
crowded	by	thoughts	than	ever.	All	sorts	of	thoughts	--
relevant,	 irrelevant,	meaningful,	meaningless	--	 they	all	will	 jumble	together.	It
will	be	rush-hour	 traffic.	And	they	will	all	claim	your	attention.	Your	attention
will	become	fragmentary;	you	will	almost	feel	like	going	mad.	You	will	be	torn
apart.	You	will	feel	you	are	being	pulled	and	pushed	in	so	many	directions	...	you
will	start	feeling	crazy.
Just	to	sit	does	not	help.	One	has	to	be	very	aware.	These	four	disciples	were	not
aware	 at	 all,	 so	 when	 the	 one	 said,	 "Fix	 those	 lamps"	 to	 a	 servant	 who	 was
passing	by,	he	must	have	done	it	in	a	very	unconscious	way;	otherwise	he	was	to
keep	silent.	It	was	none	of	his	business	whether	the	lamps	were	getting	dim	or
not.	He	had	to	remember	that	he	was	in	silence,	but	he	forgot.
The	 story	 is	 not	 humorous;	 it	 is	 tragic.	 That's	 how	 things	 are	 with	 you,	 with
everybody.
It	happened	after	twenty-four	hours.	Try	it.	Just	take	your	wristwatch	today	and
sit	 silently,	 put	 your	wristwatch	 in	 front	 of	 you,	 look	 at	 the	 second	 hand.	The
second	 hand	moves	 one	 complete	 circle	 in	 one	minute.	 Just	watch	 the	 second
hand	and	remember	that	"I	am	to	remember	the	second	hand	moving;	I	am	not	to
forget	it."	And	it	will	be	difficult	for	you	even	to	remember	for	fifteen	seconds;
you	will	forget.	After	two,	three	seconds	you	will	start	thinking	something	else;
then	again	you	will	remember;	then	again	you	will	forget.	In	one	minute	you	will
forget	 at	 least	 four,	 five	 times.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 remember	 for	 one
continuous	minute	that	you	are	to	remember	the	second	hand	moving,	that	you
are	not	to	go	anywhere	else.
So	please	don't	 laugh	 at	 this	 story.	The	 first	 reaction	 is	 laughter,	 but	 it	 is	 very
tragic.	It	is	how	we	are.
For	 twenty-four	 hours	 they	 are	 sitting	 silently;	 then	 suddenly	 one	 servant	 is
passing	and	one	of	the	pupils	says,	"Fix	those	lamps."	Not	that	he	is	interested	in
the	 lamps.	Anything	would	 have	 provoked	 him;	 anything	would	 have	 become
the	 excuse.	 He	 wanted	 to	 say	 something!	 He	 must	 have	 been	 getting	 crazy.
That's	why	the	second	cannot	tolerate	it;	he	says,
"What?	We	are	not	supposed	to	say	a	word!"	And	the	third	says,	"You	two	are
stupid!	Why	did	you	talk?"	And	the	fourth	says,	"I	am	the	only	one,	thank	God,
who	has	not	talked	yet."
They	all	wanted	to	say	something,	 to	release,	 to	get	a	 little	relief.	 It	must	have
been	getting	too	heavy	on	them.
So	one	 thing,	when	you	 sit	 silently,	 all	 doors	 for	 your	 thoughts	 to	 be	 released
through	are	closed,	so	they	hammer	within	you,	they	start	gathering	within	you.
They	become	a	mob.
Their	presence	becomes	heavy;	then	you	will	find	any	excuse	and	you	will	say
something.
In	many	traditions	a	mantra	is	given,	chanting	is	given.	The	Master	gives	you	a
mantra.
That	is	just	to	help	you	so	you	don't	go	mad,	nothing	else.	It	is	just	a	help	for	the
beginners.	A	mantra	is	given	--	go	on	repeating,	"Ram,	Ram,	Ram	..."	That	will
help;	this	will	remain	a	release.	Other	thoughts	will	not	bother	you	too	much;	at
least	one	passage	is	open	so	something	can	flow.	You	can	go	on	repeating,	"Ram,
Ram,	Ram	..."	and	this	will	help	you	in	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
46
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
the	 beginning,	 but	 this	 is	 not	 real	 meditation.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 preparation	 for
meditation.	What	Maharishi	Mahesh	 Yogi	 calls	 "transcendental	 meditation"	 is
neither	meditation	nor	 transcendental.	 It	 is	 just	a	cleaning;	a	beginner	prepares
himself	for	meditation.
Meditation	starts	with	silence,	not	with	a	mantra;	but	a	mantra	can	be	helpful	if
you	are	very	alert.	Otherwise	even	the	mantra	can	become	dangerous;	you	may
get	too	addicted	to	it.
Then	you	remain	outside	the	temple.	The	mantra	is	a	help	if	you	know	that	it	is
just	to	make	you	ready	by	and	by	to	become	silent.
Many	thoughts	are	there;	then	one	thought	is	allowed	to	you	--	"Ram,	Ram,	Ram
..."
Ninety-nine	thoughts	are	not	allowed,	one	is	allowed.	If	you	can	attain	this,	then
one	day	that	one	has	to	be	dropped	too.	But	if	 this	one	becomes	very	strong	--
and	 there	 is	 every	 possibility	 it	 will	 become	 strong	 because	 your	 whole
attachment	that	was	divided	in	a	hundred	thoughts	will	now	fall	on	one	thought	-
-	 it	 will	 become	 a	 very	 deep	 attachment.	 It	 will	 become	 your	 very	 soul.	 If
somebody	will	say,	"Drop	it,"	you	will	be	angry.	"This	is	my	mantra,"	you	will
say.	"How	can	I	drop	it?"	Even	a	man	like	Ramakrishna	found	it	very	difficult	to
drop	his	Mother	Kali,	at	the	last	moment.
Difficult.	You	have	cultivated	it	so	much;	you	have	put	so	much	into	it.	All	your
desires,	 all	 your	 projections,	 all	 your	 thoughts,	 you	 have	 poured	 into	 it.	 It
becomes	one	of	the	strongest	thoughts	in	your	being.	It	will	be	very	difficult.	So
unless	 you	 are	 alert	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 a	mantra	 can	 poison	 you	 rather
than	help	you.
In	the	Tendai	school	there	is	no	mantra,	so	these	four	disciples	must	have	been
getting	very	volcanic.	They	must	have	been	sitting	on	a	volcano;	they	must	have
been	ready	to	explode.	The	passing	of	the	servant	and	the	oil	lamps	growing	dim
was	just	an	excuse.
The	mind	is	so	habituated	to	thinking,	so	habituated	to	expressing	itself	that	it	is
almost	impossible	to	get	out	of	it	--	unless	you	put	your	total	energy	in	getting
out	of	it,	unless	you	make	it	a	life-and-death	problem.	If	you	are	just	trying	so-
so,	 it	will	 not	help.	 If	 you	are	 just	making	a	 lukewarm	effort,	 it	will	 not	help.
Unless	it	really	becomes	a	life-and-death	problem	it	is	not	going	to	help.
A	man	came	to	Sheikh	Farid	and	said,	"I	would	like	to	know	God.	Can	you	give
me	some	method?"	Farid	said,	"I	am	going	to	river	to	take	my	bath;	you	come
with	me.	And	 if	 I	get	 a	chance	 I	will	give	you	 the	method."	They	went	 to	 the
river.	 The	man	was	 very	Curious	 as	 to	what	 he	was	 going	 to	 give	 him	 at	 the
river.	At	the	river	Farid	said,	"Now	you	also	unrobe	and	get	down	into	the	river
with	me.	Let	us	first	take	a	bath."	So	the	man	got	down	into	the	river,	and	when
he	came	close	to	Farid,	Farid	jumped	on	top	of	him,	pushed	him	down	into	the
river.	Farid	was	a	very	strong	man.	The	seeker	could	not	understand	what	was
happening.	He	had	come	to	ask	how	to	attain	God,	and	this	man	was	trying	to
kill	him!
But	when	it	is	a	question	of	life	and	death,	even	the	seeker,	who	was	not	a	very
strong	man,	also	tried	hard.	He	threw	Farid	away,	and	when	he	came	out	of	the
water	he	said,	"What	nonsense!	I	had	always	thought	that	you	are	a	pious	man.
You	have	fame	as	a	mystic,	and	what	were	you	doing?	Are	you	a	murderer?	And
I	have	not	done	anything	to	you;	I	have	just	asked	a	question,	how	to	attain	to
God."	And	Farid	said,	"That's	what	I	was	doing	--	giving	you	a	method.	Just	now
tell	me	one	thing	first,	 in	case	you	forget.	What	happened	when	I	was	pushing
you	down	into	the	river?	How	many	thoughts	were	there	in	your	mind?"
He	said,	"Thoughts?	There	was	only	one	thought	--	how	to	get	rid	of	you.	And
by	the	end	even	that	disappeared.	Then	there	was	only	an	effort,	not	a	thought	--
no	 thought.	My	whole	 life	was	 at	 stake.	 It	was	 just	 an	 effort	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the
river	somehow.	And	I	had	lo	put	all	my	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
47
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
energies	--	known,	unknown,	conscious,	unconscious,	whatsoever	--	because	this
seemed	to	be	the	last	moment."
Farid	said,	"That	is	the	method.	When	God	become	a	life-and-death	problem	--
not	a	question,	not	a	curiosity,	but	a	life-and-death	problem	--	when	your	life	and
death	hang	on	the	very	question,	on	the	very	quest,	only	then	will	you	be	able	to
know."
Now	 these	 four	 seekers	 are	 sitting	 there.	 Lukewarm	 they	must	 be.	 They	 don't
know	 what	 they	 are	 doing.	 Somebody	 has	 told	 them	 to	 sit	 silently;	 they	 are
sitting.	Mind	 functions	mechanically.	To	 get	 out	 of	 it	 you	will	 have	 to	 use	 all
your	energy.	The	possibility	is	there;	you	can	get	out	of	it.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	man	is	a	machine.	Then	somebody	asked,	"Then	what
is	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 real	machine	 and	man?"	And	Gurdjieff	 said,	 "The
difference	 is	 if	 man	 wants,	 he	 can	 go	 beyond	 the	 machine	 too.	 The	 machine
cannot."	Otherwise	 there	 is	no	difference.	As	man	exists	he	 is	 a	machine.	The
only	difference	is	in	the	future,	in	the	possibility,	potentiality.	If	man	wants	to	get
out	of	the	mechanical	world	he	can,	but	great	effort	will	be	needed.
A	 city	 fellow	 bought	 a	 place	 in	 the	 country	 recently	 and	 was	 going	 to	 raise
livestock,	but	when	he	arrived	at	his	farm,	all	he	found	was	a	large,	ancient	sow.
"Hell	 of	 a	 note,"	 he	 muttered	 and	 stamped	 off	 to	 the	 general	 store.	 The
storekeeper	was	sympathetic	and	volunteered	that	he	should	breed	his	sow	with
Farmer	Jones'	boar,	and	soon	he	would	be	in	the	livestock	business.	"Great	idea,"
said	the	slicker.
So	he	loaded	his	son	in	a	wheelbarrow	and	took	her	to	Farmer	Jones'.	The	next
morning	 he	 rushed	 out	 of	 bed	 and	 looked	 into	 the	 pigpen,	 but	 no	 piglets.
Disgusted,	 he	 went	 back	 to	 the	 store,	 and	 the	 storekeeper	 tolerantly
recommended	Farmer	Smith's	boar	now.
Once	 again	 the	 sow	was	 loaded	 in	 the	wheelbarrow	and	 taken	down	 the	 road,
and	once	again	the	next	morning	the	slicker	found	no	piglets.	This	routine	went
on	for	a	week,	and	finally	on	the	eighth	day,	the	slicker	refused	to	get	out	of	his
warm	bed	in	the	early	morning.
Rolling	over	to	his	wife,	he	said,	"Look	out	the	window	and	see	if	there	are	any
piglets	in	the	pen."
His	wife	looked.	"There	aren't	any	piglets	in	the	pen,"	she	said,	"but	the	sow	is
back	in	the	wheelbarrow."
That's	how	the	mind	functions	--	mechanically.	It	goes	on	doing	things	which	it
has	been	doing.	It	goes	on	repeating.
If	you	really	want	to	become	a	man,	get	out	of	your	repetitions.	There	are	no	bad
habits	and	no	good	habits.	because	all	habits	are	bad.	To	live	through	habits	is	to
live	a	mechanical	life.	Get	beyond,	become	aware.
Now,	 all	 these	 four	men	 just	 said	 things	 out	 of	 habit,	 not	 knowing	what	 they
were	saying.
And	 it	 is	very	easy	 for	you	 to	 see	others	committing	mistakes,	 errors,	because
you	 can	 look	 at	 others	 objectively.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 look	 at	 yourself.	 The
moment	 you	 start	 looking	 at	 yourself,	 you	 are	 becoming	 nonmechanical.	 To
become	 aware	 of	 your	 habits	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 nonmechanical	 life,	 is	 the
beginning	of	life	itself.	To	exist	as	a	machine	is	not	to	exist	at	all.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
48
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
Three	 small	 stories	 of	 how	 man	 is.	 Because	 of	 mechanical	 habits	 he	 lives
unconsciously.
You	do	a	thousand	and	one	things,	but	you	simply	go	on	doing	them	because	you
have	been	doing	them.
First	scene:
One	of	the	two	drunks	standing	beside	a	lamp	post	asked	his	companion,	"Say,
you	gotta	match?"
"I	 think	 so,"	 said	 his	 companion.	 "Let	 me	 see."	 He	 reached	 in	 his	 pocket,
withdrew	a	stick	match	and	rubbed	the	unsulphured	end	on	the	lamp	post	several
times.	No	good,"	he	said	finally,	and	 threw	it	away.	He	pulled	out	another	and
tried	again	to	strike	the	unsulphured	end.
"No	good,"	he	said	again,	and	threw	it	away.	He	reached	into	his	pocket,	found
another	match,	 and	 fortunately	 tried	 to	 light	 the	 proper	 end.	 It	 blazed	 up,	 but
immediately	 he	 blew	 it	 out	 and	 thrust	 it	 into	 his	 pocket.	 "Ah,"	 he	 beamed.
"That's	a	good	one.	Gotta	save	it."
The	second	scene:
A	 cop	 approached	 three	 drunks	 on	 a	 park	 bench.	 The	 one	 in	 the	 middle	 was
snoring	peacefully,	apparently	passed	out,	but	the	two	on	either	side	were	going
through	the	motions	of	fishing,	casting	out	their	lines,	jerking	them,	and	reeling
them	 in	 swiftly.	The	 cop	watched	 for	 a	while	 and	 then	 shook	 the	middle	man
awake.
"Are	these	nuts	friends	of	yours,	buddy?"
The	drunk	nodded.
"Well,	get	them	out	of	here	and	make	it	snappy."
The	drunk	agreed,	saluted,	and	began	rowing	vigorously.
The	third	scene:
Mort	and	Leo	wandered	 into	one	of	 those	new	fangled	bars	and	sat	down	 in	a
booth.	The	sign	on	the	wall	of	their	booth	said,	"Push	button	to	call	the	waiter."
Mort	 pushed	 the	 button,	 and	 sure	 enough	 the	 waiter	 appeared.	 "Two	 beers,"
ordered	Mort	and	the	waiter	brought	them	their	beers.
This	kept	up	for	a	good	four	hours,	and	it	was	hard	to	say	which	pleased	them
more,	drinking	beer	or	pushing	the	button	for	the	waiter.	Finally,	full	of	fun	and
good	cheer	the	two	parted	and	went	home.	The	next	morning	Leo's	wife	had	him
on	 the	 carpet.	 "What	 the	 hell	 did	 you	 think	 you	 were	 doing	 last	 night?"	 she
demanded.	Leo	was	puzzled.	"I	don't	know.	What	was	I	supposed	to	have	done?"
"All	 night	 long,"	 remonstrated	his	wife,	 "you	kept	poking	your	 finger	 into	my
navel	and	calling	for	two	beers."
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
49
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
A	mechanical	mind	 is	 an	 unconscious	mind.	You	 go	 on	 doing	 things,	 but	 not
knowing	 what	 you	 are	 doing	 and	 why	 you	 are	 doing	 them.	 And	 while	 doing
them	there	is	no	awareness.
Walking,	you	walk,	but	 there	 is	no	awareness.	Eating,	you	eat,	 but	 there	 is	no
awareness.
Talking,	you	talk,	but	there	is	no	awareness.
The	story	 is	significant.	 It	 says	 the	 first	did	 it	unconsciously	 --	and	 the	second
could	see	the	error	--	but	the	second	did	something	unconsciously	himself.	The
third	 could	 see	 the	 error	 of	 them	both,	 but	 himself	 committed	 the	 same	 error!
And	 the	fourth	could	see	 the	error	of	all	 three	and	 thanked	God	 that	"I	am	the
only	 one	 who	 has	 not	 yet	 broken	 silence."	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 see	 the	 error	 of
somebody	else	because	that	is	not	YOUR	mechanical	thing.	You	can	be	aware	of
it.	 When	 it	 comes	 to	 your	 own	 mechanical	 things	 you	 become	 completely
unaware.
Can't	you	see?	Somebody	is	eating	too	much	and	you	can	say	very	easily,	"Don't
eat	too	much."	Somebody	is	angry	and	you	can	say,	"What	are	you	doing?	Going
mad?"	Somebody	is	in	love	and	doing	foolish	things	and	you	can	say,	"Are	you
going	mad?	What	are	you	doing?"
But	the	question	is,	"Can	the	man	who	has	fallen	in	love	see	it?"
Just	the	other	night,	one	beautiful	sannyasin	told	me	that	she	has	fallen	in	love
with	a	man	and	things	are	going	really	fantastically;	the	relationship	is	beautiful.
I	told	her,	"Every	beginning	of	a	relationship	is	beautiful.	That	is	not	something
to	brag	about.	The	question	is,
'Can	the	beautiful	relationship	remain	beautiful?'	All	relationships	start	in	beauty,
in	sweetness,	in	harmony.	All	relationships	start	as	they	should	be,	but	sooner	or
later	things	start	falling.	Sooner	or	later	the	negative	asserts,	sooner	or	later	the
ugly	comes	up	--	then	is	the	question."	But	the	woman	said,	"It	will	not	come."
All	that	she	said,	summarized,	will	mean	that	she	is	an	exception;	it	is	not	going
to	happen.	And	that	is	the	foolishness	of	all	lovers.
That's	how	all	lovers	think,	that	it	is	not	going	to	happen	to	them.
And	when	it	has	happened,	then	it	is	too	late.	Then	you	cannot	put	things	right
again.
When	things	start	going	wrong,	there	is	no	way	to	put	them	right	again.	Even	if
you	put	them	right,	they	will	never	be	the	same.	It	is	as	if	a	cup	has	broken.	You
can	put	it	right;	you	can	glue	it	together.	But	it	will	never	be	the	same	again.	It	is
better	 to	handle	 it	carefully	 from	the	beginning.	And	 the	 first	 thing	 to	know	is
that	 every	 relationship	 starts	 good	 and	 every	 relationship	 ends	 bad.	 Yours
included,	mind	you!	It	is	very	easy	to	see	that	others	are	just	unaware.	"But	we
two	who	have	fallen	in	love,	we	are	different,"	--	that	is	the	idea	of	everybody.
Now,	 the	 woman	 was	 very	 confident	 --	 and	 in	 that	 very	 confidence	 is	 the
problem.	 In	 that	 very	 confidence	 she	 will	 miss	 because	 when	 you	 are	 so
confident	you	don't	 take	any	precautions.	When	you	are	so	confident	you	don't
try	to	be	aware	of	what	is	happening.	Then	you	move	unaware,	and	all	that	is	in
you,	by	and	by,	will	come	up	--	is	bound	to	come	up.
In	 the	beginning	when	 two	 lovers	meet,	 they	 show	 their	 beautiful	 faces.	Their
gracefulness	 is	 infinite.	Their	care	about	each	other	 is	absolute.	 It	has	 to	be	so
because	both	are	showing	 their	beautiful	parts.	But	when	 they	will	be	 together
for	twenty-four	hours,	then	it	will	be	impossible.	It	will	be	too	heavy	to	keep	the
ugly	parts	always	hidden;	by	and	by	the	ugly	parts	will	take	revenge.	They	will
start	coming	up.
When	you	fall	in	love,	why	do	we	call	it	"fall"?	It	is	called	"fall"	because	it	helps
you	to	be	unconscious.	It	is	a	fall.	You	become	unconscious.	We	say	somebody
has	"fallen"	asleep,	somebody	has	"fallen"	in	love.	"Fall"	means	now	you	are	no
more	 conscious;	 you	 are	 behaving	 very	 mechanically.	 Love	 in	 itself	 is
mechanical.	Then,	when	the	hate	starts	coming,	you	will	be	a	victim	of	that	too.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
50
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
If	you	 really	want	 to	change	your	 life,	 start	 immediately.	 If	you	have	 fallen	 in
love,	 make	 it	 an	 awareness.	 Do	 things	 with	 full	 awareness.	 See	 that	 you	 are
showing	 the	positive	aspects	of	you	and	you	are	hiding	 the	negative.	See	well
that	this	cannot	last	long,	so	something	has	to	be	done.	If	the	relationship	has	to
become	really	intimate,	 if	 it	 is	 to	go	long,	 then	something	has	to	be	done.	And
that	 something	 has	 to	 be	 done	 in	 you,	 not	 in	 the	 other!	Otherwise	 the	woman
thinks	 the	 husband	 has	 betrayed,	 the	 husband	 thinks	 the	woman	 has	 betrayed.
That's	what	these	four	people	thought:	the	other	is	doing	the	wrong.
Whenever	you	throw	the	responsibility	on	the	other,	you	are	avoiding	awareness.
Let	 this	be	a	very	 fundamental	 law.	Whenever	you	 throw	responsibility	on	 the
other,	you	are	saying,	"I	am	doing	perfectly	well;	 the	other	is	doing	wrong."	A
man	who	is	trying	to	be	aware	will	always	see	that	"I	am	responsible;	I	am	doing
something	wrong."	 It	 is	not	a	question	of	whether	 the	other	 is	doing	wrong	or
not.	That	 is	HIS	problem.	That	 is	 not	 your	 problem.	Your	 problem	 is	whether
you	 are	 doing	 something	 unconsciously.	 If	 you	 are	 doing	 something
unconsciously,	then	things	cannot	go	on	being	beautiful	forever.	Then	all	that	is
there	is	going	to	be	temporary;	it	cannot	have	the	quality	of	the	eternal;	it	cannot
have	the	timeless	beauty	and	divinity	in	it.
So	 always	 remember,	 when	 you	 see	 somebody	 doing	 something	 wrong,
somebody	committing	an	error,	rather	than	jumping	on	him,	look	into	yourself	--
what	you	 are	doing.	 If	 you	 can	watch	 everybody's	 error	 and	 everybody's	 error
becomes	a	remembrance	of	your	own	errors,	your	life	will	be	transformed.	Then
everybody	will	become	a	 teacher	 to	you.	Then	the	whole	of	 life	becomes	your
Master.	Everywhere	you	will	find	arrows	pointing	to	you.	The	whole	of	life	will
be	arrowed	towards	you,	saying,	"This	is	unconscious	...	this	is	irresponsible."
We	have	found	a	very	easy	trick:	we	turn	the	arrows	towards	others.	Others	go
on	 throwing	 the	 arrows	 towards	 us;	 we	 go	 on	 throwing	 the	 arrows	 towards
others.	In	this	game,	life	is	lost.	Don't	continue	playing	this	game.
Your	 world	 is	 created	 by	 your	 consciousness	 or	 your	 unconsciousness.	 It	 has
nothing	 to	 do	with	 your	wife,	 your	 husband,	 your	 children,	 your	 friends,	 your
society.	Your	world	is	YOU.
Bring	 light	 to	 your	 world.	 Bring	 more	 awareness	 to	 your	 world.	 And	 start
existing	 less	 like	 a	machine,	more	 like	 a	man.	Otherwise	 one	 has	 been	 going
from	one	life	to	another,	repeating	the	same.
You	have	repeated	enough!	Are	you	not	yet	bored?	Are	you	not	yet	fed	up	with
it?	Start	changing	a	few	fundamental	things.	One,	stop	looking	at	others'	errors,
and	 each	 time	 you	 see	 somebody	 else	 committing	 an	 error,	 a	 mistake,	 start
finding	out	immediately	somewhere	some	mistake	in	yourself.	In	fact,	to	look	at
the	mistake	of	the	other	is	a	way	of	avoiding	your	own	mistake.	One	feels	very
good:	"Somebody	else	is	committing	the	mistake	and	I	am	perfectly	okay."	Start
analyzing,	observing.	Become	more	critical	about	your	habits,	about	your	ways,
about	your	style	of	life.
I	have	heard	about	one	man	who	married	eight	times.	Each	time	he	thought,	"I
have	 found	 the	 wrong	 woman."	 And	 he	 was	 not	 wrong.	 After	 each	 marriage
there	was	misery.	He	divorced	the	first	woman,	tried	to	find	another,	and	again
after	a	few	months	the	same	misery.
And	he	was	surprised	at	how	he	managed	to	find	the	same	type	of	woman	again
and	again!
Eight	 times	he	married,	and	all	 the	 times	he	married	 the	same	 type	of	woman.
And	each	time	he	was	trying	to	be	more	alert	not	to	fall	in	the	trap	again,	but	he
fell	--	because	when	you	choose	a	woman	the	chooser	is	the	same.	How	can	you
change	the	woman!
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
51
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
If	 the	chooser	 is	 the	same,	 the	choice	 is	going	 to	be	 the	same.	Again	 the	same
thing	will	 appeal	 to	 you.	Maybe	 the	 face	 is	 a	 little	 different,	 the	 hairstyle	 is	 a
little	 different,	 the	 color	 of	 the	 hair	 is	 a	 little	 different	 --	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point.
These	are	irrelevant	things.	A	marriage	does	not	depend	on	the	color	of	the	hair,
a	marriage	does	not	 depend	on	 the	 color	 of	 the	 eyes,	 and	 a	marriage	does	not
depend	on	 the	 length	of	 the	nose.	These	are	superficial	 things.	After	 two	days,
who	looks	at	the	size	of	the	nose?	Or	who	bothers	about	the	color	of	the	hair?	In
fact,	 if	your	wife	suddenly	goes	and	changes	the	color	of	her	hair,	 the	husband
will	be	the	last	one	to	note	it.	Who	bothers?
But	 more	 essential	 is	 why	 you	 choose	 a	 certain	 woman,	 why	 you	 choose	 a
certain	man.
Why?	What	fits	with	your	mind?	Again	you	will	choose	the	same	type	of	woman
--	 for	 the	 same	 reasons.	 Those	 reasons	 are	 unconscious.	 So	 you	 can	 go	 on
changing	women	and	you	will	 not	 find	 the	woman	you	are	 searching	 for.	You
can	go	on	changing	your	job	and	you	will	not	find	the	job	you	are	searching	for.
And	you	can	go	on	searching	among	the	Masters	--
from	one	to	another	you	can	go	on	moving	--	and	you	will	not	find	the	Master
you	 are	 searching	 for,	 unless	 you	 become	 more	 alert	 about	 your	 mechanical
habits.
Once	you	become	aware	of	your	mechanical	habits	things	start	changing.	Then
the	 first	 ray	 of	 light	 has	 entered.	 Then	 you	 will	 choose	 a	 different	 kind	 of
woman,	 because	 you	 have	 become	different.	Then	 you	will	 choose	 a	 different
kind	 of	 Master,	 because	 you	 have	 become	 different.	 Then	 you	 will	 choose
EVERYTHING	in	a	different	way,	because	you	are	different.
And	if	a	person	chooses	out	of	awareness,	he	chooses	rightly.
People	 come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 ask,	 "What	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong?"	 I	 say,
"Awareness	is	right;	unawareness	is	wrong."	I	don't	 label	actions	as	wrong	and
right.	I	don't	say	violence	is	wrong.	Sometimes	violence	can	be	right.	I	don't	say
love	 is	 right.	Sometimes	 love	 can	be	wrong.	Love	 can	be	 for	 a	wrong	person,
love	 can	 be	 for	 a	 wrong	 purpose.	 Somebody	 loves	 his	 country.	 Now,	 this	 is
wrong	because	nationalism	is	a	curse.	Somebody	loves	his	religion.	He	can	kill,
he	can	murder,	he	can	burn	others'	 temples.	Neither	 is	 love	always	right	nor	 is
anger	always	wrong.
Then	what	 is	 right	 and	what	 is	 wrong?	 To	me,	 awareness	 is	 right.	 If	 you	 are
angry	 with	 full	 awareness,	 even	 anger	 is	 right.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 loving	 with
unawareness,	even	love	is	not	right.
So	let	the	quality	of	awareness	be	there	in	every	act	that	you	do,	in	every	thought
that	you	think,	in	every	dream	that	you	dream.	Let	the	quality	of	awareness	enter
into	your	being	more	and	more.	Become	suffused	with	the	quality	of	awareness.
Then	whatsoever	you	do	is	virtue.
Then	whatsoever	you	do	is	good.	Then	whatsoever	you	do	is	a	blessing	to	you
and	to	the	world	in	which	you	live.
Ponder	 over	 this	 small	 story.	 It	 is	 a	 story	 of	 four	 unconscious	 people	who	 are
trying	to	be	silent.	But	they	have	not	understood	the	laws	of	thought,	they	have
not	 understood	 the	 law	 of	 being	 unconscious.	 They	 don't	 know	 that	man	 is	 a
machine.	They	don't	know	that	to	look	at	the	other	is	a	way	of	avoiding	oneself.
They	are	not	yet	conscious	of	what	they	are	doing.
Even	 though	 they	are	sitting	 in	meditation	and	 trying	 to	be	silent,	 they	are	not
aware	 of	 the	 science	 of	 silence,	 of	 the	 yoga	 of	meditation.	Hence	 this	 foolish
anecdote	became	possible.
You	will	be	repeating	the	same	thing.	All,	the	whole	of	humanity,	are	repeating.
Don't	think	that	you	are	an	exception!	Don't	think	that	if	you	were	one	of	these
four	 people	 you	would	 not	 have	 committed	 this.	 Know	well	 you	would	 have
committed	 it!	 This	 story	 is	 about	 you.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 Tendai
school.	These	four	can	be	Osho	sannyasins.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
52
Chapter	3	-	The	Only	One	Who	Has	Not	Talked
Watch	 each	 step	 that	 you	 take	 --	 in	 action	 or	 in	 thought.	 The	 only	 goal	 is
awareness	 ...	 and	 then	 your	 whole	 life	 is	 transformed.	 Then	 your	 whole	 life
attains	 to	 a	 new	quality,	 to	 a	 new	dimension.	And	 that	 dimension	 leads	 to	 the
first	principle.
YOU	are	the	first	principle!
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
53
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
4
Go	with	the	River
14	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Question
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 IT	 SEEMS	 TO	 ME	 THAT	 I	 DON'T	 UNDERSTAND
ANYTHING.
That's	far	out,	Vidya.	If	it	is	really	true,	then	it	is	great.	If	you	don't	understand
anything,	 then	 the	 door	 is	 open,	 then	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 hinder	 your	 way,	 to
hinder	your	vision.	It	is	knowledge	that	is	obstructing.	Ignorance	is	an	opening.
Ignorance	is	very	blissful.	k	is	knowledge	that	creates	noise.	k	is	knowledge	that
does	not	 allow	you	 to	 see.	 If	your	eyes	are	completely	 rid	of	knowledge,	 then
what	is	there	to	hinder	you	from	seeing	the	truth?	The	truth	is	obvious.	You	just
need	a	clarity	to	see	it.	Ignorance	gives	that	clarity.
To	 be	 consciously	 ignorant	 is	 to	 be	 in	 satori.	 A	 child	 is	 ignorant,	 but	 not
conscious	of	his	ignorance.	A	saint	is	ignorant,	but	is	conscious	of	his	ignorance.
He	knows	that	he	knows	not.
That's	 the	only	difference.	The	child	 also	knows	not,	 but	he	does	not	know	 it.
The	saint	knows	that	he	knows	not.	His	whole	knowledge	consists	of	one	single
thing:	that	there	is	nothing	to	be	known	and	there	is	no	possibility	to	know,	that
the	whole	 effort	 towards	 knowledge	 is	 futile,	 that	 existence	 is	 such	 a	mystery
that	it	can	never	be	reduced	to	knowledge.
All	 that	we	know	 is	 superficial,	 arbitrary.	All	 that	we	know	has	nothing	 to	 do
with	reality.
The	 reality	 remains	 untouched	 by	 our	 knowledge.	 The	 reality	 remains
mysterious.
If	 it	 is	 really	 true	 that	you	have	become	aware	of	your	 ignorance,	 then	there	 is
nothing	else	to	be	sought,	nothing	else	to	attain.	Relax	in	this	ignorance.	Accept
this	ignorance.	And	feel	blissful.
But	 it	may	 not	 be	 true.	 That's	 why	 I	 say	 IF	 it	 is	 true.	 It	may	 again	 be	 just	 a
hankering	to	know.	Then	you	have	not	understood,	then	you	are	not	at	ease	with
your	nonknowing.	The	question	seems	to	be	because	you	are	worried;	otherwise
why	a	question?	You	are	worried.
Something	 is	 gnawing	 at	 your	 heart.	You	 are	worried	 that	 "I	 don't	 understand
anything,	 and	 I	 have	 to	 understand."	 In	 fact,	when	Vidya	 had	 come,	 she	must
have	thought	that	she	knows.
Now	 by	 and	 by	 I	 have	 been	 hammering	 on	 her,	 and	 her	 knowledge	 has
disappeared.	Now	she	is	worried.
When	 you	 come	 to	 me	 you	 come	 full	 of	 knowledge.	 You	 come	 with	 much
luggage,	and	that	luggage	has	to	be	destroyed,	burned	utterly,	so	that	you	cannot
find	it	again.	When	you	lose	your	luggage	you	start	feeling	as	if	you	are	missing
something.	Naturally	so.	You	have	been	carrying	the	load	so	long;	now	suddenly
it	is	gone;	you	feel	you	are	missing	something.
The	question	has	arisen	because	of	your	feeling	that	something	is	being	missed:
"I	don't	know	anything?"	The	knowledge	has	disappeared	and	ignorance	has	not
yet	been	accepted.
If	you	don't	accept	ignorance,	sooner	or	later	you	will	attain	to	knowledge	again,
you	will	 start	 gathering	and	hoarding.	And	 this	 time	you	will	 hoard	 in	 a	more
subtle	way	so	that	it	cannot	be	easily	taken	away	from	you.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
54
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
Beware.	These	are	the	moments	when	you	need	a	Master	to	say	to	you,	"Accept
and	relax	into	this	ignorance."	I	am	not	here	to	impart	knowledge	to	you.	I	am
here	to	take	it	away	from	you.
In	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient	 books	 in	 India,	 SHIVASUTRA,	 there	 is	 a
tremendously	 significant	 sutra:	 "GYANAM	 BUNDHAM"	 "Knowledge	 is
bondage".	 When	 there	 is	 no	 knowledge,	 a	 man	 is	 free.	 It	 is	 such	 a	 radical
statement:	 all	 knowledge	 is	 bondage.	 The	 moment	 you	 know	 that	 you	 don't
know,	the	bondage	falls,	but	if	you	have	lived	in	the	bondage	for	long,	you	start
accepting	it	as	part	of	you.
If	a	man	has	lived	in	prison	for	many	years	with	chains	on	his	hands	and	on	his
feet	and	then	you	suddenly	take	away	the	chains	--	he	will	not	even	be	able	to
sleep	in	the	night.	He	has	become	accustomed	to	them;	he	needs	that	weight,	that
noise.	When	he	used	to	turn	in	the	night,	those	chains	used	to	make	noise;	now
suddenly	the	noise	will	not	be	there.	He	will	become	awake	again	and	again	in
the	 night:	 something	 is	 missing.	 Walking,	 he	 will	 feel	 as	 if	 he	 is	 naked:
something	is	missing.	He	has	become	accustomed	to	that	weight,	and	that's	how
everybody	has	become	accustomed	to	the	weight	of	knowledge.	Knowledge	is	a
bondage.
The	question	arises	only	because	the	acceptance	has	not	arisen	yet.	You	can	miss
this	great	opportunity	of	being	ignorant.
Relax,	 love	 it,	 embrace	 it,	 feel	 one	with	 it,	 and	 there	will	 arise	 a	 new	 sort	 of
innocence.
You	were	innocent	when	you	were	a	child.	This	will	be	a	new	birth	and	a	new
sort	of	innocence.	Again	you	will	become	a	child,	and	yet	your	childlike	quality
will	not	be	childish;	it	will	have	a	maturity	in	it.
Sometimes	 reading,	 sometimes	 listening,	and	particularly	 listening	 to	Zen,	you
may	 start	 feeling,	 "I	 don't	 know	 anything."	 Because	 the	 Zen	 people	 are	 very
much	against	knowledge,	you	may	start	clinging	to	the	idea	of	not	knowing.	But
that	idea	is	not	going	to	help.	That	idea	is	again	part	of	knowledge.	Listening	to
the	Zen	Masters,	you	may	start	getting	attached	to	the	very	idea	of	not	knowing.
Then	this	idea	of	not	knowing	becomes	your	knowledge.
To	 be	 really	 in	 deep	 ignorance	 means	 you	 don't	 even	 have	 the	 idea	 of
nonknowledge.	You	are	 simply	 innocent.	The	knowledge	has	disappeared,	 and
nothing	has	appeared	in	its	place.
Let	me	tell	you	this	famous	anecdote:
Traditionally	Zen	monasteries	will	only	admit	wandering	Zen	monks	if	they	can
show	proof	of	having	solved	a	koan.
And	you	can	solve	a	koan	only	when	you	have	fallen	 into	deep	 ignorance,	not
before	 it,	 because	a	koan	 is	not	 a	puzzle.	Or	 if	 it	 is	 a	puzzle,	 then	 it	 is	not	 an
ordinary	puzzle.	An	ordinary	puzzle	can	be	solved	by	the	mind;	if	you	put	your
mind	 to	 it	 you	 can	 find	 a	way	 to	 solve	 it;	 it	 has	 a	 solution.	A	 koan	 is	 such	 a
puzzle	 that	 it	 has	 no	 mind	 solution	 possible;	 you	 cannot	 solve	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	what	you	do,	it	is	insoluble.	Mind	cannot	give	any	answer	to	it.
For	example,	Zen	Masters	say,	"Listen	to	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping."	Now,
one	hand	cannot	clap,	and	unless	it	claps	there	will	not	be	any	sound,	so	to	what
are	you	going	to	listen?
The	mind	will	work	 out	many	 solutions,	 and	 all	will	 be	meaningless,	 and	 the
Master	will	send	you	back	again	and	again.	Again	listen.	Meditate.	The	solution
will	happen	one	day	when	the	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
55
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
mind	disappears.	When	you	work	hard	with	the	mind	and	the	mind	finds	no	way
to	 reach	 any	 solution,	 out	 of	 sheer	 tiredness	 the	mind	 falls	 flat	 on	 the	ground.
Suddenly	 you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind,	 and	 you	 hear	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand
clapping.
The	mind	hears	only	the	sound	of	two	hands	clapping	be	cause	the	mind	lives	in
duality.
The	mind	can	hear	only	a	created	sound.	When	 the	mind	disappears,	you	hear
the	soundless	sound,	what	the	Hindus	call	ANAHAT	NAD.	The	word	ANAHAT
means	exactly	the	same	as	what	Zen	people	call	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
If	you	clash	two	things	there	is	a	sound	that	is	called	AHAT	NAD,	a	sound	that
comes	out	of	conflict.	And	there	is	a	sound	permeating	existence	itself	--	which
is	 not	 created,	 uncreated.	 When	 you	 become	 so	 silent	 that	 the	 mind	 has
disappeared,	 disappeared	 with	 all	 its	 noise,	 suddenly	 that	 soundless	 sound	 is
heard,	 that	 AUMKAR,	 that	 ANAHAT	 NAD	 is	 heard.	 But	 that	 happens	 only
when	the	mind	has	gone.
Traditionally	Zen	monasteries	will	only	admit	wandering	Zen	monks	if	they	can
show	proof	of	having	solved	a	koan.
It	seems	that	a	monk	once	knocked	on	a	monastery	gate.	The	monk	who	opened
the	 gate	 did	 not	 say	 "Hello"	 or	 "Good	morning"	 but	 "Show	me	 your	 original
face,	the	face	you	had	before	your	father	and	mother	were	born."	...
This	is	a	koan.	And	the	host	is	asking	the	guest	to	show	some	sign	that	he	can
solve	 a	 koan;	 otherwise	 he	 is	 not	 worthy	 of	 being	 allowed	 to	 stay	 in	 the
monastery;	then	he	will	have	to	go	away.
...	The	monk	who	wanted	 a	 room	 for	 the	night	 smiled,	 pulled	 a	 sandal	off	 his
foot	 and	 hit	 his	 questioner	 in	 the	 face	with	 it.	 The	 other	monk	 stepped	 back,
bowed	respectfully,	and	bade	 the	visitor	welcome.	After	dinner,	host	and	guest
started	 a	 conversation,	 and	 the	 host	 complimented	 his	 guest	 on	 his	 splendid
answer.
"Do	you	yourself	know	the	answer	to	the	koan	you	gave	me?"	the	guest	asked.
"No,"	answered	 the	host,	 "but	 I	knew	 that	your	answer	was	 right.	You	did	not
hesitate	 for	 a	moment.	 It	 came	out	quite	 spontaneously.	 It	 agreed	 exactly	with
everything	I	have	heard	or	read	about	Zen."
The	guest	did	not	 say	 anything,	 and	 sipped	his	 tea.	Suddenly	 the	host	became
suspicious.
There	was	something	in	the	face	of	his	guest	which	he	did	not	like.
"You	DO	know	the	answer,	don't	you?"	he	asked.
The	guest	began	to	laugh	and	finally	rolled	over	the	mat	with	mirth.
"No,	reverend	brother,"	he	said,	"but	I	too	have	read	a	lot	and	heard	a	lot	about
Zen."
Hearing	me,	 there	 are	many	 things	 you	will	 start	 imagining,	many	 things	 you
will	 start	 believing.	 Beware,	 because	 those	 things	 won't	 help.	 Hearing	 Zen,
reading	Zen	is	not	going	to	give	you	Zen.	Zen	is	a	quality	that	you	have	to	attain
to.	It	is	a	new	vision	of	life	and	reality.	It	is	a	new	penetration	into	the	mystery	of
existence.	It	is	not	intellectual;	it	is	existential.	You	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
56
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
have	to	throb	with	it,	your	heart	has	to	beat	with	it,	you	have	to	breathe	it	in	and
out.	It	is	not	going	to	be	just	an	intellectual	understanding.
Listening	 to	me,	 the	 understanding	will	 come	 to	 you	 intellectually	 very	 easily
because	whatsoever	I	am	saying	is	simple.	There	is	nothing	difficult	about	it.	It
is	 not	 very	 complex.	 I	 am	 not	 spinning	 any	 philosophical	 theories	 here.	 I	 am
simply	stating	simple	facts.
Now,	this	fact	is	simple	that	a	child	has	an	innocent	clarity.	And	one	day	if	you
also	 attain	 consciously	 to	 that	 childhood	 --	 what	 Jesus	 calls.	 "When	 you	 are
reborn,"	that	is	rebirth	--	then	you	will	be	able	to	see	what	is.	But	listening	to	me,
you	may	start	 thinking,	"Yes,	that's	right.	I	also	don't	know	anything."	But	is	it
your	 understanding,	 or	 just	 a	 reflection	 of	 my	 understanding?	 Is	 it	 your
experience,	or	just	an	imitation?
It	 happens	 --	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 every	 Master	 it	 happens	 --	 because	 man	 is
naturally	imitative.	Darwin	is	right.	Man	comes	from	the	monkeys,	and	is	very
imitative.	He	can	imitate	anything.
I	have	heard	there	was	a	great	Master:
The	Master	would	sit	for	hours	alone	in	his	cave	meditating,	his	only	companion
being	 a	 favorite	 cat	 which	 he	 tied	 to	 a	 post	 in	 his	 cave	 during	 his	 periods	 of
meditation.	 As	 years	 went	 by	 his	 fame	 spread	 and	 he	 soon	 had	 a	 number	 of
pupils	who	came	to	learn	from	him	and	who	made	him	their	guru	or	their	Master.
He	instructed	his	pupils	to	meditate	as	he	did.	Soon	each	pupil	could	be	observed
meditating	with	a	cat	tied	to	a	post	by	his	side.
The	Master	died,	so	what	did	the	pupils	do?	They	had	known	always	of	one	cat
being	tied	to	a	post	by	the	side	of	the	Master.	Naturally	they	thought	the	cat	must
have	something	to	do	with	meditation.	And	cats	are	very	esoteric	people.	The	cat
must	have	something	to	do	with	meditative	energy.	Somehow	the	cat	must	have
been	a	help;	otherwise	why?	The	Master	used	 to	do	 it	 continuously.	For	years
they	had	seen	it.	Whenever	he	was	meditating,	the	cat	was	there	tied	to	the	post.
He	 had	 to	 tie	 the	 cat;	 otherwise	 the	 cat	would	 disturb	 his	meditation!	The	 cat
may	 jump	 into	his	 lap,	might	 like	 to	play	with	him.	Cats	don't	bother	whether
you	are	meditating	or	not,	so	the	cat	has	to	be	tied	to	the	post.	But	what	about	the
disciples?	They	watched.	And	you	can	see	only	the	outward;	the	inner	remains
invisible.	Naturally	they	also	tried	to	imitate	it.
It	 happens.	 Beware	 of	 that	 too.	 Don't	 be	 imitative.	 Just	 because	 I	 am	 saying
something,	you	need	not	repeat	it.	If	you	repeat	it,	it	will	not	be	helpful	for	your
own	growing	understanding.
Don't	repeat	it.	Let	it	sink	into	your	being.	Experience	it.
If	 I	 say	 something,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 believe	 in	 it.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to
disbelieve	either.
Remain	open.	If	I	say	something,	then	try	it.	Then	look	at	the	trees	without	any
ideas	whatever.	Look	at	the	birds	and	the	sky	with	no	knowledge.	Drop	language
and	see	whether	what	 I	am	saying	gives	you	clarity.	 If	you	can	drop	 the	word
"rose"	and	then	see	the	rose	flower,	what	happens?	You	will	immediately	feel	a
new	kind	of	relationship	arising	between	you	and	the	flower.	Don't	even	call	it	a
flower;	 there	 is	 no	 need.	 Your	 language	 is	 not	 needed	 to	 support	 it;	 it	 exists
without	 language.	Why	bring	 language	 in?	Put	 language	 aside.	 Put	 aside	 your
continuous	gibberish	that	goes	on	inside	the	mind.	Just	look.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
57
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
In	the	beginning	it	is	difficult	--	the	language	will	come	up	again	and	again,	just
out	of	old	habit	--	but	sooner	or	later	it	comes	easily:	you	can	remain	at	least	for
a	 few	 moments	 without	 language.	 Listening	 to	 the	 song	 of	 the	 birds	 or	 the
murmur	 of	 the	 wind	 passing	 through	 the	 trees,	 or	 the	 river,	 you	 can	 remain
without	 language	for	a	few	seconds.	And	in	 those	seconds	will	be	 the	proof	of
what	I	have	been	saying	to	you.	Suddenly	you	will	see	as	if	a	great	darkness	has
disappeared	and	everywhere	 is	 light.	You	can	see	as	 if	 the	doors	of	perception
have	been	cleansed.
Ordinarily	 we	 are	 looking	 through	 dark	 curtains.	 The	 glass	 we	 are	 looking
through	is	too	dusty.	Only	fragments	of	reality	appear,	not	the	totality.
Experience	what	I	am	saying,	don't	imitate,	and	then	this	is	going	to	happen	to
you:	one	day	you	will	suddenly	see	you	don't	know	anything.	But	this	will	be	a
vision,	a	realization.
Then	it	is	great.	If	it	is	truly	happening,	it	is	great.
Question
MEHER	 BABA	 HAS	 TALKED	 ABOUT	 GOD	 DESCENDING	 IN	 MAN
(AVATAR,	 RASOOL,	 CHRIST)	 AND	 MAN	 RISING	 TO	 BE	 GOD	 (THE
PERFECT	 MASTER,	 SADGURU,	 QUTUB,	 TEERTHANKARA).	 WOULD
YOU	PLEASE	TALK	TO	US
ABOUT	THE	SAME?
God	is.	He	neither	ascends	nor	descends.	Where	can	he	ascend	to	and	where	can
he	 descend	 to?	 God	 is	 all.	 There	 is	 nothing	 in	 to	 which	 God	 can	 ascend	 or
descend.	There	is	nobody	else	other	than	God.	All	that	is	is	divine.	So	the	first
thing:	there	is	no	ascendence,	no	descendence.
But	when	Meher	Baba	says	it,	there	must	be	some	meaning	in	it.	The	meaning	is
something	quite	different.	Let	me	explain	it	to	you.
God	is,	remember.	God	is	a	pure	isness,	pure	existence,	and	there	is	nowhere	for
God	to	go	or	come.	The	whole	is	full	of	him.	He	fills	his	existence,	one	thing.
Second	 thing:	 but	Meher	 Baba	must	 be	 true.	 Then	 there	 must	 be	 some	 other
meaning	to	it	--	not	God	descending	and	ascending.	What	can	be	the	meaning?
The	meaning	is	there	are	two	ways	of	man	approaching	God.
What	do	I	mean	by	"man"	when	God	is	the	only	reality?	Man	is	the	God	who	has
forgotten	that	he	is	God;	man	is	a	God	who	has	forgotten	himself.
Man	 can	 remember	 his	 godliness	 in	 two	ways.	 One	way	 is	 that	 of	 surrender,
devotion,	love,	prayer;	another	way	is	that	of	will,	effort,	meditation,	yoga.	If	a
man	tries	to	work	his	way	through	will,	then	he	will	feel	he	is	ascending	towards
God	or	he	is	reaching	towards	God	through	his	will.	Hence	Jainas	call	the	man
who	attains	to	godliness	a	TEERTHANKARA.
TEERTHANKARA	means	consciousness	has	reached	the	peak;	man	has	arrived
by	ascending,	as	if	there	has	been	a	ladder,	the	ladder	of	the	will,	the	ladder	of
effort	and	yoga.	So	 is	 the	concept	of	 the	Buddhas;	 that	 too	 is	 the	path	of	will.
Avatar	means	God	descending;	that	is	another	approach,	when	a	man	surrenders.
He	 cannot	 ascend.	He	 simply	 opens	 his	 heart	 and	waits,	 prays	 and	waits,	 and
suddenly	he	starts	feeling	a	stirring	in	his	heart.	Certainly	he	will	see	"God	has
descended	in	me."	Avatar	means	descendence,	God	coming	down.
Mahavir	went	up.	For	Meera,	God	came	down.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
58
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
But	 God	 never	 comes	 down,	 never	 goes	 up.	 God	 is	 where	 he	 is.	 But	 your
experience	will	be	different.	If	you	try	hard	to	achieve	God,	you	will	go	higher
and	 higher	 and	 higher;	 naturally	 you	 will	 feel	 the	 God	 hidden	 inside	 you	 is
arising,	rising	up,	reaching	to	the	zenith.
But	 if	 you	 surrender,	 nothing	 is	 arising	 in	 you.	 You	 are	 where	 you	 are,	 you
simply	wait	in	deep	prayer,	in	deep	love,	in	deep	trust,	and	one	day	you	find	God
is	 descending	 in	 you,	 coming	 from	 above.	 These	 are	 the	 experiences	 of	 two
types	of	seekers.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	God.
It	has	something	to	do	with	the	seeker	and	his	way:	will	or	surrender,	effort	or
prayer,	yoga	or	BHAKTI.
So	 the	 religions	 which	 believe	 in	 BHAKTI,	 in	 devotion	 ...	 Christianity	 says
Christ	comes	from	God.	That	is	the	meaning	of	saying	that	he	is	God's	son	--	he
comes	from	above,	he	has	been	sent.	And	that	is	the	meaning	of	Mohammed	--
he	is	a	prophet,	a	messenger,	PAIGAMBAR.	PAIGAMBAR	means	a	messenger
who	comes	from	above,	brings	the	message.	He	does	not	belong	to	this	world;	he
comes	like	a	ray	of	light	into	the	darkness.	And	so	is	the	concept	of	the	Hindus'
avatar	--	Krishna,	Ram	--	they	come,	they	come	into	the	world.
The	Buddhist,	the	Jaina	concept	is	just	the	reverse.	They	say	there	is	no	God	to
come,	 and	 God	 is	 not	 a	 father	 and	 he	 cannot	 have	 a	 son.	 These	 are	 all	 very
childish	concepts	for	them.
And	 if	 you	 look	 through	 their	 eyes	 they	 are;	 these	 concepts	 are	 childish,	 very
anthropomorphic,	man-centered.	You	create	God	in	your	own	image,	as	 if	God
also	has	a	family.	He	has	a	family	--	the	Trinity:	God	the	Father,	Christ	the	Son,
and	 the	Holy	Ghost.	The	Holy	Ghost	must	 be	 a	woman;	 otherwise	 the	 family
will	not	be	exactly	as	it	should	be.
But	why	don't	Christians	call	the	Holy	Ghost	a	woman?	Male	chauvinism.	They
cannot	 make	 a	 woman	 also	 part	 of	 the	 Trinity;	 it	 is	 difficult	 for	 them,	 very
difficult	 for	 them.	 So	 to	what	 have	 they	 reduced	 their	 God?	 It	 seems	 to	 be	 a
homosexual	 family.	All	men,	 not	 a	 single	woman	 there.	 It	 looks	ugly.	But	my
feeling	is	that	the	Holy	Ghost	must	be	a	woman.
We	create	God	in	our	own	image.
Jainas	and	Buddhists	say	that	there	is	no	God	and	there	is	no	God's	family	and
nobody	comes	from	there.	Then	what	has	one	to	do?	One	has	to	arise.	God	is	in
you	like	a	seed,	as	a	tree	arises	from	the	earth	and	goes	higher	and	higher.	God	is
not	like	rain	falling,	but	a	tree	arising.	Man	has	the	seed.	Man	is	potentially	God.
So	when	you	work	hard,	you	start	growing.
These	are	the	two	concepts.	That's	why	Meher	Baba	says,	"...	God	descending	in
man	 (Avatar,	 Rasool,	 Christ)	 and	 man	 rising	 to	 be	 God	 (the	 Perfect	 Master,
Sadguru,	Qutub,	Teerthankara)."	But	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	God.
Question
WHEN	I	WAS	A	CHILD	I	WAS	INOCULATED	AGAINST	THE	MEASLES.
CAN	I	STILL	CATCH	THEM	NOW?
Yes,	 every	 child	 has	 been	 inoculated.	 Every	 child	 has	 been	 destroyed.	 Every
child	has	been	conditioned	 in	 such	a	way	 that	 he	 cannot	get	 the	measles	 I	 am
talking	about.
You	have	been	brought	up	as	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu.	That	very	upbringing	closes
your	doors.	Even	if	Christ	comes'	 to	you,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	him.	The
idea	that	Christianity	has	given	to	you	about	Christ	is	so	false,	it	is	so	foolish.	it
is	so	inhuman,	that	if	Christ	comes	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
59
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
to	you,	you	will	 not	be	 able	 to	 recognize	him.	You	will	 not	be	 able	 to	get	 the
measles	 even	 from	Christ!	And	Buddhists	 have	 created	 the	 idea	of	Buddha	 so
abstractly	 and	 they	 have	 so	 conditioned	 their	 children	 with	 that	 abstract	 idea,
with	that	inoculation,	that	even	if	Buddha	comes	across	you,	you	will	not	be	able
to	recognize	him.	So	it	is	not	only	that	a	Christian	will	not	be	able	to	recognize
Buddha,	Mahavir,	Patanjali,	he	will	not	even	be	able	to	recognize	Christ.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	one	of	Dostoevsky's	novels,	THE	BROTHERS
KARAMAZOV.	After	eighteen	hundred	years	Christ	 thinks,	 "Now	almost	half
the	world	is	Christian.	If	I	go	again	I	will	be	welcomed."	The	last	time,	they	had
treated	 him	 very	 badly,	 and	 it	 was	 natural	 because	 there	 was	 not	 a	 single
Christian,	 there	were	only	Jews;	 they	 tortured	Jesus	badly	and	they	killed	him.
He	must	have	still	been	thinking	about	 the	torture	that	he	had	met,	but	now	he
thinks,	"Half	of	the	world	is	Christian.	Half	of	the	world	belongs	to	me;	if	I	go
now	 then	 people	will	 simply	 fall	 at	my	 feet.	They	will	 recognize	 a	Christ	 has
come	back	and	he	has	fulfilled	his	promise."
So	 he	 comes,	 he	 comes	 to	 the	 small	 town	 of	 Bethlehem.	 Must	 be	 some	 old
attachment	with	 the	 town,	 some	 nostalgia	 of	 those	 days,	where	 he	 had	 played
and	 worked	 and	 had	 been	 a	 carpenter,	 must	 have	 loved	 women,	 played	 with
friends.	And	he	was	a	man	who	knew	how	to	celebrate.	He	was	a	man	who	knew
how	to	give	parties,	how	to	dance	and	sing	and	how	to	love	people.	And	he	was
a	man	who	knew	how	to	drink.	He	had	loved	the	small	joys	of	life.
He	was	a	real	human	being.
And	he	used	to	call	himself	son	of	man	more	than	he	used	to	call	himself	son	of
God.
So	 he	 comes	 to	 Bethlehem.	 Naturally	 he	 descends	 in	 front	 of	 the	 church.	 He
stands	there	under	a	tree.	Naturally	he	has	chosen	Sunday	--	all	the	Christians	are
together	 and	 it	 will	 be	 easier	 for	 them	 to	 recognize	 him,	 because	 Christians
believe	 in	 the	Sunday	 religion.	Six	days	 they	don't	bother	at	all.	Six	days	who
will	look	at	him?	But	Sunday	they	will	be	free	and	they	will	be	able	to	look	at
him,	so	he	stands	under	a	tree.	People	come	out	of	the	church.	They	see	a	young
man,	looks	like	a	hippie	--	long	hair.	They	come	around;	seems	to	be	a	stranger
in	the	town.	The	closer	they	come,	the	more	they	are	surprised	--	looks	like	Jesus
Christ.	Pretending	well.	Seems	to	be	an	actor.	And	they	laugh	and	they	say,	"You
did	well,	but	escape	before	the	priest	comes	out.	Otherwise	you	are	bound	to	get
into	trouble."
But	Jesus	says,	"What	do	you	mean,	did	well?	I	am	Jesus	Christ."
And	 they	 laugh	and	 they	 say,	 "It	 is	okay,	but	you	 just	 escape.	You	seem	 to	be
crazy.	 Jesus	Christ,	 and	you?	Yes,	he	has	promised	 to	come,	but	he	will	 come
sitting	on	the	clouds,	angels	dancing	and	singing	around.	Where	are	 the	angels
and	where	 is	 the	cloud?	And	what	proof	have	you	got?"	Proof	 --	a	passport,	a
visa.	"Have	you	got	any	certificate	from	your	father?"
Jesus	had	not	thought	about	these	practical	things.	He	looks	a	little	uneasy	and
nervous.
And	before	he	can	escape,	the	high	priest	comes.	People	very,	very	respectfully
give	way	to	the	high	priest.	The	high	priest	comes,	looks	at	this	young	man,	and
tells	him	to	come	down.
He	was	standing	under	the	tree	on	a	platform.	"Come	down,	you	fool.	What	are
you	doing	here?"
Jesus	says,	"Even	you	cannot	recognize	me!"
The	priest	says,	"I	recognize	you	very	well."	And	he	tells	a	few	people,	church
attendants,
"Take	this	man	into	the	church.	Seems	to	be	dangerous,	this	man.	Pretending	that
he	is	a	Jesus	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
60
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
Christ.?	This	is	sacrilege.	This	cannot	be	tolerated.	This	man	has	to	be	punished!
You	cannot	take	Jesus	so	nonseriously."
Jesus	cannot	believe	it.	He	says,	"But	I	am	the	real	one."
The	Priest	says,	"You	keep	quiet."
Jesus	 is	 chained,	 put	 into	 a	 dark	 cell	 in	 the	 church.	 He	 starts	 thinking	 and
brooding	"There	seems	to	be	no	difference	at	all.	This	is	the	same	way	the	Jews
had	acted.	But	they	could	have	been	forgiven	because	they	did	not	know	me.	But
my	people,	Christians,	 they	sing	 to	me	every	day,	 they	 think	of	me	every	day,
they	wait	for	me	every	day,	and	I	have	come,	and	they	can't	even	recognize	me.
They	think	I	am	a	pretender?"
Now	he	feels	even	sorrier	than	he	had	felt	on	the	cross,	because	those	were	alien
people.	If	they	had	killed	him	it	was	understandable,	but	are	these	people	going
to	kill	him	again?
In	the	middle	of	the	night	he	cannot	sleep.	In	the	middle	of	the	night	comes	the
priest	with	a	candle,	opens	the	door,	locks	it	again,	comes	close	to	Jesus,	falls	at
the	feet	of	Jesus.	And	Jesus	feels	relieved,	"So,	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	A
little	late,	but	he	has	recognized	me."
The	 priest	 says,	 "I	 know	 who	 you	 are,	 but	 I	 cannot	 recognize	 you	 in	 the
marketplace.	And	mind	you,	you	are	not	needed	at	all.	We	are	doing	perfectly
well.	And	you	are	the	old	disturber.	If	you	come	you	will	destroy	everything	that
we	have	done	in	eighteen	hundred	years.	It	has	been	a	long	struggle	to	establish
Christianity	 --	 and	 you	 have	 always	 been	 against	 establishment.	 You	 are	 not
establishment.	We	will	pray	to	you,	we	will	sing	your	name,	we	will	praise	you
like	anything,	but	please	don't	come.	And	if	you	insist	on	being	recognized	in	the
marketplace,	then	be	ready:	tomorrow	morning	you	will	be	crucified.	We	cannot
tolerate	such	things."
Now	 Jesus	 is	 even	more	 puzzled.	This	man	 recognizes	 him;	 he	 says,	 "I	 know
that	you	arc	the	true	one,	but	I	cannot	recognize	you."
The	 old	 priest	 says,	 "Listen	 to	 me.	 I	 am	 old,	 older	 than	 you,	 I	 am	 more
experienced.	I	know	how	people	live,	I	know	how	people	behave.	Don't	try	to	be
foolish	again.	Simply	escape	before	the	morning	--	and	never	come	back	again."
This	is	a	beautiful	parable.
Yes,	I	know	you	are	inoculated.	That's	why	it	is	so	difficult	to	catch	the	measles.
I	am	carrying	here.	It	is	so	difficult	to	drop	your	resistance.	You	find	a	thousand
and	one	rationalizations	how	not	to	surrender.	Surrender	does	not	mean	anything
else:	it	simply	means	a	state	of	no	resistance,	a	state	of	vulnerability,	a	state	of
opening.	And	let	me	repeat:	God	cannot	be	taught,	it	can	only	be	caught.	God	is
like	measles.
You	say,	"When	I	was	a	child	I	was	inoculated	against	the	measles."	Everybody
has	 been	 inoculated.	 The	 society	 takes	 every	 care	 to	make	 you	 closed.	 That's
why	the	work	of	a	Master	is	so	hard.	To	attain	to	God	is	not	hard,	but	because	of
this	 inoculation	 ...	First	 the	 inoculation	has	 to	be	undone,	and	 that	 is	 the	really
hard	thing.	The	poison	that	has	been	put	into	you	in	the	name	of	inoculation	has
to	 be	 driven	 out	 of	 your	 system.	 That's	 why	 so	many	 techniques	 are	 needed,
meditations	 are	 needed,	 so	 that	 the	 poison	 oozes	 out	 of	 your	 system.	The	 day
your	 system	 is	 free	of	 inoculation,	 suddenly	you	 find	 the	measles	have	 started
happening.	And	blessed	are	those	who	can	get	these	measles.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
61
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
Question
I	 WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	 BE	 A	 WORLD	 TEACHER,	 THE	 SECOND
TEERTHANKARA	OF
THE	 "TRADITION	OF	THE	MOON	 "	 IS	 IT	POSSIBLE	TO	EXPOSE	THIS
DESIRE	TO
THE	PUBLIC?
First,	 if	 you	 really	want	 to	 be	 a	 teacher,	 become	 a	 disciple.	Unless	 you	 are	 a
really	 deep	 disciple,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 become	 a	 teacher.	 If	 your
disciplehood	 is	perfect,	one	day	 suddenly	you	will	 find	 the	Perfect	Master	has
arisen	in	you.	It	comes	only	out	of	disciplehood.
But	 disciplehood	 is	 difficult	 because	 the	 ego	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	 Everybody
would	 like	 to	 become	 a	world	 teacher.	 It	 seems	 so	 beautiful,	 it	 seems	 such	 a
beautiful	 ego	 trip.	Who	will	 not	 enjoy	 being	 in	 such	 a	 position	where	 he	 can
teach,	where	he	can	guide?
But	 to	where	 are	 you	 going	 to	 guide	 people?	You	 are	 in	 the	 ditch.	 Resist	 the
temptation.
Otherwise	 it	 happens	 that	 the	 blind	 people	 start	 leading	 the	 blind	 people,	 and
they	all	fall	into	the	dark	ditch.
Yes,	people	are	in	need	of	guidance,	so	if	you	start	exposing	your	desire	to	the
public,	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 find	 disciples.	 There	 is	 no	 lack	 of	 disciples.	 If	 you
expose	 yourself,	 that	 you	 are	 the	 world	 teacher,	 you	 will	 find	 suddenly	 that
disciples	 have	 started	 to	 come.	 And	 their	 coming	 will	 help	 you	 to	 feel	 that
maybe	 it	 seems	 you	 are	 really	 the	world's	 teacher.	 Otherwise	why	 are	 people
coming?	 How	 can	 people	 be	 so	 foolish?	 By	 and	 by,	 looking	 into	 their	 eyes,
feeling	their	confidence	in	you,	you	will	start	feeling	confident	about	yourself.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	man,	 of	 course	 a	 Jew,	who	 opened	 the	 first	 bank	 in	 the
world,	and	he	became	very	rich	and	the	business	was	beautiful.	When	he	became
very	 old	 somebody	 asked	 him,	 "How	 in	 the	 first	 place	 did	 you	 start	 a	 bank?"
"Nobody,	I	wrote	the	name	'Bank'	and	put	the	sign	on	my	door.	I	had	no	trust	in
it	 that	 it	would	work,	but	 I	had	nothing	 to	do.	 I	was	unemployed,	so	I	 thought
why	not	try.	And	within	a	few	hours	a	man	came	and	deposited	his	money.	I	was
surprised.	I	looked	at	the	man;	I	thought	this	seems	to	be	the	greatest	fool	in	the
town.	I	may	escape	with	his	money.	Then	came	another	and	another,	and	by	the
evening	I	had	deposits	of	a	lot	of	money.	And	looking	into	these	people's	eyes,	I
became	so	confident	that	I	deposited	my	own	money	in	the	bank!"
That's	 how	 it	works.	 If	 you	 just	 declare	 that	 you	 are	 a	world	 teacher,	 you	 are
bound	to	find	disciples.	And	when	the	disciples	come,	certainly,	you	have	to	be
truly	a	world	teacher.
And	sometimes	it	will	happen	that	not	only	will	disciples	come,	but	something
will	 start	 happening	 to	 the	 disciples.	 Then	 you	 will	 be	 really	 surprised.
Somebody's	KUNDALINI	 arising.	 Somebody	 seeing	 visions.	 Just	 by	 touching
your	feet,	somebody	feeling	great	silence.
It	happened	...	Ramkrishna	loved	this	story	very	much.
There	was	a	Master,	his	name	was	Tapobana,	and	Tapobana	had	a	disciple	who
served	him	with	irreproachable	diligence.	It	was	solely	because	of	this	diligence
and	the	services	he	rendered	 that	Tapobana	kept	him,	for	he	found	the	disciple
rather	stupid.
One	day,	the	rumor	spread	throughout	the	whole	region	that	Tapobana's	disciple
had	walked	on	water	--	 that	he	had	been	seen	crossing	the	river	as	one	crosses
the	street.
Tapobana	 called	 his	 disciple	 and	 questioned	 him:	 "Is	 what	 people	 are	 saying
about	 you	 possible?	 Is	 it	 really	 true	 that	 you	 crossed	 the	 river	walking	 on	 the
water?"
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
62
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
"What	 could	 be	 more	 natural?"	 answered	 his	 follower.	 "It	 is	 thanks	 to	 you,
Blessed	One,	that	I	walked	on	water.	At	every	step	I	repeated	your	saintly	name,
and	that	is	what	upheld	me."
And	Tapobana	thought	to	himself,	"If	the	disciple	can	walk	on	water,	what	can
the	Master	not	do?	If	it	is	in	my	name	that	the	miracle	takes	place,	I	must	possess
power	I	did	not	suspect	and	holiness	of	which	I	have	not	been	sufficiently	aware.
After	all,	I	have	never	tried	to	cross	the	river	as	if	I	were	crossing	the	street."
And	without	more	ado,	he	 ran	 to	 the	 river	bank.	Without	hesitation,	he	 set	his
foot	 on	 the	 water,	 and	 with	 unshakable	 faith	 repeated,	 "Me,	 me,	 me	 ..."	 And
sank.
So	you	are	carrying	a	very	dangerous	desire.
The	question	is	from	Premprabhu.	I	know	you.	The	first	thing	that	you	have	to
do	is	to	learn	the	secrets	of	disciplehood;	then	one	day	the	Master	will	be	born.	It
is	on	the	way,	but	don't	be	in	a	hurry;	otherwise	you	will	miss	being	a	Master.	If
you	try	to	become	a	Master,	you	will	miss	being	a	Master.	The	Mastership	arises
only	when	you	learn	slowly,	slowly	to	dissolve	into	existence.	The	day	you	are
not,	you	will	be	the	Master,	not	before	it.	If	you	are,	then	still	some	work	has	to
be	done.	You	cannot	be	the	Master.	Only	when	you	are	absent	does	the	Master
become	present	in	you.
Right	now	it	will	be	good	if	you	take	a	bath.	To	explain	this	to	you,	let	me	tell
you	this	anecdote:
A	sweet	old	lady	visited	a	doctor	and	surprised	him	by	saying,	"Doctor,	I	think	I
am	pregnant,	and	want	you	to	verify	it."
It	 was	 obvious	 to	 the	 doctor,	 because	 of	 her	 advanced	 age,	 that	 she	 was
imagining	things.
But	he	spoke	to	her	kindly,	"What	makes	you	think	you	are	pregnant?"
"I	know.	I	know	it	because	I	feel	life,"	she	said	as	she	patted	her	stomach.
To	humor	her	along,	the	doctor	asked	her	to	disrobe.	After	a	brief	examination,
he	advised	her	to	go	home	and	take	a	bath	and	forget	about	the	pregnancy.
"But	doctor,"	she	insisted,	"I	tell	you	I	feel	life,	and	you	tell	me	to	go	home	and
take	a	bath?	And	I	am	feeling	life!"	And	she	again	patted	her	stomach.
"Yes,	yes,"	said	the	doctor	gently,	"you	have	got	a	bug	in	your	navel."
So	go	and	take	a	bath.
Question
WHY	AM	I	THE	WAY	I	AM?	I	FEEL	LIKE	THE	LOTUS	WHO	WANTS	TO
BE	THE
ROSE.
So	what	is	the	trouble?	So	you	are	the	lotus	who	wants	to	be	the	rose	--	and	be	it.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
63
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
Whatever	you	are,	you	are.	And	it	is	to	be	accepted	in	absolute	humility.	Even	if
you	are	feeling	that	you	are	a	lotus	and	you	want	to	be	the	rose,	so	you	are	the
lotus	who	wants	 to	 be	 the	 rose.	What	 is	 is,	 and	what	 ain't	 ain't!	Relax	 into	 it,
accept	it,	welcome	it,	and	suddenly	you	will	see	a	great	peace	surrounding	you
and	 a	 great	 silence	 arising	 in	 you	 and	 a	 great	 joy	 overflowing	 in	 you.	We	 are
missing	joy	because	we	are	always	trying	to	be	something	else.
Now,	 I	can	understand	your	question.	 I	have	been	 telling	you,	"Don't	 try	 to	be
something	else,"	and	I	had	told	you,	"A	lotus	is	a	lotus	and	a	rose	is	a	rose,	and
the	 lotus	 should	not	 try	 to	be	 a	 rose	 and	 the	 rose	 should	not	 try	 to	be	 a	 lotus;
otherwise	they	will	go	neurotic."	That's	why	you	have	asked	the	question.
You	say,	"I	feel	like	the	lotus	who	wants	to	be	the	rose."	So	you	are	thinking	you
have	asked	a	very	relevant	question,	and	I	can	understand	why	you	feel	that	way,
but	listen	to	my	answer:	so	you	are	the	lotus	who	wants	to	be	the	rose	--	so	be	it.
That's	what	I	mean:	don't	try	to	be	anything	else.	If	this	is	you,	then	this	is	you.
Now,	you	would	like	to	try	to	remain	the	lotus	and	not	to	be	the	rose.	But	if	that
is	 coming	 naturally	 to	 you,	 you	will	 create	 a	 tension	 in	 yourself.	Whatsoever
comes	naturally	is	good,	whatsoever	comes	of	its	own	accord	is	good.
The	 question	 is	 from	 Shanti	 Sagar,	 and	 I	 can	 see	 the	 possibility	 of	 his	 deep
acceptance	of	the	fact.	Accept	it.	If	this	is	the	way	God	wants	you	to	be,	then	be
this	way.	Then	this	is	your	destiny.
Once	you	start	accepting	things,	tensions	disappear,	anxieties	fall,	anguish	is	felt
no	more.
And	to	be	in	a	state	of	no	anguish,	no	anxiety,	no	tension	is	to	be	religious.
Question
NO	EFFORT	IS	REQUIRED	TO	BE	BORN.
NO	EFFORT	IS	REQUIRED	TO	DIE.
NO	EFFORT	IS	REQUIRED	TO	FALL	IN	LOVE
WHY	 IS	 SUCH	 EFFORT	 REQUIRED	 TO	 KNOW	 GOD	 (THROUGH
MEDITATION)	 WHEN	 THIS	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 THE	 MOST	 NATURAL
THING?
IS	GOD	TRYING	TO	TEST	US	IN	SOME	WAY?
First	 thing:	no	effort	 is	required	in	meditation	either.	Meditation	also	comes	on
its	 own	 accord.	 Through	 effort	 it	 never	 comes.	 To	 whom	 has	 meditation
happened	 through	 effort?	 It	 will	 be	 almost	 like	 making	 an	 effort	 to	 love
somebody.	How	 can	 you	make	 any	 effort	 to	 love	 somebody?	The	more	 effort
you	make,	the	more	the	love	will	be	false,	pseudo,	just	a	pretension.	Love	has	to
arise	naturally.	So	arises	meditation.
But	 all	 meditators	 are	 not	 spontaneously	 in	 it	 --	 and	 neither	 are	 all	 lovers
spontaneously	in	it.	In	fact,	psychologists	say	--	a	tremendous	discovery	--	that	if
love	is	not	talked	about,	ninety-nine	percent	of	people	will	never	know	anything
about	 it.	 If	 love	 is	 not	 talked	 about,	 if	 poets	 don't	 go	 on	 praising	 it,	 and	 if
traditional	 literature	 is	 not	 available	 about	 love,	 ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 people
will	never	be	aware	that	anything	like	love	exists.	They	will	know	about	sex,	but
not	 about	 love.	 But	 because	 of	 the	 poets	 and	 because	 of	 the	 novelists	 and
because	of	 the	 films	 and	 the	TV,	 love	 is	 talked	 so	much	about	 that	 everybody
starts	thinking	that	he	is	in	love.	That	love	is	also	false.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
64
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
And	 the	 same	 is	 the	 case	with	meditation.	Ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 people	 start
meditating	because	meditation	is	talked	about.	There	are	times	when	it	becomes
fashionable.	 America	 is	 passing	 through	 such	 a	 phase.	 Meditation	 is	 talked
about;	 everybody	 is	 doing	 meditation.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 doing	 it	 you	 must	 be
missing	something.	You	don't	feel	any	need	for	it,	it	has	not	arisen	in	your	being,
you	have	not	 come	 to	 that	point	of	 evolution	where	meditation	happens	on	 its
own	accord;	but	everybody	is	doing	it	and	everybody	is	going	to	the	Masters	and
everybody	 is	 sitting	silently.	Somebody	 is	doing	zazen	and	somebody	 is	doing
TM	and	somebody	is	doing	Dynamic.	You	must	be	missing	something.	So	greed
arises;	out	of	greed	you	start	making	effort.
That	 effort	 is	 not	 for	 meditation.	 That	 effort	 is	 to	 gain	 something	 which	 you
think	will	be	gained	out	of	meditation.
These	phases	come	and	go.	These	cults	arise	and	disappear.	These	are	just	 like
fashions.
The	real	meditator	has	not	come	to	meditate	because	others	are	meditating,	but	a
deep	need	has	arisen	in	him,	has	become	a	knocking	in	his	heart,	a	continuous
knocking.	 The	 whole	 world	 seems	 to	 be	 meaningless;	 he	 wants	 to	 go	 in.	 He
wants	 to	know	who	he	 is.	Not	because	others	have	known!	 If	 there	 is	 nobody
propagating	meditation	and	no	books	are	available	and	all	books	are	destroyed
and	all	Masters	go	and	hide	in	the	caves	in	the	Himalayas,	then	too	there	will	be
a	few	people	who	will	meditate,	who	will	find	out	how	to	meditate	on	their	own
accord.	Those	will	be	the	real	meditators.	And	for	them	meditation	will	be	just	as
easy	as	anything.	It	will	be	just	like	breathing.
When	 such	 a	 man	 comes,	 then	 any	 technique	 functions	 for	 him.	 I	 observe	 it
every	day.	If	somebody	whose	time	has	come	to	meditate	...
It	 is	 just	 like	 sexual	maturity.	A	boy	of	 three	years	has	no	 idea	about	 sex,	 and
even	if	the	boy	of	three	years	comes	to	see	a	man	making	love	to	a	woman,	he
will	 not	 understand	what	 is	 happening.	At	 the	most,	 he	will	 think	 the	man	 is
trying	 to	kill	 the	woman;	 they	are	fighting	or	something.	He	will	not	have	any
idea	what	is	happening.	By	the	age	of	fourteen,	suddenly	something	explodes	in
his	biology.	He	is	not	aware	of	what	it	is,	but	something	is	happening.
He	is	the	same	no	more.
And	then	follows	a	time,	a	period,	of	very	much	embarrassment	because	the	boy
does	 not	 know	 what	 exactly	 is	 happening.	 But	 something	 is	 happening,
something	very	much	unknown,	something	which	is	creating	trouble,	something
which	is	hovering	around;	and	he	does	not	know	what	it	is	and	how	to	tackle	it
and	 how	 to	 figure	 it	 out.	 It	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon;	 now	 sex	 has	 become
mature;	the	sex	gland	is	secreting.
If	life	goes	naturally,	beautifully,	if	there	are	no	lifenegative	teachers,	if	there	are
no	politicians	and	priests	to	distract	you	--	then	near	about	the	age	of	forty-two,
exactly	as	sex	maturity	comes,	comes	meditation	maturity,	Near	about	the	age	of
forty-two,	one	 starts	 feeling	 to	 fall	withinwards.	Near	 the	 age	of	 fourteen,	one
starts	 falling	 towards	 the	 other,	 becomes	 extrovert.	 Love	 is	 extroversion;
relationship	is	 to	 think	of	 the	other.	Meditation	is	 introversion;	meditation	is	 to
think	of	one's	own	self,	of	one's	own	center.
Between	the	age	of	fourteen	and	the	age	of	forty-two	there	comes	a	change.	By
and	 by	 one	 lives	 life,	 knows	 what	 love	 is,	 knows	 its	 fulfillment	 and	 its
frustration,	 knows	 its	 joy	 and	 its	 sadness,	 knows	 its	 beauty	 and	 its	 ugliness,
knows	 that	 there	 are	 moments	 of	 great	 ecstasy	 and	 then	 great	 valleys	 of
darkness.	Then	 one	 starts	 by	 and	 by	moving	 towards	 his	 own	 self,	 because	 to
depend	 on	 the	 other	 can	 never	 be	 really	 ecstatic.	 If	 your	 joy	 depends	 on	 the
other,	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
65
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
that	 joy	can	never	have	the	quality	of	freedom	in	it.	And	a	joy	which	does	not
have	the	quality	of	freedom	is	not	much	joy.	If	you	are	dependent	on	the	other,
then	there	is	a	limitation.
And	the	joy	that	comes	through	love	is	momentary.	You	can	meet	with	the	other
only	for	moments,	and	then	again	you	are	separate	and	you	fall	apart.	Just	in	the
middle	of	it	you	fall	apart.	Just	for	a	moment	you	become	joined	together.	Then
one	starts	 thinking,	"Is	 there	a	way	to	become	one	with	existence	and	never	 to
fall	 apart	 again?"	 That's	 what	 meditation	 is.	 Love	 is	 joining	 with	 existence
through	another	person	for	only	moments.	Meditation	is	getting	joined	together
with	existence	eternally.	"Yoga"	means	"to	join	together".
This	 has	 to	 happen	 somewhere	 in	 the	 deepest	 core.	And	 then	 there	 is	 joy	 and
then	 there	 is	 freedom.	 And	 then	 there	 is	 bliss	 and	 there	 is	 no	 dark	 valley
following	 it.	 Then	 happiness	 is	 eternal,	 then	 celebration	 is	 eternal.	 But	 that
moment	comes.	That	too	comes,	remember.
So	you	 say,	 "No	effort	 is	 required	 to	be	born.	No	effort	 is	 required	 to	die.	No
effort	is	required	to	fall	in	love."	I	would	like	to	tell	you,	"No	effort	is	required	to
fall	into	meditation	either."
But	if	there	are	hindrances	...	For	example,	in	a	primitive	community,	when	the
child	is	born	there	is	no	effort	--	neither	on	the	side	of	the	child	nor	on	the	side	of
the	mother.	But	 that	 is	not	 the	case	 in	a	civilized	 society;	 effort	 is	needed,	 the
doctor's	help	is	needed.	Much	effort	is	needed	to	help	the	child	to	be	born,	and
the	mother	 feels	 so	much	pain.	And	you	don't	 know	how	much	pain	 the	 child
feels.	If	you	want	to	know	you	can	ask	the	Primal	therapists	how	much	trauma
he	passes	through.	That	small	tube,	the	small	passage,	from	the	mother's	womb
to	the	world	is	very	painful.	And	the	child	wants	to	get	out	of	it,	and	he	thrusts
hard	to	get	out	of	it.	And	the	mother	feels	pain	because	the	passage	is	small	and
the	 child	 is	 big.	And	 she	wants	 to	 hold	 back,	 unconsciously.	 She	 cannot	 hold
back	--	in	the	nature	of	things	the	child	has	to	come	out	--	but	there	is	a	struggle.
The	mother-and-the-child	conflict	has	started.	The	child	wants	to	get	out	and	the
mother	is	afraid	and	she	is	holding,	she	is	controlling.
This	 is	 true	 about	 the	 civilized	 person,	 not	 true	 about	 the	 uncivilized.	 The
uncivilized	mother	simply	goes	with	it.	And	the	uncivilized	person	has	no	need
for	Primal	 therapy,	because	he	never	passes	 through	any	 trauma;	 the	mother	 is
helpful.	The	child	simply	floats	and	comes	out.	In	fact,	you	will	be	surprised	to
know	that	primitive	women	know	such	pleasure	and	ecstasy	in	childbirth	that	the
ecstasy	that	comes	through	sexual	orgasm	is	nothing	compared	to	it.
What	is	the	ecstasy	in	sexual	orgasm?	A	man	is	thrusting	into	the	woman	and	her
sexual	 energies	 start	 becoming	 vibrated,	 start	 becoming	 stirred.	 That	 is	 her
sexual	 orgasm.	 That	 pulsation	 spreads	 all	 over	 the	 body.	 But	 it	 cannot	 be
compared	 with	 the	 child	 thrusting	 and	 starting	 to	 come	 out.	 It	 is	 the	 same
passage.	And	the	child	is	far	bigger	than	any	male	organ.
Naturally	the	whole	being	pulsates	and	the	body	goes	through	a	great	orgasm.
But	only	a	primitive	woman	knows	that,	that	it	is	great	ecstasy	to	give	birth	to	a
child;	it	is	not	painful	at	all,	it	is	joy.	But	when	it	is	natural,	then	it	is	joy.
You	say	no	effort	is	required	to	be	born	...?	Not	for	the	civilized.	The	civilized
person	 needs	 much	 effort	 to	 be	 born.	 Maybe	 the	 mother	 has	 been	 given
tranquilizers,	 sedatives,	 she	has	been	put	 into	unconsciousness	 so	she	does	not
pass	through	great	pain,	or	even	the	birth	may	be	a	Caesarian,	 the	mother	may
have	to	be	operated	on.	The	doctor	is	needed,	the	nurse	is	needed,	the	midwife	is
needed.	Why?	To	undo	the	wrong	that	the	society	has	done.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
66
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
You	say	no	effort	is	required	to	die?	You	are	wrong	again.	You	can	go	and	look
in	 the	American	hospitals.	Many	old	people	are	 ready	 to	die,	and	 they	want	 to
die;	they	are	not	allowed	to	die.	The	question	of	euthanasia	has	become	one	of
the	most	 important	questions	 for	 the	 future	because	medical	 science	has	 really
evolved	and	it	can	help	a	person	to	live	for	two	hundred	years	or	even	more.	He
may	not	have	much	of	a	life,	but	he	can	hang	on;	he	can	hang	on	in	a	hospital.
He	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 move	 or	 to	 talk	 or	 to	 love,	 but	 he	 can	 be	 just	 there
vegetating.	It	will	be	tremendous	misery	and	hell.
Now,	if	he	wants	to	die,	no	society	allows	him	to	die.	They	say,	"It	is	illegal;	you
cannot	 commit	 suicide."	A	 person	who	 has	 become	one	 hundred	 thirty	 or	 one
hundred	forty	years	of	age	wants	to	die	because	his	existence	is	simply	torture.
The	society	seems	to	be	very	sadistic
...	they	say,	"You	are	not	allowed	to	die;	you	will	have	to	live."	And	the	doctors
will	continue	 to	help	you	 to	 live	because	 they	have	much	compassion	 for	you.
Because	 of	 the	 compassion,	 you	will	 have	 to	 live.	Now,	 his	wife	 is	 dead,	 his
children	are	dead,	his	relations	are	dead,	his	friends	are	gone,	and	he	is	hanging
on,	 for	no	purpose.	He	does	not	know	what	 is	going	 to	happen	 tomorrow.	Just
hanging	on	and	hanging	on	and	hanging	on	...	Can	you	think	of	the	misery	that
he	will	feel	 ...?	Then	there	will	be	the	need	to	commit	suicide.	He	will	have	to
find	 ways	 and	 means.	 Maybe	 he	 will	 have	 to	 bribe	 the	 doctor	 to	 cut	 the
connection	 from	 the	 oxygen	 tank,	 or	 not	 to	 give	 him	any	more	medicines.	He
may	have	to	bribe	someone;	effort	will	be	needed.
Natural	death	is	natural,	but	man	is	not	natural	anymore!	So	nothing	is	natural	--
not	even	death.	If	you	die	naturally,	that	will	be	a	totally	different	thing.	But	you
don't	live	naturally;	how	can	you	die	naturally?	Death	has	to	be	the	culmination
of	whatsoever	you	have	done	in	your	life.	If	you	have	lived	unnaturally,	you	will
die	unnaturally.	A	natural	death	is	possible	only	if	the	life	has	been	natural.
So	 the	 questioner	 says,	 "No	 effort	 is	 required	 to	 die."	You	 are	 true.	 In	 a	 very
primitive	 society	 no	 effort	 is	 required,	 but	 because	 of	 the	 compassion	 of	 the
missionaries,	 primitives	 have	 disappeared.	 They	 have	 all	 become	 educated
people	now.	Now	effort	is	needed	to	die.
Why	do	so	many	people	commit	suicide?	And	the	suicide	rate	goes	on	growing
every	year.
Why?	Isn't	natural	death	enough	...?	Suicide	means	death	with	effort.
And	 the	 suicide	 rate	 will	 go	 higher	 and	 higher	 if	 the	 governments	 are	 too
adamant	 to	 relax	 and	 they	 don't	 allow	 people	 to	 die	 and	 they	 force	 them	 into
nursing	 homes	 and	 into	 hospitals	 and	 force	 them	 to	 live	 against	 their	 wishes.
Then	more	and	more	suicides	will	be	there.
Man	has	disturbed	all	that	is	natural.
And	you	say	no	effort	is	required	to	fall	in	love?	That	too	is	not	true.	That	too	is
not	true.
Looking	at	 the	TV	continuously,	 looking	at	and	watching	films,	reading	poetry
and	 novels,	 they	 all	 help	 you	 to	 fall	 in	 love.	 They	 give	 you	 the	 ideas;	 they
nourish	your	so-called	love.	It	is	not	natural.
The	 natural	 has	 disappeared.	 All	 that	 is	 nature	 has	 disappeared;	 everything	 is
false	 and	 plastic.	 Hence	 meditation	 also	 has	 to	 be	 false	 and	 plastic.	 But	 real
meditation	never	happens	through	effort.
Then	what	does	one	have	 to	do?	You	have	 to	do	some	effort	 in	 the	beginning;
otherwise	you	will	never	come	close	 to	any	meditation	 technique,	close	 to	any
meditation	school.	You	will	have	to	go	through	effort	because	you	have	become
unnatural	beings.	Making	effort	will	help	you	to	understand	what	meditation	is.
It	will	not	lead	you	into	meditation;	it	will	simply	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
67
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
help	 you	 to	 understand	 what	 meditation	 is.	 It	 will	 help	 you	 to	 understand
whether	you	can	fall	into	that	space	called	meditation	easily	or	not.
If	you	feel	 that	 it	comes	very	easily	 to	you,	 that	you	can	fall	 in	 that	space	and
you	can	reach	that	space,	effort	will	disappear	by	itself.	There	will	be	no	need.
You	can	simply	sit	with	closed	eyes	and	it	is	there.	It	is	so	natural.	But	only	once
it	happens,	then	it	is	very	natural.
And	 unless	 it	 has	 happened	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 know	whether	 you	 are	 a
natural	meditator	or	not;	so	effort	will	be	needed.
Man	has	been	made	 so	artificial	 that	 everything	will	have	 to	be	made	 through
effort.	But	by	making	effort	you	will	come	to	feel	and	see	whether	you	can	easily
float	into	it	or	not.
And	you	ask,	"Why	is	such	effort	required	to	know	God	when	this	seems	to	be
the	 most	 natural	 thing?"	 If	 it	 is	 the	 most	 natural	 thing,	 then	 it	 must	 have
happened	 to	 the	 questioner.	 k	 has	 not	 happened;	 otherwise	 you	would	 not	 be
here.	What	is	a	God-realized	man	doing	here
...?	There	 is	no	point.	Your	seeking	has	stopped	 if	you	have	known.	Yes,	once
you	know,	it	is	very	simple	and	easy,	but	until	you	know	it,	effort	will	be	needed.
And	remember,	effort	is	not	needed	for	meditation.	Effort	is	needed	to	undo	what
the	society	has	done	to	you.	A	dehypnosis	is	needed.	The	society	has	hypnotized
you.	The	society	has	conditioned	you;	an	unconditioning	is	needed.	The	society
has	made	you	dirty;	 a	 cleansing	 is	 needed.	A	good	 shower	 --	 that's	what	 your
effort	is.	Once	you	have	started	feeling	that	meditation	is	your	innermost	quality,
you	can	go	into	it	anytime.	It	is	so	easy,	as	breathing.
Then	all	effort	disappears.
And	you	ask,	"Is	God	trying	to	test	us	in	some	way?"	No.	There	is	no	God	in	the
first	place	to	test	you.	And	even	if	there	is	a	God,	he	is	not	in	any	way	interested
in	testing	and	examining	you.	What	is	the	point?	And	he	is	not	a	sadist	to	torture
you.
Teachers	are	sadists;	examiners	are	sadists.	You	can	ask	the	psychologists.	They
say	people	who	want	to	torture	others,	they	become	teachers.	Some	tendency	to
torture.	And	you	 cannot	 find	more	beautiful	 opportunities	 than	 small	 children.
Torture	them,	test	 them,	examine	them	--	and	for	 their	own	good!	And	nobody
can	prevent	you,	because	you	are	doing	it	for	their	own	good.
God	 is	 not	 in	 any	 way	 interested	 in	 testing	 you.	 The	 problem	 is	 not	 arising
because	of	God.
The	problem	 is	 arising	because	of	your	 society,	your	politics,	 your	priesthood.
They	have	made	you	in	such	a	way	that	you	cannot	meditate.	They	have	made
such	simple	things	impossible.
It	 is	 just	 like	 in	 the	 ancient	 days	 in	 China	 they	 used	 to	 put	 small	 shoes,	 iron
shoes,	on	women's	feet	because	that	was	the	sign	--	a	smaller	foot	was	the	sign
that	 the	woman	comes	 from	a	 royal	 family.	 If	 the	woman	cannot	walk	 rightly,
she	 is	royal!	So	no	rich	women	were	able	 to	walk;	 they	had	small	feet.	And	if
you	encase	the	feet	in	iron	shoes,	what	are	you	doing?	Great	pain	was	suffered
just	 to	 have	 small	 feet.	 Those	 feet	 cannot	 be	 beautiful.	 Those	 feet	 are	 ugly
because	the	growth	has	not	happened.	How	can	something	retarded	be	beautiful?
But	that	was	thought	of	for	thousands	of	years	as	beautiful,	and	women	suffered
it	--	and	they	enjoyed	it,	that	they	had	small	feet.
Now	 that	 has	 disappeared.	 Now,	 if	 a	 royal	 woman,	 a	 rich	 woman	 in	 ancient
China	was	 to	 learn	 running,	 jogging,	 it	would	 have	 been	 very	 difficult.	Much
effort	would	have	been	needed	because	she	did	not	have	the	feet	for	it.	Not	that
God	 is	 testing	 her	 --	 just	 because	 the	 society	 is	 foolish	 and	 the	 society	 has
conditioned	her	feet	in	such	a	way	that	she	cannot	run.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
68
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
And	the	same	is	 true	about	a	 thousand	and	one	things.	Your	society	conditions
you	in	a	certain	way;	 then	you	cannot	do	certain	 things.	When	you	want	 to	do
them,	much	effort	is	needed	to	undo	what	the	society	has	done.
The	 society	 has	 taught	 you	 to	 think,	 and	 to	 think	 continuously,	 and	 to	 think
skillfully	and	cleverly.	 It	has	not	allowed	you	 to	know	 that	 there	are	spaces	of
no-thought,	 because	 the	 society	 is	 afraid.	Those	 spaces	of	 no-thought	 are	very
dangerous.	 Those	 spaces	 of	 no-thought	 are	 very	 crazy.	 Those	 spaces	 of	 no-
thought	will	 give	 you	 great	 joy,	 but	will	make	 you	 so	 rebellious.	 Those	 great
spaces	will	make	 you	 very,	 very	 happy,	 but	 a	 happy	 person	 becomes	 free.	He
cannot	be	easily	forced	to	do	foolish	things.
You	cannot	send	him	to	the	army.	He	will	say,	"Nonsense.	I	am	so	happy,	why
should	I	go	and	kill	others	and	be	killed?"	You	cannot	send	him	to	the	military;
he	will	simply	say	no.
You	cannot	force	him	to	do	foolish	things	for	his	whole	life	like	a	machine,	He
will	say,
"Why?	 I	 will	 do	 things	 that	 I	 like	 and	 that	 I	 love."	 An	 ecstatic	 person	 is	 a
rebellion	in	the	world.	You	cannot	tell	him	to	just	be	a	clerk	in	an	office	and	go
on	filing	things,	putting	files	upon	files	his	whole	life.	He	will	say,	"I	will	go	and
become	a	farmer	because	I	love	trees.	If	I	am	not	going	to	be	rich,	it	is	okay.	My
richness	will	be	of	the	inner."	"I	am	going	to	become	a	fisherman.	I	will	be	on
the	open	sea.	I	don't	want	to	become	a	clerk."
But	 then	 things	 will	 be	 difficult	 for	 the	 society.	 Society	 needs	 clerks,	 society
needs	soldiers.	Society	needs	very	repressed	people	whose	energies	are	boiling
inside	and	have	no	way	to	go	anywhere	--	so	that	they	can	be	put	into	any	work.
Society	arranges	things	in	such	a	way	that	you	can	become	slaves.
The	society	is	not	here	to	make	you	free	people,	because	with	freedom	politics
will	disappear,	states	will	disappear.	In	a	free	world	there	will	be	no	nation	and
there	will	be	no	need	for	nations	and	there	will	be	no	need	for	armies.	Millions
of	people	just	wasting	their	life
--	doing	parade.	Left	turn!	Right	turn!	Turn	about!	Millions	of	people	--	doing	it
very	happily	and	thinking	they	are	doing	great	things,	great	service	to	humanity.
Who	would	like	it?	Free	people	would	like	to	become	singers	or	dancers.	Good
if	you	dance.	But	"turn	about,"	"left	turn,"	"right	turn"?	Have	you	ever	seen	any
bird	doing	right	turn,	left	turn?	Have	you	seen	any	animal?	They	dance,	yes,	they
dance,	but	dance	 is	a	 totally	different	 thing.	People	will	dance	and	people	will
sing	and	people	will	go	into	the	forest	and	chop	wood,	and	they	will	go	to	the	sea
and	fish	and	they	will	go	to	the	mountains,	they	will	do	farming,	gardening,	they
will	 be	 carpenters,	 weavers,	 spinners.	 But	 people	will	 do	 something	 that	 they
like	to	do.
Right	now	you	are	doing	something	that	the	government	wants	you	to	do.	And
subtle	is	the	trick.	The	university,	the	school,	the	college	--	subtle	is	the	trick	to
force	you	into	something	which	you	never	wanted	to	do.	Then	of	course	if	you
remain	miserable	it	is	just	understandable.	How	can	you	be	happy?
It	is	very	rare	that	you	come	across	a	celebrating	being	because	it	is	very	difficult
to	escape	from	the	prisons	the	society	has	created	around	you.	In	a	natural	world
things	will	be	just	the	reverse.	It	will	be	very	difficult	to	find	a	miserable	man.
Why?	There	seems	to	be	no	need	to	be	miserable.	Buddhas	will	be	just	common.
Rarely	 will	 you	 find	 a	 man	 who	 is	 not	 a	 Buddha,	 if	 things	 go	 naturally.	 But
things	are	not	natural.
That's	why	you	even	have	to	learn	how	to	meditate,	and	you	have	to	learn	how	to
love,	and	you	have	to	learn	how	to	be	happy,	and	you	have	to	learn	how	to	know
God.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
69
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
Question
WHY	ARE	ALL	THE	RELIGIONS	AGAINST	SEX?	AND	WHY	ARE	YOU
NOT
AGAINST	SEX?
All	 the	 religions	 are	 against	 sex	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 make	 you
miserable.	That	is	the	only	way	to	make	you	feel	guilty.	That	is	the	only	way	to
reduce	you	to	being	sinners.
Sex	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fundamental	 truths	 of	 life,	 so	 fundamental	 that	 if
somebody	says	it	is	wrong,	he	is	putting	you	in	trouble.	You	cannot	get	rid	of	it.
Unless	you	become	really	enlightened	you	cannot	get	rid	of	 it.	And	to	become
enlightened	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it.	 In	 fact,	 if	 you	 go	 deeper	 into	 it,
enlightenment	will	be	easier	because	a	man	who	has	gone	deep	in	love	will	be
capable	of	going	deep	in	meditation	--	because	in	the	deepest	moments	of	love
there	are	a	few	glimpses	of	meditation.
That's	how	meditation	has	been	discovered.	That's	how	SAMADHI,	satori	have
been	discovered.	Because	in	a	deep	love	affair,	sometimes,	suddenly,	your	mind
disappears.	There	are	no	thoughts,	no	time,	no	space.	You	become	one	with	the
whole.	People	have	carried	 those	glimpses	 in	 their	memories	and	 they	want	 to
attain	 to	 those	 glimpses	 more	 naturally,	 more	 in	 their	 aloneness,	 because	 to
depend	on	 the	other	 is	not	very	good,	 and	 then	 it	happens	only	 for	a	moment.
How	to	attain	to	that	glimpse	permanently,	so	it	remains	there,	it	becomes	your
nature?
Religions	are	against	 sex	because	down	 the	centuries	 they	have	come	 to	know
that	sex	is	the	most	enjoyable	thing	for	man.	So	poison	his	joy.	Once	you	poison
his	joy	and	you	put	this	idea	in	his	mind	that	something	is	wrong	in	sex	--	it	is
sin	--	 then	he	will	never	be	able	 to	enjoy	it,	and	if	he	cannot	enjoy	it,	 then	his
energies	will	start	moving	in	other	directions.	He	will	become	more	ambitious.
A	 really	 sexual	 person	 will	 not	 be	 ambitious.	 Why?	 He	 will	 not	 hanker	 to
become	 the	 prime	 minister	 or	 the	 president.	 Why?	 The	 energy	 that	 becomes
ambition	is	repressed	sex.	A	sexually	free	person	will	not	try	to	become	anybody.
Whatsoever	he	is,	he	is	beautifully	happy.	Why	should	he	bother	to	hoard	money
...?	When	you	 cannot	 love,	 you	hoard	money;	money	 is	 a	 substitute.	You	will
never	 find	 a	money	hoarder	 a	 loving	person,	 and	you	will	 never	 find	 a	 loving
person	a	money	hoarder.	It	is	very	difficult.	Money	is	a	substitute;	it	is	a	pseudo
love	affair.	You	are	afraid	to	make	love	to	a	woman	or	a	man,	so	you	make	love
to	dollars,	rupees,	pounds.
Have	you	not	seen	when	a	miser	comes	across	money?	Have	you	seen	the	light
that	comes	to	his	eyes,	and	how	the	face	becomes	luminous,	as	if	he	is	looking	at
a	beautiful	woman	or	a	beautiful	man	...?	Just	give	him	a	hundred-dollar	note,	a
greenback,	and	see	how	he	touches	it,	how	he	feels	it.	Saliva	starts	flowing.	It	is
a	 love	 affair.	 Just	 look	when	he	opens	his	money	box	 and	 looks	 into	 it.	He	 is
facing	God.	Money	is	his	God,	his	beloved.
And	when	 an	 ambitious	 person	 is	 trying	 to	 become	 the	 prime	minister	 or	 the
president	...
Ambition	is	sex	energy	diverted,	and	the	society	diverts	you.	You	say,	"Why	are
all	the	religions	against	sex?"	They	are	against	sex	because	that	is	the	only	way
to	 make	 you	 unhappy,	 guilty,	 afraid.	 Once	 you	 are	 afraid,	 you	 can	 be
manipulated.	Remember	this	fundamental	rule:	make	a	person	afraid	if	you	want
to	dominate	him.	First	make	him	afraid.	If	he	is	afraid,	you	can	dominate	him.	If
he	is	not	afraid,	why	and	how	can	you	dominate	him?
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
70
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
How	will	he	allow	you	to	be	the	dominator?	He	will	say,	"Be	gone.	Who	are	you
to	dominate	me?"	First	make	him	afraid.
And	there	are	two	things	which	make	people	very	much	afraid.	One	is	death,	so
religions	have	exploited	that.	That	you	are	going	to	die,	that	you	are	going	to	die,
that	you	are	going	to	die	--	they	persist,	so	they,	they	create	a	trembling.	So	you
say,	"What,	what	am	I	to	do	now?
How	should	I	behave?	How	should	I	live?"	And	then	they	say	there	is	hell	and
there	is	heaven.
Greed	and	profit,	punishment	and	reward.
So	one	is	death.	But	death	is	not	yet,	so	you	can	postpone	it.	It	is	not	much	of	a
problem;	you	say,	"Okay,	when	we	will	die	we	will	see.	And	I	am	not	going	to
die	right	now.	I	am	going	to	live	fifty	years	more,	at	least,	so	why	bother?"	And
man	does	not	have	a	very	distant
--	seeing	vision;	he	does	not	have	radar.	He	cannot	see	fifty	years	ahead.	Yes,	if
you	 say	 to	him,	 "Tomorrow	you	are	going	 to	die,"	he	may	become	afraid,	but
fifty	years?	He	will	say,
"Wait,	 there	 is	 no	hurry.	Let	me	do	my	 things	 first."	He	may	 even	 start	 doing
them	faster	because	"Only	fifty	years	are	left?	So	let	me	do	whatsoever	I	want	to
do.	Eat,	drink,	be	merry."
So	 the	 second	 thing,	 which	 is	 more	 fear-creating,	 is	 sex.	 Sex	 is	 already	 the
problem.	Death	WILL	be	the	problem;	it	is	in	the	future.	Sex	has	the	problem	in
the	present;	it	is	already	there.
Religions	contaminate	your	 sex	energy.	They	 start	making	you	afraid	 that	 it	 is
wrong,	it	is	ugly,	it	 is	sin,	it	will	drag	you	to	hell.	They	want	to	dominate	you;
that's	why	they	are	against	sex.
I	have	no	idea	to	dominate	you	I	am	here	to	make	you	absolutely	free.	And	there
are	only	two	things	needed	to	make	you	free.	One	is	that	sex	is	not	a	sin.	k	is	a
God-given	gift,	it	is	a	grace.	And	second,	there	is	no	death.	You	will	be	forever,
because	whatsoever	is	remains.
Nothing	ever	disappears.	Forms	change,	names	change,	but	the	reality	continues.
So	I	take	away	all	fear.	I	don't	want	to	make	you	in	any	way	feel	guilty,	afraid.	I
want	 to	 take	 all	 fears	 from	 you	 so	 that	 you	 can	 live	 naturally,	 without	 any
domination,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 live	 according	 to	 your	 own	 spontaneity.	And	 that
spontaneity	 will	 bring	 enlightenment.	 Then	 sex	 disappears,	 and	 then	 death
disappears.
It	 has	 disappeared	 to	me,	 so	 I	 know	 it	will	 disappear	 to	 you	 also.	 So	why	 be
worried	...?
And	 it	 disappears	 more	 easily	 if	 you	 have	 known	 it	 rightly.	 knowledge	 of
anything	takes	you	beyond;	you	are	finished	with	it.	If	you	have	not	lived	rightly,
you	will	 be	 as	 other	 religious	 people	who	have	 not	 lived	 rightly:	 they	 hanker,
they	 desire,	 they	 dream,	 but	 they	 repress,	 so	 they	 remain	 clinging	 to	 their
repressions	--	they	are	never	free	of	sex.
A	beautiful	story.	Meditate	over	it:
The	 time	 is	 the	 not	 too	 distant	 future.	We	have	 finally	 destroyed	 ourselves	 by
means	 of	 a	 nuclear	 holocaust.	 Everyone	 is	 waiting	 restlessly	 in	 a	 seemingly
endless	 line	 leading	up	to	 the	gates	of	heaven.	At	 the	head	of	 the	 line,	Peter	 is
deciding	which	souls	shall	enter	and	which	shall	be	turned	away.
Some	distance	from	the	gates,	an	American	stands	in	line	wringing	his	hands	in
apprehension.	Suddenly	he	hears	a	murmur	beginning	at	the	front	of	the	line,	and
growing	into	a	joyful	rush	of	sound	as	it	builds	in	volume	moving	down	the	line
toward	his	place.	He	can	make	out	sounds	of	celebration	in	many	languages.	He
hears	shouts	of	"Bravo,"	"Bravissimo,"
"Bis,"	"Encore,"	and	"Hip,	Hip,	Hooray."
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
71
Chapter	4	-	Go	with	the	River
"What	is	it?	What	is	it	all	about?"	he	implores	of	those	up	ahead	of	him	in	the
line.	At	last	someone	closer	to	the	gates	shouts	back	to	him,	"Peter	just	told	us:
'Screwing	don't	count!'	..."
Get	it?	Sex	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	enlightenment.	Love	has	nothing	to	do
with	your	enlightenment.	It	is	in	fact	going	to	help	you	because	it	will	make	you
more	natural.	Be	natural	and	don't	cultivate	any	abnormalities,	and	you	will	be
closer	to	God.
Hence	 I	 am	 not	 against	 sex,	 I	 am	 not	 against	 anything.	 I	 am	 only	 against
unnatural	attitudes,	perverted	attitudes.	Be	natural	and	normal,	and	allow	God	to
flow	though	you.	He	will	take	you.	His	river	is	already	moving	towards	the	sea.
Don't	try	to	swim	upstream,	don't	try	to	push	the	river.	Go	with	the	river.	That's
what	surrender	is,	and	that's	what	sannyas	is.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
72
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
5
Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
15	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
HAKUJU	SERVED	AS	A	DISTINGUISHED	LECTURER	AT	THE	TENDAI-
SECT
COLLEGE.	AS	HE	WAS	LECTURING	WITH	HIS	CUSTOMARY	ZEAL	ON
THE
CHINESE	CLASSICS	ONE	HOT	SUMMER'S	AFTERNOON,	HE	NOTICED
THAT	A	FEW	OF	THE	STUDENTS	WERE	DOZING	OFF.	HE	STOPPED	HIS
LECTURING	IN
MIDSENTENCE	AND	SAID,	"IT	IS	A	HOT	AFTERNOON,	ISN'T	IT?	CAN'T
BLAME
YOU	FOR	GOING	TO	SLEEP.	MIND	IF	I	JOIN	YOU?"
WITH	 THIS,	 HAKUJU	 SHUT	 HIS	 TEXTBOOK,	 AND	 LEANING	 WELL
BACK	IN	HIS
CHAIR,	FELL	ASLEEP.
THE	 CLASS	 WAS	 DUMBFOUNDED,	 AND	 THOSE	 WHO	 HAD	 BEEN
DOZING
WERE	AWAKENED	BY	HIS	SNORES.	ALL	SAT	UP	IN	THEIR	SEATS	AND
WAITED
FOR	THE	MASTER	TO	AWAKEN.
The	first	principle,	 the	principle	 that	cannot	be	said	--	but	we	can	still	 try.	The
first	 principle	 is	 that	 samsara	 is	 nirvana,	 that	 the	ordinary	 is	 the	 extraordinary,
that	this	world	is	the	other	world,	that	matter	is	mind,	that	there	is	no	distinction
between	the	holy	and	the	unholy,	that	the	profane	is	the	sacred.	This	is	the	first
principle.	Yes,	it	cannot	be	said,	and	I	am	not	saying	it,	but	it	can	be	indicated.
The	indivisible	 is	 the	first	principle.	The	moment	we	divide	reality,	 it	becomes
the	second	principle.	The	second	is	a	shadow;	the	first	is	the	original.
This	is	one	of	the	greatest	contributions	of	Zen	to	the	world.	Zen	says	the	world
is	 God,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 God.	 The	 creation	 is	 the	 creator,	 there	 is	 no	 other
creator.	The	very	creativity	is	divine.	It	is	not	like	a	painter	who	is	different	from
his	painting.	It	 is	 like	a	dancer	who	is	one	with	his	dance.	God	is	one	with	his
existence.	God	 is	 his	 existence.	 In	 fact,	 to	 say	 "God	 is"	 is	 tautological,	 it	 is	 a
repetition,	because	"God"	means	the	same	thing	that	"is"	means.	God	is	isness.
All	that	is	divine.
It	is	very	difficult	for	the	so-called	religious	to	understand	it	because	his	whole
trip	depends	on	the	distinction:	this	is	good,	this	is	bad,	this	has	to	be	done	and
this	 has	 to	be	 avoided.	The	marketplace	has	 to	be	 condemned,	 and	one	has	 to
move	into	the	Himalayas	or	into	the	monasteries.
The	ordinary	religious	mind	depends	on	condemnation,	it	is	an	ego	trip,	so	when
you	 become	 ordinarily	 religious,	 you	 start	 having	 the	 feeling	 of	 "holier	 than
thou".	Because	you	live	in	a	certain	way	--	you	eat	certain	things	and	you	don't
eat	certain	 things,	and	you	have	a	certain	 style	 to	your	 life	 --	you	start	 feeling
you	are	holier	 than	others.	A	Catholic	monk	or	a	Jaina	monk	 thinks	he	 is	very
holy	 because	 he	 is	 doing	 certain	 things	 and	 he	 is	 avoiding	 certain	 things.	His
holiness	consists	of	doing.
The	 insistence	of	Zen	is	 that	doing	 is	not	 important	at	all,	what	 is	 important	 is
being.	You	are	not	what	you	do.	You	are	what	you	are.	And	by	doing,	you	never
change,	but	if	your	being	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
73
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
changes,	certainly	your	doing	changes.	 It	becomes	 totally	different;	 it	becomes
suffused	with	a	new	light.	A	new	quality,	a	new	dimension	opens	to	it.	You	can
do	the	same	thing	without	your	being	having	gone	through	any	transformation,
and	then	it	will	be	second,	secondhand,	then	it	will	not	be	real.
For	 example,	 Mahavir	 became	 naked.	 His	 nudeness	 comes	 out	 of	 the	 first
principle;	it	is	a	flow	from	his	innermost	core.	It	is	an	innocence	that	has	come	to
his	 life.	You	can	become	nude	--	 there	are	 thousands	of	Jaina	monks	down	the
centuries	who	have	become	nude	--	but	it	is	an	action.	For	Mahavir	it	was	not	an
action;	basically	it	was	a	change	in	his	being.	He	became	so	childlike	that	there
was	no	need	for	any	clothes.	There	was	nothing	to	hide.	He	became	so	open,	so
simple.	 From	 the	 interiormost	 flowed	 this	 nudeness.	 Then	 it	 had	 a	 different
quality:	the	quality	of	innocence,	of	childlike	simplicity.	But	those	who	followed
him,	and	became	naked	as	followers,	were	cunning	people,	clever	people.	It	was
a	mathematical	 conclusion,	 a	 logical	 conclusion.	 They	 pondered	 over	 it.	 They
thought	Mahavir	became	Mahavir	by	becoming	nude;	"If	we	become	nude,	we
will	become	Mahavir."	Action	is	first	for	them.
Mahavir	became	nonviolent.	He	became	so	careful	about	every	kind	of	life,	even
the	 life	 of	 the	 trees.	 He	 would	 not	 walk	 on	 grass;	 it	 may	 hurt	 the	 grass.	 He
became	 so	 loving,	 so	 compassionate,	 because	 his	 being	 changed.	 Then	 his
followers	have	been	trying	the	same,	from	the	other	extreme,	from	the	other	end:
they	have	been	trying	it	as	a	cultivated	behavior.
They	try	not	to	kill,	they	try	to	avoid	any	violence,	but	it	is	just	an	action.
Action	 cannot	 change	 your	 being.	 The	 periphery	 cannot	 change	 your	 center.
Only	when	the	center	changes,	the	periphery	changes.	Let	this	be	one	of	the	most
fundamental	rules.
The	Zen	people	say	THIS	samsara,	THIS	world,	is	the	other	world	too.	There	is
no	other	world,	so	don't	look	for	the	hereafter;	there	is	none.	This	moment	is	all!
If	you	start	looking	for	some	other	world,	you	have	divided	existence	in	two	--
and	existence	 is	 indivisible.	 It	 is	not	 that	 there	comes	a	boundary	 to	 the	world
and	then	comes	the	boundary	of	God.	God	is	not	a	neighbor!	God	is	in	the	world.
He	 is	 not	 transcendental;	 he	 is	 immanent.	 He	 is	 one	 with	 existence.	 So	 don't
divide.	The	moment	you	divide,	you	are	 falling	 into	 the	shadowy	world	of	 the
secondhand.
If	you	can	look	with	an	undivided	eye	you	come	across	the	first	principle.
You	must	have	heard	about	 the	 third	eye.	You	have	 two	eyes:	 two	eyes	means
duality.	And	all	those	who	have	looked	inwards,	they	say	there	comes	a	moment
when	the	third	eye	opens.
The	third	eye	is	one,	single.	There	is	no	third	eye	physiologically	in	your	body;	it
is	a	metaphor.	When	two	eyes	disappear	and	become	one,	when	you	don't	look
into	 existence	 with	 a	 dividing	 mind,	 you	 look	 into	 existence	 with	 absolute,
undivided	consciousness,	then	you	are	one.
Jesus	says	to	his	disciples,	"If	you	become	of	one	eye,	 then	you	will	know	my
kingdom	of	God.	 If	 you	 attain	 to	 one	 eye,	 then	 all	 bliss	will	 be	 yours	 and	 all
benediction."	He	is	 talking	about	 the	 third	eye,	and	the	 third	eye	gives	you	the
glimpse	into	the	first	principle.
The	 first	 principle	 is	 that	 samsara	 is	 nirvana,	 that	 the	 ordinary	 is	 the
extraordinary.	So	please,	don't	think	that	something	is	spiritual	and	something	is
nonspiritual.	You	can	do	everything	in	a	spiritual	way	and	you	can	do	everything
in	 an	 unspiritual	way.	 If	 you	 divide,	 you	 are	 unspiritual.	 If	 a	man	 says	 this	 is
good	and	that	is	bad,	he	is	unspiritual.	If	a	man	says,
"This	has	to	be	desired	and	this	has	to	be	not	desired,"	he	is	spiritual	no	more.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
74
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
Spirituality	has	no	shoulds,	no	should-nots.	Spirituality	has	a	deep	acceptance	of
whatsoever	 is	--	 that	which	is.	Buddhists	call	 it	TATHATA,	suchness	--	such	is
the	case.
Whatsoever	 is	 the	 case	 is	 the	 case:	 one	has	 to	 accept	 and	 relax	 into	 it.	 In	 that
relaxation	 is	 the	dimension	of	 the	spiritual.	 If	you	can	do	ordinary	actions	 in	a
relaxed	way,	with	no	tension	in	 the	mind,	with	no	hankering	in	 the	mind	to	be
successful	or	to	be	winners,	then	you	are	doing	a	spiritual	thing.	Then	it	can	be
anything.
Zen	 people	 sip	 tea,	 and	 they	 call	 it	 a	 tea	 ceremony.	 Sipping	 tea	 can	 become
spiritual.	How	does	 it	become	spiritual?	To	 those	people	who	have	not	 looked
into	reality	in	any	way	it	looks	simply	absurd.	Sipping	tea?	How	can	it	become
religious?	Yes,	if	you	are	chanting	God's	name,	maybe	it	is	religious.	If	you	are
praying,	fasting,	maybe	it	is	spiritual,	but	sipping	tea?
How	can	it	be	religious	or	spiritual?	The	Zen	people	say	if	you	can	sip	tea	with
an	 absolutely	 undivided	mind,	 so	 that	 the	 tea	 and	 the	 sipper	 of	 the	 tea	 are	 no
more	divided,	it	becomes	one	energy,	there	is	so	much	silence,	one	is	relaxed	--
and	if	you	cannot	be	relaxed	while	sipping	tea,	where	else	can	you	be	relaxed?	--
a	cup	of	tea	can	become	a	cup	of	prayer.
Then	 anything	 can	 become	 spiritual.	 Digging	 in	 the	 garden,	 looking	 after	 the
trees	 can	become	 spiritual.	Anything	whatsoever	 can	have	 the	 spiritual	 quality
because	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 God.	 You	 just	 have	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 it.	 A
relaxed	awareness	makes	everything	spiritual.
So	this	dictum	that	samsara	is	nirvana,	is	one	of	the	greatest	dictums	ever	uttered
by	any	man	on	 this	earth.	The	 founder	of	Zen,	Bodhidharma,	uttered	 it.	 It	 is	a
thunderbolt.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 revolutionary	 sayings.	 It	 destroys	 all
distinction,	 and	 it	 brings	 to	 light	 that	 all	 other	 so-called	 religions	 are	 just
philosophies,	not	really	religions,	because	they	go	on	dividing	--
the	devil	 and	God,	hell	 and	heaven,	 and	 they	go	on	dividing.	Division	 is	 their
work,	and	division	is	of	the	mind.
Mind	functions	like	a	prism.	A	ray	of	light	enters	into	a	prism	and	is	divided	into
seven	colors.	Entering,	it	was	of	one	color,	it	was	pure	white,	it	was	undivided.
Getting	out	of	the	prism,	it	is	no	more	one;	it	is	seven,	seven	colors,	the	whole
rainbow.	 The	world	 is	 divided	 because	 of	 the	 prism	 of	 the	mind.	 That	 which
enters	in	the	mind	is	one;	that	which	comes	out	of	the	mind	is	seven.
If	you	want	 to	know	 the	 first	principle	you	will	have	 to	get	beyond	 the	prism.
You	will	have	to	come	to	that	point	where	the	ray	is	one.
Now,	there	are	two	ways	to	seek	the	truth.	One	is	the	goal-oriented	way,	and	the
second	 is	 the	 source-oriented	way.	 The	 first	 is	wrong	 and	 the	 second	 is	 right.
When	I	say	the	first	is	wrong,	I	am	not	condemning	it.	I	am	not	saying	it	is	bad.
What	I	am	saying	by	"wrong"	is	not	a	condemnation;	it	is	just	an	indication	that
it	leads	nowhere,	that	it	leads	into	a	cul-de-sac,	that	you	can	go	into	it,	but	you
will	never	arrive.	You	can	go	on	going	and	going,	but	you	will	never	arrive.	It	is
a	false	way.	It	appears	like	a	way,	but	it	is	not	a	way.	It	has	the	appearance,	but
only	the	appearance.
Let	us	first	understand	the	false	way	because	if	you	can	understand	the	false	as
the	false,	half	the	journey	is	over.	Then	it	is	very	simple	to	understand	the	true	as
the	 true.	 To	 know	 the	 false	 as	 the	 false,	 you	 have	 already	 come	 to	 an
understanding	 of	 what	 is	 or	 what	 can	 be	 the	 true.	 So	 always	 start	 by
understanding	the	false	first.	False	eliminated,	the	true	remains.	So	first	the	false
way.
Everybody	is	prone	to	getting	into	the	trap	of	the	false	because	it	is	very	alluring;
it	functions	almost	like	a	magnet.	The	mind	feels	very	much	attracted	to	it.	The
mind	has	a	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
75
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
tendency	to	be	attracted	to	the	false.	Why?	Because	the	mind	itself	is	the	false.	It
feeds	 on	 the	 false.	 So	wherever	 your	mind	 feels	 attracted,	 beware:	 something
false,	 something	 illusory,	 something	 of	 the	world	 of	 dreams	 is	 attracting	 you.
Mind	lives	in	dreams;	it	is	made	of	dream	stuff.	In	the	day	you	call	those	dreams
thoughts,	in	the	night	you	call	those	thoughts	dreams,	but	it	is	all	the	same,	the
same	 flow,	 the	 same	 energy.	 The	 mind	 goes	 on	 spinning	 dreams,	 sometimes
verbally,	 sometimes	 through	 images,	 but	 the	whole	 production	 of	 the	mind	 is
dream.
The	mind	feels	very	much	attracted	to	the	goal-oriented	way	because	the	mind	is
always	attracted	to	the	future.	The	mind	is	afraid	of	the	present;	it	does	not	want
to	be	in	the	present.
Have	you	ever	observed	a	very,	very	significant	fact	that	the	mind	cannot	be	in
the	present?	--	cannot	be	in	the	present	at	all?	When	you	are	in	the	present,	the
mind	is	not.	The	present	is	so	small	that	there	is	no	space	for	thoughts	to	move.
It	is	so	small	that	thoughts	cannot	exist.	They	need	a	little	space	to	play	around,
to	jog	around.	The	present	moment	cannot	contain	any	thoughts,	so	mind	cannot
exist	in	the	present;	it	exists	in	the	future	or	in	the	past.	It	is	an	expert	about	the
past	and	an	expert	about	the	future	--	and	both	are	not:	the	past	is	no	more,	and
the	future	has	not	yet	happened.	So	mind	lives	in	the	false:	either	that	which	is
no	more	or	that	which	is	not	yet.	Both	are	false,	both	are	unreal.	So	mind	either
runs	backwards	or	forwards,	but	the	mind	is	never	now,	never	here.
And	 the	whole	 art	 of	meditation	 is	 to	 be	 herenow.	To	 be	 herenow	means	 you
have	 slipped	 out	 of	 the	mind.	And	 even	 to	 slip	 out	 for	 a	 single	moment	 is	 of
tremendous	 beauty	 and	 tremendous	 significance	 because	 then	 you	 see	 what
reality	is.	Then	you	see	that	which	is.
Then	you	see	God,	or	truth.	Then	you	see	existence	in	its	authentic	color,	quality,
sound.
The	moment	mind	starts	working,	the	future	has	entered,	or	the	past.	Either	you
are	 imagining	or	you	are	 remembering.	So	 the	mind	 feels	very	happy	with	 the
goal-oriented	way.
It	gives	enough	space	 for	 the	mind	 to	 fool	around,	 to	go	on	 thinking	 thoughts,
dreaming	dreams.	There	is	enough	space.	Future	is	an	opening	for	the	mind.
But	 the	moment	mind	 starts	working,	 you	 are	 closed	 to	 the	 present	 --	 and	 the
present	is	all	that	is	true.	The	present	means	the	eternal.	The	future	and	past	are
part	of	time;	the	present	is	part	of	eternity.	Through	the	present	you	slip..
into	God:	you	slip	out	of	the	mind	and	into	God.	You	slip	out	of	the	ego,	and	into
your	innermost	core,	which	is	also	the	innermost	core	of	the	whole	existence.
Your	center	 is	not	your	center	alone.	 It	 is	my	center	 too.	 It	 is	 the	center	of	 the
trees	too.	It	is	the	center	of	the	stars	too.	We	are	different	on	the	periphery;	we
are	one	at	the	center.	On	the	periphery	you	are	separate	from	me.	At	the	center
there	is	no	I,	there	is	no	you;	there	is	only	we.	And	the	"we"	includes	trees	and
rocks	and	stars	and	everything;	it	includes	all.	The
"I"	 is	a	mind	product.	The	"we"	is	a	 totally	different	direction,	 totally	different
dimension.
The	goal-oriented	seeker	thinks,	"What	is	the	ultimate	and	of	existence?	To	what
meaning	 is	existence	moving?	Where	are	we	going?"	The	goal-oriented	seeker
thinks,	"What	are	we	going	to	become?	What	HAVE	we	to	become?"	He	never
looks	into	being;	he	looks	into	becoming:	"What	am	I	to	become?	A	saint?	What
am	I	going	to	become?	What	 is	my	destiny	in	the	future?	What	 is	 the	goal	my
life	 is	 striving	 to	attain?"	He	 looks	 into	 the	 future.	The	future	 is	not.	 It	 is	very
dark	there,	very	silent	there,	so	you	can	easily	imagine	whatsoever	you	like.	And
the	 future	 cannot	 say	 you	 are	wrong,	 because	 the	 future	 is	 not,	 so	whatsoever
you	imagine	never	struggles,	collides	with	reality.	There	is	no	reality;	it	is	simply
your	projection.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
76
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
You	can	go	on	imagining,	and	there	is	nobody	who	will	say	you	are	wrong.	You
are	always	right,	in	the	future.
In	the	present	the	reality	is	too	much,	and	the	reality	will	destroy	the	dream,	but
in	the	future	there	is	no	reality.	You	are	alone.	The	world	of	the	future	gives	you
a	freedom,	gives	you	a	freedom	from	reality	--	a	bondage	to	dreams	and	freedom
from	reality.
The	goal-oriented	person	starts	thinking.	"How	should	I	be	so	that	the	goal	can
be	 attained?"	 He	 starts	 changing	 his	 behaviour,	 his	 character,	 his	 style,	 his
actions.	 He	 becomes	 a	 perfectionist.	 The	 goal-oriented	 person	 is	 always	 a
perfectionist.	He	has	 some	 idea	 of	 perfection	 --	 how	man	 should	 be	 --	 and	 he
starts	managing	his	own	being	according	to	that	idea.	Christians	have	one	idea,
Hindus	have	another,	Jainas	have	another,	but	all	have	ideas	how	man	should	be.
Christians	 may	 think	 man	 should	 be	 like	 Jesus;	 then	 that	 is	 the	 idea,	 and
everybody	has	to	fit	with	the	idea.	If	you	don't	fit	you	are	wrong;	if	you	fit	you
are	right.
Now	the	misery	is:	 if	you	fit	you	are	false.	If	you	don't	fit	you	are	wrong,	you
may	be	real.
So	reality	starts	becoming	wrong	and	unreality	becomes	right.	Let	me	explain	it
to	you.
Nobody	else	can	fit	with	Jesus	exactly,	because	God	never	creates	anybody	the
same	way	again.	God	does	not	have	an	assembly	line;	he	is	not	making	men	as
cars	are	manufactured.
You	can	have	as	many	cars	similar	to	each	other	as	you	want.	There	is	a	mold,
and	 the	 car	 is	 produced	 according	 to	 the	 mold,	 so	 you	 can	 have	 one	 Ford,
another	Ford,	another	Ford,	millions	of	Fords,	exactly	similar.	But	God	has	no
mold.	 God	 has	 no	 factory.	 He	 does	 not	 create	 according	 to	 molds.	 God	 is
creativity;	 he	 never	 repeats.	 He	 is	 very	 innovative.	 Never	 again	 is	 the	 same
person	repeated,	each	is	unique,	so	there	is	only	one	Jesus;	there	is	never	again.
So	the	problem	is	if	you	try	to	fit	with	the	idea	of	Jesus:	how	Jesus	is,	you	should
be,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 Christian;	 or	 the	 goal	 of	 the	 Buddhist	 --
Buddha	--	one	should	fit	with	Buddha;	or	the	goal	of	the	Jaina	--	one	should	fit
with	Mahavir.	Now,	these	are	all	false	ways	to	approach	reality.
If	you	fit	with	Jesus	you	will	be	false	because	you	have	not	been	made	to	fit	with
Jesus.
You	can	be	only	yourself,	nobody	else,	never	anybody	else.	The	only	real	way
for	you	is	to	be	yourself,	whatsoever	you	are.	And	you	cannot	find	any	similar
being	in	the	past,	and	you	cannot	find	any	similar	being	in	the	present	or	in	the
future.	 You	 are	 alone,	 and	 this	 aloneness	 is	 beautiful.	 This	 is	 the	 way	 God
respects	you,	by	making	you	absolutely	anew,	unique,	and	alone.
If	you	fit	with	Jesus	you	are	false,	but	Christians	will	say	you	are	right.	Now	see
how	false	becomes	right!	If	you	don't	fit	with	Jesus	you	may	be	right,	but	then
you	 are	 wrong.	 If	 you	 don't	 fit	 with	 Jesus	 you	 may	 be	 real,	 authentically
yourself,	 but	 then	 you	 don't	 fit,	 so	 no	 Christian	 will	 appreciate	 you:	 you	 are
wrong.	Real	becomes	wrong,	the	false	becomes	right.
Whenever	 you	 have	 any	 idea,	 fixed	 idea,	 fixed	 ideology,	 you	 are	 creating
neurosis	in	man.
And	there	is	great	anxiety,	naturally.	If	you	cannot	fit	with	the	idea	and	you	have
been	brought	up	 as	 a	Christian	or	 a	Hindu,	you	cannot	 fit	with	 the	 idea,	 great
anxiety	arises:	you	are	going	wrong.	Your	life	is	the	life	of	sin.	You	start	feeling
guilty.	 You	 feel	 nervous,	 you	 lose	 confidence,	 you	 lose	 courage,	 you	 become
very	much	afraid.	You	become	a	coward,	because	whatsoever	you	do	seems	to
be	wrong.	k	 is	not	fitting	with	Jesus	or	Buddha	or	Mahavir	or	Krishna,	so	you
must	be	wrong.	How	can	Buddha	be	wrong?	And	when	you	start	feeling,	"I	am
wrong,"	naturally,	you	tremble	with	fear.
Soren	Kierkegaard	has	said	that	man	is	a	trembling,	but	I	would	like	to	say	man
is	not	a	trembling,	man	has	been	FORCED	to	become	a	trembling	--	forced	by
the	so-called	religions,	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
77
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
who	give	you	ideologies.	"How	you	should	be"	--	once	you	start	thinking	in	that
way,	you	are	bound	to	be	trapped	into	some	trouble,	misery,	neurosis.
The	first	thing	to	become	authentically	yours,	authentically	yourself,	is	to	get	rid
of	any	idea	whatsoever	that	you	are	carrying.
Zen	 has	 no	 idea	 how	 you	 should	 be.	 That's	 why	 Zen	 people	 say	 if	 you	meet
Buddha	 on	 the	 way,	 kill	 him	 immediately.	 That	 is	 just	 a	 way	 of	 saying	 don't
allow	 any	 idea	 to	 settle	 into	 your	 consciousness.	 Kill	 that	 idea	 immediately.
Don't	be	an	ideologist.	Don't	have	any	ideals,	and	don't	be	a	perfectionist.
A	perfectionist	is	a	person	who	goes	on	trying	to	make	himself	according	to	the
idea.	 One	 day	 you	 can	 succeed.	 That	 possibility	 is	 there	 --	 that	 dangerous
possibility	is	there	--	you	can	succeed,	but	then	you	become	pseudo.	That's	what
hypocrisy	 is	 all	 about.	You	become	a	hypocrite.	 If	you	 really	become	 the	 idea
that	you	have	been	carrying,	you	become	a	hypocrite.
Go	 and	 look	 into	 your	 mahatmas,	 into	 your	 saints,	 and	 you	 will	 find	 them
hypocrites,	 untrue	 to	 themselves.	True	 to	 some	 idea,	 but	 untrue	 to	 themselves.
And	if	you	are	untrue	to	yourself,	you	are	untrue	to	God.
Then,	 the	perfectionist	has	so	many	shoulds	and	should-nots.	The	whole	life	 is
without	joy.	He	cannot	enjoy,	he	cannot	celebrate,	he	cannot	be	happy,	he	cannot
delight.	He	 cannot	 lose	himself	 in	 any	moment,	 he	 cannot	 abandon	himself	 in
any	moment,	because	 those	shoulds	and	should-nots	are	continuously	haunting
him:	"You	should	not	do	this,	you	should	do	this,	you	should	not	be	like	that,	you
should	be	like	that	..."	He	cannot	relax.	How	can	he	relax?
Now,	 people	 come	 to	 me,	 and	 they	 want	 to	 relax,	 and	 they	 say,	 "We	 cannot
relax."	How	can	you	relax	by	being	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan?	It
is	impossible	to	relax;	they	won't	allow	you	to	relax.	They	want	you	to	be	tense;
they	create	your	tensions.
Relaxation	means	you	don't	have	any	shoulds.	You	are	simply	living	moment	to
moment,	 not	 according	 to	 some	 future	 idea	 of	 yourself,	 but	 according	 to	 your
reality	that	is	herenow.	To	live	with	the	reality,	moment	to	moment,	is	to	be	sane.
To	live	with	the	idea	is	to	be	insane.
The	whole	earth	has	become	almost	a	madhouse	because	of	these	perfectionists.
Perfectionism	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 madness;	 only	 mad	 people	 try	 to	 be	 perfectionists.
Sane	people	never	try	to	be	perfectionists.
Sane	people	are	humble	people.	They	know	their	 limitations,	 they	don't	 try	 the
impossible,	 so	 they	 enjoy	 the	 possible.	 If	 you	 try	 the	 impossible	 you	 cannot
enjoy	the	possible,	and	in	trying	the	impossible	you	miss	the	possible	too.	And
from	the	other	end,	sane	people	enjoy	the	possible	and	they	don't	hanker	for	the
impossible,	and	enjoying	the	possible,	one	day	suddenly	they	stumble	upon	the
impossible	too.
Their	 joy	 becomes	 so	much	by	 and	by,	moment	 to	moment,	 they	go	 on	 being
blissful.	In	ordinary	things	they	are	blissful.	They	don't	ask	for	great	things,	they
don't	ask	for	paradise,	 to	be	blissful,	 they	don't	ask	for	God,	 they	don't	ask	for
nirvana.	 Small	 things.	 Playing	 with	 your	 own	 child,	 loving	 your	 wife,	 eating
your	food,	taking	a	shower,	or	going	for	a	morning	walk,	is	more	than	enough.
Just	 running	on	 the	beach	 is	more	 than	enough.	What	more	do	you	want	 to	be
happy?	The	touch	of	the	cool	sand,	and	the	warm	rays	of	the	sun	showering	on
you,	and	the	wild	roar	of	the	sea	playing	around	you	...	what	more	do	you	need
to	be	happy?	Playing	with	a	child,	the	laughter	of	the	child	...	what	more	do	you
need	to	be	happy?
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
78
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
But	there	are	neurotic	people.	They	will	say,	"What	is	there?	Unless	we	achieve
God	we	cannot	be	happy."	And	let	me	tell	you,	these	people	will	not	be	happy
even	 if	 they	 can	 achieve	God.	They	 cannot	 be.	They	will	 find	 faults;	 they	 are
fault	 finders.	Even	God	will	not	be	able	 to	 fit	 in	 their	 idea	of	perfection.	They
will	find	faults	with	God.	They	will	not	be	able	to	see	any	limitations,	they	will
not	allow	any	frailty.	These	are	impossible	people.	And	these	impossible	people
destroy	 their	 own	 lives	 and	 destroy	 many	 others'.	 These	 people	 are	 the	 very
source	of	madness	on	this	earth.
The	goal-oriented	way	is	an	ego	trip:	the	ego	always	wants	to	be	perfect.	And	the
search	cannot	be	fulfilled,	because	it	is	almost	a	blind	man's	search,	a	blind	man
groping	 in	 the	dark,	 a	 blind	man	groping	 in	 the	dark	night	with	no	 light	 for	 a
black	cat	which	is	not	there.
The	future	is	not	yet.	There	is	no	goal	in	existence.	Let	this	sink	into	your	heart.
There	is	no	goal	in	existence,	the	existence	is	not	moving	towards	any	purpose.
There	 is	 not	 any	 purpose;	 it	 is	 sheer	 joy.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 business;	 it	 is	 a	 play.	Of
course,	I	understand	you	cannot	even	play	without	the	business	mind.
Just	a	few	days	before,	a	young	man	came	to	me,	and	he	was	very	tense,	and	I
asked	him	--
because	I	could	see	from	his	face	too	much	goal	orientation	--	I	asked	him	one
thing,	"Do	you	play	anything?"	He	said,	"Yes,	I	am	interested	in	games.	I	play
many	games.	I	play	chess."
And	 I	 asked	 him,	 "What	 happens	when	 you	 don't	win?"	He	 said,	 "I	 feel	 very
much	frustrated;	I	cannot	sleep.	I	feel	good	only	when	I	am	the	winner."	Even	in
play,	you	know	it	is	a	game,	just	a	makebelieve	--	even	in	play,	if	you	are	not	the
winner,	you	become	tense.	You	have	to	be	the	winner,	even	in	play.
Such	a	type	of	person,	if	you	tell	him,	"I	went	to	the	cricket	match,"	he	will	ask,
"Who	was	the	winner?"	He	will	not	ask	whether	the	players	enjoyed,	whether	it
was	a	beautiful	game,	no;	he	will	ask,	"Who	was	the	winner?"	This	is	a	wrong
person.
If	 you	 meet	 a	 person	 who	 really	 knows	 how	 to	 enjoy,	 he	 will	 ask,	 "Did	 the
players	enjoy	it?"
If	you	are	playing	chess	and	you	enjoy	it,	it	does	not	matter	who	wins	and	who	is
defeated,	 because	 that	 is	 secondary,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 purpose	 of	 the	 game.	 The
purpose	is	to	enjoy.	The	goal	is	not	the	purpose;	the	purpose	is	the	way.	If	you
can	enjoy	the	way,	the	trees	and	the	birds	singing	on	the	way,	who	bothers	about
the	goal?	In	fact,	the	existence	has	no	goal.	It	is	just	a	way.
That	is	the	beauty	of	the	Chinese	word	TAO;	it	means	the	"way".	They	don't	talk
about	God,	because	the	moment	you	talk	about	God,	it	appears	as	if	God	is	the
goal.	They	say,
"There	is	no	God.	There	is	TAO,	the	way."
You	must	have	heard	about	one	Japanese	religion	Shinto.	The	original	was	not
Shinto;	the	original	was	SHINTAO.	That	is	very	beautiful;	it	means	"the	way	of
the	gods".	SHIN	means	gods,	and	TAO	means	the	way.	Shintao:	the	way	of	the
gods.	Everything	 is	a	god,	and	existence	 is	 the	way.	Gods	moving	on	 the	way.
You	are	not	going	to	become	gods.	You	are.
The	goal-oriented	idea	is	driving	you	mad.	Drop	that	idea,	and	suddenly	you	will
see	sanity	explodes	into	your	being.	You	start	laughing	again.	You	start	dancing
again.	You	 start	 singing	again.	You	 start	playing	again.	And	you	have	become
religious.	That	is	the	idea	of	real	religion,	that	you	start	dancing	again,	that	you
start	loving	again,	that	your	life	energy	starts	flowing,	that	your	juice	is	stuck	no
more,	is	not	stale,	again	flows,	that	you	start	sharing.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
79
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
We	are	not	going	anywhere!	We	are	here!	And	we	have	been	here	for	the	whole
of	eternity	and	we	are	going	to	be	here	for	the	whole	of	eternity.	Now	it	is	up	to
you	to	enjoy	or	not	to	enjoy.	We	are	here	and	we	are	going	to	be	here.	There	is
no	way	to	escape.	Now	it	is	for	you	to	choose	whether	to	enjoy	or	just	to	cry	and
weep	for	the	goal.
The	goal	is	not;	there	is	no	goal.	The	world	is	not	moving	towards	some	goal	so
that	once	achieved,	it	is	finished.	Then	what	will	you	do?	Have	you	ever	thought
about	it?	Once	the	goal	is	achieved,	what	will	you	do?	You	will	have	to	commit
suicide.	What	will	you	do?	If	the	whole	existence	achieves	the	goal,	then?	Then
there	is	nowhere	to	go,	nowhere	to	move;	the	goal	has	been	achieved.	Then	the
whole	existence	will	dry	up,	will	become	dead,	the	juice	will	flow	no	more,	the
love	will	not	be	there,	and	the	laughter	will	not	be	there,	and	trees	will	not	bloom
and	birds	will	not	sing	and	rivers	will	not	flow.	All	has	stopped.	No,	the	world
has	no	goal.
If	 the	world	has	 any	goal,	 it	would	have	 achieved	 it	 by	now.	How	 long	 it	 has
existed!	The	very	fact	that	it	has	not	achieved	it	yet	is	proof	enough	that	it	has	no
goal	 to	 achieve.	 It	 simply	goes	on;	 it	 is	 an	ongoing	affair.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 film	 that
comes	 to	an	end,	 it	 is	not	 a	novel	 that	 comes	 to	an	end.	We	are	always	 in	 the
middle,	never	in	the	beginning	and	never	at	the	end.
We	are	always	in	the	middle.	And	that	is	the	way	things	are.
So	the	goal-oriented	person	misses	all	that	is	beautiful	in	life.	The	goal	he	cannot
achieve	because	there	is	no	goal,	and	on	the	way	he	misses	all	things.	Have	you
watched?	 Sometimes	 you	 are	 rushing	 towards	 the	market,	 to	 your	 shop	 or	 to
your	office,	you	pass	through	the	same	street	where	you	go	for	a	morning	walk,
or	sometimes	in	the	moonlit	night	you	go	for	a	stroll
--	the	same	road,	the	same	trees	--	but	when	you	are	going	to	the	office	you	have
a	goal	in	mind;	then	you	don't	see	the	greenery	and	then	you	don't	listen	to	the
birds.	You	are	not	interested	in	the	way;	you	are	interested	in	the	goal.	You	want
to	finish	it	any	way.	The	faster	you	can	go,	the	better.	You	will	not	like	to	walk	to
the	office.	You	go	in	a	car	or	in	a	bus.
And	if	someday	science	manages	to	materialize	and	dematerialize	man,	you	will
simply	stand	in	a	machine	in	your	house	and	dematerialize	there	and	materialize
in	the	office	--	so	no	need	for	the	way.	One	day	it	is	going	to	happen.	There	is	no
need	 to	 go.	 Immediately,	 from	 one	 place	 to	 another	 place	 you	 can	 have	 a
quantum	leap,	a	quantum	jump.	In	 the	middle	you	will	not	be.	Speed.	Because
you	are	not	interested	in	the	way.
But,	the	same	way,	in	the	morning	when	you	go	for	a	walk,	has	a	totally	different
quality.
You	enjoy	it.	Each	breeze	passing	through	the	trees	and	each	bird	flying	around.
You	 enjoy	 it	 because	 you	 are	 not	 going	 anywhere	 in	 particular.	 You	 are	 just
going	for	a	morning	walk.	It	is	playful.	You	can	turn	back	from	any	point.	There
is	no	goal	in	your	mind.	You	are	nontense,	you	are	relaxed.	There	is	joy,	there	is
poetry.	You	start	singing	a	song.
You	 can	 treat	 yourself	 on	 the	way	 of	 life	 in	 these	 two	ways.	 If	 you	 are	 goal-
oriented	--
God,	 heaven,	 MOKSHA,	 nirvana,	 whatsoever	 you	 call	 it	 --	 then	 you	 cannot
enjoy,	you	cannot	celebrate	on	the	way.	Zen	says	the	way	is	the	goal.	That	is	the
meaning	when	 they	 say	 the	 samsara	 is	 nirvana.	 The	way	 is	 the	 goal,	 so	 don't
miss	anything.	Enjoy.	Each	moment	has	to	be	tasted;	each	moment	is	delicious.
Each	moment	brings	something	to	you,	a	blessing,	a	benediction.	Don't	miss	it.
This	is	the	first	way,	the	false	way,	that	is	very	attractive	to	the	mind.
On	 this	 false	way	masochists	 feel	very	good,	masochists	become	mahatmas.	A
masochist	 is	a	person	who	likes	 to	 torture	himself.	The	greater	 the	self-torture,
the	greater	the	mahatma.
If	somebody	fasts	for	months,	the	crowd	of	worshipers	will	become	bigger	and
bigger.	And	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
80
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
who	 are	 these	 worshipers?	 These	 are	 sadists.	 They	 enjoy.	 This	 foolish	 man
torturing	himself,	and	they	enjoy	--	and	they	bring	flowers	in	respect.	What	are
they	saying?	They	are	saying,
"We	would	 like	 to	 torture	 you,	 but	we	 cannot	 do	 so	 because	 of	 the	 law	 and	 a
thousand	and	one	 things,	and	you	are	so	kind	 that	you	save	us	 the	 trouble	and
you	 are	 doing	 it	 on	 your	 own,	 and	we	 are	 really	 happy."	Masochists	 become
mahatmas	 and	 sadists	 become	 followers,	 worshipers.	 They	 say,	 "Look	 at	 our
mahatma.	For	three	months	he	has	not	eaten	anything,"	or
"For	years	he	has	 lived	only	on	fruit	 juice,"	or	"For	years	he	has	not	slept,"	or
"He	is	sleeping	on	a	bed	of	thorns.	Look	at	our	mahatma.	He	has	lived	a	life	of
celibacy;	 he	 has	 never	 enjoyed	 any	 relationship	 with	 anybody.	 He	 has	 never
loved	a	woman.	He	has	never	tasted	love;	he	has	denied	himself	all	 the	beauty
that	love	can	give."
These	deniers,	these	life-negative	people	are	worshiped	tremendously.	Who	are
these	worshipers?	And	why	should	they	worship	these	people?
I	went	to	one	town,	and	a	few	people	came	to	me,	and	they	said,	"In	our	town
there	is	a	great	mahatma.	For	ten	years	he	has	been	standing,	and	people	come
from	 faraway	 places	 for	 his	 DARSHAN.	 "	 SO	 I	 said,	 "But	 what	 else	 has	 he
done?"	 They	 said,	 "What	 else?	 He	 is	 just	 standing."	 I	 insisted,	 "But	 still
something?"	They	were	puzzled;	they	said,	"Why	do	you	insist?
He	has	done	such	a	great	thing.	What	else	is	needed?	He	is	just	standing	for	ten
years."
I	went	to	see	the	man	because	I	wanted	to	see	--	that	man	must	be	mad.	And	he
was	mad!
He	 was	 standing	 ...	 his	 feet,	 his	 legs	 had	 become	 so	 thick.	 His	 whole	 body's
blood	had	gone	into	the	legs.	Ten	years	of	just	standing,	he	had	become	just	legs.
The	whole	body	had	shrunk.
He	had	elephant	legs.	Now	even	if	he	wanted	to	sit	he	could	not.	The	flexibility
of	the	body	is	there	no	more;	the	elasticity	is	lost.	And	I	looked	into	his	eyes;	I
have	never	seen	such	an	idiotic	person.	Such	dull	eyes.	And	bound	to	be,	doing
such	an	idiotic	thing,	just	standing.	He	was	holding	himself	on	crutches,	he	was
holding	ropes	with	his	hands;	and	the	whole	night	disciples	would	do	KIRTAN
and	 singing	 so	 he	 kept	 awake.	Or	 if	 sometimes	 he	would	 fall	 asleep	 standing,
then	a	few	people	would	support	him	so	he	didn't	fall.	These	are	sadists.
Hmm?	They	should	have	helped	him	to	go	to	sleep,	but	they	were	helping	him
not	to	fall.
Now,	these	people	have	killed	this	man's	whole	life.
And	why	is	he	standing?	He	is	enjoying	in	a	way.	Thousands	of	people	come	to
see	him.
He	has	nothing.	His	ego	 is	 feeling	very	much	 fulfilled;	he	 thinks	he	 is	 a	great
mahatma.
Money	is	being	poured	at	his	feet.	Flowers	and	respect.
But	nothing	of	the	creative.	He	has	not	written	a	poem.	If	you	respect	a	man	who
has	written	a	beautiful	poem,	it	seems	meaningful.	He	has	made	the	world	a	little
more	beautiful.
If	somebody	has	painted	a	picture	or	somebody	has	danced	a	beautiful	dance,	he
has	made	the	world	a	little	more	beautiful.	He	has	to	be	appreciated.	But	nobody
will	appreciate	him.
A	man	standing	just	doing	nothing	--	dying.	It	 is	a	long,	slow	suicide.	And	the
man	must	be	really	interested	in	selftorture.	This	is	great	torture,	but	people	call
it	TAPASCHARYA,	 they	 call	 it	 austerity,	 asceticism.	Asceticism	 is	 part	 of	 the
goal-oriented	mind.
And	 the	world	 is	 divided	 between	masochists	 and	 sadists.	Masochists	 become
leaders,	mahatmas.	And	 sadists	 become	 followers;	 they	 say,	 "We	cannot	do	 it;
we	want	 to	do	 these	 things	 to	people,	but	we	cannot	do	 them."	But	 there	are	a
few	people	who	are	doing	it	on	their	own,	so	they	appreciate.
Avoid	this	false	way.	Know	it	is	false.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
81
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
And	on	 this	 false	way	many	illusions	exist.	Now,	a	man	standing	for	 ten	years
will	become	hallucinatory,	he	will	have	hallucinations.	Whenever	he	will	close
his	 eyes	 he	 will	 have	 dreams.	 And	 those	 dreams	 will	 become	 very,	 very	 real
because	he	has	deprived	himself	of	sleep.	You	 just	 try	 it	 for	a	 few	days.	Don't
eat,	don't	sleep.	Within	three	weeks	your	hallucination	will	be	perfect.	You	may
start	 talking	 to	 God,	 you	 may	 start	 seeing	 God.	 Deprive	 yourself	 of	 your
ordinary	necessities,	and	the	mind	starts	becoming	hallucinatory.	The	mind	goes
berserk,	and	you	can	start	seeing	things	which	are	not.
I	have	heard,	a	real	story:
Fred	P.	Shields,	73,	spotted	a	nest	of	copperheads	one	day	in	the	eighty-foot	well
on	his	farm	in	Cheshire,	Ohio,	so	he	enlisted	his	forty-two-year-old	son	Fred	D.
and	his	eighteen-year-old	grandson	James	to	help	kill	them	...
Now	 the	 son	 and	 the	 grandson	 didn't	 bother	 about	whether	 those	 snakes	were
there	or	not.
...	They	attached	a	hose	to	the	exhaust	pipe	of	their	pickup	truck,	stuck	the	hose
into	the	well,	and	filled	it	with	carbon	monoxide.	After	a	while,	Shields	lowered
himself	 into	 the	well	 to	 see	 if	 the	 snakes	were	 really	 dead.	When	he	 failed	 to
come	out	again,	his	son	went	in	after	him.	When	the	second	man	failed	to	come
out,	 the	grandson	went	 in.	Rescuers	from	the	sheriff's	office	retrieved	the	three
men,	all	dead,	apparently	of	carbon	monoxide	poisoning,	but	they	found	no	sign
of	any	snakes	in	the	well.
You	can	see	things	which	are	not.	Always	remember	that	the	mind	is	capable	of
seeing	things	which	are	not.	And	by	seeing	things	which	are	not,	you	will	miss
seeing	 things	 which	 are.	 So	 the	 hallucinatory	 effort	 has	 to	 be	 avoided.	 Don't
deprive	 --	 don't	 deprive	 your	 body	 either	 of	 food	 or	 of	 sleep	 or	 of	 rest.	Don't
deprive	your	body	of	anything.	Let	your	body	function	as	healthily	as	possible,
as	normally	as	possible.	Don't	torture	the	body,	because	your	mind	is	part	of	the
body.	If	you	torture	the	body,	the	mind	goes	berserk	and	starts	seeing	things.
And	once	you	start	seeing	things	you	are	trapped.	Then	you	want	to	avoid	them
or	kill	them,	or,	if	they	are	beautiful	things,	you	want	to	attain	more	of	them.
That	which	is	needs	no	deprivation.	You	need	not	lie	down	on	a	thorn	bed	and
you	need	not	go	on	a	fast	and	you	need	not	torture	your	body	by	not	sleeping.	In
fact,	 the	more	 healthy	 and	 normal	 you	 are,	 the	more	 is	 the	 possibility	 for	 the
truth	to	be	seen.
The	people	who	are	goal-oriented,	they	don't	look	into	life.	They	look	in	books,
because	they	can	find	the	goal	only	in	books.	In	life	there	is	no	goal.	If	you	look
around	 there	 is	 no	 goal.	 Life	 is	 there,	 every	 part	 of	 existence	 is	 full	 of	 joy,
celebrating,	the	children	are	turning	and	dancing,	and	the	birds	are	dancing,	and
the	 peacocks	 are	 dancing,	 and	 the	 stars	 are	 turning	 and	 dancing.	 The	 whole
existence	is	turning	in	a	dance.	If	you	look	into	life	there	is	dance,	but	there	is	no
God.	Where	to	find	the	God?	Where	to	find	the	perfection?	You	have	to	look	in
the	books.	It	exists	only	 in	 the	books,	 in	 the	 imaginations	of	 those	people	who
have	written	books.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
82
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
I	have	heard:
A	 Japanese	 academic	 who	 wished	 to	 understand	 Zen	 more	 fully	 went	 to	 a
monastery	 to	 submit	 himself	 to	 the	koans.	He	was	 asked,	 "What	 is	mu?"	 --	 to
define,	that	is,	a	word	which	has	no	meaning	in	Japanese	...
It	 is	 just	 like	"hoo".	"Hoo"	is	a	Sufi	word;	 it	means	nothing;	 it	 is	 just	a	sound.
Exactly	is	the	word	"mu";	it	means	nothing;	it	is	just	a	sound.	In	English	there	is
one	word	coined	by	a	new	logician;	that	word	is	"po".	Yes	means	yes,	no	means
no.	Po	 is	 just	 between	 the	 two;	 it	 neither	means	yes	nor	means	no.	Learn	 this
word;	it	is	a	very	significant	word.	If	somebody	asks,	"Is	there	a	God?"	say	"Po",
because	if	you	say	yes,	it	is	wrong	--	you	don't	know;	if	you	say	no,	it	is	wrong,
because	 you	 don't	 know.	 So	 po.	 Po	 does	 not	 make	 you	 committed	 to	 any
ideology.	It	makes	no	sense;	it	is	simply	a	nonsense	sound.	So	is	mu.	If	you	ask	a
Zen	Master,
"Has	a	dog	buddha	nature?"	he	will	 say,	"Mu".	 It	means	neither	no	nor	yes.	 If
you	ask,	"Do	Buddhas	exist	after	they	have	left	the	body?"	he	will	say,	"Mu".	Or
my	disciples	can	use	the	word	"hoo".	This	word	"mu"	has	no	meaning.
...	As	a	good	scholar,	he	proceeded	to	look	up	the	syllable	in	Japanese	and	other
Oriental	dictionaries	to	determine	a	potential	root	meaning	and	habitual	usage	...
When	 the	 Master	 gave	 him	 mu	 to	 meditate	 on,	 he	 went	 to	 the	 dictionary.
Naturally,	a	scholar	goes	that	way.	He	must	have	gone	to	the	library.	The	Master
has	 said,	 "Meditate	 on	 mu":	 the	 Master	 has	 said,	 "Meditate	 on	 something
nonsensical,	 so	 that	you	can	get	out	of	your	mind."	The	mind	can	manage	 the
sensible,	 the	 mind	 can	 manage	 the	 rational,	 but	 the	 mind	 cannot	 manage	 the
nonsensical.	The	nonsensical	takes	you	out	of	the	mind.
So	if	you	meditate	on	mu,	what	will	happen?	Nothing	can	happen,	because	mu
means	nothing.	 If	 I	 say,	 "Meditate	on	 'dog'."	much	will	happen.	You	may	start
thinking	about	a	dog	you	had	 in	your	childhood,	you	may	start	 thinking	about
dogs	 that	 you	 were	 always	 afraid	 of,	 the	 neighbors'	 dogs,	 or	 you	 may	 start
thinking	of	a	dog	your	girlfriend	had,	and	then	about	the	girlfriend	and	then	all
the	girlfriends	that	you	had,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	You	can	move	from
"dog"	 and	 the	mind	 can	 function,	 the	 law	 of	 association.	 And	 infinite	 are	 the
possibilities.	You	may	think	about	"dog",	you	may	read	it	in	the	reverse	order;	it
becomes	"god",	and	you	may	start	thinking	about	theologies	and	religions	...
The	word	 "mu"	means	 nothing;	 you	 cannot	 go	 anywhere	with	 it.	You	have	 to
remain	 stuck:	 mu.	 Now	 where	 to	 go?	 It	 does	 not	 remind	 you	 of	 anything;	 it
makes	no	 sense,	 so	 there	 is	no	association	with	 it.	 If	you	go	on	meditating	on
mu,	there	will	come	a	point	of	frustration,	boredom.	Exhausted,	your	mind	will
start	rebelling.	Your	mind	will	say,	"Drop	this.	Enough	of	it!	And	I	cannot	think
anything	 about	 it."	 The	 mind	 is	 ready	 to	 think,	 but	 what	 to	 think	 about	 mu?
There	 is	no	door	opening	anywhere,	 it	 leads	nowhere,	 so	one	 time	comes,	one
moment	comes,	when	the	mind	simply,	fed	up	with	the	whole	thing,	drops	itself,
disappears.
And	in	that	moment	there	is	a	vision	of	reality.
That	is	the	way	of	a	koan.	A	koan	is	a	nonsensical	thing,	you	cannot	figure	it	out;
but	the	scholar	went	to	the	library.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
83
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
...	he	proceeded	to	look	up	the	syllable	in	Japanese	and	other	oriental	dictionaries
to	 determine	 a	 potential	 root	 meaning	 and	 habitual	 usage.	 He	 presented	 his
findings	to	 the	Master,	who	repulsed	him	and	immediately	sent	him	away.	Our
scholar	next	thought	the	question	to	be	more	subtle	and	tried	to	analyze	the	tonal
component	 of	 the	 syllable	 in	 every	 language	 of	 the	 Chinese	 group.	 He	 again
presented	his	findings	and	research	to	the	Master,	who	now	thought	it	was	time
to	convince	this	poor	scholar	of	the	seriousness	of	his	situation,	that	it	was	not	a
question	of	another	academic	excursion.	"I	will	give	you	one	more	chance,"
he	said,	"and	if	you	do	not	solve	the	riddle,	I	will	cut	off	your	leg."
Now,	 even	 in	 the	 most	 extreme	 arguments	 or	 thesis	 examinations	 of	 the
academic	world,	things	usually	don't	become	this	tough	and	this	rough	...
The	scholar	could	not	believe	what	type	of	Master	he	is.	"He	will	cut	off	my	leg!
At	the	most	you	can	fail,	you	can	say	that	 'You	have	failed',	but	cutting	off	the
leg?	This	is	too	much,	this	is	too	rude."
...	 But	 the	 threat	 did	 frighten	 the	 scholar	 out	 of	 his	 wits,	 so	 to	 speak.	 He
completely	concentrated	upon	the	syllable	itself,	NOW	...
Because	 it	 was	 dangerous.	 This	 man	 can	 do	 something,	 and	 he	 looked
dangerous.	Zen	Masters	look	dangerous.
I	have	heard	about	one	Zen	seeker	who	was	working	and	working	upon	his	koan
and	was	 not	 able	 to	 solve	 it	 and	was	 becoming	 very	much	 afraid	 to	 go	 to	 his
Master	 because	 the	Master	 would	 beat	 him,	 throw	 him,	 jump	 upon	 him,	 and
would	do	anything,	whatsoever	happened	in	that	moment.	So	he	was	becoming
so	afraid,	so	much	afraid	that	he	was	avoiding	going	to	him.	And	that	night	he
received	a	message	that	"Tomorrow	morning	you	have	to	come,"	so	he	was	very
much	 afraid.	He	 tried	 hard	 on	 his	 koan	 so	 that	 some	 answer	would	 come	 that
appealed	to	him,	to	this	madman,	"...	otherwise	he	will	beat	me	again."	He	could
not	sleep.	He	meditated,	meditated,	and	he	was	feeling	very	tired	and	exhausted.
So,	sitting	in	meditation,	just	for	a	moment	he	fell	asleep,	and	in	sleep,	it	is	said,
he	 saw	 in	 a	 dream	 Bodhidharma,	 the	 archpriest,	 the	 patriarch,	 the	 original
patriarch,	the	Master	of	all	Zen	Masters.	And	Bodhidharma	is	really	dangerous
looking;	 his	 eyes	 are	 so	 big.	 And	 Bodhidharma	 looked	 into	 the	 face	 of	 this
young	 seeker,	 and	 he	 became	 so	 afraid	 of	 Bodhidharma's	 eyes	 that,	 the	 story
says,	he	awoke	out	of	fear	--	and	not	only	out	of	the	ordinary	sleep,	but	from	the
sleep	of	lives	together.	He	awoke.	Out	of	fear	he	became	enlightened.	The	face
of	Bodhidharma	and	his	eyes!
So	this	scholar	was	very	much	frightened;	out	of	his	wits	he	was.
...	He	completely	concentrated	upon	the	syllable	 itself,	 trying	 to	puzzle	out	 the
meaning,	 and	 in	 the	 process	 of	 concentration	 itself	 achieved	 the	 result.	 The
question	had	a	nonanalytic	effect,	and	a	nonverbal	result	as	well.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
84
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
Those	who	are	not	privy	to	the	extreme	concentration	brought	about	by	the	Zen
Master's	exercise,	or	the	scholar's	reply,	might	not	realize	that	many	of	the	most
important	 and	 compelling	 questions	 that	 face	 us	 cannot	 be	 looked	 up	 in	 an
encyclopedia	or	dictionary.	There	is	no	place	where	the	meaning	of	one's	life	is
written	up.
There	is	no	book,	no	scripture,	no	bible	which	has	the	answer	for	your	life.	There
is	nobody	who	can	give	you	the	answer.	In	fact	there	is	no	answer;	there	is	only
an	 understanding.	 By	 understanding,	 the	 question	 disappears.	 There	 is	 no
answer.
And	 the	 goal-oriented	 man	 seeks	 the	 answer,	 so	 he	 will	 come	 upon	 many
answers	and	will	hang	around	one	answer	for	a	few	days,	few	months,	few	years,
sometimes	a	few	lives,	and	then	will	get	fed	up	and	will	move	to	another	answer.
But	 that	 is	a	 long	procession;	one	can	go	on	ad	 infinitum,	 from	one	answer	 to
another	answer.
The	real	path	is	not	of	finding	an	answer,	but	of	finding	an	understanding.	In	the
light	 of	 understanding,	 the	 question	 disappears.	 And	 suddenly	 YOU	 are	 the
answer!	Suddenly	 life	 itself	 is	 the	answer!	The	way	 is	 the	goal,	 the	samsara	 is
nirvana.
I	 have	 heard	 a	 very	 beautiful	 anecdote.	 You	 may	 have	 heard	 it.	 It	 has	 many
versions,	 but	 this	 version	 I	 don't	 think	 you	 will	 have	 heard	 before:	 Six	 blind
medical	 students	 sat	 by	 the	 gate	 of	 a	 great	 city	 as	 an	 elephant	was	 led	 slowly
past.	Inspired	by	scientific	curiosity	of	the	highest	degree,	the	six	blind	students
rushed	 forward	 to	 palpate	 the	 great	 beast	 and	 to	 determine	 the	 nature	 of	 his
being.	The	first	man's	hands	fell	upon	the	elephant's	 tusks.	"Ah,"	said	he,	"this
creature	is	a	thing	of	bones;	they	even	protrude	through	his	skin."	Later	on,	years
having	past,	this	man	became	an	orthopedist.
At	 the	 same	 time	 the	 second	blind	medical	 student	 seized	 the	 elephant's	 trunk
and	identified	its	function.	"What	a	nose!"	he	exclaimed.	"Surely	this	is	the	most
important	part	of	the	animal."	Accordingly,	he	became	a	rhinologist.
The	 third	 man	 chanced	 upon	 the	 elephant's	 great	 flapping	 ear	 and	 came	 to	 a
similar	 conclusion:	 for	 him	 the	 ear	was	 everything,	 so	 he,	 in	 time,	 became	 an
otologist.
The	fourth	rested	his	hands	on	the	huge	chest	and	abdomen	of	the	elephant.	"The
contents	 of	 this	 barrel	 must	 be	 enormous,"	 he	 thought,	 "and	 the	 pathological
derangements	 infinite	 in	 number	 and	 variety."	 Nothing	 would	 do	 but	 that	 he
would	become	an	internist.
One	of	the	blind	men	caught	hold	of	the	elephant's	tail.	"This,"	he	said,	"would
appear	 to	be	a	useless	appendage.	 It	might	 even	be	a	 source	of	 trouble.	Better
take	it	off."	The	blind	man	became	a	surgeon.
But	 the	last	of	 the	six	did	not	depend	upon	the	sense	of	 touch.	Instead	he	only
listened.	He	had	heard	the	elephant	approaching,	the	rattle	of	the	chains,	and	the
shouts	of	the	keepers.	It	may	be	that	he	heard	the	elephant	heaving	a	great	sigh
as	he	trudged	along.	"Where	is	the	creature	going?"	he	asked.	No	one	answered.
"Where	did	he	come	from?"	he	asked.	No	one	knew.	Then	 this	man	fell	 into	a
deep	 reverie.	 What	 was	 in	 the	 elephant's	 mind,	 he	 wondered,	 in	 having	 left
wherever	he	was	and	having	come	to	this	great	city?	Why	does	he	submit	to	the
indignities	 of	 our	 curiosity	 and	 the	 slavery	 of	 chains?	 And	 while	 he	 was
wondering	how	to	find	out	the	answers	to	these	questions	the	elephant	was	gone.
This	man	became	a	psychiatrist.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
85
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
The	other	students	were	disgusted	at	this	impracticality.	They	turned	their	backs
upon	their	visionary	companion.	What	difference	does	it	make,	said	they,	what
the	 elephant's	 purpose	may	be?	And	his	 chains	 --	 they	 constitute	 a	 legal	 not	 a
medical	problem.	The	important	thing	is	to	recognize	the	animal's	structure.
Then	 they	 fell	 to	 quarreling	 among	 themselves	 as	 to	 whether	 the	 elephant's
structure	was	 primarily	 that	 of	 a	 nose	 or	 that	 of	 an	 ear	 or	 that	 of	 a	 tail.	 And
although	they	all	differed	flatly	from	one	another	on	these	points,	they	all	agreed
that	the	psychiatrist	was	a	fool.
People	look	into	books,	find	out	fragments,	make	philosophies	out	of	fragments.
That's	 how	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 evolved,	 and	 all	 the	 theologies	 and	 all	 the
philosophies.	They	are	all	fragmentary.
The	whole	vision	cannot	be	contained	in	any	book,	and	the	whole	vision	cannot
be	 contained	 in	 any	 creed.	 Then	 where	 to	 find	 the	 whole	 vision?	 The	 whole
vision	can	be	 found	only	when	you	drop	 the	mind	and	 look	 into	 the	 reality	of
things	without	thinking	about	them.
It	is	not	a	question	of	contemplation,	not	a	question	of	thinking,	not	a	question	of
logical	 thinking.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 any	 syllogism.	 You	 have	 to	 just	 look
silently,	innocently,	into	that	which	is	already	herenow.	That	is	revelation.
And	not	that	you	come	upon	a	truth.	Suddenly	you	find	the	seeker	is	the	sought
and	 the	 observer	 is	 the	 observed,	 that	 the	 objective	 and	 the	 subjective	 are	 not
two,	that	they	were	looking	like	two	because	the	mind	was	standing	in	between
and	was	making	a	boundary.	Now	the	mind	has	disappeared,	 the	boundary	has
disappeared;	there	is	only	oneness,	one	whole.
Now	 the	 second	way.	 The	 second	way	 is	 the	 way	 I	 call	 source-oriented.	 The
source	 is	 already	 here,	 the	 goal	 is	 not.	 The	 source	 is	 within	 you,	 the	 goal	 is
without.	 The	 goal	 will	 be	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future,	 the	 source	 is	 already
nourishing	 you.	 It	 is	 hidden	 in	 you;	 otherwise	 you	 would	 not	 be	 alive.	 It	 is
flowing	in	you.	The	source	is	present,	the	goal	is	absent.	To	look	for	the	absent	is
to	look	in	a	wrong	way.	To	look	into	the	present	and	for	the	present	is	to	look	in
the	right	way.
The	 source-oriented	 person	 is	 never	 a	 perfectionist,	 cannot	 be.	 The	 source-
oriented	 person	 is	 a	 holist,	 a	 totalist.	He	 has	 no	 idea	 of	 perfection.	He	 simply
lives	moment	 to	moment	 in	 its	 totality.	He	 lives	 a	 very	 unpredictable	 life.	He
lives	 a	 life	 of	wonder	 and	 surprise.	 You	 cannot	 predict	 him.	 Even	 he	 himself
cannot	predict	what	he	is	going	to	do	the	next	moment.	Who	knows?	The	next
moment	will	come	and	we	will	see.	The	next	moment	will	bring	its	own	reality,
and	 the	 next	 moment	 will	 create	 its	 own	 response.	 He	 lives	 responsively,
responding.
He	 is	 always	 alert	 to	 respond	 to	 every	 situation,	 whatsoever,	 but	 he	 has	 no
prefixed	idea	how	to	react,	how	to	respond,	what	to	do.	He	is	alert.	The	situation
arises;	he	responds.	He	responds	out	of	his	alertness,	but	he	never	responds	out
of	any	answers	that	he	has	gathered	in	the	past.	His	each	moment	is	total.
Remember,	I	am	not	saying	"perfect".	His	each	moment	is	TOTAL.	What	is	the
difference?	 A	 perfect	 man,	 maybe,	 will	 never	 be	 angry.	 That	 is	 the	 idea	 of	 a
perfect	man:	he	will	never	be	angry.	But	a	total	man	can	be	angry.	You	can	only
be	promised	one	thing,	that	he	will	be	totally	angry.	It	cannot	be	said	he	will	not
be	angry.	Only	one	thing	can	be	said,	that	he	will	be	totally	angry;	if	ever	he	is
angry	he	will	be	totally	angry.
It	happened	a	scholar	came	to	Raman	Maharshi,	and	he	was	arguing	and	arguing
and	 arguing;	 and	 nobody	 had	 seen	Raman	Maharshi	 ever	 being	 angry.	Raman
was	saying	again	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
86
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
and	again,	"I	am	not	a	philosopher,	and	I	don't	believe	in	proofs	and	arguments,
and	I	don't	know	any	logic.	I	say	'God	is'	because	I	have	experienced	it	so."	But
the	 scholar	 wouldn't	 listen.	 Then	 suddenly	 the	 disciples	 saw	 something	 they
could	 not	 believe.	 Raman	 Maharshi	 jumped,	 with	 his	 staff	 in	 his	 hand,	 and
rushed	 after	 that	 scholar.	And	 the	 scholar	 ran	 away;	 he	 also	 could	 not	 believe
that	this	man	would	do	such	a	thing.	He	chased	him	out,	came	back	laughing,	sat
on	his	couch,	and	forgot	all	about	it.
Now,	this	is	a	whole	man.	He	is	not	perfect	according	to	your	idea	of	perfection,
but	 he	 is	whole.	 Yes,	 sometimes	 anger	may	 be	 needed:	 that	may	 be	 the	 right
response.	So	one	never	knows.	Even	he	himself	would	have	been	surprised	by	it.
When	he	came	back	after	 chasing	 the	man	out	he	must	have	been	 laughing	at
himself	too.	"So	this	is	possible,"	he	must	have	laughed.	He	must	have	enjoyed
the	whole	thing;	he	must	have	chuckled.
A	whole	man	 lives	moment	 to	moment,	not	knowing	what	 is	going	 to	happen.
His	life	has	no	script.	His	life	is	not	a	drama;	he	has	no	script.	Nothing	is	decided
beforehand.	 Each	 moment	 opens	 a	 door,	 and	 he	 responds	 accordingly.	 He
responds	with	the	totality	of	his	being.
I	can	see	Raman	TOTALLY	angry	in	that	moment.	And	that	is	the	beauty	of	it,
that	is	the	innocence	of	it.
The	 whole	 man	 is	 spontaneous,	 natural.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 hypocrite,	 he	 is	 not
pretending	anything.	He	 is	open,	vulnerable,	available.	He	 is	childlike,	 simple,
and	tremendously	beautiful.
This	is	the	way	of	Zen.	It	is	the	most	unique	phenomenon	in	the	whole	world	of
religions.
Zen	is	the	highest	peak	that	religion	has	attained	yet.	It	is	the	sanest	religion.
Now	 this	 beautiful	 anecdote.	 It	 is	 simple,	 but	 now	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to
understand.
HAKUJU	SERVED	AS	A	DISTINGUISHED	LECTURER	AT	THE	TENDAI-
SECT
COLLEGE.
Hakuju	was	a	great	Zen	Master,	but	a	Zen	Master	continues	to	live	his	ordinary
life.
Somebody	once	asked	Bokuju,	another	great	Zen	Master,	"What	did	you	use	to
do	before	you	became	enlightened?"	He	said,	"I	used	to	cut	wood	for	my	Master,
and	carry	water	from	the	well."	Now	he	himself	had	become	the	Master.	And	the
inquirer	asked,	"And	now?	Now	what	do	you	do?"	He	said,	"I	chop	wood,	and
carry	 water	 for	 myself."	 And	 the	 man	 asked,	 "Then	 what	 is	 the	 difference?
Before	also	you	used	 to	chop	wood	and	carry	water,	 and	now	also	you	do	 the
same,	 so	 what	 is	 the	 difference?"	 Bokuju	 said,	 "Before,	 I	 used	 to	 do	 it
unconsciously.
Now	I	do	it	consciously."	The	quality	of	being	has	changed;	action	remains	the
same.
HAKUJU	SERVED	AS	A	DISTINGUISHED	LECTURER	AT	THE	TENDAI-
SECT
COLLEGE.	And	remember	that	Bokuju	was	in	a	simple	situation.	To	chop	wood
is	 easy,	 even	 after	 enlightenment	 it	 is	 easy,	 but	 to	 lecture	 in	 a	 college	 is	more
difficult.	 It	 is	 more	 difficult	 than	 chopping	 wood.	 But	 Hakuju	 continued;	 he
became	enlightened,	but	he	continued	the	way	he	was	doing.	He	became	famous
all	over	the	country,	but	he	continued,	he	remained	a	lecturer.
Zen	believes	that	the	ordinary	life	has	not	to	be	renounced.	The	ordinary	life	has
to	be	transformed	by	your	inner	understanding.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
87
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
Another	great	Zen	saying.	Another	great	Zen	Master	has	said,	"Before	I	came	to
my	Master,	rivers	were	rivers	and	mountains	were	mountains.	Then	my	Master
confused	me	 utterly;	 then	 rivers	 were	 no	more	 rivers	 and	mountains	 were	 no
more	 mountains.	 Then	 living	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 my	 Master,	 by	 and	 by	 the
confusion	 disappeared,	 the	 smoke	 disappeared,	 and	 one	 day	 again	 rivers	were
rivers	and	mountains	were	mountains."
Now,	what	 is	 the	 difference,	 because	 rivers	were	 rivers	 before	 and	mountains
were	mountains	before?	Now	 they	are	mountains	and	 they	are	 rivers	again,	 so
what	is	the	difference?	The	difference	is	not	in	the	outside.	The	difference	is	in
the	inside.	Before,	they	were	just	ordinary	mountains,	rivers;	now	they	have	an
extraordinary	quality.	That	quality	YOU	give	to	them,	you	pour	into	them.	Your
luminosity	makes	your	whole	existence	luminous.
A	man	is	not	what	he	does;	a	man	is	what	he	is.	So	the	emphasis	of	Zen	is	never
to	 change	 your	 actions;	 just	 transform	 your	 understanding,	 transform	 your
consciousness.	Bring	a	new	consciousness	into	existence.
AS	 BE	 WAS	 LECTURING	 WITH	 HIS	 CUSTOMARY	 ZEAL	 ON	 THE
CHINESE
CLASSICS	 ONE	 HOT	 SUMMERS	 AFTERNOON,	 BE	 NOTICED	 THAT	 A
FEW	OF	THE
STUDENTS	 WERE	 DOZING	 OFF	 HE	 STOPPED	 LECTURING	 IN
MIDSENTENCE	AND
SAID,	 "IT	 IS	A	HOT	AFTERNOON,	 ISN'T	 IT?	CAN'T	BLAME	YOU	FOR
GOING	TO
SLEEP.	MIND	IF	I	JOIN	YOU?"
Now,	a	perfectionist	will	not	be	able	to	do	it	at	all.	How	can	a	perfectionist	fall
asleep	before	his	students?	Howsoever	hot	the	summer	is,	and	he	may	be	feeling
sleepy,	 because	 the	 body	 is	 the	 body	 ...	Whether	 it	 belongs	 to	 an	 enlightened
person	 or	 to	 an	 unenlightened	 person	 doesn't	 make	 any	 difference:	 the	 body
follows	its	own	laws.	He	must	have	been	feeling	sleepy;	it	was	really	hot.	But	a
perfectionist	will	try	to	pretend.	A	holist,	a	totalist	will	not	pretend.
The	moment	 he	 felt	 sleep	was	 coming	 to	 him	 he	 stopped	 in	midsentence.	He
would	not	complete	even	the	sentence;	he	lives	moment	to	moment.	Even	to	wait
to	 complete	 the	 sentence	 is	 false.	Why	wait?	 He	 stopped	 in	midsentence	 and
asked	the	students,	"IT	IS	A	HOT
AFTERNOON,	ISN'T	IT?	CAN'T	BLAME	YOU	FOR	GOING	TO	SLEEP."
And	see	the	point.	A	perfectionist	will	always	be	blaming	everybody,	that	"You
are	wrong,"	that	"You	are	not	doing	this,"	that	"This	should	be	done	this	way."	A
perfectionist	is	continuously	condemning	everybody;	that	is	his	joy.	He	is	trying
to	put	everything	right	in	the	world.
It	 is	said	a	man,	must	have	been	a	perfectionist,	came	to	a	Zen	Master,	Rinzai,
and	the	man,	who	was	a	Christian,	said	to	Rinzai,	"In	our	scripture	it	is	written
that	God	created	 the	world	 in	six	days,	and	 then	on	 the	seventh	day	he	 rested.
But	what	sort	of	world?	I	have	been	asking	my	Christian	missionaries,	but	they
can't	answer,	so	I	have	come	to	you,	Master.	What	sort	of	world?	Such	an	ugly
world,	 so	 full	 of	 pain	 and	 misery.	 Full	 of	 imperfections!	 What	 a	 world	 God
created.	And	he	took	six	days!"	Rinzai	looked	at	the	man,	and	he	said,	"Do	you
think	you	can	improve	upon	it?"	The	man	was	a	little	puzzled,	but	still	he	said,
"Yes,	I	think	I	can."	So	Rinzai	shouted,	"Then	what	are	you	doing	here?	Why	are
you	waiting	and	wasting	time?	Improve!	How	many	days	will	you	take?"
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
88
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
The	perfectionist	will	find	fault	even	with	God.	"Why	did	he	create	this	world?
Why	did	he	create	tuberculosis	and	cancer?	And	why	did	he	create	poverty	and
richness,	 and	 why	 did	 he	 create	 this	 and	 that?	 Why?"	 A	 perfectionist
continuously	condemns;	that	is	his	joy.
If	this	Master	Hakuju	was	a	perfectionist,	he	would	have	shouted	at	the	students,
"What	 are	 you	 doing?	For	what	 have	 you	 come	 here?	You	 are	 falling	 asleep?
This	 is	 not	 the	 way	 of	 a	 seeker,	 not	 the	 way	 of	 a	 disciple,	 not	 the	 way	 of	 a
student."	 But	 rather	 than	 saying	 this,	 he	 says,	 "IT	 IS	 A	HOT	AFTERNOON,
ISN'T	IT?	CAN'T	BLAME	YOU	FOR	GOING	TO
SLEEP."	 He	 understands.	 The	 total	 man	 understands.	 He	 understands	 his
limitations;	 he	 understands	 everybody	 else's	 limitations.	 He	 never	 asks	 the
impossible.
"MIND	IF	I	JOIN	YOU?"	Really	beautiful.	Just	superb,	a	master	stroke.	"MIND
IF	I	JOIN
YOU?"	 He	 is	 asking	 their	 permission,	 because	 a	 few	 of	 them	 may	 be
perfectionists!	And	they	were.
WITH	 THIS,	 HAKUJU	 SHUT	 HIS	 TEXTBOOK,	 AND	 LEANING	 WELL
BACK	IN	HIS
CHAIR,	FELL	ASLEEP.
And	 not	 only	 that,	 when	 a	 really	 total	 man	 falls	 asleep,	 he	 snores	 too:	 THE
CLASS	WAS	DUMBFOUNDED,	AND	THOSE	WHO	BAD	BEEN	DOZING
WERE	AWAKENED	BY	HIS	SNORES.
Must	have	been	a	man	of	childlike	qualities.	It	is	very	difficult	to	fall	asleep	so
easily,	and	to	snore.	And	to	snore	before	one's	own	students?	Must	have	been	a
very	egoless	person.
THE	CLASS	WAS	DUMBFOUNDED	...	They	could	not	believe	it,	because	the
man	 was	 known	 as	 an	 enlightened	 Master,	 all	 over	 the	 country.	 Even	 the
emperor	used	 to	come	 to	see	him.	And	 this	enlightened	man	has	 fallen	asleep,
cannot	keep	himself	 awake,	 is	 as	ordinary	 as	 any	ordinary	person?	They	were
dumbfounded.
And	when	they	heard	him	snoring,	it	was	unbelievable.	Who	has	ever	heard	of	a
Buddha	snoring?	But	a	real	Buddha	will	not	be	worried.	If	he	wants	to	snore,	he
will	snore.	If	he	feels	like	snoring,	he	will	snore.	He	will	not	bother	what	you	say
about	him.
...	 AND	THOSE	WHO	BAD	BEEN	DOZING	WERE	AWAKENED	BY	HIS
SNORES.
ALL	SAT	UP	IN	THEIR	SEATS	...
Now	their	sleep	disappeared.
...	AND	WAITED	FOR	THE	MASTER	TO	AWAKEN.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
89
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
This	you	can	find	only	in	the	Zen	literature,	this	possibility	of	being	so	human,
of	being	so	imperfect	and	yet	unworried	about	it.	A	tremendous	acceptance	of	all
that	is,	of	sleep,	of	snoring.	No	effort	to	hide	yourself	behind	any	facade.
Once	 there	 was	 a	 famous	 Buddhist	 layman	 named	 Busol.	 He	 was	 a	 deeply
enlightened	 man;	 his	 wife	 too	 was	 enlightened,	 and	 so	 were	 his	 son	 and
daughter.	A	man	came	up	to	Busol	one	day	and	asked,	"Is	Zen	difficult	or	not?"
Busol	said,	"Oh,	it	is	very	difficult.	It	is	like	taking	a	stick	and	trying	to	hit	the
moon."
The	man	was	puzzled	and	began	to	think.	"If	Zen	is	so	difficult,	how	did	Busol's
wife	 attain	 enlightenment?"	So	 he	went	 and	 asked	her	 the	 same	question.	 She
said,	"It	is	the	easiest	thing	in	the	world.	It	is	just	like	touching	your	nose	when
you	wash	your	face	in	the	morning."
By	now	the	man	was	thoroughly	confused.	"I	don't	understand.	Is	Zen	easy?	Is	it
difficult?
Who	is	right?"	So	he	asked	their	son.	The	son	said,	"Zen	is	not	difficult	and	not
easy.	On	the	tips	of	a	hundred	blades	of	grass	is	the	Buddha's	meaning."
"Not	difficult?	Not	easy?	What	is	it	then?"	So	the	man	went	to	the	daughter	and
asked	her.
"Your	father,	your	mother,	and	your	brother	all	gave	me	different	answers.	Who
is	right?"	She	said,	"If	you	make	it	difficult,	it	is	difficult.	If	you	make	it	easy,	it
is	easy.	But	if	you	don't	think,	the	truth	is	just	as	it	is."
If	you	make	it	difficult,	it	is	difficult.	If	you	make	it	easy,	it	is	easy.	But	if	you
don't	 think,	 the	 truth	 is	 just	 as	 it	 is.	 THE	 TRUTH	 IS	 JUST	 AS	 IT	 is.	 This
suchness,	this	total	acceptance,	this	total	surrender	to	truth	--	no	pretensions,	no
hypocrisies,	no	effort	to	hide	yourself	behind	screens,	no	effort	to	show	yourself
as	more	than	the	life-size	--	this	authenticity	is	Zen.	And	this	authenticity	is	the
door	to	the	first	principle.
Be	spontaneous,	be	natural,	and	you	have	already	arrived.
I	was	reading	a	few	lines	of	Ogden	Nash:
The	centipede	was	happy	quite,	Until	a	toad	in	fun	Said:	"Pray,	which	leg	goes
after	which?"	This	worked	his	mind	to	such	a	pitch,	He	lay	distracted	in	a	ditch,
Considering	how	to	run.
If	you	ask	a	centipede	...	A	centipede	has	a	hundred	legs.
The	centipede	was	happy	quite,	Until	a	 toad	 in	 fun	Said:	Pray,	which	 leg	goes
after	which?"	This	worked	his	mind	to	such	a	pitch,	He	lay	distracted	in	a	ditch,
Considering	how	to	run.
Now	it	becomes	impossible.	The	moment	you	think,	things	become	impossible.
If	you	don't	think,	the	truth	is	as	it	is.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
90
chapter	5	-	Beyond	the	Prism	of	the	Mind
The	last	parable:
The	Buddha	 sprang	 from	 the	 right	 side	 of	 his	mother	 and	 took	 seven	 steps	 in
each	of	the	four	directions.	He	then	looked	once	each	way,	pointed	one	finger	to
the	sky,	and	touched	the	ground	with	his	other	hand.	He	said,	"In	the	sky	above
and	the	sky	below,	only	I	am	holy."
This	is	a	very	beautiful	story.	When	Buddha	was	born,	the	mother	was	standing
under	a	tree.	He	was	born	while	the	mother	was	standing,	and	he	was	born	in	a
very	miraculous	way.
He	suddenly	sprang	from	his	mother's	side,	stood	on	the	ground,	walked	seven
feet,	put	one	hand	towards	the	sky	and	touched	the	earth	with	the	other	hand,	and
said,	"In	the	sky	above	and	the	sky	below,	only	I	am	holy."
Zen	people	have	laughed	about	this	story	very	much.	If	they	were	Christian	they
would	have	tried	to	prove	it,	that	it	has	to	be	real,	historical.	But	they	don't	take
things	seriously.
One	Zen	Master,	Un-mun,	said	...
Somebody	 asked	 Un-mun,	 "What	 do	 you	 say	 about	 this	 nonsense	 story?"	 He
said,	 "On	 the	 Buddha's	 birthday,	 I	 was	 there,	 present."	 Un-mun	 present?	 The
inquirer	was	surprised.
Un-mun	 said,	 "As	 he	 sprang	 from	 the	 side	 of	 his	mother,	 I	 hit	 him	 and	 killed
him,	and	fed	him	to	a	hungry	dog.	The	whole	world	was	at	peace."
The	 inquirer	 was	 very	 much	 puzzled,	 so	 he	 went	 to	 another	 Master,	 saying,
"What	do	you	say?	The	story	 is	nonsense,	 and	Un-mun's	answer	 is	 even	more
nonsense;	 he	 says,	 'I	was	 present.	Not	 only	 present,	 I	 killed	Buddha	 then	 and
there,	and	fed	him	to	a	hungry	dog,	and	the	whole	world	has	been	at	peace	since
then.'"
Otherwise	 Buddha	 would	 have	 created	 trouble	 for	 people.	 Zen	 Masters	 say,
"Buddha,	why	were	you	born?	You	created	so	much	trouble	for	people,	because
everybody	 is	 trying	 to	meditate	 since	you	came.	Had	you	not	come,	 the	world
would	have	been	at	peace.	Nobody	would	have	been	meditating,	nobody	would
have	been	into	this	trip	of	nirvana.	Why	did	you	come?"	That	is	the	meaning	of
Un-mun	when	he	says,	"I	killed	him	and	fed	him	to	a	hungry	dog,	and	since	then
the	world	has	been	at	peace."
The	inquirer	went	to	another	Master,	Lin-chi.
"What	the	Buddha	said	on	his	birthday	is	wrong,"	said	Lin-chi,	"so	I	will	hit	him
thirty	times.	And	what	Zen	Master	Un-mun	said	is	also	wrong,	so	I	will	hit	him
thirty	times.	And	what	I	just	said	is	wrong,	so	I	will	hit	myself	thirty	times."
In	fact,	the	moment	you	say	something	about	the	first	principle,	you	go	wrong.
Nothing	can	be	 said	about	 the	 first	principle.	Yes,	 it	 can	be	experienced.	Drop
the	mind,	and	experience	it.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
91
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
6
The	Irrational	Rationalist
16	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Question
OSHO,	DR.	ABRAHAM	KOVOOR	HAS	ATTACKED	YOU	IN	AN	ARTICLE
PUBLISHED	 BY	 THE	 WEEKLY	 CURRENT.	 WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 HAVE	 TO
SAY	ABOUT
IT?
I	 enjoyed	 it.	 It	 was	 sheer	 delight.	 It	 was	 delicious.	 It	 was	 simply	 far	 out.	 I
enjoyed	it	because	nobody	else	has	complimented	me	so	highly	as	he	has	done.	I
could	 not	 believe	 that	 somebody	 would	 praise	 me	 so	 highly.	 Listen	 to	 his
compliments.
First	compliment:	he	says	Rajneesh	is	crazy.	True,	sir.	I	agree	absolutely.	In	fact,
there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 God	 unless	 you	 are	 utterly	 crazy.	 Only	 those	 who	 are
courageous	enough	to	go	beyond	the	boundaries	of	so-called	sanity	attain.	Only
those	who	are	 ready	 to	put	 their	minds	aside,	only	 those	who	are	 ready	 to	 cut
their	heads	off	completely,	they	attain.	I	am	crazy.	So	was	Buddha,	so	was	Jesus.
There	are	books	written	against	Jesus	in	which	people	have	tried	to	prove	that	he
was	mad.
And	of	course	when	Mahavir	was	walking	on	the	streets,	naked,	ecstatic,	people
must	have	thought	him	mad.	He	was	driven	out	of	towns,	cities;	shelter	was	not
given	to	him.	Down	the	centuries	the	man	of	God	has	always	been	thought	of	as
mad.	The	reason	is	simple:	if	he	is	sane	then	you	are	all	insane,	then	the	majority
is	 insane.	The	majority	cannot	accept	the	fact.	It	 is	easier,	more	comfortable	to
call	him	insane.
But	 remember	 something	 George	 Bernard	 Shaw	 once	 said.	 Somebody	 was
saying,
"Millions	of	people	believe	this.	How	can	they	be	wrong?"	And	George	Bernard
Shaw	said,
"If	millions	of	people	believe	it,	how	can	they	be	right?"	Millions	of	people	and
being	in	the	right?	--	impossible.	The	greater	the	crowd,	the	less	is	the	possibility
of	truth.
Truth	has	been	 available	 to	only	 a	 few	 individuals.	Why?	Because	only	 a	 few
dare	 to	 enter	 into	 that	 madness.	 Only	 a	 few	 dare	 to	 put	 their	 reasoning,
cunningness,	argument	aside.	Life	is	not	logic;	it	goes	beyond	it.
And	not	only	the	mystics	say	so;	now	even	the	physicists	--	who	are	not	mystics
at	all	--
what	they	are	saying	is	incredible.	Let	me	quote	a	few	things.	The	physicists	are
now	 saying	 the	 same	old	nonsense	 as	 the	mystics	 used	 to	 in	 the	 ancient	 days.
The	 so-called	 rationalists	 have	 always	 called	 those	 mystics	 mad.	 Certainly
whatsoever	 they	 say	 does	 not	 follow	 ordinary	 reason;	 it	 is	 something	 beyond.
Now	listen	to	what	physicists	are	saying;	they	speak	of	a	universe	which	is	finite
but	unconfined.	They	say	the	universe	is	expanding,	but	expanding	into	nothing.
They	 also	 tell	 us	 that	 electrons	 are	 capable	 of	 passing	 through	 space	 without
make	use	of	the	term	"quark"	to	describe	a	particle	of	which	taking	any	time	to
do	it.	They	are	now	even	proposing	to	the	essential	property	is	that	when	three	of
them	combine,	their	collective	weight	is	less	than	that	of	any	of	them	by	itself,
although	nothing	has	been	lost	by	their	conjunction.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
92
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
It	 is	 absurd.	 It	 cannot	 be	 so	 according	 to	 ordinary	 logic.	 But	 if	 you	 ask	 the
physicist	he	says,	"What	can	we	do?	We	are	helpless.	It	is	so.	We	cannot	change
the	 reality.	 Just	 to	 adjust	 to	 your	 logic,	we	 cannot	 change	 the	 reality.	And	 the
reality	does	not	believe	in	your	Aristotles.
It	 does	 not	 suffer	 from	Aristotle-itis.	 It	 does	 not	 bother	 about	what	 your	 logic
says;	it	goes	on	its	own	way."	So	the	physicists	say,	"What	can	we	do?	Change
your	logic.	If	it	looks	mad,	maybe	the	universe	is	mad."
It	looks	mad,	but	the	mystics	have	always	said	so.	In	the	Upanishads	it	is	said,
"Take	 the	 whole	 out	 of	 the	 whole,	 and	 the	 whole	 remains	 behind."	 Now,	 Dr.
Abraham	Kovoor	will	call	this	man	mad.	If	you	take	the	whole	out	of	the	whole,
nothing	 remains	 behind!	 This	 is	 ordinary	 mathematics	 and	 logic.	 But	 the
Upanishads	 say,	 "You	 take	 the	 whole	 out	 of	 the	 whole,	 and	 the	 whole	 still
remains	 behind.	You	 go	 on	 taking	 as	many	wholes	 as	 you	want,	 and	 still	 the
whole	remains	behind."	The	mystics	have	also	stumbled	upon	 the	 illogicalness
of	reality.
Now,	what	do	you	say	about	this	"quark"?	It	fits	absolutely	with	the	Upanishadic
idea.	It	does	not	fit	with	Aristotle.	Bad	for	poor	Aristotle!	And	bad	for	poor	Dr.
Abraham	Kovoor!
I	am	crazy.	I	have	seen	the	reality	which	does	not	fit	with	the	mind.	In	fact,	the
mind	 is	 the	only	barrier	 to	reality.	 It	does	not	allow	you	to	see	 the	reality.	The
more	you	are	confined	in	the	mind,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	knowing.	And	if
you	insist	that	you	will	know	only	through	the	mind,	then	you	will	never	know.
The	mind	 is	 very	 ordinary.	 It	 is	 good	 for	 day-to-day	 use,	 but	 to	 penetrate	 the
infinite,	to	penetrate	the	eternal,	to	penetrate	that	which	is	--	the	ultimate	mystery
--	 the	 mind	 is	 just	 as	 futile	 as	 if	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 empty	 the	 ocean	 with	 a
teaspoon.	It	is	just	irrelevant.
The	reality	is	irrational,	the	reality	is	nonsensical,	the	reality	is	absurd.
Now,	Abraham	Kovoor	can	be	against	the	mystics,	but	what	will	he	do	against
the	physicist?	And	why	have	 they	both	come	 to	 the	 same	conclusion?	Science
has	penetrated	into	reality	from	a	different	door,	but	the	reality	is	the	same.	So
have	done	 the	mystics:	 they	have	entered	 from	a	different	door,	 but	 they	have
entered	into	the	same	space.
Now	scientists	say	the	universe	is	expanding.	Into	what?	Because	when	we	say
"the	universe,"	we	include	everything	that	is.	When	we	say	"universe"	we	mean
the	whole,	 the	 total.	Now	you	say	 the	universe	 is	expanding.	 Into	what?	There
cannot	 be	 anything	 outside	 the	 universe.	 We	 have	 included,	 by	 the	 very
definition	of	 the	word	"universe,"	 that	all	 is	 in	 it.	So	nothing	 is	outside	 it.	 Into
what	is	the	universe	expanding?	Even	if	you	say	"into	nothingness,"
then	 the	nothingness	 is	outside	 the	universe.	Then	 the	nothingness	 is	very	 real
into	 which	 the	 universe	 can	 expand.	 Then	 the	 nothingness	 is	 not	 just
nothingness.	Then	you	have	not	decided	rightly	what	the	universe	is.
This	 concept	 of	 an	 expanding	universe	 is	 crazy,	 but	 that	 is	what	mystics	 have
been	saying	down	the	ages.	Hindus	have	chosen	the	word	"Brahman";	Brahman
means	"that	which	goes	on	expanding".
Now,	Abraham	Kovoor	says	that	he	believes	only	in	something	which	is	proved
objectively.	 God	 is	 not	 proved	 objectively.	 What	 is	 proved	 objectively?	 The
electron	 is	 proved?	 The	 neutron	 is	 proved?	 The	 proton	 is	 proved?	 What	 is
proved	 objectively?	 Nobody	 has	 yet	 seen	 electrons,	 nobody	 has	 yet	 seen
neutrons,	nobody	has	yet	seen	protons,	but	the	scientists	say	they	are.	If	nobody
has	seen	them,	nobody	has	looked	at	them,	nobody	has	observed	them	as	objects,
then	why	do	you	say	they	are?	Scientists	say,	"Because	we	can	see	Osho	-	The
First	Principle
93
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
the	effect.	We	cannot	see	 them,	but	we	can	see	 their	effect."	The	same	say	 the
mystics:	"God	is	not	observed	objectively,	but	we	can	see	the	effect."
Can't	 you	 see	 the	 universe	 running	 so	 intelligently?	Can't	 you	 see	 tremendous
intelligence	permeating	the	whole?
And	it	 is	not	only	 the	mystics	who	say	 the	universe	 is	 full	of	 intelligence.	Just
the	other	day	I	was	reading	and	I	came	across	one	of	Albert	Einstein's	quotes.	He
says,	"The	scientist's	religious	feeling	takes	the	form	of	a	rapturous	amazement
at	 the	 harmony	 of	 the	 natural	 law	 which	 reveals	 an	 intelligence	 of	 such
superiority	 that	 compared	 with	 it,	 all	 the	 systematic	 thinking	 and	 acting	 of
human	beings	is	an	utterly	insignificant	reflection."
"Intelligence	of	such	superiority"!	And	this	is	not	Jakob	Bohme,	Ramkrishna,	or
Rajneesh.
This	 is	 Albert	 Einstein	 saying	 so.	 Intelligence	 of	 such	 superiority	 that	 human
intelligence	 is	 reduced	 to	 utterly	 insignificant	 status!	 The	 world	 is	 running	 in
such	a	deep	harmony;	that	harmony	shows	that	there	is	a	unity	in	it,	that	it	is	not
a	dead	universe,	that	it	is	not	a	"stupid"
universe,	that	it	is	intelligent.
Physics	has	become	metaphysics	again.	Physicists	even	talk	about	atoms	having
free	will.
Albert	Einstein	has	said	that	no	event	can	be	postulated	without	the	presence	of	a
witnessing	observer.	And	Eddington	says:	"Religion	first	became	possible	for	a
reasonable	scientific	man	about	 the	year	1927."	But	Dr.	Kovoor	seems	to	have
not	lived	since	then!	Eddington	also	says:
"We	begin	to	suspect	that	the	stuff	of	the	world	is	mind-stuff.	The	universe	looks
more	like	a	thought	than	like	a	thing."	And	that	is	what	I	mean	when	I	say	that
there	 is	 intelligence,	 great	 intelligence	 in	 existence	 or	 God.	 Recently	 a	 new
branch	of	science,	molecular	biology,	has	conclusively	proved	that	the	"matter"
of	organic	life,	our	very	flesh,	really	is	mind-stuff.
Eddington,	Jeans,	Einstein,	Schrodinger	all	agree	 in	 this.	But	 the	problem	with
the	learned	Dr.
Kovoor	is	that	he	goes	on	fighting	against	out-of-date	religion	with	the	aid	of	his
out-of-date,	so-called	science!
You	can	ask	what	is	the	purpose	of	this	intelligent	universe.	The	scientist	David
Foster	says:	"To	become	more	 intelligent."	 I	 love	 this	answer.	This	 is	what	 the
mystics	have	always	been	propounding.	From	unawareness	to	awareness	...	from
unintelligence	to	intelligence	...
there	 is	 the	 way	 and	 there	 is	 the	 goal.	 The	 Upanishads	 say:	 "TAMSOMA
JYOTINGAMAY"
--	"O	Master	of	the	Universe,	take	me	from	darkness	to	light."
What	 do	 we	 mean	 when	 we	 say	 "God	 is"?	 We	 only	 mean	 that	 the	 world	 is
intelligent,	nothing	else.
Now,	Dr.	Kovoor	has	a	very	childish	idea	of	God,	and	he	goes	on	demolishing
that	idea	--
and	without	ever	bothering	about	the	fact	 that	 that	 is	not	MY	idea.	It	seems	he
has	not	 read	 anything	of	whatsoever	 I	 have	been	 saying.	Through	his	 article	 I
could	not	gather	that	he	has	read	anything.	What	type	of	rationalist	is	he?	He	is
ready	to	condemn	me	and	criticize	me,	and	without	ever	having	read	anything.
At	 the	 most,	 it	 seems	 that	 he	 has	 read	 a	 few	 reports	 of	 journalists	 in	 the
newspapers	--	and	that	too	it	seems	was	many	years	ago	because	for	years	I	have
not	 been	 conducting	 meditation	 sessions	 and	 he	 says	 I	 conduct	 meditation
sessions	and	I	hypnotize	people!	He	is	not	aware	of	what	I	am	doing	here.	This
is	not	a	rationalistic	approach.
And	he	says	he	believes	only	that	which	is	proved	objectively.	In	the	article,	he
mentions	that	fifty	years	ago,	his	wife	conceived	a	son	from	him,	and	now	that
son	 is	 still	 alive	 and	 still	 healthy	 and	 "still	 growing	 and	 proliferating
independently	 as	 Dr.	 Aries	 Kovoor".	 Now,	 he	 says	 he	 believes	 only	 in	 the
objective	 truth.	The	mother	knows;	 the	father	only	believes.	The	son	 is	Osho	-
The	First	Principle
94
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
never	an	objective	fact	for	the	father.	Dr.	Kovoor's	wife	may	know	to	whom	the
son	 belongs,	 but	 not	Dr.	Kovoor.	Dr.	Kovoor,	 you	may	 be	misguided	 by	 your
wife!	And	women	are	very	strange	creatures.	What	objective	proof	have	you	that
this	 is	your	 son?	There	 is	no	possibility	of	any	objective	proof.	You	 trust,	you
believe.
God	 cannot	 be	 proved	 objectively,	 that's	 true.	 Nobody	 is	 trying	 to	 prove	 him
objectively.
In	 fact,	 if	 God	 is	 proved	 objectively,	 he	will	 be	 no	 longer	God.	 Then	 he	will
become	a	thing.
Then	 you	 can	 dissect	 God	 in	 your	 lab,	 you	 can	 dissect	 God	 in	 the	 scientist's
laboratory.	You	can	analyze;	then	it	will	not	be	God	at	all.
We	are	not	saying	that	God	exists	as	a	person;	at	least,	I	have	never	said	so.
Now,	 he	 goes	 on	 saying	 that	 "Rajneesh	 holds	 the	 foolish	 view	 that	 through
meditation	man	can	'feel	the	very	core	of	existence'."	If	this	is	the	foolish	view,
then	Buddha	 is	 a	 fool	 and	 so	 is	Krishna	and	 so	 is	Christ,	 so	 is	Lao	Tzu,	 so	 is
Chuang	Tzu,	so	is	Zarathustra,	and	so	is	Mohammed,	because	they	all	hold	the
view	 that	 through	 meditation	 you	 can	 come	 to	 the	 very	 core	 of	 existence	 --
because	 through	meditation	 you	 come	 to	 your	 innermost	 core	 of	 intelligence.
Through	meditation	you	become	so	silent	that	your	own	intelligence	is	revealed
to	you.	In	that	very	revelation,	God	is	revealed.
If	 I	 am	 intelligent	 in	 my	 innermost	 core,	 then	 the	 existence	 cannot	 be
unintelligent,	because	I	am	born	out	of	this	existence.	I	am	a	by-product	of	this
existence.	 If	 I	 am	 intelligent,	 then	 the	universe	has	 to	be	 intelligent;	otherwise
from	where	will	my	intelligence	come?	Dr.
Kovoor	 is	 an	 intelligent	 man.	 And	 that	 is	 enough	 proof	 that	 there	 is	 God.
Otherwise	from	where	comes	this	intelligence?
He	 goes	 on	 saying	 that	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 chemicals;	 life	 is	 "sustained	 by	 the
oxidatory	chemical	action	(oxidization)	...	This	chemical	action	is	maintained	by
my	 breathing	 and	 blood	 circulation.	 It	 is	 not	 in	 any	 way	 different	 from	 the
production	of	heat	and	light	energies	during	the	combustion	of	the	hydrocarbon
in	a	burning	candle."	But	a	burning	candle	has	no	intelligence.	He	says	there	is
no	difference	in	any	way	between	a	man's	life	and	a	burning	candle.	The	burning
candle	is	not	intelligent.
I	 tried	because	I	 thought	"maybe"	--	so	I	criticized	a	burning	candle	 last	night.
But	I	could	not	provoke	her.	I	succeeded	with	Dr.	Kovoor.	I	"pushed	his	button";
he	 is	 very	 angry.	 Can	 you	 push	 the	 button	 of	 a	 burning	 candle,	 and	 will	 the
burning	candle	criticize	you?	There	seems	to	be	a	little	difference,	Dr.	Kovoor.	It
can't	be	just	a	burning	candle.	You	got	hurt;	you	jumped	to	defend	yourself.	You
have	been	arguing	against	me;	you	have	been	calling	me	names	--	all	the	names
that	can	be	called.	He	says	Rajneesh	is	an	"ignoramus",	Rajneesh	is	a
"fool",	Rajneesh	is	"crazy",	Rajneesh	is	"mad",	Rajneesh	is	"absurd",	Rajneesh	--
so	on,	so	forth.	He	has	exhausted	the	whole	vocabulary.
Now,	I	tried	hard	with	a	burning	candle.	Nothing	happened.	The	burning	candle
continued	 to	 burn.	 There	 is	 some	 difference.	 The	 difference	 is	 that	 of
intelligence.
And	if	you	say	that	life	is	born	out	of	chemicals,	then	too	you	will	have	to	accept
that	 somehow	 the	 chemicals	 are	 carrying	 a	 latent	 intelligence.	Otherwise	 from
where	will	this	intelligence	come	in?	Out	of	the	blue?	From	where?
He	says	life	is	nothing	but	oxidization,	breath	--	breathing	in,	breathing	out.	But
can't	you	become	a	witness	to	your	breath?	Can't	you	sit	silently?	The	Buddhists
have	been	doing	 so	down	 the	 ages.	Can't	 you	 see	 the	breath	 coming	 in,	 going
out?	You	breathe	in;	you	can	watch.
You	breathe	out;	you	can	watch.	Between	the	two	there	is	a	gap;	you	can	watch
that	gap	too.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
95
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Certainly	 somebody	 else	 is	 there	 hidden	 behind	 the	 breathing	 process:	 a
witnessing	intelligence.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	to	know	the	witness,	to	know	the	SAKSHIN,
to	know	the	observer.
Even	if	life	comes	out	of	chemicals,	out	of	oxidization,	even	if	life	is	prolonged
by	oxidization,	one	thing	is	certain:	that	life	is	far	superior	to	these	things.	There
is	intelligence,	there	is	awareness.	This	awareness	cannot	be	objectively	proved,
because	 I	 cannot	 put	 this	 awareness	 on	 the	 table	 for	 your	 examination.	 This
awareness	is	subjectivity.	When	a	scientist	is	trying	to	analyze	something,	there
are	 two	 things:	 the	 thing	 that	 he	 is	 analyzing	 and	 the	 person	 who	 is	 hidden
behind	and	is	analyzing	it.	The	analyzed	is	not	the	analyzer;	and	the	analyzer	is
not	the	analyzed.	The	observer,	the	subjectivity,	is	there	standing	behind.
The	 object	 confronts	 you.	 That's	why	we	 call	 it	 "object"	 that	which	 confronts
you.	How	can	I	confront	myself?	I	will	always	remain	the	subjective.	Things	can
confront	me;	I	will	always	be	the	one	who	confronts	things.	I	cannot	be	a	thing.
Man	cannot	be	reduced	to	being	an	object.
And	 if	man's	 consciousness	cannot	be	 reduced	 to	being	an	object,	what	 to	 say
about	the	total	consciousness	of	existence?	That's	what	God	is.
He	says,	"I	am	an	atheist	because	I	do	not	believe	in	Gods,	and	I	do	not	believe
in	 Gods	 because	 it	 is	 not	 rational	 to	 believe	 something	 for	 which	 there	 is	 no
objective	 evidence."	There	 is	 no	objective	 evidence	 for	 the	 subjectivity.	That's
why	 we	 call	 it	 "subjectivity."	 By	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 it	 there	 is	 no	 objective
evidence,	but	inference	is	possible.	A	candle	is	a	candle.	A	candle	is	not	Kovoor.
And	 there	 IS	 a	 difference!	And	 it	 is	 not	 a	 slight	 difference.	 The	 difference	 is
great	 because	 the	 difference	 is	 that	 of	 subjectivity.	 The	 candle	 has	 no
subjectivity;	it	has	no	interiority.	The	candle	has	no	intention.	It	is	burning	there;
it	 has	 no	 innermost	 core.	 If	 Kovoor	 is	 standing	 there,	 he	 has	 an	 intention,	 an
interiority.	That	interiority,	that	intention,	that	subjectivity	cannot	be	objectified,
and	 if	we	cannot	objectify	a	single	man's	consciousness,	how	can	we	objectify
the	consciousness	of	the	total?	But	the	total	is	full	of	intelligence.
Watch	the	trees,	the	birds,	the	life	growing,	evolving.	Watch	the	stars	moving	...
In	such	absolute	harmony,	with	such	rhythm	--	it	cannot	be	just	accidental.
There	are	only	two	possibilities.	Either	the	existence	is	just	accidental	or	it	has
something	running	 in	 it	which	 joins	 it	 together.	We	call	 that	 thread	God	which
runs	into	everything	and	joins	and	keeps	the	whole	existence	together.	God	is	not
a	person,	is	not	a	thing.	God	is	just	the	intelligence	of	the	existence.
He	says,	"Unlike	Rajneesh,	I	am	not	a	fool	to	believe	in	a	creator	of	the	cosmos
that	was	not	created.	Universe	 is	matter	and	energy	 in	 space	and	 time.	Matter,
energy,	space,	and	time	have	neither	beginning	nor	end."	Now,	I	have	never	said
that	God	created	the	universe.	That's	why	I	say	he	has	never	read	anything	I	have
said.	He	goes	on	projecting	his	own	ideas	and	arguing	against	them!	I	have	never
said	 that	 God	 has	 created	 the	 universe.	 I	 have	 again	 and	 again	 said	 that	 the
creation	is	the	creator,	that	the	world	is	God,	that	there	is	no	separation,	that	it	is
not	like	a	painter	and	the	painting	--	that	it	is	like	a	dancer	and	the	dance.	God	IS
existence.	There	is	no	separation.	Not	that	God	has	created	it;	God	has	become
it.	 You	 cannot	 find	 God	 anywhere	 else	 other	 than	 in	 his	 existence,	 and	 you
cannot	separate	them.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
96
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Can	you	find	the	dance	when	the	dancer	has	gone?	Or	can	you	call	a	person	a
"dancer"
when	he	is	not	dancing?	They	are	always	together;	the	dance	and	the	dancer	are
together.	They	are	two	aspects	of	one	energy.	Creation	and	creator	are	together.
In	 fact,	my	own	 choice	 is	 that	 I	 don't	 like	 calling	God	 a	 "creator".	 I	 call	God
"creativity".	k	 is	 an	ongoing	process.	Not	 that	one	day	God	created	 the	world.
The	 creation	 continues.	 It	 is	moment	 to	moment,	moving,	 it	 is	 a	 process,	 it	 is
dynamic,	it	is	riverlike.	And	God	is	not	separate.
But	then	he	will	say,	"Then	why	bring	God	in?	Why	can	we	not	simply	say	that
'existence'
is	 enough?"	 There	 is	 a	 reason.	 If	 you	 don't	 like	 the	 word	 "God",	 there	 is	 no
problem	with	me.
You	can	drop	 the	word	"God".	 I	bring	 the	word	"God"	 in	only	 to	 indicate	 that
existence	is	not	just	material,	it	has	intelligence;	that	the	existence	is	not	just	the
outer	periphery,	it	has	an	interiority;	that	there	is	a	great	intention	moving,	that	it
is	not	without	a	soul.
If	you	want	 some	other	word	you	can	use	one,	Dr.	Kovoor.	 I	 am	not	a	 fanatic
about	 words;	 any	 word	 will	 do.	 You	 can	 call	 it	 "X	 energy".	 If	 you	 are	 so
obsessed	with	 the	 idea	 of	 being	 anti-God,	 drop	 that	word;	 that	 doesn't	matter.
Buddha	never	used	it,	Mahavir	never	used	it.
There	is	no	need;	it	can	be	dropped.	If	you	accept	that	the	existence	is	intelligent,
drop	the	word	"God".	We	are	not	worried	about	it.	But	if	you	accept	intelligence
in	existence,	you	have	accepted	God.	That's	all	we	mean	by	"God".	It	is	a	way	of
saying	that	things	have	not	just	happened	accidentally.
What	do	I	mean	when	I	say	there	is	"intention"?	If	I	give	you	a	wristwatch	and
you	open	it,	you	will	immediately	say,	"Somebody	has	done	a	beautiful	job."	If	I
say	to	you,	"Nobody	has	done	this.	It	is	just	out	of	existence,	out	of	millions	of
years	of	existence,	just	accidents.
Things	got	together;	somehow	it	turned	out	to	be	a	watch,"	you	will	laugh	at	me.
You	have	already	laughed!	You	will	not	even	believe	a	small	wristwatch	can	turn
out	without	anybody	making	 it,	without	any	 intelligence	 functioning	behind	 it.
That	will	 be	 a	 great	miracle.	You	 cannot	 believe	 even	 a	 small	wristwatch	 can
come	 out	 of	 accidents,	 and	 you	 can	 believe	 that	 the	 whole	 existence	 --	 so
delicate,	 so	 subtle,	 so	 complex	 that	 we	 have	 not	 yet	 been	 able	 to	 know	 its
mystery	--	has	come	just	out	of	accidents?
It	 is	as	if	you	give	a	typewriter	 to	a	monkey	and	he	goes	on	typing	at	random,
and	one	day	suddenly	a	great	book	like	the	Bible	happens.	Out	of	accidents.	The
monkey	goes	on	typing,	goes	on	typing.	Something	will	happen.	And	you	see	the
Sermon	on	the	Mount	is	being	typed!
Just	 accidentally?	 It	 is	 not	 probable.	 It	 is	 impossible.	No	 possibility	 of	 it	 ever
happening.
That's	 what	 I	 mean	 when	 I	 say	 "intelligence",	 "intention".	 The	 existence	 is
functioning	 so	 together,	 so	 beautifully,	 and	 the	 evolution	 is	 moving	 to	 higher
peaks.	All	this	shows	that	existence	is	full	of	intelligence.
To	 remain	 confined	 to	 your	 intelligence	 is	 to	 remain	 confined	 in	 an
imprisonment.	To	get	out	of	this	limitation	and	to	look	into	the	intelligence	of	the
universal,	of	the	universal	intelligence,	to	have	a	feel	for	it,	that's	what	religion
is.	But	one	needs	to	go	crazy	over	it.
Dr.	 Kovoor	 says,	 "Life	 must	 have	 originated	 on	 different	 planets	 at	 different
times	 by	 chemical	 evolution	 first	 and	 then	 by	 biological	 evolution	 ..."	 But	 it
makes	no	difference.	If	it	started	on	some	other	planet,	how	did	it	start?	Whether
it	started	here	on	the	earth	or	on	some	other	planet,	how	did	it	start?	The	atheist,
the	materialist	has	to	agree	with	one	thing:	that	it	started	suddenly	for	no	reason
at	all;	it	was	not	there	and	it	started.	It	was	not	hidden,	it	was	not	latent,	it	was
not	in	a	seed	form.	If	you	say	it	was	hidden,	it	was	latent,	it	was	in	a	seed	Osho	-
The	First	Principle
97
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
form,	that's	what	religions	say.	They	say,	"God	is	hidden	and	is	getting	more	and
more	expressed."
Man	 is	 yet	 the	 highest	 expression	 of	 that	 intelligence.	 The	 tree	 is	 a	 lower
expression;	the	rock	a	still	lower	expression.	But	all	are	expressions	of	the	same
intelligence.	Man,	as	far	as	we	know	on	this	earth,	 is	 the	highest	expression	of
that	intelligence.	There	are	higher	possibilities,	because	man	is	not	the	end.	And
the	highest	possibility	that	we	have	seen	is	what	we	call	"enlightenment".	A	man
comes	 to	 such	 a	 peak	 that	 all	 thoughts	 disappear	 and	 only	 pure	 awareness
remains	 --	 no	 clouds,	 only	 pure	 sky	 of	 being;	 no	 smoke	 of	 thoughts,	 only	 the
flame	burning	bright,	of	pure	life	and	awareness,	of	pure	energy.
We	have	seen	in	Buddha	the	ultimate	expression	of	that	intelligence.	That's	why
we	 call	 Buddha	 "Bhagwan",	 because	 he	 comes	 closest	 to	 the	 ultimate
intelligence.	Maybe	there	are	higher	possibilities.	One	can	never	be	closed	to	the
possibility;	maybe	there	are	higher	possibilities.	It	is	impossible	to	conceive	of,
but	maybe.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 conceive	 of	 it	 because	when	 all	 thoughts	 have
been	dropped	there	is	no	longer	anything	contaminating	consciousness,	so	what
more	can	be	possible?	That's	why	we	have	called	Buddha	"Bhagwan".
"Bhagwan"	simply	means	that	he	has	become	the	vehicle	of	the	intelligence,	and
now	the	vehicle	does	not	interfere	at	all.
When	I	say	"God	is"	I	do	not	mean	God	is	the	creator.	I	mean	God	is	the	hidden
energy	of	existence.	Matter	is	visible	God,	and	soul	is	invisible	God.
He	 does	 not	 believe	 in	God,	 but	 he	 believes	 in	 four	 gods	 instead.	 Those	 four
gods	 are	 matter,	 energy,	 space,	 and	 time.	 Now,	 he	 seems	 to	 be	 completely
unaware.	 Since	 he	 left	 school	 --	 he	 is	 eighty,	 so	 he	 must	 have	 left	 school
somewhere	sixty	years	back	--	 it	seems	since	he	 left	school	he	has	not	been	in
touch	 with	 what	 has	 been	 happening	 in	 science,	 in	 the	 world	 of	 science.	 Dr.
Kovoor,	much	water	has	flowed	down	the	Ganges.	Now	matter	exists	not!	And
you	talk	about	matter.	Friedrich	Nietzsche	declared,	"God	is	dead,"	and	God	is
not	 dead.	 He	 is	 still	 alive	 and	 kicking.	 But	 matter,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 is	 dead.
Matter	has	been	found	not	to	exist.
When	the	physicists	went	deeper	into	the	constituents	of	matter,	they	found	there
is	no	matter	at	all;	 there	 is	only	energy.	Then	what	 is	 the	"matter"	we	see	 in	a
rock?	It	is	just	condensed	energy.	Matter	is	appearance.	It	only	appears.	There	is
no	solidity.	Solidity	is	just	an	appearance.	Hindus	have	the	right	word	for	it;	they
call	it	"maya".	Maya	means	that	which	only	appears	and	is	not.	Matter	has	been
proved	maya!	And	 that's	what	Shankara	 has	 been	 saying	 in	 India	 and	Buddha
has	been	saying	and	Nagarjuna	has	been	saying:	that	matter	is	illusory.	Science
has	absolutely	proved	it,	that	matter	is	illusory.
When	you	go	deeper	into	matter	and	when	you	come	to	the	electrons,	matter	is
not.	Those	are	nonmaterial	energy	phenomena.	But	the	energy	moves	so	fast	that
it	creates	the	illusion	of	stability,	solidity.	It	is	as	if	you	run	an	electric	fan	very
fast,	so	fast	that	you	cannot	see	the	blades	separately	and	you	cannot	see	the	gaps
between	 two	blades.	Now	scientists	say	 if	 the	fan	runs	with	 the	same	speed	as
electrons	 run,	 you	 can	 sit	 on	 the	 fan	 and	you	will	 not	 feel	 the	blades	moving.
They	will	be	moving	so	fast.	Sunrays	move,	in	one	second,	186,000	miles	--	in
one	 second	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 speed	 of	 electric	 energy.	 That	 is	 the	 speed	 of
electrons.	Now,	 in	 a	 small	 space	 the	 electron	 is	moving	with	 such	great	 speed
that	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 gaps.	 That's	 why	 the	wall	 seems	 to	 be	 solid	 and	 you
cannot	pass	through	it.	In	fact,	it	is	not	solid.	In	fact,	the	wall	can	be	reduced	to
such	a	small	size	that	it	will	become	invisible	--	it	has	much	space	in	it.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
98
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
The	scientists	say	the	whole	earth	can	be	reduced	to	the	size	of	one	orange.	It	is
very	porous.	The	whole	of	existence	--	all	the	matter	that	exists	in	the	whole	of
existence	 --	 can	 be	 reduced	 to	 such	 a	 small	 size	 that	 you	 can	 carry	 it	 in	 your
suitcase.	All	is	porous;	much	space	exists.
And	 those	 small	 elements	 that	go	on	 running	are	not	material	 either.	They	are
just
"electrons"	--	electric	energy.	Now,	Kovoor	goes	on	talking	about	matter.	Matter
exists	not,	Doctor.	You'd	better	start	looking	into	modern	science	again.
And	 the	 second	 thing.	 He	 goes	 on	 talking	 about	 space	 and	 time,	 and	 Albert
Einstein	 has	 proved	 that	 they	 are	 not	 two.	Time	 also	 does	 not	 exist	 separately
from	space;	it	is	a	dimension	of	space.	So	Einstein	uses	"spaciotime";	he	never
says	"space	and	time".
Now	matter	 has	disappeared.	Time	has	disappeared	 as	 a	 separate	 entity;	 it	 has
become	a	dimension	of	space.	So	there	are	two	things:	energy	and	space.
Now,	 Albert	 Einstein	 also	 says	 to	 keep	 this	 energy	 and	 space	 together,
intelligence	 is	 needed.	 Great	 intelligence	 is	 needed;	 otherwise	 they	 will	 fall
apart.	 Who	 will	 keep	 them	 together?	 How	 will	 they	 be	 kept	 together?	 That
intelligence	is	God.
So	three	things:	space,	intelligence,	energy.	Three	things.
That	is	the	Christian	trinity,	the	very	idea	of	the	three:	God	the	Father,	Christ	the
Son,	and	 the	Holy	Ghost.	And	 that	 is	 the	 idea	of	 the	Hindu	Trimurti:	Brahma,
Vishnu,	 Mahesh.	 Three	 faces	 of	 one	 reality.	 These	 are	 metaphors,	 because
mystics	are	not	talking	about	mathematics.
Mystics	are	talking	in	poetry;	the	same	truth	is	being	expressed	in	poetry.	This	is
the	 whole	 idea	 of	 the	 three	 GUNAS	 of	 the	 Sankhyas:	 SATTVA,	 RAJAS,
TAMAS,	 three	 GUNAS,	 three	 attributes,	 are	 there,	 but	 they	 are	 faces	 of	 one
reality.	That	reality	is	God.
You	can	call	it	X,	Y,	Z,	whatsoever	name	you	like.	It	doesn't	matter.	A	rose	is	a
rose	is	a	rose.	By	what	name	you	call	it	makes	no	difference.
But	he	goes	on	talking	as	if	matter,	energy,	space,	and	time	are	four	things.	He	is
not	aware	of	modern	science.
David	Foster,	the	cybernetic	scientist,	says:	"Nothing	whatsoever	is	known	about
the	following	rather	basic	phenomena:	mass,	electricity,	magnetism,	spaciotime,
et	 cetera,	 et	 cetera	 ...	 Existence	 remains	 a	 mystery,	 it	 is	 not	 available	 to
knowledge	...	essentially	it	is	unknowable."	I	call	this	unknowable	element	God.
What	is	matter?	Physics	says	there	is	no	matter	as	such.	What	we	know	as	matter
is	made	of	waves	or	quanta.	The	quantum	is	a	mysterious	phenomenon.	 It	 is	a
point	and	a	line	simultaneously!	Absurd.	Illogical.	Bizarre.	And	if	you	ask	what
sort	of	waves	are	these,	the	answer	is:	"waves	of	probability".	Not	even	waves	of
"anything"!	The	modern	understanding	of	science	is	mystery	and	magic.
If	we	 think	deeply	 into	 anything,	we	 are	 bound	 to	 stumble	 upon	God	because
God	is	the	depth	of	existence.	If	you	go	deep	into	the	rock	you	will	come	upon
God.	If	you	go	deep	into	yourself	you	will	come	upon	God.	God	is	the	depth.	If
we	 think	 hard	 enough	 in	 any	 single	 direction	 we	 always	 arrive	 at	 the
unthinkable.	If	we	ask	enough	questions	along	a	given	line	of	inquiry,	we	come
in	the	end	to	an	unanswerable	question.	That	unanswerable	question	is
"Who	am	 I?"	That	unanswerable	question	 is	 the	koan	of	 the	Zen	people.	That
unanswerable	question	is	what	meditation	is	all	about.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
99
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Second	compliment:	he	says	Rajneesh	is	an	ignoramus.	Perfectly	true,	sir.	I	don't
claim	any	knowledge.	I	only	claim	ignorance,	utter	ignorance	...	but	that's	what
the	 Upanishads	 have	 been	 saying:	 those	 who	 say	 that	 they	 know,	 know	 not.
That's	 what	 Socrates	 has	 been	 saying:	 "I	 know	 only	 one	 thing:	 that	 I	 know
nothing."	These	are	all	 ignoramuses,	and	 I	am	happy	with	 this	company	 --	 the
Upanishads,	 the	 Taoists,	 the	 Zen	 people,	 the	 Sufis.	 I	 am	 tremendously	 happy
with	this	company.
In	 fact,	 to	 know	 reality,	 to	 know	yourself,	 you	 have	 to	 unlearn.	Knowledge	 is
good,	but	good	only	for	the	practical	world,	good	only	for	the	objective	world.	It
is	not	good	for	knowing	yourself.	You	need	not	know	anything	to	know	yourself.
What	you	need	is	to	go	within.	You	can	enter	into	your	being.	There	is	no	need
to	know	anything	beforehand.
Knowledge	has	to	be	dropped.
A	German	 philosopher	 came	 to	 Raman	Maharshi	 and	 said	 to	 him,	 "Master,	 I
have	come	to	learn	from	you,	and	I	have	traveled	long	and	I	have	been	desiring
and	desiring	to	come,	and	now	I	am	happy	that	I	have	come."	And	Raman	said,
"Please,	the	first	Principle	is	that	you	will	have	to	unlearn.	I	am	not	here	to	help
you	 to	 learn!	 You	 already	 know	 too	 much!	 If	 you	 want	 more	 learning,	 go
somewhere	 else.	 Here	 the	 whole	 work	 is	 of	 unlearning,	 unconditioning.	 I	 am
ignorant,	and	I	help	people	 to	become	ignorant	again,	so	 that	 they	can	become
innocent,	childlike."
And	yes,	Jesus	is	right.	Only	those	who	are	childlike	will	be	able	to	enter	into	the
kingdom	of	God.	That	quality	of	innocence	has	to	be	attained.
Third	 compliment:	 Rajneesh	 is	 a	 fool.	 Good.	 True.	 It	 I	 was	 not	 a	 fool,	 why
should	 I	 be	 seeking	and	 searching	 for	God?	Only	 fools	do	 that.	Clever	people
seek	money,	power,	prestige.	Cunning	people	seek	something	of	the	world.	Only
fools	try	to	seek	the	ultimate.
In	Hindi	we	have	the	same	word	for	"fool"	as	for	the	"enlightened	one".	We	call
a	 fool	 BUDDHU;	 it	 is	 derived	 from	 "Buddha".	 People	 must	 have	 thought
Buddha	 a	 fool.	He	 looks	 foolish.	He	had	 everything	 that	 one	 can	desire	 --	 the
palace,	the	beautiful	woman,	the	kingdom
--	all	comforts	--	and	suddenly	he	renounced.	The	masses	must	have	called	him
BUDDHU,	a	fool.	These	are	the	things	one	desires,	and	he	is	renouncing	them.
And	what	is	he	going	to	seek	and	search	for?	What	more	is	there	than	this?	St.
Francis	was	thought	to	be	a	fool.
Dr.	Kovoor	has	 put	me	 in	 the	great	 company	of	 the	greatest	 people	who	have
walked	on	the	earth.	I	am	thankful.
Fourth	 compliment:	Rajneesh	 is	 dangerous.	 I	 am.	 Those	who	 come	 to	me	 are
going	to	be	destroyed	by	me,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	give	them	rebirth.	If
you	come	to	me,	I	am	going	to	destroy	you	because	only	through	that	destruction
is	resurrection.	A	Master	has	to	be	a	death	to	the	disciple.	You	will	never	be	the
same	 again.	 The	 danger	 is	 there.	 I	 will	 take	 all	 that	 you	 have	 away.	 All	 the
illusions	have	to	be	taken	away.	I	will	leave	you	naked	and	nude,	empty.	But	in
that	 emptiness	 happens	 that	which	 is	 real,	 happens	 that	which	 is	 eternal.	 I	 am
dangerous.
And	 the	 fifth	 compliment:	 Rajneesh	 is	 a	 voyeur.	 Beautiful.	 Psychologists	 say
that	there	are	two	types	of	people:	voyeurs	and	exhibitionists.	Man	is	a	voyeur,
woman	is	an	exhibitionist.
And	 out	 of	 the	 voyeurism	 of	 man,	 all	 that	 has	 happened	 has	 happened.	 It	 is
voyeurism	to	inquire	into	truth.	It	is	voyeurism	to	penetrate	into	reality,	into	the
mystery	of	reality.	It	is	voyeurism	to	go	to	Everest	and	to	see	what	is	there.	It	is
voyeurism	to	go	 to	 the	moon.	Women	have	not	been	very	creative	 in	 that	way
because	they	are	not	voyeurs;	they	are	exhibitionists.
They	are	satisfied	to	exhibit	themselves.	Finished.	Their	work	is	finished.	Man	is
a	voyeur.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
100
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
And	 the	 mystics	 are	 the	 voyeurs	 par	 excellence.	 They	 penetrate	 to	 the	 very
mystery	of	God.
You	 can	 ask	 Sigmund	 Freud.	 He	 says	 that	 the	male	 energy	 starts	 seeking	 the
female	energy.	That	 is	natural.	That's	why	the	woman	waits	and	 the	man	takes
the	initiative.	Even	small	children	will	play	the	game	of	doctor.	And	the	woman
will	be	the	patient	and	the	boy	will	be	the	doctor	--	the	voyeur!	He	wants	to	see
how	this	girl	clicks,	what	makes	her	click,	what	is	inside	her.	Now	the	scientist	is
born	--	and	the	mystic	too.
Out	of	this	sexual	curiosity,	all	curiosity	is	born.	All	curiosity	basically	is	sexual.
But	nothing	is	wrong.	I	love	to	see	a	beautiful	woman	as	much	as	I	love	to	see	a
beautiful	rose.	I	love	to	see	a	beautiful	face	as	much	as	I	like	to	see	a	beautiful
sunrise.	I	love	to	see	a	beautiful	body	as	much	as	I	love	to	see	a	beautiful	bird	on
the	wing.	I	love	beauty.	I	am	a	voyeur.	And	I	love	beauty	so	much	that	I	want	to
find	out	how	this	whole	existence	clicks.	In	that	very	search,	one	stumbles	upon
God.
And	 I	 want	 to	 know	 how	 I	 click,	 what	 is	 this	 intelligence	 in	 me.	 And	 only
because	of	that	search	does	one	come	to	one's	own	being.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	being	a	voyeur.	And	I	would	have	thought	that	Dr.	Kovoor
was	a	voyeur.	His	name	fits	with	the	sound	of	"voyeur"	--	"Kovoor".	It	must	be
accidental,	because	he	believes	in	accidents.	But	 it	 rhymes	well.	But	according
to	himself,	it	seems	that	he	is	an	exhibitionist.	That's	not	very	good.	You	are	in
bad	 shape,	Dr.	Voyeur.	 I	 had	 always	 thought	 you	were	 a	man!	Now	you	have
created	suspicion	in	me.
The	 quality	 of	 voyeurism	 is	 the	 quality	 of	 inquiry.	 Nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it.
Everybody	 should	 be	 a	 voyeur.	 And	 I	 would	 like	 even	 women	 to	 become
voyeurs;	only	then	will	they	be	able	to	become	more	creative;	only	then	will	they
be	able	to	penetrate	into	the	mysteries	of	life.	We	should	try	to	know	what	it	is!
The	very	curiosity	helps	you	to	grow	towards	higher	peaks	of	intelligence.
The	 sixth	 compliment:	Rajneesh	 is	 a	 sexual	 pervert.	 That	 is	wonderful.	 To	 go
beyond	sex	is	certainly	a	perversion.	It	is	not	natural.	So	it	is	a	perversion!	It	is
not	 part	 of	 unconscious	 evolution.	 It	 is	 conscious	 revolution.	 It	 happens	 only
through	transforming	the	unconscious	into	the	conscious.	When	not	even	a	trace
of	 unconsciousness	 remains	 one	 is	 free	 from	 all	 desire.	 This	 is	 real
BRAHMACHARYA.	But	 to	have	eyes	 in	 the	valley	of	 the	blind	 is	 certainly	a
perversion.	Dr.	Kovoor,	who	 is	not	a	voyeur,	 simply	 shows	his	obsession	with
sex.
Just	a	nice	old	dirty	man!
And	the	last	compliment:	Rajneesh	is	absurd.	I	am	really	at	a	loss	how	to	thank
Dr.
Voyeur.	These	are	the	words	I	love!	I	am	the	genius	of	the	absurd,	and	that	is	the
highest	that	one	can	attain.	Tertullian,	a	mystic,	a	Christian	mystic,	is	reported	to
have	 said,	 "I	 believe	 in	 God	 because	 God	 is	 absurd."	 I	 also	 believe	 in	 God
because	 God	 is	 absurd.	 I	 believe	 in	 existence	 because	 this	 existence	 is	 really
absurd.	It	is	incredible.	It	is	so	beautiful.	It	is	so	wonderful.	It	is	so	fantastic.	It	is
so	psychedelic.	And	it	comprehends	all	contradictions.	It	 is	so	tremendously	in
harmony	that	even	contradictions	don't	contradict!	The	night	and	the	day,	and	the
summer	and	the	winter,	and	life	and	death	--	what	more	contradictions	can	you
find	 and	 what	 more	 absurdities?	 But	 somehow	 everything	 fits	 together.	 The
absurdity	makes	life	more	fun.
If	God	was	just	an	Aristotelian,	life	would	have	been	without	fun.	It	would	have
been	too	serious	--	and	dull	and	boring.	God	is	not	dull,	not	boring.	Life	is	full	of
joy	and	delight.	There	is	love	and	there	is	song	and	there	is	celebration.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
101
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
I	am	absurd.
You	 will	 think	 that	 Dr.	 Kovoor	 uses	 all	 these	 terms	 in	 a	 very	 condemnatory
sense.	That	is	his	business	--	that	is	his	problem.	I	am	a	religious	man.	If	I	can
find	 a	 rose	 flower,	 I	 don't	 bother	 about	 the	 thorns.	 If	 I	 can	 see	 that	 the	 black
cloud	has	a	white,	silver	lining,	I	dance	for	the	silver	lining;	and	I	feel	thankful
for	the	black	cloud	also	because	without	it	 the	silver	lining	cannot	exist.	I	look
through	religious	eyes.	Even	the	negative	turns	positive.	So	maybe	he	has	tried
to	 condemn	 me,	 but	 that	 is	 HIS	 problem.	 Why	 should	 I	 take	 it	 as	 a
condemnation?	 I	 take	 it	as	praise;	he	has	complimented	me.	And	 these	are	my
words	that	I	like,	that	I	enjoy.
Now,	a	few	things	that	I	am	sorry	to	say	that	I	cannot	agree	on	with	Dr.	Kovoor.
The	first	thing:	he	says	that	man	has	no	soul.	That	means	man	has	no	interiority,
no	intention.	That	means	man	has	no	meaning.
He	goes	on	throwing	theories	upon	me	which	I	have	never	propounded,	and	then
he	 condemns	 them.	 He	 is	 fighting	 with	 ghosts	 --	 and	 he	 himself	 has	 created
them.	 I	 have	 never	 said	 that	 man	 has	 an	 individual	 soul.	We	 have	 individual
bodies,	but	our	soul	is	universal.	On	the	periphery	we	are	different;	at	the	center
we	are	one.
Now,	 he	 goes	 on	 condemning	 and	 criticizing,	 "How	 is	 it	 possible?	When	 the
body	dies,	where	can	the	soul	go?	Nobody	has	ever	seen	the	soul	going."	I	have
never	said	that	the	soul	goes	anywhere.	There	is	nowhere	to	go!	In	fact,	the	body
is	 nothing	 but	 the	 visible	 aspect	 of	 the	 soul,	 and	 the	 soul	 is	 nothing	 but	 the
invisible	 aspect	 of	 the	 body.	Man	 is	 an	 ensouled	 body	 and	 an	 embodied	 soul.
These	are	two	aspects	of	some	energy:	X	or	God.	One	aspect	is	the	body,	another
aspect	is	the	soul.	When	a	man	dies	it	is	not	that	the	soul	goes	somewhere.
When	the	man	dies	the	soul	moves	into	the	unmanifested.
Now,	he	says	one	man,	a	certain	Peter,	has	been	revived	seven	times.	He	dies	of
a	heart	attack;	through	artificial	techniques	he	is	revived	again.	Again	after	a	few
days	 or	 a	 few	 hours	 he	 dies;	 again	 he	 is	 revived.	 In	 all,	 seven	 times.	 So	 Dr.
Kovoor	asks	what	I	say	about	it.	Does	the	soul	go	and	come	back	again,	go	and
come	 back	 again?	No.	 There	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go.	 The	 soul	 becomes	 unmanifest
when	 the	 situations	 to	manifest	 it	 are	 no	more	 there.	When	 the	 situations	 are
there	again,	it	becomes	manifest.
It	is	just	like	the	seed.	Where	has	the	tree	gone?	You	cannot	find	it	in	the	seed.	It
has	disappeared	in	the	seed.	It	has	become	unmanifest	in	the	seed.	Put	the	seed
in	 the	soil,	and	again	 the	 tree	 is	 there.	And	again	 the	 tree	will	die	one	day	and
will	leave	many	seeds.
The	 manifest	 becomes	 the	 unmanifest,	 the	 unmanifest	 becomes	 the	 manifest.
These	are	the	two	wings	of	reality.	Nobody	goes	anywhere.	There	is	nobody	to
go	and	nowhere	to	go.
I	 don't	 believe	 in	 individual	 souls.	 I	 believe	 in	 the	 universal	 ocean	 of
consciousness.	A	wave	arises;	 then	 the	wave	disappears.	Where	has	 it	gone?	It
has	gone	 to	 the	 same	source	 from	where	 it	had	arisen	 in	 the	 first	place.	 It	had
risen	out	of	the	ocean;	now	it	has	gone	back	to	the	ocean.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	about	Junaid,	a	Sufi	mystic.	He	was	passing	through	a
small	village.	It	was	evening,	and	a	small	boy	was	carrying	a	small	candle.	He
was	going	 to	 the	mosque	 to	put	 the	candle	 there.	The	mosque	was	dark	and	 it
was	a	dark	night,	and	the	night	was	descending.	Junaid	just	laughingly,	jokingly
asked	the	small	child,	"Have	you	yourself	lighted	this	candle?"	And	the	boy	said,
"Yes,	sir."	And	Junaid	said,	"Then	tell	me	one	thing.
From	where	has	this	flame	come?	From	where?	And	you	say	you	yourself	have
lighted	the	candle,	so	you	must	have	seen	from	where	this	flame	has	come."	The
boy	must	have	been	a	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
102
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
genius.	He	laughed	and	blew	the	candle	out,	and	he	said,	"Right	now	it	has	gone.
Where?	You	have	seen	it!	Where	has	it	gone?	"
The	coming	and	going	is	not	from	somewhere	to	somewhere.	We	arise	out	of	the
cosmic	 consciousness;	 we	 fall	 back	 into	 the	 cosmic	 consciousness.	 We	 arise
again;	we	fall	back	again.
My	concept	of	the	soul	is	exactly	the	same	as	that	of	Gautam	the	Buddha.	There
is	no	individual	soul,	there	is	no	ego.	That's	why	I	insist	so	much:	drop	the	ego.
Then	you	will	start	living	a	life	--	a	cosmic	life,	a	divine	life.	Then	you	will	live
like	God	--	because	God	will	live	through	you.	You	will	not	be	there.
Second	thing:	he	calls	me	a	fraud.	I	would	have	loved	it	if	I	could	have	agreed
with	him.	I	could	not.	 I	am	sorry.	He	calls	me	a	fraud	because	he	says	I	claim
miraculous	powers.	I	was	simply	amazed.	I	have	never	claimed	any.	With	whom
is	 he	 fighting?	 With	 Satya	 Sai	 Baba?	 I	 have	 never	 claimed	 any	 miraculous
powers,	 and	 he	 says	 I	 claim	 miraculous	 powers.	 That's	 why	 I	 am	 a	 fraud,
because	 there	are	no	miraculous	powers.	My	whole	emphasis	 is	 that	 the	whole
existence	is	miraculous!	There	are	no	miraculous	powers,	but	the	whole	of	life	is
miraculous.	And	 I	don't	 claim	any	power.	 I	 am	 the	most	ordinary	man.	 I	don't
claim	anything.
I	have	no	claim.
When	I	say	that	I	am	the	most	ordinary,	I	mean	it	exactly.	I	am	not	special;	I	am
not	"holier	than	thou".	Then	what	am	I	doing	here	with	people?	I	am	just	helping
them	to	come	back	to	their	reality,	to	their	ordinariness,	to	their	first	principle.	If
you	 start	 living	 and	 enjoying	 your	 ordinariness	 you	 are	 divine,	 because	 the
ordinary	is	the	divine.
He	projects	something,	 then	he	demolishes	it,	and	he	thinks	he	has	demolished
me.
And	 the	 third	 thing.	Because	 I	 say	 that	without	God	 there	will	 be	no	meaning
and	 I	 had	asked	Dr.	Kovoor,	 "What	meaning	will	 your	 life	have	 if	 there	 is	 no
God?"	 he	 has	 answered	 that	 his	 life	 has	 an	 aim,	 and	 that	 aim	 is	 to	 impart
whatsoever	 he	 has	 learned	 to	 other	 human	 beings.	 But	 that	 seems	 to	 be	 very
irrelevant.	One	 candle	 imparting	 to	 other	 candles!	What	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 it?
There	 is	no	difference.	And	why	do	you	say	"human	beings"?	And	what	 is	 the
point?	Even	if	you	make	a	candle	very	much	informed	--	you	talk	and	talk	and
talk	--	what	is	the	point?	A	candle	is	a	candle	--	there	is	no	difference,	sir.	And
this	is	your	whole	aim	of	life!	Whatsoever	you	have	learned	in	life,	you	have	to
teach	others.	This	does	not	seem	to	be	much	of	an	aim.	It	seems	more	like	a	duty
--	and	a	mechanical	one	at	that.
And	 why	 help	 these	 candles	 --	 these	 chemicals,	 oxidization	 processes	 --	 why
help?	If	 they	remain	ignorant,	 if	 the	candles	are	ignorant,	what	 is	 lost?	And	he
says,	"My	aim	in	 life	 is	 to	help	people	so	 that	 they	become	aware	and	nobody
can	exploit	them."	But	what	is	the	point	if	one	candle	exploits	another	candle?	A
little	wax	goes	from	here	to	there	--	what	is	the	point?
It	does	not	seem	very	meaningful.
And	 then,	 finally,	 he	 says,	 "Except	 for	 creating	 mental	 derangements	 and
hallucinations	...
there	 is	 absolutely	 no	 beneficial	 value	 in	 meditation	 ...	 meditation	 is	 a	 ...
technique	 of	 inducing	 self-hypnosis."	 Now,	 he	 says	 meditation	 only	 creates
"mental	derangement,"	"hallucination,"
and	only	"religious	maniacs"	do	meditation,	and	people	who	are	"mentally	sick".
That	means	all	 the	Vedas	were	written	by	mentally	sick	people.	And	 the	Bible
and	 the	 Koran	 and	 the	 Dhammapada	 and	 the	 Tao	 Te	 Ching	 and	 the	 Zend-
Avestaall	were	written	by	mentally	ill	people.	Then	all	that	has	been	of	any	value
on	this	earth	was	illness!	Then	Buddha	has	no	health;	then	Buddha	has	no	well-
being.	Then	who	else	can	have	well-being?	Then	Nagarjuna	and	Shankara	and
Vasubandhu	 and	 Bodhidharma	 and	 Bokuju	 and	 Lin	 Chi,	 all	 are	 "religious
maniacs".	 Then	 Jalaluddin	 and	 Bahauddin	 and	 Junaid	 and	 Mansur	 are	 all
mentally	ill	people.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
103
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
If	 these	 are	 ill	 people,	 then	 who	 is	 healthy?	 Adolf	 Hitler?	 Mao	 Tse-Tung?
Genghis	Khan?
Tamurlane?	Nadir	Shah?	Who	is	healthy?
He	 says	 meditation	 only	 creates	 derangement.	 He	 does	 not	 know	 even	 the
ABCD	 of	 meditation.	 He	 has	 not	 even	 read	 about	 it.	 Experience	 is	 not	 the
question	at	all;	he	has	not	even	 read	about	 it.	Or	whatsoever	he	has	 read	must
have	come	from	some	people	who	are	just	like	him.	Maybe	he	has	been	reading
Karl	Marx	on	meditation!	Or	Betrand	Russell	on	meditation.
If	you	want	to	know	about	meditation,	ask	the	meditators.	If	you	want	to	know
about	meditation,	 the	 real,	 rational	way	 is	 to	 go	 into	meditation	 and	 see	what
happens	because	the	proof	of	the	pudding	is	in	its	tasting.
He	has	no	idea	what	meditation	is.	He	calls	it	a	technique	of	hypnosis.	It	is	just
the	 opposite,	 let	me	 tell	 you.	Hypnosis	means	 sleep,	 induced	 sleep.	 The	word
HYPNOS	means
"sleep".	Hypnosis	means	 "suggesting	 to	 you	 to	 fall	 asleep".	Meditation	means
AWARENESS.
Meditation	 means	 helping	 you	 to	 become	 more	 aware.	 Meditation	 is	 not
hypnosis.	Meditation	is	a	process	of	de-hypnosis;	it	is	a	dehypnotization.	You	are
hypnotized	 already	 by	 the	 society,	 by	 the	 schools,	 by	 the	 priests	 and	 the
politicians.	Meditation	is	a	way	to	dehypnotize	you,	to	uncondition	you,	so	that
you	can	attain	to	your	childhood	innocence	again.	And	the	difference	is	so	vital
and	so	clear	and	so	distinct	that	unless	one	is	absolutely	closed	to	understanding
there	is	no	way	to	miss	it.
Hypnosis	 is	 sleep;	 when	 you	 hypnotize	 a	 person	 he	 falls	 asleep,	 he	 loses
consciousness.
When	a	person	meditates	he	becomes	conscious	--	he	attains	consciousness.	He
becomes	MORE	conscious.	 In	fact	a	meditator	by	and	by	starts	 feeling	 that	he
needs	 less	sleep	 than	before;	and	with	 less	sleep	he	feels	more	vital.	 If	he	was
sleeping	for	eight	or	 ten	hours	before,	now	he	feels	 five	or	six	or	even	four	or
three	hours	are	enough;	that	gives	him	enough	rest.
And	a	meditator	by	and	by	comes	to	know	that	even	in	sleep	something	remains
aware	in	him.
But	 these	are	experiences,	Dr.	Kovoor.	 I	cannot	 invite	you	 into	my	sleep.	 I	am
helpless.
Otherwise	I	would	have	invited	you	into	my	sleep	to	see	what	is	happening.	The
only	way	to	know	is	to	meditate.
And	I	am	not	saying	something	for	 the	first	 time.	Down	the	ages	 thousands	of
mystics	have	 said	 the	 same	 thing.	Krishna	 says	 in	Geeta,	 "When	everybody	 is
fast	asleep,	the	yogi	is	awake."	Buddha's	disciple	Ananda	asked	Buddha,	"I	have
a	feeling	that	in	your	sleep	you	remain	alert."	Buddha	said,	"You	are	right.	Body
goes	to	sleep,	mind	goes	to	sleep;	I	remain	aware."	In	fact	modern	psychology
says	 that	 a	 layer	 of	 your	 consciousness	 is	 there	which	 is	 always	 alert,	 always
awake.
Have	you	not	watched?	A	mother	is	sleeping.	There	are	thundering	clouds	in	the
sky,	 or	 airplanes	 are	 passing	 by,	 and	 her	 sleep	 will	 not	 be	 disturbed.	 But	 her
small	child	--	just	a	small	movement	or	the	child	starts	crying	--	and	she	is	fully
awake.	What	happenend?	She	was	not	disturbed	by	the	airplane	passing,	she	was
not	disturbed	by	the	thundering	in	the	clouds.	What	happened?	Just	a	small	noise
from	 the	 child,	 and	 she	 is	 fully	 alert.	 A	 part	 of	 her	 being	 is	 aware	 and	 keeps
caring	 for	 the	 child.	 She	 closes	 herself	 against	 the	 thundering	 clouds,	 but	 she
cannot	close	her	awareness	from	the	child.	She	is	alert.
If	you	fall	asleep	here	and	I	come	and	I	suddenly	call	a	name,	"Is	Ram	here?"
nobody	will	listen,	but	the	man	whose	name	is	Ram	will	say,	"Who	is	disturbing
my	sleep?	Yes,	I	am	here	what	do	you	want?"	Everybody	heard	it,	but	nobody
responded;	only	Ram	 responded.	A	part	of	his	mind	 --	 even	 in	 sleep	 --	knows
this	is	the	name,	somebody	has	called	him.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
104
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Even	in	sleep	you	go	on	chasing	the	mosquitoes.	If	an	insect	crawls	on	you,	you
throw	it	away,	and	sleep	is	not	disturbed.	Something	keeps	alert,	surrounds	you.
This	is	in	ordinary	life.	When	you	become	a	meditator,	this	awareness	becomes
deeper,	more	 crystallized.	 A	 point	 comes	when	 you	 can	 sleep	 and	 yet	 remain
awake.
I	would	like	to	invite	Kovoor	into	my	sleep,	but	my	sleep	is	subjective.	I	know
it,	 but	 I	 cannot	 put	 it	 in	 front	 of	 you,	Dr.	Kovoor,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 examine	 it
objectively.
But	there	is	a	way:	you	can	learn	meditation.	You	can	meditate,	and	you	can	see
what	the	difference	between	hypnosis	and	meditation	is.	They	are	diametrically
opposite!
And	he	says	"There	 is	absolutely	no	beneficial	value	 in	meditation."	Now,	 this
going	 too	 far.	 So	many	 universities	 are	 experimenting,	 and	 there	 is	 now	 solid
proof	 from	 medical	 colleges,	 medical	 research,	 psychiatric	 research	 that
meditation	is	of	tremendous	benefit.	He	seems	to	be	completely	unaware	of	what
is	happening	in	the	world.
I	 invite	you,	Dr.	Kovoor.	You	 should	 come	here.	We	have	 thousands	of	books
here	--	the	latest	ones.	It	seems	you	have	not	seen	books	for	sixty	years.
And	 whatsoever	 he	 says	 in	 his	 article	 is	 just	 elementary	 biology,	 high-school
biology.
When	I	was	reading	I	thought,	"My	God,	what	knowledge!"
Now	there	is	absolute	proof	that	a	meditator	is	less	prone	to	ulcers,	less	prone	to
heart	 attacks,	 less	 prone	 to	 high	 blood	 pressure.	 A	 meditator	 is	 less	 prone	 to
many	illnesses	that	happen	ordinarily	to	everybody.	A	meditator	is	less	prone	to
madness,	 to	 insanity,	 to	neurosis,	psychosis.	And	a	meditator	 is	certainly	more
quiet,	calm,	and	collected.	A	meditator	is	more	responsible.	A	meditator	is	more
loving.	 And	 there	 is	 definite	 proof	 that	 a	 meditator	 lives	 longer	 than	 a
nonmeditator.	 A	 meditator	 has	 a	 higher	 I.Q.,	 more	 intelligence,	 than	 a
nonmeditator,	more	vitality,	more	creativity.
Meditation	 is	 therapeutic.	 In	 fact,	 "meditation"	 and	 "medicine"	 come	 from	 the
same	root.
Meditation	 is	a	healing	 force,	because	 it	 relaxes	you	and	allows	nature	 to	heal
you.	But	that	is	not	the	primary	benefit	of	meditation.	It	is	just	a	side	effect.	The
basic	benefit	 is	 the	 entry	 into	 the	divine.	Self-realization.	God-realization.	Oh!
the	ecstasy	of	it,	the	blessing	and	the	benediction.
And	 these	 are	 not	 assertions	 of	 mystics.	 Now	 scientific	 labs	 are	 producing
papers,	 research	 work,	 theses,	 dissertations.	 Through	 scientific	 equipment,
measurement,	ways	and	means,	now	it	is	almost	a	certain	fact	that	mind	can	exist
in	many	wavelengths	and	meditation	changes	the	wavelength.	Meditation	creates
more	"alpha"	waves	--	and	alpha	waves	release	joy,	happiness,	bliss,	benediction.
Forget	what	the	mystics	say,	but	you	can	listen	to	the	scientists.
In	the	end,	I	pray	for	the	old	man.	Please,	you	also	pray	for	him.	His	days	cannot
be	 many	 and	 I	 would	 not	 like	 him	 to	 die	 believing	 that	 he	 is	 nothing	 but	 a
chemical	process	and	oxidization!	Poor	thing!
And	 finally	Dr.	Kovoor	 requests	 the	 government	 to	 prevent	my	work.	 This	 is
great!	What	type	of	argument	is	this?	This	is	nerve	failure,	Dr.	Kovoor!	Can	you
not	argue	yourself,	so	now	you	need	the	support	of	the	state?
And	he	 thinks	he	 is	 a	 rational	man	and	he	has	a	 scientific	outlook.	 I	don't	 see
rationality	or	scientific	outlook.	I	simply	see	a	dogmatic,	closed	attitude,	as	if	he
has	decided	once	and	for	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
105
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
all	what	 is	 truth	and	 is	adamant	not	 to	 listen	 to	anything	which	can	disturb	his
dogmatic	ideas,	ideologies.
Now,	a	few	nonserious	questions.
Question
OSHO,	 LIFE	 IS	 BEAUTIFUL,	 BUT	 I	 AM	UNHAPPY.	 YOU	ARE	GIVING
MUCH
LOVE,	 BUT	 I	 CANNOT	 TAKE	 IT.	 WHAT	 YOU	 SAY	 IS	 TRUE,	 BUT	 I
CANNOT
FOLLOW	 IT.	 I	 WANT	 TO	 BE	 TRANSFORMED,	 BUT	 WHAT	 IS
PREVENTING	ME?
I	will	just	tell	you	one	anecdote:
After	passing	a	group	of	women	talking	near	his	church,	the	minister	decided	to
preach	a	sermon	on	gossip.
"Members	of	the	congregation,"	he	began,	"as	I	entered	the	church	the	other	day
prior	 to	 one	of	 your	Ladies'	Aid	meetings,	 in	 one	group	 someone	was	 saying,
'Mrs.	 Wilson	 is	 a	 wonderful	 woman,	 but	 ...'	 At	 another	 group	 I	 heard,	 'Miss
Brown	is	really	a	nice	woman,	but	...'	At	still	another	group	someone	was	saying,
'The	Arnolds	seem	to	be	a	lovely	couple,	but	...'	And	I	am	telling	you	right	now,
that	if	you	are	not	careful,	you	are	going	to	slide	right	into	hell	on	your	BUTS!"
Question
OSHO,	I	AM	ALWAYS	AFRAID	OF	WASTING	TIME.	TIME	IS	VALUABLE,
AND	I	WANT	TO	USE	IT	RIGHTLY.	CAN	YOU	GUIDE	ME	AS	TO	WHAT	I
SHOULD	DO	SO
THAT	NO	MISTAKE	IS	COMMITTED?
First,	time	is	not	valuable.	There	have	been	people	who	have	been	saying	"time
is	money."
They	are	neurotic	people.	They	have	created	much	neurosis	in	the	world.	Time	is
not	valuable,	because	eternity	is	available.	There	is	no	end	to	time	and	there	is
no	 beginning	 to	 time.	 So	 don't	 be	worried	 about	 it.	 The	more	 you	worry,	 the
more	you	waste.	Only	an	unworried	person	knows	how	to	live	joyously,	moment
to	 moment.	 Time	 consciousness	 is	 a	 great	 disease	 ...	 and	 the	 whole	 West	 is
suffering	from	it.	And	the	disease	is	spreading	to	the	East	too.	It	has	even	spread
to	the	animals.	I	was	reading	one	anecdote	...
An	old	lady	kept	a	parrot	which	was	always	swearing.	Every	Sunday	she	kept	a
lid	over	the	cage,	removing	it	on	Monday	morning,	thus	preventing	the	bird	from
swearing	on	the	Sabbath.	On	a	Monday	she	saw	the	minister	coming	towards	the
house;	so	she	again	placed	the	cover	on	the	cage.	As	the	priest	was	about	to	step
into	the	parlor,	the	parrot	remarked,
"This	has	been	a	damned	short	week!"
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
106
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
You	have	enough	time.	And	don't	be	so	afraid	of	committing	mistakes!	That	 is
the	 only	mistake	 one	 has	 to	 avoid	 --	 the	 only	mistake,	 I	 say,	 that	 a	 man	 can
commit	in	life	--	and	that	is:	becoming	afraid	of	committing	mistakes.	Then	you
never	grow,	then	you	never	go	anywhere,	then	you	never	do	anything.	Then	by
and	 by	 you	 will	 slip	 into	 dullness	 and	 deadness.	 You	 will	 become	 stuck,
stagnant.	Commit	mistakes.	What	is	wrong	in	committing	mistakes?
Just	 remember	 one	 thing:	 don't	 commit	 the	 same	mistake	 again.	 Commit	 new
mistakes	every	day.	Be	inventive.	Innovate.	A	man	only	learns	when	he	commits
many,	many	mistakes.
Go	astray	as	far	as	you	can	go.	God	is	everywhere.	Where	can	you	go?	And	the
further	 astray	 you	 go,	 the	 deeper	 is	 your	 understanding	 of	 coming	 home;	 and
when	you	come	home,	you	understand	what	you	were	missing.
Nothing	is	wrong.	You	are	too	afraid	and	too	cowardly.	Drop	this	fear	and	drop
this	cowardliness.
Question
OSHO,	PLEASE	HELP	ME.
I	 cannot	 do	 that.	 I	 am	 not	 your	 enemy.	 I	 am	 not	 a	 do-gooder.	 I	 don't	 "help",
because	the	help,	the	very	desire	to	be	helped,	is	a	desire	to	continue	as	you	are.
You	want	some	props,	some	supports.	You	want	consolation,	comfort.	No,	I	am
the	last	person	to	give	you	any	consolation.	I	am	going	to	withdraw	all	props,	so
you	fall	flat	on	the	ground.	From	there	starts	a	new	life,	a	new	beginning.
Henry	Thoreau	once	observed	that	if	he	knew	for	certain	that	a	man	was	on	his
way	to	see	him	with	the	single	purpose	of	trying	to	help	him,	he	would	run	for
his	life.
That	should	be	the	attitude	towards	helpers.	If	somebody	is	coming	to	help	you,
escape!
Your	life	is	in	danger.	Avoid	the	do-gooders,	the	so-called	saints	and	mahatmas.
I	am	not	here	to	console	you,	to	comfort	you,	to	make	you	secure.	I	am	here	to
destroy	you	utterly,	because	only	then	is	the	new	born	--	the	new	man,	the	new
consciousness.	If	I	help,	the	old	will	continue.	All	help	goes	to	help	the	old.	All
help	keeps	the	old	surviving;	 it	nourishes	it.	No,	I	am	not	going	to	help	in	any
way.
I	 know	you	want	 help.	You	don't	want	 resurrection.	You	want	help.	You	don't
want	death,	you	don't	want	a	new	life.	But	if	you	are	around	me	long	enough,	by
and	by	I	will	withdraw	all	your	supports.	I	will	even	take	the	earth	beneath	your
feet	away,	so	you	fall	into	the	bottomless	abyss	of	existence.	You	disappear	into
that	abyss	...	and	in	that	very	disappearance,	God	appears	to	you.	When	you	are
utterly	helpless,	God's	help	becomes	available.
I	am	not	going	to	help	you.	I	am	going	to	make	you	utterly	helpless	so	 that	 in
your	 helplessness	 a	 prayer	 arises,	 so	 that	 in	 your	 helplessness,	 surrender
becomes	possible,	and	then	comes	God's	help.	Only	God	can	help.	And	all	other
help	is	a	barrier	to	God's	help.
One	beautiful	 story	 that	 I	always	 love	 ...	Krishna	has	 just	 sat	down	 to	 take	his
lunch	and	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	 lunch	he	rushes	 towards	 the	door,	and	his	wife,
Rukamani,	 says,	 "Where	 are	 you	 going?"	 But	 he	 is	 in	 such	 a	 hurry	 that	 he
doesn't	answer.	At	the	door	he	suddenly	stops,	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
107
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
then	 comes	 back	 slowly,	 a	 little	 sad,	 sits	 back,	 starts	 eating.	 Rukamani	 asks,
"What	is	the	matter?	What	happened?	Where	were	you	going	so	suddenly,	as	if
there	was	some	emergency?	And	now	suddenly	you	turn	back	from	the	door	and
you	are	sad.	What	happened?"
Krishna	 says,	 "One	 of	 my	 lovers,	 one	 of	 my	 devotees,	 is	 passing	 through	 a
capital	and	people	are	throwing	stones	at	him	and	blood	is	flowing	from	his	head
and	he	has	wounds,	but	he	remains	utterly	helpless	--	not	a	condemnatory	word
on	his	lips,	not	even	in	his	mind.	His	surrender	is	total.	I	had	to	rush	to	help	him.
He	was	so	helpless!"
Then	Rukamani	is	even	more	surprised.	"Then	why	did	you	come	back?"
Krishna	says,	"By	the	time	I	reached	the	door,	he	had	taken	a	stone	in	his	own
hand.	Now	he	is	ready	to	answer	himself.	Now	I	am	not	needed.	Now	he	is	no
more	helpless."
Remember,	all	human	help	becomes	a	barrier	to	divine	help.	My	purpose	here	is
to	make	you	REALLY	helpless,	utterly	helpless,	so	God	rushes	towards	you	and
fills	your	emptiness.
That	will	be	the	day	of	real	rejoicing,	ecstasy.
Don't	 ask	 for	 my	 help.	 Ask	 that	 I	 destroy	 all	 that	 you	 have	 arranged	 around
yourself	as	help,	comfort,	consolation.	Ask	that	I	kill	you.	Ask	that	I	behead	you.
The	moment	your	head	has	rolled	down	on	the	earth,	you	will	grow	a	new	head,
and	that	head	will	be	the	divine.	That	will	be	God's	head.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
108
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
7
The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
17	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
A	PUZZLED	MONK	ONCE	SAID	TO	FUKETSU,	"YOU	SAY	TRUTH	CAN
BE
EXPRESSED	WITHOUT	SPEAKING,	AND	WITHOUT	KEEPING	SILENT.
HOW	CAN
THIS	 BE?"	 FUKETSU	 ANSWERED,	 "IN	 SOUTHERN	 CHINA,	 IN	 THE
SPRING,	 WHEN	 I	 WAS	 ONLY	 A	 LAD,	 AH!	 HOW	 THE	 BIRDS	 SANG
AMONG	THE	BLOSSOMS."
God	IS.	Truth	IS.	Love	IS.	There	is	no	way	to	say	it,	and	there	is	no	way	to	hide
it.	There	is	no	word	which	can	express	it,	and	there	is	no	methodology	of	how	to
keep	it	unexpressed.
That	 is	 the	dilemma	of	 the	mystic.	He	has	 to	 say	 it,	 and	 it	 cannot	be	 said.	He
cannot	 keep	 quiet	 about	 it,	 he	 cannot	 keep	 silent.	 It	 overfloods	 him;	 it	 starts
overflowing;	 it	 is	beyond	him	 to	keep	silent.	He	has	 to	say	 it,	and	nobody	has
ever	been	able	to	say	it.
God	is	not	a	word,	neither	is	truth	a	word,	nor	is	love	a	word.	And	they	are	not
just	silences	either,	because	their	isness	is	a	singing	isness;	they	are	songs.	It	is
not	 just	 dull	 and	 dead	 there.	 It	 is	 full	 of	 joy,	 it	 is	 overflowing	 joy.	 It	 is
celebration,	 it	 is	ecstasy,	 it	 is	orgasm,	because	 it	 is	a	meeting	of	 the	opposites,
because	it	is	a	meeting	of	the	polarities,	because	it	is	a	marriage,	a	marriage	of
yin	 and	 yang,	 day	 and	 night,	 summer	 and	 winter,	 life	 and	 death,	 sound	 and
silence.
So	when	 it	happens,	you	cannot	 say	 it,	but	you	have	 to	 sing	 it,	 and	 that	 is	 the
beauty	of	the	song.	It	has	something	of	the	word	and	something	of	silence	in	it.
That	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 poetry,	 the	 beauty	 of	 dance.	 Something	 is	 visible,
something	is	invisible;	the	manifest	and	the	unmanifest	meet	there,	embrace	each
other,	are	fulfilled	in	each	other.
If	 you	 simply	 say	 and	 use	words	 and	 there	 is	 no	 silence	 in	 those	words,	 your
words	will	 be	 like	 dead	 stones.	They	 can	 hit	 somebody's	 head,	 you	 can	 argue
with	them,	but	you	cannot	convert.	They	don't	have	that	quality	of	silence	which
becomes	conversion.	When	a	word	has	a	 silence	at	 its	 innermost	core,	when	a
word	is	luminous	with	silence,	it	brings	conversion.
Then	 it	 is	 a	 gospel,	 then	 it	 is	 good	 news.	 Then	 somebody,	 who	 is	 saying
something	with	silence	in	it,	is	not	throwing	a	dead	rock	at	you,	but	is	throwing	a
flower.	 It	 will	 also	 hit	 you,	 but	 it	 will	 also	 caress	 you,	 and	 it	 will	 go	 deeper
because	you	can	be	vulnerable	to	it	and	it	will	reach	to	your	very	heart.	Because
how	can	you	protect	yourself	against	it?	You	will	be	nondefensive.
So	remember,	all	the	mystics	have	been	singing	and	dancing,	celebrating.	They
go	on	saying,	"We	cannot	say	it,"	and	they	go	on	saying	all	the	same.
There	 is	 a	difference	 in	 saying	and	 saying.	When	you	 say	without	knowing	 it,
without	realizing	it,	it	is	just	gibberish,	just	words	and	words	and	words,	without
any	soul	in	them;	it	is	a	corpse;	there	is	no	aliveness	in	it.	Those	words	stink	--
they	 stink	 of	 death.	 There	 is	 no	 heartbeat	 of	 life.	When	 you	 know,	when	 you
have	experienced,	when	you	have	 fallen	 into	 that	 abyss	 called	God,	when	you
are	 transformed	 by	 that	 surrender,	when	 you	 are	 totally	 immersed	 in	 it,	 when
your	every	cell	is	bathed	in	it,	then	you	say;	but	your	words	are	not	mere	words.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
109
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
They	carry	silence.	They	are	vehicles	of	silence;	they	are	gestures	of	silence.	We
have	a	special	name	for	it	in	the	East:	MAHAMUDRA	--	the	great	gesture.
Look	 at	 my	 hand.	 If	 it	 is	 empty,	 if	 there	 is	 nobody	 behind	 it	 who	 has
experienced,	 then	 it	 is	 an	 ordinary	gesture.	But	 if	 there	 is	 somebody	behind	 it
who	has	known,	who	has	lived,	who	has	experienced,	then	raising	this	hand	is	a
great	gesture,	MAHAMUDRA.	Then	the	ordinary	hand	becomes	extraordinary.
Then	 ordinary	 words	 are	 no	 more	 ordinary	 words.	 You	 cannot	 go	 to	 the
dictionary	to	find	their	meaning.	When	a	word	is	full	of	silence,	you	will	have	to
go	within	yourself	to	find	its	meaning,	not	to	a	dictionary,	not	to	a	library.	You
will	have	to	go	within	yourself.	The	meaning	will	be	found	in	your	experience.
The	word	of	a	man	who	knows	is	loaded,	loaded	with	great	fragrance.	You	will
have	to	decode	it	 in	your	innermost	core	of	being,	 into	the	innermost	shrine	of
your	being.
Truth	 is	 a	 transcendence,	 transcendence	 of	 all	 duality.	 So	 those	who	 say	 truth
cannot	be	 said,	only	 say	a	half-truth;	 and	 those	who	say	 that	 truth	can	be	 said
only	in	silence,	they	also	say	a	half-truth.
Zen	brings	the	whole	truth	to	the	world.	Zen	is	a	great	blessing	to	the	world;	it
brings	the	whole	truth.
The	whole	 truth	 is:	Truth	cannot	be	said,	and	yet	can	be	said.	 If	not	said,	 then
showed,	 indicated.	The	ordinary	duality	 is	 transcended.	We	are	always	moving
from	 one	 pole	 of	 the	 duality	 to	 the	 other.	 Sometimes	we	 say,	 "Yes,	 it	 can	 be
said";	this	is	one	pole.	Then	we	become	aware,	"How	can	it	be	said?"	--	the	other
pole.	 Then	 we	 keep	 silent,	 but	 then	 again	 we	 become	 aware	 that	 there	 is
something	left:	"Yes,	it	can	be	said."	This	way	it	goes	on	moving,	it	swings.
Zen	 says	 truth	 is	 a	 transcendence,	 transcendence	 of	 all	 duality.	 The	 duality
between	the	word	and	the	silence	is	also	to	be	transcended.
The	 Bible	 says	 in	 the	 beginning	 there	 was	 the	 word.	 The	 Vedas	 say	 in	 the
beginning	 there	was	 silence,	 eternal	 silence,	 and	 the	 silence	 brooded	 over	 the
sea,	and	it	was	dark.	And	the	Bible	says	there	was	the	word.	The	first	thing	that
happened	in	existence	was	the	word.	God	said	let	 there	be	light,	and	there	was
light.	Both	are	half-truths.
If	you	ask	the	Zen	people	 ...	They	have	not	written	any	Bible	or	any	Veda	yet,
and	 they	will	never	 try,	because	 they	don't	believe	 in	scriptures.	They	say	 it	 is
beyond	the	scriptures;	it	is	a	transmission	beyond	the	scriptures.	But	if	they	ever
write	a	Bible,	or	if	they	are	forced	to,	like	Lao	Tzu	was	once	forced	to	write	the
Tao	Te	Ching	because	the	king	wouldn't	allow	him	to	leave	the	country	unless	he
wrote	his	experiences	...
Lao	Tzu	wanted	to	go	to	 the	Himalayas,	 to	die	 there;	certainly	 there	cannot	be
any	more	beautiful	 a	 place	 to	 die.	Those	 eternal	 peaks,	 those	 snow	 --	 covered
virgin	peaks,	where	can	you	find	a	better	place	to	disappear	in	God?	What	better
moment?	 He	 wanted	 to	 go	 --	 he	 was	 very	 old	 and	 he	 wanted	 to	 go	 to	 the
Himalayas	 to	 rest	 and	 disappear	 there,	 nobody	 ever	 knowing	 about	 him.	 He
wanted	to	disappear	absolutely	alone.	He	wanted	his	death	to	be	private.
And	death	 is	a	private	 thing.	Nobody	else	can	be	with	you	when	you	die;	 it	 is
absolutely	 internal.	So	he	wanted	 to	escape	and	go	away	 from	 the	crowds.	He
was	 afraid	 too	 many	 people	 will	 surround	 him	 and	 his	 death	 will	 become	 a
public	affair.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
110
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
But	 the	 king	 insisted,	 "First	 you	write	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 known."	 And	 he
ordered	the	guards	on	the	boundary	saying	that	"This	man	is	not	to	be	allowed	to
go	out."	So	he	was	caught	at	a	guard	post,	and	for	three	days	he	sat	in	the	guards'
room	and	wrote	down	the	Tao	Te	Ching.
If	somebody,	forces	a	Zen	Master	to	write	down	a	Bible,	a	Veda,	then	they	will
say	there	was	song	in	the	beginning.	Neither	word	nor	silence,	but	song.	There
was	song	in	the	beginning,	and	God	sang	and	danced.	Not	"Let	there	be	light":
God	sang	and	danced.	And	that	dance	became	the	beginning	of	creation.
That	dance	continues.	That	dance	is	what	existence	is.
The	song	has	a	mystery	about	it	because	it	is	a	meeting,	a	marriage	of	opposites.
In	the	song	there	is	sound	and	silence.	The	song	says	something,	but	says	in	such
a	way	that	you	cannot	grasp	it.	Not	that	it	doesn't	say	anything.	It	makes	much
available,	 but	 you	 cannot	 grasp	 it,	 you	 cannot	 just	 possess	 it.	 If	 you	 try	 to
possess,	you	will	kill	it.	You	cannot	have	a	song	in	your	fist;	otherwise	the	song
will	be	killed.	It	is	too	delicate;	you	cannot	be	that	rough	with	it.
A	song	has	to	be	preserved	in	the	heart,	not	in	the	fist.	About	a	song	you	have	to
be	 receptive,	 not	 aggressive.	You	 can	 keep	 an	 argument	 in	 the	 fist;	 it	 is	 hard,
rocklike,	it	will	not	die.	You	can	keep	and	possess	an	argument,	you	can	become
the	 possessor	 of	 an	 argument.	 That's	 why	 the	 ego	 enjoys	 very	 much	 to	 have
arguments,	 proofs,	 logic,	 philosophies.	 The	 ego	 feels	 very	 much	 fulfilled:	 "I
know	so	much."
The	 song	 cannot	 be	 possessed	 that	 way;	 the	 ego	 cannot	 be	 its	 possessor.	 The
song	can	penetrate	your	being,	but	the	ego	has	to	give	way.	If	the	ego	comes	in
between,	the	song	will	be	shattered.	You	may	get	fragments	of	it,	and	you	may
start	interpreting	those	fragments,	but	you	will	miss	the	unity	of	it.	And	it	was	in
the	unity.
A	song	has	not	to	be	thought	about.	If	you	start	thinking,	about	a	song,	you	are
already	missing	it.	When	you	listen	to	music,	how	do	you	listen?	Do	you	bring
your	mind	 in?	 If	 you	 bring	 your	mind	 in,	where	 is	 the	music?	Music	 and	 the
mind	both	cannot	exist	 together.	That	 is	 the	mystery	of	music:	you	have	to	put
your	mind	 aside.	You	 cannot	 argue	with	music;	 you	 cannot	 nod	 your	 head	 in
agreement	 or	 disagreement.	 You	 cannot	 say,	 "Yes,	 I	 agree,"	 or	 "No,	 I	 don't
agree."	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 agreement	 or	 no	 agreement.	With	 music	 you
simply	become	one.	If	you	want	to	feel	it	you	have	to	put	your	head	aside.	The
heart	has	to	open	towards	it.	It	goes	directly	to	the	heart,	it	showers	on	the	heart.
It	helps	 the	 flower	of	 the	heart	 to	open	and	bloom.	 It	 is	 a	nourishment	 for	 the
inner	lotus.
The	Zen	people	will	say,	"There	was	song	in	the	beginning,	and	then	God	sang
and	God	danced,	and	that's	what	he	has	been	doing	since	then."	Each	moment	it
is	a	dance.	Look	around.	Can't	you	hear	these	birds?	These	are	not	birds;	don't	be
deceived	 by	 them.	 These	 are	 not	 birds.	 It	 is	 God	 singing,	 the	 God	 of	 the
beginnings	--	because	it	is	always	a	beginning.
Each	moment	is	a	beginning.	Never	think	that	the	beginning	was	somewhere	in
the	past.	This	is	the	beginning,	and	it	is	always	the	beginning	and	there	is	no	end.
It	is	God	singing.
Can't	you	hear	the	silence	of	the	trees?	It	is	God,	silent.
In	the	birds	he	is	singing,	in	the	trees	he	is	silent.	Birds	cannot	exist	without	the
trees,	 and,	 let	me	 tell	 you,	 the	 trees	 cannot	 exist	without	 the	 birds	 either.	 The
birds	 sing	 for	 the	 trees,	 and	 the	 trees	 are	 silent	 for	 the	 birds,	 and	 there	 is	 a
marriage.	They	are	tied	together.	If	trees	disappear,	birds	will	disappear.	Kill	all
the	 birds	 of	 the	 world,	 and	 you	 will	 one	 day	 see	 the	 trees	 are	 disappearing.
Everything	is	intertwined,	everything	is	interlinked.	This	is	what	we	mean	by	the
word	"ecology"	--	everything	is	together.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
111
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
It	is	God	singing,	it	is	God	silent.
Once	 you	 understand	 that	 God	 is	 both,	 then	 this	 highest	 possibility	 opens	 for
you.	This	is	the	first	principle,	that	you	need	not	divide,	all	division	is	false,	that
you	need	not	create	any	duality,	because	existence	is	nondual,	because	existence
is	one.
And	all	our	misery	is	because	we	are	divided.	Why	do	you	feel	so	thrilled	when
you	are	in	love?	What	happens?	Is	 the	thrill	 just	chemical,	hormonal?	No,	it	 is
not.	The	thrill	is	existential.	When	you	are	in	love,	at	least	with	one	person	you
feel	 to	be	one,	at	 least	with	one	person	you	have	dropped	duality,	at	 least	with
one	person	you	are	no	more	separate,	at	least	with	one	person	the	boundaries	are
not	 there.	You	have	 removed	 the	boundaries.	Two	 spaces	have	 come	 so	 close,
they	overlap.	You	feel	so	thrilled	with	love,	so	blissful	with	love,	because	it	is	an
experience	of	God,	a	very	limited	experience	of	course.
And	if	it	is	so	beautiful	to	be	one	with	one	person,	how	much	more	beautiful	will
it	be	to	be	one	with	the	whole,	to	be	one	with	all	the	persons,	men	and	women,
trees	and	birds	and	animals	and	the	clouds	and	the	mountains	and	the	stars?	How
will	it	be?	How	much	more	beautiful?	The	beauty	cannot	be	imagined,	because
the	difference	will	not	be	only	of	quantity,	it	will	be	of	quality.	It	will	be	utterly
different.
Love	can	at	 the	most	be	only	a	glimpse	of	 a	 ray,	not	 the	 ray	 itself,	but	only	a
glimpse	 in	 the	 lake.	 A	 ray	 of	 the	 sun	 playing	 on	 the	 lake,	 and	 you	 see	 the
glimpse.	That	glimpse	is	love.
When	 you	 find	 out	 the	 real	 ray,	 it	 becomes	 prayer.	 When	 you	 start	 moving
through	that	ray,	upwards,	you	start	climbing	on	that	ray	and	you	start	reaching
towards	the	source	of	all	light,	then	you	are	growing	in	spirituality.	One	day	you
are	 dissolved	 into	 that	 light.	You	 yourself	 have	 become	 that	 light.	 That	 is	 the
orgasm	I	talk	about.	That's	ecstasy.
And	Zen	people	say	that	when	you	know,	you	have	to	say,	knowing	well	that	it
cannot	be	said.	You	have	to	sing	it.
Zen	 Masters	 have	 been	 very	 creative.	 Either	 they	 were	 singers,	 dancers,	 or
painters,	or	 in	 some	sort	of	art,	 calligraphy,	pottery.	Whatsoever	 they	could	do
they	 did.	That	 became	 the	 gesture	 of	 their	 expression.	They	were	 not	 inactive
people.	 Deep	 down	 they	 were	 not	 doers,	 and	 on	 the	 surface	 they	 were	 not
inactive	at	all.	Deep	down	they	were	just	instrumental	to	the	divine.	No	doer,	no
idea	of	doing	anything	--	just	being,	but	on	the	surface	very	creative.	The	world
would	have	been	far	richer	if	every	religion	had	developed	such	a	school	as	Zen.
For	example,	Hindu	monks	have	lived	a	very	uncreative	life.	Jaina	monks	have
lived	 a	 very	 uncreative	 life.	 Except	 Zen,	 even	 Buddhists	 have	 lived	 a	 very
uncreative	life.	So	has	been	the	case	with	the	Catholics.
Zen	brings	creativity.	And	remember,	if	you	want	to	be	one	with	the	creator,	you
will	 have	 to	 learn	 some	ways	 of	 creativity.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 be	 one	with	 the
creator	 is	 to	be	 in	some	moment	of	creativity,	when	you	are	 lost.	The	potter	 is
lost	 in	making	 his	 pottery;	 the	 potter	 is	 lost	while	working	 on	 the	wheel.	The
painter	 is	 lost	 while	 painting.	 The	 dancer	 is	 lost;	 there	 is	 no	 dancer,	 only	 the
dance	remains.	Those	are	the	peak	moments,	where	you	touch	God,	where	God
touches	you.
Now,	 the	 scholar,	 the	 so-called	 scholar,	 becomes	 wordy.	 He	 goes	 on	 learning
more	words,	more	words,	more	information,	more	scriptures.	He	has	no	silence.
That	 is	 a	very	 lopsided	phenomenon.	Then	against	 the	 scholar	 there	 are	 a	 few
saints,	who	keep	quiet;	they	don't	even	say	a	single	word.	That	too	is	moving	to
the	 other	 extreme.	 They	 become	 uncreative.	 Of	 course,	 they	 are	 silent,	 better
than	the	scholar	--	at	least	they	will	not	throw	their	rubbish	into	Osho	-	The	First
Principle
112
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
other	people's	heads,	at	least	they	are	not	committing	any	crime	--	but	in	a	higher
sense	they	are	also	criminals	because	they	are	not	benefiting	existence.	They	are
parasites.	They	are	not	making	existence	richer	by	their	being	here.	They	are	not
helping	God	in	his	dance,	in	his	song.
Zen	 brings	 the	 highest	 synthesis.	Don't	 be	 afraid	 of	 speaking,	 but	 don't	 go	 on
speaking	if	you	don't	know.	Don't	be	silent.	Just	being	silent	will	not	help.
It	 has	 to	 be	 understood	because	 too	many	 times	 this	 comes	 to	 your	mind	 too:
Why	 go	 on	 speaking?	Why	 not	 keep	 quiet?	 But	 your	 silence	 will	 be	 YOUR
silence.	The	words	will	go	on	moving,	revolving	inside	you.	You	will	become	a
madhouse	 inside.	You	may	 look	 silent	 from	 the	outside;	you	will	not	be	 silent
inside.	How	can	you	simply	drop	 those	words,	 those	old	habits	of	many	lives?
The	mind	will	 go	 on	 chattering,	 the	mind	will	 go	 on	 saying	 things,	 repeating
things.	The	mind	is	 like	an	automaton;	even	if	you	don't	want	 to	talk	the	mind
goes	on.	If	you	don't	talk	to	others	it	goes	on	talking	to	itself.	It	creates	both	the
parties:	it	talks	from	one	side	and	answers	from	another	side;	it	goes	on	playing
the	game.	From	the	outside	one	can	be	easily	silent,	but	from	the	inside?
And	 if	 you	 are	 silent	 from	 the	 inside,	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 your	 silence
becomes	 so	 loaded	with	 ecstasy	 that	 you	have	 to	 sing.	There	 is	 no	 other	way.
That	 you	 have	 to	 dance,	 that	 you	 have	 to	 share.	When	 you	 have	 you	 have	 to
share.	 If	you	have	 it	at	all	you	will	have	 to	share.	 If	you	don't	have	 it	you	can
keep	quiet,	but	what	is	the	point	of	keeping	quiet	if	you	don't	have	it?
There	are	two	types	of	people:	one	who	goes	on	talking	without	having	it,	and
one	who	goes	on	keeping	silent	without	having	it.	Both	are	in	the	same	boat.
There	is	a	third	type	of	person,	who	has	come	to	know	it,	who	has	really	become
silent	and	in	the	silence	he	has	heard	the	soundless	sound,	in	the	silence	God	has
delivered	 his	message	 to	 him.	God	has	 spoken	 to	 him.	He	has	 had	 a	 dialogue
with	God	himself.	The	silence	has	 filled	his	heart	with	 so	much	 juice,	with	 so
much	life,	with	life	abundant,	that	he	is	bursting.
He	has	to	say	it.	There	is	no	way	to	get	rid	of	it.
And	his	saying	will	have	a	totally	different	significance	because	words	will	not
be	mere	words.	If	such	a	person	sits	silently,	even	his	silence	will	be	a	sharing.	If
such	 a	 person	 keeps	 completely	 silent,	 you	 will	 see	 his	 silence	 is	 singing	 all
around	him.	You	will	feel	the	vibe.
His	 silence	 is	 saying	 something.	 He	 is	 indicating	 from	 his	 silence	 too.	 If	 he
speaks	he	speaks.
If	he	is	silent,	then	too	he	speaks.
If	 you	 don't	 sing	 it,	 remember,	 you	 don't	 have	 it.	 If	 it	 does	 not	 overflow	 in	 a
thousand	and	one	gestures,	then	it	is	not	there.	You	cannot	hold	it	if	it	 is	there.
And	 you	 cannot	 possess	 it	 if	 it	 is	 there;	 it	 is	 not	 your	 property.	 You	 cannot
become	the	owner	of	it.	You	cannot	hoard	it,	you	cannot	be	miserly	about	it.	If	it
is	 there	at	all,	 it	drowns	you	utterly.	 It	possesses	you.	You	cannot	possess	 it;	 it
possesses	 you.	 And	 then	 it	 leads	 you	 into	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 gestures.	 In	 a
thousand	and	one	streams	you	start	flowing,	and	whatsoever	you	do	becomes	an
expression.
I	have	heard	a	very	beautiful	legend.	The	legend	is,	there	was	a	great	Master	in
India,	 the	 twenty-seventh	 successor	 of	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha;	 his	 name	 was
Hanyatara.	A	king	in	south	India	requested	him	to	come	to	his	court.	The	king
himself	 came,	 bowed	 down	 to	 Hanyatara,	 touched	 his	 feet,	 and	 said,	 "Please,
come	 to	my	court,	 to	bless	us.	And	 this	has	been	my	desire,	 to	 listen	 to	 some
sutras	of	Gautam	the	Buddha	by	a	man	who	is	a	Buddha	himself,	so	I	have	been
avoiding	 scholars,	 pundits,	 professors.	 I	 have	 been	 avoiding,	 I	 have	 been
waiting,	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
113
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
because	 those	 sutras	 that	Buddha	uttered	are	 so	pregnant	 that	only	a	man	who
has	attained	to	that	consciousness	will	be	able	to	give	expression	to	them."
Hanyatara	came	to	the	court	with	an	attendant.	The	king	was	thrilled;	it	was	his
dream	for	his	whole	 life	one	day	 to	have	a	Buddha	 in	his	court,	 in	his	palace.
The	 whole	 palace	 was	 decorated,	 the	 whole	 town	 was	 decorated;	 the	 whole
capital	 was	 celebrating.	 It	 was	 a	 great	 day	 of	 celebration.	 But	 the	 king	 was
puzzled,	a	little	bewildered:	Hanyatara	sat	silently,	not	saying	a	single	word,	and
the	 attendant	 recited	 the	 sutra.	Now,	 this	was	 not	 the	 purpose	 at	 all.	 The	 king
could	have	found	better	people	to	recite	the	sutra	than	the	attendant.	He	was	just
an	attendant	who	 looked	after	Hanyatara,	 just	used	 to	do	small	errands,	a	very
ordinary	 man,	 not	 even	 a	 great	 scholar.	 His	 grammar	 was	 faulty,	 his
pronunciation	was	not	exactly	as	it	should	be.	He	was	an	ordinary	man.
Just	out	of	respect,	the	king	kept	silent.	When	the	sutra	was	finished,	he	touched
the	 feet	 of	Hanyatara	 and	 said,	 "Sir,	 enlighten	me	 about	 this;	 otherwise	 I	will
remain	puzzled.	Why	did	not	YOU	recite	the	sutra?"
And	Hanyatara	 said,	 "What,	 I	 did	 not	 recite	 the	 sutra?	 Then	 what	 else	 was	 I
doing	the	whole	time	here?	You	fool!"
The	king	was	even	more	puzzled,	because	he	had	kept	quiet,	he	had	not	said	a
single	word.
The	 king	 said,	 "Please,	 explain	 it	 to	me.	 I	 don't	 understand.	 I	 am	 an	 ordinary,
ignorant	person.
I	may	not	know	the	ways	of	the	Buddhas."
And	 Hanyatara	 said,	 "I	 sat	 silently,	 breathing	 in,	 breathing	 out.	 That	 was	 my
sutra.	What	else	is	there	in	life?	Breathe	in,	breathe	out.	Be	alert,	aware.	When	I
breathed	in,	I	was	aware;	when	I	breathed	out,	I	was	aware.	It	was	all	awareness!
What	 else	 is	 a	 sutra?	 Awareness.	 If	 you	 had	 listened	 to	 the	 rhythm	 of	 my
breathing	you	would	have	understood.	I	have	recited	it!
Words	 are	 one	way	 to	 recite	 it.	 Breathing	 silently,	 but	with	 full	 awareness,	 is
another	 way	 to	 recite	 it	 --	 and	 far	 better	 a	 way.	 I	 have	 been	 very	 expressive
today,	as	I	have	never	been	before.
Thinking	 that	you	have	been	waiting	 for	 so	 long,	 I	 thought,	 'Why	not	give	 the
real	thing?'	"
The	king	was	 thrilled,	 seeing	 the	compassion.	Now	he	 felt	 there	was	a	certain
rhythm	in	his	silence.	Now	he	became	aware,	retrospectively	of	course,	that	this
man	was	not	silent	in	the	ordinary	way.	He	had	seen	silent	people;	sometimes	he
himself	 had	 sat	 in	 silence.	 This	 was	 a	 different	 silence.	 There	 was	 a	 song,
certainly	there	was	a	song.	There	was	a	fragrance	around	this	man.	There	was	a
vibe	 of	 a	 different	 quality;	 he	 was	 vibrating.	 Strange	 it	 was,	 but	 now	 he
remembered,	yes,	 it	was	there.	And	the	way	he	was	breathing	was	no	ordinary
way.
Not	that	he	was	doing	anything	special	in	the	breathing:	his	breathing	was	pure,
natural,	like	a	small	baby.
When	you	breathe,	your	breathing	is	never	natural.	If	you	are	a	little	angry,	your
anger	changes	your	breathing.	If	you	are	full	of	passion,	lust,	your	lust	changes
your	 breathing.	 If	 you	 are	 greedy,	 your	 greed	 is	 reflected	 in	 your	 breathing.
Continuously	 your	 mind	 mood	 infiltrates	 breathing	 and	 changes	 it.	 You	 can
watch	it.	When	you	are	angry,	 try	not	 to	disturb	the	breathing,	and	you	will	be
completely	 unable	 to	 be	 angry.	 Just	 try	 not	 to	 change	 the	 breathing.	 Let	 the
breathing	remain	as	it	was	before	you	became	angry,	and	then	try	to	be	angry.	It
will	be	impossible.	The	breathing	has	to	change	first.	Through	the	breathing	the
body	changes;	the	mind	first	affects	the	breathing.	When	you	are	in	a	moment	of
lust,	watch,	keep	 the	breathing	natural,	and	you	will	suddenly	find	 the	 lust	has
disappeared,	the	moment	came	and	passed.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
114
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
By	and	by	you	will	be	able	to	see	each	mood	is	reflected	in	your	breathing,	so
your	breathing	is	never	natural,	because	there	is	some	mood	or	other.	The	natural
breathing	means	there	is	no	mood:	that	means	there	is	no	mind	--	neither	anger
nor	greed	nor	lust	nor	jealousy	nor	love	nor	hate.	No	--	mood	means	no-mind.	In
that	 state	 of	 no-mind	 the	 breathing	 is	 natural.	 Then	 there	 is	 a	 song	 to	 it,	 then
there	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 quality	 to	 it.	 Then	 it	 is	 pure	 life.	 Then	 the	 flame	 is
without	smoke.
Yes,	 the	 king	 remembered,	 there	 was	 something	 strange,	 something	 was
happening.	He	had	missed	it.	He	started	crying.	He	said,	"I	have	missed	it.	Why
didn't	you	tell	me	before?
Now	I	know	there	was	something,	and	I	had	even	felt	it,	but	my	consciousness	is
not	so	developed,	so	I	could	not	understand	what	was	happening.
"And	I	was	too	concerned	about	that	foolish	sutra.	I	was	continuously	thinking
about	why	you	were	not	reciting	the	sutra	and	why	this	attendant	was	reciting	the
sutra.	I	was	so	much	concerned	about	the	sutra	that	I	missed.
"But	 I	 am	 grateful	 that	 you	 showed	 such	 compassion,	 that	 you	 showed	 your
being	so	naked,	so	true,	so	authentic."
He	presented	a	great	diamond,	the	most	valuable	he	had,	to	Hanyatara,	and	then
he	said	 to	Hanyatara,	"I	have	 three	sons.	Sir,	be	kind	enough.	 I	will	call	 them.
Bless	them."
Thinking	that	young	people	are	young	people,	and	the	youngest	was	only	seven,
they	may	disturb	the	sutra	reciting,	he	had	not	called	them	to	participate	before.
The	three	young	princes	came	in.
Rather	 than	 blessing	 them,	 Hanyatara	 showed	 the	 diamond	 that	 the	 king	 had
presented	 to	him	 to	 the	 first	prince,	 the	eldest.	He	must	have	been	somewhere
near	fifteen.	The	prince	looked	at	the	diamond	and	said,	"A	great	diamond,	of	the
finest	water,	 purest	water.	Where	 could	you	get	 it?	 It	 is	 rare.	 It	 is	 no	ordinary
diamond."
Yes,	 his	 understanding	 about	 the	 diamond	 was	 perfectly	 true.	 It	 was	 a	 rare
diamond,	of	the	most	perfect	water.	Even	Hanyatara	had	never	seen	such	a	thing.
Then	he	called	 the	second	prince,	who	must	have	been	near	about	 ten,	and	 the
second	prince	looked	at	the	diamond,	and	he	said,	"Not	only	the	finest,	not	only
the	best,	it	is	certain	that	it	belongs	to	my	father	because	in	this	kingdom	nobody
can	have	such	a	diamond.	It	is	rare.	Sir,	it	does	not	belong	to	you,	it	cannot.	To
protect	 this	diamond	you	will	need	a	great	army,	otherwise	you	cannot	have	it.
Just	this	attendant	won't	do."
Yes,	his	understanding	was	also	very	correct.
And	then	the	third	son	was	called.	He	was	only	seven.	He	looked	at	the	diamond,
looked	at	Hanyatara,	and	laughed	and	said,	"What?	Do	you	want	to	befool	me?"
He	 was	 only	 seven,	 and	 he	 said,	 "Do	 you	 want	 to	 befool	 me?	 You	 cannot!
Because	the	real	diamonds	are	never	of	the	outside.	And	what	are	you	trying	to
show	me?	You	have	 the	 real	diamond	within	YOU.	 I	 can	 see	 it!	This	 is	 just	 a
stone	that	you	have	in	your	hand.	Throw	it,	sir!"
And	it	is	said	that	Hanyatara	hugged	this	small	boy.
This	 boy's	 name	 was	 Bodhitara,	 and	 Hanyatara	 changed	 his	 name	 to
Bodhidharma.	He	 became	 the	 twenty-eighth	 successor	 of	 Buddha;	 he	was	 the
first	patriarch	of	Zen	in	China,	this	small	boy	Bodhitara,	whose	name	Hanyatara
changed	to	Bodhidharma.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
115
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
Hanyatara	said,	"This	boy	has	looked	into	the	deepest	reality	anybody	can	look
into.
DHARMA	means	'the	ultimate	reality'.	He	has	penetrated	to	the	ultimate	reality."
He	said	to	the	king,	"Even	you	could	not	see	who	I	am.	That's	why	you	missed
my	 sermon,	 my	 silent	 sermon.	 That's	 why	 you	 missed	 my	 silent	 song.	 I	 was
singing	here	but	you	missed.	But	this	boy,	yes,	I	cannot	befool	him.	This	boy	is
going	to	be	my	successor."
And	 then	he	 said	 to	 the	king,	 "Sir,	 forgive	me.	 I	have	not	 come	 for	you	and	 I
have	not	come	because	you	requested	me	to.	I	had	to	come	because	of	this	boy.	I
have	been	in	search	of	this	boy!	This	has	been	a	promise	from	the	past	life,	and
this	has	been	a	decided	gesture:	 in	 the	past	 life	I	 told	this	boy,	 'I	will	seek	you
and	 find	you	 and	 I	will	 show	you	 a	 diamond,	 and	 that	will	 be	 the	moment	 of
your	examination.	 If	you	can	see	my	 inner	diamond	and	you	are	not	befooled,
you	will	be	my	successor.'"
The	 legend	 is	 of	 tremendous	 value.	 First,	 the	 silent	 sermon.	Yes,	 sometimes	 a
mystic	can	be	silent	--	but	he	is	not	silent!	His	silence	is	a	very	telling	silence.
He	may	not	do	anything,	he	may	not	even	move	his	eyes,	he	may	not	move	any
of	his	limbs,	but	still	his	presence	goes	on	doing	a	thousand	and	one	things.	Just
to	be	in	his	presence,	just	to	breathe	with	him	in	the	same	rhythm,	and	something
is	transferred:	his	song,	his	silence,	his	dance.	You	will	never	be	the	same	again.
Truth	is	not	hidden,	from	the	very	beginning.	Truth	is	unhidden;	only	your	eyes
are	closed.
Truth	is	being	preached	from	every	tree	and	from	every	bird	and	from	every	rock
and	from	every	star;	just	your	eyes,	your	ears,	your	sensitivity	is	not	there.	You
are	deaf.	Truth	is	not	dumb;	you	are	deaf.	And	truth	is	not	hiding	anywhere.
A	man	 came	 to	 a	 Zen	Master	 and	 asked,	 "Sir,	 where	 should	 I	 go	 to	 find	 the
truth?"	And	 the	Zen	Master	said,	"You	 just	keep	 looking	 in	 front	of	your	nose
and	go	on,	and	you	will	find	it.
It	is	just	in	front	of	your	nose!	Truth	is	just	in	front	of	you.	In	fact,	wherever	you
look	it	is	truth,	you	just	need	to	know	how	to	look	for	it.	But	you	are	looking	for
other	things;	that's	why	you	go	on	missing.
That	great	king	missed	Hanyatara's	 sermon.	 It	was	a	Zen	 sermon,	 the	 same	as
Buddha	preached	to	the	first	Zen	Master,	Mahakashyap,	sitting	silently,	holding
a	flower	in	his	hand.
This	second	sermon,	of	Hanyatara	to	the	king,	was	even	more	subtle.	He	was	not
even	holding	a	 flower	 in	his	hand.	He	was	 just	breathing	 in	and	out,	 a	natural
breathing,	 an	 ordinary	 breathing,	 unaffected	 by	 the	mind.	And	 truth	was	 there
and	the	sutras	were	recited	there	through	his	breathing,	but	the	king	missed.
You	may	 have	 come	 across	 a	 Buddha	 in	 your	 life	 --	 or	 you	may	 have	 come
across	many	 Buddhas	 in	 your	 past	 lives	 --	 but	 you	 have	missed	 because	 you
were	 not	 sensitive	 enough	 to	 feel	 that	 vibe.	That	 vibe	 is	 subtle.	You	were	 not
aware	enough	to	move	to	that	height,	to	feel	the	presence.
Be	a	little	more	alert.	The	sermon	is	preached	constantly.	From	everywhere	God
is	 speaking	 to	 you.	 Even	 when	 everything	 is	 silent	 he	 is	 speaking	 through
silence.	His	song	is	eternal.
Zen	 says,	 "Truth	 is	 not	 hidden,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 so	 you	 are	 not	 to
uncover	 truth,	 you	 are	only	 to	uncover	your	 eyes."	You	 just	 have	 a	 curtain	on
your	eyes.	Just	pull	your	earplugs	out.	Your	ears	are	plugged;	hence	you	cannot
hear.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
116
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
How	to	unplug	the	ears?	How	to	open	the	eyes?	How	to	drop	barriers	that	don't
allow	 you	 to	 become	 sensitive	 enough?	 What	 is	 the	 way?	 The	 way	 is
IMMEDIACY.	Be	immediate,	be	in	the	moment.
Otherwise	 Buddhas	 can	 go	 on	 shouting	 from	 the	 housetops,	 and	 you	will	 not
hear	--	or	you	will	hear	something	which	has	not	been	said	at	all.
A	few	scenes.	First	scene:
Warden:	"Can't	you	see	the	sign	'NO	FISHING	HERE'?"
Angler:	"Yes,	and	I	don't	agree.	There	is	good	fishing	here!	Just	look	at	this	lot	I
have	landed	today.	Whoever	put	that	sign	up	must	be	crazy."
The	second	scene:
The	Dean	of	Women	was	lecturing	to	a	class	on	the	subject	of	sex	morality.	"In
moments	 of	 temptation,	 ask	 yourself	 just	 one	 question:	 Is	 an	 hour	 of	 pleasure
worth	a	lifetime	of	shame?"
One	of	the	girls	raised	her	hand	naively	and	asked,	"How	do	you	make	it	last	one
hour?"
The	third	scene:
Ethel	was	shapely	out	shy,	and	visited	a	doctor	for	the	first	time.	He	ushered	her
into	 his	 private	 office	 and	 said,	 "Now,	 my	 dear,	 please	 get	 completely
undressed."
Ethel	blushed	and	replied,	"Okay,	Doctor,	but	you	first."
Fourth	scene:
The	 following	 ad	 appeared	 in	 the	 Personal	 column	 of	 a	 London	 paper:	 "My
husband	and	 I	have	 four	 sons.	Has	anyone	any	suggestions	as	 to	how	we	may
have	a	daughter?"	Letters	poured	in	from	all	over	the	world.	An	American	wrote,
"If	at	first	you	don't	succeed,	try,	try,	and	try	again."	A	Buddhist	from	Thailand
suggested	that	they	should	seek	the	help	of	Buddha.
A	South	African	recommended	a	special	diet.	An	Indian	proposed	yoga.
A	Frenchman	merely	wrote,	"May	I	be	of	service?"
And	the	last	and	the	fifth	scene:
A	lion	tamer	had	quit	without	notice,	and	the	circus	manager	needed	someone	to
replace	him	for	 the	next	night's	 show.	He	put	an	ad	 in	 the	 local	paper,	and	 the
next	morning	two	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
117
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
applicants	 showed	 up	 outside	 his	 office.	 One	 was	 a	 rather	 ordinary	 looking
young	man,	 and	 the	 other	 a	 ravishing	 redheaded	 beauty.	 Neither	 one	 of	 them
looked	very	much	like	a	lion	trainer,	but	the	manager	was	desperate.	"All	right,"
he	said.	"Here	is	a	whip,	a	chair,	and	a	gun.	Let	us	see	what	you	can	do	with	the
big	Leo	over	there.	We	will	let	you	have	the	first	try,	miss,	but	be	careful.	He	is	a
mean	one."
The	ravishing	redhead	strode	past	 the	whip,	 the	chair,	and	the	gun,	and	empty-
handed,	fearlessly	entered	the	cage.	Big	Leo	rose,	snarling,	then	came	charging
across	 the	 cage	 towards	 her	 with	 a	 ferocious	 roar.	When	 the	 lion	 was	 almost
upon	her	the	girl	threw	open	her	coat.
Underneath,	she	was	stark	naked.	Leo	skidded	to	a	stop	and	crawled	the	rest	of
the	way	on	his	belly.	He	nuzzled	the	girl's	feet	with	his	nose,	purred,	and	licked
her	trim	ankles.
The	 astonished	 circus	 manager	 grinned	 happily	 and	 turned	 to	 the	 pop-eyed
young	man.
"Well,	young	fella,"	he	asked,	"think	you	can	top	that?"
"Yeah,"	panted	the	applicant.	"Just	get	that	stupid	lion	out	of	there."
Truth	 is	 all	 around,	 but	 your	 interpretations	 are	YOUR	 interpretations.	God	 is
speaking	all	the	time,	but	you	hear	not,	or	even	if	you	hear,	you	hear	something
else.	 You	 hear	 according	 to	 you,	 your	 mind	 comes	 in,	 and	 hence	 you	 go	 on
missing.
Unless	 the	mind	 is	 dropped	you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 know	what	 truth	 is.	Truth
cannot	be	discovered	by	mind;	mind	is	the	barrier.	It	is	because	of	the	mind	that
you	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 discover	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 how	 to	 train	 the
mind	to	know	the	truth.	The	more	the	mind	is	trained	and	becomes	capable,	the
less	 is	 the	 possibility	 to	 know	 the	 truth.	 The	more	 skilled	 a	mind,	 the	 farther
away	you	are	from	the	truth.
Mind	is	the	barrier.	No-mind	is	the	door.
How	 to	 attain	 to	 no-mind?	The	 only	way	 --	 the	ONLY	way	 --	 is	 to	 be	 in	 the
present.	The	only	way	is	not	to	think	of	the	past,	not	to	think	of	the	future.	And
you	cannot	think	of	the	present.	That	is	the	whole	secret:	you	cannot	think	of	the
present;	there	is	not	space	enough	for	thought	to	move.	Thought	needs	room	to
move.	Can	you	think	anything	right	now?	If	you	think	it,	either	it	will	be	of	the
past	or	of	the	future.
This	moment	 of	 silence.	 If	 you	 think,	 "Yes,	 this	 is	 a	moment	 of	 silence,"	 it	 is
already	past.
Or	you	say,	"How	beautiful!"	It	is	already	past.	Utter	a	word	"beautiful,"	and	it	is
already	past.
You	cannot	think.	Thinking	stops	when	you	are	in	the	present.	So	that	is	the	only
key,	and	it	is	a	master	key;	it	unlocks	all	the	doors	of	being.	Immediacy,	that	is
the	whole	insistence	of	Zen.
If	you	go	 to	 a	Zen	Master	 and	you	ask	 something,	 it	 is	unpredictable	what	he
will	do	to	you.	He	may	hit	you.	Or	he	may	not	hit	you;	he	may	hit	himself!	Or	he
may	say	something	absurd,	totally	irrelevant	to	what	you	have	asked.	Somebody
asks,	"How	to	attain	Buddhahood?"	and	the	Master	says,	"The	cypress	tree	in	the
courtyard."	Now	what?	How	are	 they	 related?	They	 are	not,	 but	 the	Master	 is
indicating,	"Please,	drop	all	this	nonsense.	Look	at	this	--	THIS	--	cypress	tree	in
the	courtyard.	What	nonsense	are	you	talking	about?	--
Buddha,	and	how	to	become	a	Buddha.	You	are	 talking	about	 the	past	and	 the
future.	You	have	heard	about	Buddha	in	the	past,	so	you	have	a	greed,	a	desire.
Now	you	want	to	become	a	Buddha	in	the	future,	so	you	have	come	to	me.	All
nonsense."	He	simply	gives	something	immediate;	he	says,	"Look!	The	cypress
tree	in	the	courtyard."	It	is	not	relevant	if	you	think	in	terms	of	the	mind.	If	you
think	in	terms	of	no-mind	it	is	the	only	thing	relevant.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
118
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
A	man	 comes	 to	 a	 Zen	Master	 and	 asks,	 "What	 is	 the	way?"	And	 the	Master
says,	"Listen,"
and	everything	becomes	silent,	and	just	by	the	side	of	 the	Master's	hut	flows	a
fountain,	 and	 the	 water	 is	 making	 the	 sound,	 the	 murmur.	 The	 sound	 of	 the
water,	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 running	water.	 For	 a	moment	 everything	 is	 silent,	 the
seeker,	the	questioner,	is	also.	The	Master	says,
"Listen.	Hear.	This	is	the	way."	The	sound	of	the	running	water?	That's	all	he	has
heard.	 And	 the	Master	 says,	 "Hear!	 This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 become	 a	 Buddha,	 to
attain	to	enlightenment."	He	is	bringing	the	mind	to	an	immediacy,	to	a	state	of
immediacy.
What	 is	 he	 saying?	He	 is	 not	 saying	 anything	 about	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 running
water.	 In	 that	 moment,	 when	 suddenly	 the	 Master	 shocked	 the	 inquirer	 --
because	he	was	asking	about	the	way	to	attain	to	nirvana,	and	the	Master	says,
"Listen",	 it	 is	 so	 out	 of	 context,	 it	 is	 so	 unrelated	 to	 his	 question,	 that	 for	 a
moment,	out	of	the	shock	of	it,	the	sheer	shock	of	it,	everything	becomes	silent.
And	when	 the	Master	says,	"Hear.	This	 is	 the	way."	He	 is	not	saying	anything
about	the	running	water	or	its	sound.	He	is	indicating	the	silent	moment	that	has
penetrated	 into	 the	 consciousness	 of	 the	 inquirer.	 He	 says,	 "Hear.	 This	 is	 the
way."
If	you	become	immediate	you	attain.	If	you	live	moment	to	moment	you	attain.
Once	a	Western	psychiatrist	went	to	see	a	Zen
Master	in	Japan.	"How	do	you	deal	with	neurotics?"	he	asked.
The	Master	replied,	simply,	"I	trap	them."
Trap	 them?	The	 psychiatrist	 could	 not	 understand	what	 he	means	 by	 trapping
them.	How	can	you	trap	a	neurotic?	The	neurotic	will	trap	you!
"But	how?"	pressed	the	psychiatrist.
The	Master	replied,	"I	get	them	to	where	they	cannot	ask	any	more	questions."
Then	they	are	trapped,	if	they	cannot	ask	any	more	questions.
If	the	mind	is	allowed	to	ask	questions,	then	the	mind	goes	on	and	on,	so	the	Zen
Master	brings	you	down	to	the	immediate	facticity	of	life.	Sometimes	he	may	hit
you.	By	hitting,	suddenly	you	are	herenow.	It	is	great	compassion.
You	ask,	"Has	God	created	the	world?"	and	the	Master	hits	you,	sharply.	For	a
moment	 you	 are	 puzzled,	 shocked.	For	 a	moment	 all	 thinking	 stops.	The	very
shock	of	it,	 the	unpredictableness	of	it.	For	a	moment,	certainly,	certainly	for	a
moment,	everything	stops.
And	the	Master	says,	"This,	this	is	how	God	created	the	world."	This	is	how	God
goes	 on	 creating	 the	world.	 This	moment	 of	 pure	 silence,	 this	moment	 of	 no-
mind,	is	the	door	to	all	solutions,	to	salvation,	to	liberation.
This	 is	 unique;	 sometimes	 a	 Master	 will	 do	 something	 which	 you	 had	 not
expected	at	all.
And	 the	Master	can	do	 that	only	 if	he	 is	not	 following	certain	 rules.	He	 is	not
following	 any.	 If	 he	 simply	 repeats	 from	 old	 Masters,	 then	 disciples	 become
acquainted	with	it.	No,	sometimes	he	will	do	something	you	cannot	believe.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
119
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
There	was	a	Zen	Master	who	used	to	talk	about	God	or	Buddha,	but	whenever	he
would	talk	about	God	or	Buddha	or	the	ultimate	reality	he	would	raise	his	hand:
one	 finger	 pointing	 towards	 the	 sky.	 This	 became	 a	 joke	 among	 his	 disciples.
Whenever	they	would	talk	about	such	great	things	they	would	raise	their	fingers
and	point	to	God.	A	small	young	boy	was	the	attendant	of	the	Master;	he	used	to
bring	 his	 tea	 and	 things	 like	 that.	He	 became	 a	 perfect	master	 in	 showing	 his
finger,	 and	 he	 was	 always	 there	 and	 the	 Master	 was	 always	 doing	 it	 to
everybody,	so	he	became	very	perfect;	he	could	imitate	it	perfectly.
And	the	Master	was	aware	of	it.	Sometimes	he	would	be	standing	by	the	side	at
the	back	and	the	Master	would	raise	his	finger	and	he	would	also	raise	his	finger
and	everybody	would	laugh	--	and	the	Master	was	aware	of	what	was	happening.
One	day	the	boy	did	that,	and	the	Master	called	him	in	front	of	him,	took	a	sharp
knife,	and	cut	off	his	finger.	The	boy's	finger	was	cut	off.	The	pain	was	sharp;
the	boy	shrieked.	And	the	Master	said,	"Stop!	Now	do	it.	Now	do	it!	Whatsoever
you	have	been	doing	for	so	long	--
now	do	it	without	the	finger!"
And	 when	 the	 Master	 shouted,	 "Stop!"	 all	 pain	 disappeared	 in	 that	 moment,
there	was	 silence.	And	 the	 small	 young	boy	 showed	 the	 finger	which	was	not
there	 anymore,	 blood	 was	 flowing.	 But	 it	 is	 said	 in	 that	 moment	 he	 became
enlightened.
Now,	it	is	possible.	That	very	sharpness	of	it.
Another	 story.	 In	 a	 Zen	Master's	 ashram	 there	were	 five	 hundred	monks,	 and
there	were	two	wings.	Just	in	the	middle	was	the	Master's	hut;	on	one	side	was
one	wing,	on	the	other	side	the	other	wing.	There	was	a	beautiful	cat,	and	there
was	a	great	debate	between	 these	 two	 sides	 as	 to	whom	 it	 belonged.	 It	 almost
became	a	quarrel,	and	things	went	to	such	a	state	that	both	the	wings	were	ready
to	kill	each	other	for	the	cat.	To	whom	does	it	belong?	The	left	wing	was	saying,
"It	 belongs	 to	us";	 and	 the	 right	wing	was	 saying.	 "It	 belongs	 to	us."	 It	was	 a
really	beautiful	cat.
The	Master	heard	it.	He	called	the	whole	ashram,	and	the	cat	was	brought,	and
he	said,
"Now,	give	me	a	 true	answer,	 any	one	of	you,	and	 the	cat	will	belong	 to	him.
Stand	up	 and	 show	your	 understanding	of	 reality,	 any	one	of	 you.	And	 if	 you
don't	show	within	seconds,	I	will	cut	the	cat	in	two,	and	one	part	will	go	to	the
left	side	and	one	part	will	go	to	the	right	side."
They	 were	 shocked.	 They	 could	 not	 find	 out	 how	 to	 respond	 to	 the	Master's
demand.	What	 to	 do	 so	 that	 the	 cat	 can	 be	 saved?	What	 to	 do?	 They	 started
thinking.	In	their	very	thinking	they	missed	the	moment	because	when	you	think,
you	 cannot	 be	 immediate	 and	 you	 cannot	 show	 your	 understanding	 of	 reality.
You	 cannot	 show	 the	 understanding	 of	 immediacy.	 Not	 a	 single	 monk	 out	 of
those	five	hundred	could	show.
For	seconds	the	Master	waited,	then	took	a	sword,	cut	the	cat	in	two;	half	the	cat
was	given	to	each	wing,	and	he	disposed	of	it.	He	said,	"Now	go."	They	were	all
sorry.
By	the	evening,	one	monk,	who	had	gone	outside,	came	back.	When	he	came	in
to	see	the	Master,	he	was	just	taking	his	shoes	off,	and	the	Master	said,	"Where
have	 you	 been?	Were	 you	 not	 there	when	 I	 cut	 the	 cat	 in	 two?	 I	 had	 told	 the
other	monks	that	if	they	can	show	some	understanding	of	reality	the	cat	can	be
saved.	Where	have	you	been?"
The	young	man,	who	had	taken	off	one	shoe	and	was	going	to	take	off	the	other
shoe,	took	that	shoe,	put	it	on	his	head,	walked	back.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
120
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
And	the	Master	called	him,	"Come,	my	son.	Had	you	been	here	the	cat	would	be
alive	still.
The	cat	could	have	been	saved	if	you	were	here."
That	 immediacy.	Not	 that	 this	 is	 the	 answer,	 but	 the	 immediacy.	That	was	 the
moment.	He	allowed	it	to	happen.	It	was	not	done	with	the	mind,	with	thinking.
It	was	done	without	any	thinking,	it	was	done	without	any	mind.	He	simply	said
that	 it	 is	 as	 foolish	 as	me	 having	my	 shoe	 on	my	 head	 to	 cut	 the	 cat.	 It	 is	 as
foolish.	But	it	was	not	an	answer	from	the	mind.	It	was	an	immediate	response.
And	 the	Master	 said,	 "My	boy,	 if	you	had	been	here,	 the	cat	would	have	been
alive.	But	those	fools	could	not	show	any	understanding."
Now	this	small,	beautiful	anecdote:
A	PUZZLED	MONK	ONCE	SAID	TO	FUKETSU,	"YOU	SAY	TRUTH	CAN
BE
EXPRESSED	WITHOUT	SPEAKING,	AND	WITHOUT	KEEPING	SILENT.
HOW	CAN
THIS	BE?"
FUKETSU	ANSWERED,	"IN	SOUTHERN	CHINA,	IN	THE	SPRING,	WHEN
I	WAS
ONLY	A	LAD,	AH!	HOW	THE	BIRDS	SANG	AMONG	THE	BLOSSOMS.	"
A	very	simple	anecdote,	but	with	great	significance.	Meditate	over	it.
A	PUZZLED	MONK	ONCE	SAID	TO	FUKETSU	...
From	 where	 do	 you	 become	 puzzled?	 From	 the	 mind.	 The	 mind	 is	 always
dividing	things,	and	then	cannot	figure	it	out.	Once	you	divide,	there	is	conflict
and	confusion.	How	can	it	be?
Once	you	divide	--	this	is	good,	this	is	bad	--	then	the	question	arises:	"Why	has
God	created	a	world	where	so	much	evil	exists?"	You	divide,	 that	 this	 is	good
and	 this	 is	 bad,	 and	 once	 you	 divide,	 then	 the	 problem	 arises:	 "Why	 has	God
created	such	a	world	where	so	much	evil	exists,	so	much	bad?"
Now,	you	call	God	"God"	because	you	think	he	is	good.	God	is	both	and	neither.
Division	is	yours.	It	is	your	problem;	it	is	not	God's	problem.	You	say,	"Why	do
so	many	people	die?
Why	has	God	created	a	world	where	death	happens?"	You	don't	understand	at
all.	 First	 you	 divide	 life	 in	 two	 parts,	 life	 and	 death.	 It	 is	 undivided.	 For	God
death	is	as	beautiful	as	birth;	they	are	both	parts	of	the	same	phenomenon.	For
the	whole	 there	 is	no	distinction	between	birth	and	death.	Birth	 is	a	death,	and
death	is	a	birth.	They	both	are	the	same:	two	polarities,	two	which	can	exist	only
in	 togetherness.	 Life	 cannot	 exist	 without	 death,	 and	 neither	 can	 death	 exist
without	life.
Have	 you	 ever	 observed	 the	 fact?	 All	 that	 you	 love	 in	 life	 is	 possible	 only
because	of	death.	You	 love	a	woman	because	 today	she	 is	beautiful,	 tomorrow
she	may	not	be.	Old	age.
Today	she	is	here,	tomorrow	she	may	not	be	there.	Death	is	possible.	You	love
the	woman.	 If	you	knew	 that	 the	beauty	 is	eternal,	 that	always	and	always	 the
woman	will	be	beautiful	and	that	nobody	is	going	to	die,	will	there	be	joy	in	life?
It	will	be	sheer	boredom.	And	if	it	was	impossible	even	to	commit	suicide,	you
cannot	 conceive	 of	 a	 more	miserable	 life	 --	 just	 people	 living	 and	 living	 and
doing	 the	 same	 thing	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again	 and	nothing	 ever	Osho	 -	The
First	Principle
121
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
changes	and	everything	is	eternal,	nobody	ever	dies.	Just	think	if	all	the	people
that	have	lived	on	the	earth	were	living	now	--	there	will	not	be	any	space	even
to	stand	--	and	everybody	was	eternal	...	Life	will	lose	all	beauty.	The	beauty	is
in	its	momentariness.
That's	why	I	go	on	insisting:	Celebrate	the	temporal.	By	celebrating	it	you	will
know	that	this	is	the	way	the	eternal	functions.	The	temporal	is	a	function	of	the
eternal.
Celebrate	 the	 temporal.	 Celebrate	 the	 momentary.	 In	 the	 momentary	 is	 the
eternal,	hiding.
Don't	throw	it	away.	If	you	throw	the	momentary	you	are	throwing	the	baby	with
the	bathwater.	The	eternal	is	hidden	there.	The	eternal	comes	in	the	momentary,
penetrates	the	moment.
A	PUZZLED	MONK	ONCE	SAID	TO	FUKETSU	...
What	was	his	bewilderment?	What	was	his	confusion?	Why	was	he	so	puzzled?
The	 puzzle	 was	 there	 because	 he	 says	 the	 Master	 has	 said	 ...	 "YOU	 SAY
TRUTH	CAN	BE
EXPRESSED	WITHOUT	SPEAKING,	AND	WITHOUT	KEEPING	SILENT.	"
Now,	 this	 is	 impossible;	 this	 is	 very	 contradictory.	 If	 you	 say,	 "Truth	 can	 be
expressed	by	words,"	okay.	 If	you	say,	 "Truth	cannot	be	expressed	by	words,"
then	it	naturally	means,
"Truth	 can	 be	 expressed	 by	 silence."	 But	 the	 Master	 says,	 "Truth	 cannot	 be
expressed	by	words,	and	truth	cannot	be	expressed	by	silence."	And	the	Master
says,	"Truth	can	be	expressed	by	words	too,	and	it	can	be	expressed	by	silence
too."	Now,	it	is	confusing.	Now,	it	is	illogical,	it	is	absurd.
How	 can	 this	 be	 that	 truth	 can	 be	 expressed	 without	 speaking	 and	 without
keeping	silent?
One	can	do	only	one;	either	one	can	speak	it	or	one	can	keep	silent.	You	deny
both?	Then	what	is	the	possibility?
FUKETSU	ANSWERED,	"IN	SOUTHERN	CHINA,	IN	THE	SPRING,	WHEN
I	WAS
ONLY	A	LAD,	AH!	HOW	THE	BIRDS	SANG	AMONG	THE	BLOSSOMS."
Now,	this	is	very	irrelevant.	What	the	disciple	is	asking	and	what	the	Master	is
saying	is	not	related	at	all,	but	it	is	related	in	a	nonmind	way.	Meditate	over	it,
how	it	is	related	in	a	nonmind	way.
He	 has	 said	 many	 things.	 First,	 he	 says	 "IN	 THE	 SPRING'.'	 First,	 he	 says,
"When	 the	 spring	 came,	 HOW	 THE	 BIRDS	 SANG	 AMONG	 THE
BLOSSOMS."	They	were	expressing	truth,	but	they	were	silent	when	the	spring
was	 not	 there;	 and	 when	 the	 spring	 came	 they	 sang,	 they	 burst	 forth	 into
celebration.	So	the	first	thing	is	"when	the	spring	is	there".	What	does	he	mean?
He	means	when	you	have	 the	spring	 in	your	heart,	when	 the	 light	has	dawned
upon	 you,	 when	 the	 right	 maturity	 has	 happened,	 when	 the	 right	 climate	 has
happened,	when	your	fruit	is	ripe,	when	the	spring	has	come	--	that	is	what	satori
is,	the	spring	of	the	inner	heart	--
when	the	SAMADHI	has	come,	then	you	need	not	bother:	the	birds	don't	go	to
schools	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 sing.	 The	 spring	 has	 come.	 They	 don't	 seek	 teachers.
They	don't	go	in	to	anybody,	they	don't	ask	the	elders,	"How	to	sing?	The	spring
has	come."	When	the	spring	comes	the	spring	starts	singing	in	them.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
122
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
What	the	Master	means	is	that	when	SAMADHI	is	there,	you	will	know.	How	to
say	it	without	saying	it	and	without	keeping	silent	--	you	will	know	it.	It	is	not	a
question.
Many	people	go	on	asking	foolish	questions.	The	question	was	foolish.	People
come	 to	 me,	 they	 say,	 "If	 we	 become	 enlightened,	 what	 will	 happen	 to	 our
family?"	You	please	first	become	enlightened.	"If	we	become	enlightened	what
will	become	of	our	business?"	You	first	become	enlightened.	Right	now	you	are
asking	 it	 as	 if	 it	 will	 create	 some	 problem.	 It	 has	 never	 created	 any	 problem.
Whenever	 somebody	 becomes	 enlightened,	 he	 knows	 what	 to	 do.	 If	 an
enlightened	person	does	not	know	what	to	do,	then	who	will	know?
If	 you	 come	 to	me	 and	 you	 ask	me,	 "When	 truth	 has	 happened,	 how	 are	 we
going	 to	 express	 it?"	 ...	When	 it	 happens	when	 the	 spring	 comes	 --	 the	 birds
know	 how	 to	 sing.	 In	 fact,	 there	 is	 no	 "how"	 to	 it.	 The	 very	 presence	 of	 the
spring,	 and	 the	 birds	 are	 thrilled.	 Something	 goes	 berserk	 in	 their	 hearts.
Something	simply	starts	pulsating	their	being,	something	simply	starts	singing	in
their	being.	It	is	not	that	they	sing.	It	is	spring	that	sings	in	them.	It	is	satori,	it	is
SAMADHI,	that	is	expressed	by	you.	It	is	not	a	question	of	YOU	expressing	it.
That's	why	the	Master	says,	"It	cannot	be	expressed	through	words,	and	it	cannot
be	expressed	through	silence."	The	very	question	that	can	be	expressed	through
words	 is	 foolish,	 the	 very	 question	 that	 can	 be	 expressed	 through	 silence	 is
foolish,	because	nobody	knows	--
when	the	spring	comes	the	cuckoo	will	sing	in	its	own	way,	and	the	parrots	will
fly	 in	 their	 own	 way,	 and	 there	 will	 be	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 songs,	 different,
unique.
The	cuckoo	cannot	screech	the	way	parrots	do,	and	the	parrots	cannot	imitate	the
cuckoos.
And	there	is	no	need.	The	cuckoo	is	beautiful,	so	is	the	parrot.
When	satori	has	happened,	nobody	knows.	Meera	dances;	Buddha	never	danced.
The	cuckoo	and	the	parrot	...
Listen	...
Chaitanya	sang,	took	his	drum	and	danced	all	over	Bengal.	Mahavir	remained	in
silence,	never	spoke	a	single	word.	Now,	you	will	be	puzzled.	Then	how	do	the
Jaina	sutras	exist?
How?	It	is	a	beautiful	story.
Jainas	 say	 Mahavir	 never	 spoke,	 but	 those	 who	 were	 able	 to	 hear	 him,	 they
heard,	and	they	have	collected	the	sayings.	Listen	again;	you	may	have	missed:
Jainas	 say	Mahavir	 never	 spoke,	 but	 those	who	 could	 hear,	 they	 heard.	 In	 his
silent	presence	 they	heard	what	he	was	 saying,	 and	 they	collected	 the	 sayings.
The	Jaina	sutras	start	always,	"We	have	heard."	They	don't	start,	"Mahavir	said,"
no.	The	disciples	say,	"We	have	heard.	That's	true,	on	our	part,	we	have	heard.
We	don't	know	whether	he	has	said	it	or	not,	but	in	a	certain	moment	we	heard	it.
A	voiceless	voice,	a	soundless	sound."
Yes,	a	cuckoo	is	a	cuckoo,	a	parrot	is	a	parrot,	and	both	are	needed.	If	the	world
is	 only	 for	 cuckoos	 it	 will	 be	 ugly.	 Too	 many	 cuckoos,	 it	 will	 not	 be	 good.
Existence	needs	variety,	and	existence	is	rich	because	of	variety.	Yes,	it	is	good
sometimes	a	Mahavir	keeps	silent,	and	it	is	good	sometimes	a	Meera	goes	mad,
dancing.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 have	 a	 Christ	 and	 a	 Krishna.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 have	 a
Zarathustra	and	a	Mohammed	and	a	Lao	Tzu.	All	are	so	different	and	so	unique,
and	yet	the	message	is	the	same.
Those	who	 have	 eyes	 to	 see,	 they	will	 see	 the	 same	 truth	 being	 expressed	 in
millions	 of	 forms.	 And	 those	 who	 have	 ears	 to	 hear,	 they	will	 hear	 the	 same
song,	sung	in	so	many	different	languages.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
123
Chapter	7	-	The	Song	of	Sound	and	Silence
It	 is	 the	 same	 rose;	whether	 you	 call	 it	 "rose"	 or	GULAB	does	 not	make	 any
difference.	In	India	we	call	it	GULAB,	in	the	West	you	call	it	"rose".	Sometimes
we	can	even	quarrel	and	argue	"What	is	it	--	GULAB	or	rose?"
Zen	Masters	say,	"Don't	quarrel,	please.	Bring	a	GULAB	or	a	rose,	whatsoever
you	call	it.
Bring	 it	here.	Make	 it	 immediate,	 and	 then	 look."	And	 then	 the	quarrel	 ceases
because	when	somebody	brings	a	rose	you	will	see	--	and	he	call	it	GULAB	--
you	will	 understand;	 you	will	 say,	 "Okay,	 that's	 okay.	 Call	 it	 whatsoever	 you
want	to	call	it.	It	is	the	same	thing	I	have	been	calling	rose	and	you	call	GULAB,
and	we	have	been	quarreling."
Scholars	 quarrel,	 argue.	 Masters	 look	 at	 the	 thing	 called	 rose	 or	 GULAB,	 or
there	can	be	a	thousand	names	--	there	are	so	many	languages,	each	language	has
a	different	name	for	it.
Each	person	who	attains	to	SAMADHI	gives	expression	in	his	own	way.	But	the
question	is:	Has	the	spring	come?
So	the	Master	says,	"IN	SOUTHERN	CHINA,	IN	THE	SPRING,	WHEN	I	WAS
ONLY
A	 LAD,	 AH!	 HOW	 THE	 BIRDS	 SANG	 AMONG	 THE	 BLOSSOMS."	 The
second	 thing	 he	 says,	 "When	 I	was	 only	 a	 boy	when	my	 eyes	were	 innocent,
when	I	was	young	and	fresh	and	virgin,	when	I	was	not	corrupted	by	the	society,
when	 I	 was	 uncorrupted,	 when	 my	 freshness	 had	 not	 gathered	 any	 dust	 of
knowledge,	experience	--	THEN.	"
"...	 IN	THE	SPRING,	WHEN	I	WAS	ONLY	A	LAD,	AH!	HOW	THE	BIRDS
SANG
AMONG	 THE	 BLOSSOMS."	 There	 were	 a	 great	 many	 flowers	 and	 a	 great
many	birds,	 and	 singing,	 the	 same	 song,	 the	 same	 spring,	 the	 same	youth,	 the
same	life	juice.	What	he	is	saying	is,	"Please,	let	the	spring	come	first,	and	don't
be	worried	about	how	it	can	be	said	neither	in	words	nor	in	silence."
It	can	be	said	both	in	words	and	in	silence.	In	fact,	whenever	it	is	said,	there	is
word	and	silence	together.	But	the	word	is	not	a	mere	word;	that's	why	they	say
it	cannot	be	said	through	words.	And	the	silence	is	not	a	dead	silence,	 it	 is	not
the	silence	of	the	cemetery;	that's	why	the	Master	says	it	cannot	be	said	through
silence,	either.	The	word	is	not	of	the	pundit,	and	the	silence	is	not	of	the	dead
man;	but	there	is	a	great	marriage	between	word	and	silence.
The	word	speaks	through	silence,	the	silence	speaks	through	the	word;	and	when
silence	and	word	meet	there	is	song.	Then	there	is	celebration.
When	 the	 spring	 has	 come	 there	 is	 celebration.	 When	 the	 SAMADHI	 has
happened	 there	 is	 celebration.	 In	 that	 celebration	 it	 is	 expressed,	 and	 it	 is
expressed	abundantly.	In	that	celebration,	in	that	blossoming,	it	is	expressed.	But
it	 is	expressed	only	 for	 those	who	can	understand,	who	can	see,	who	can	 feel,
who	can	love.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
124
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
8
The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
18	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Question
MY	EXPERIENCE	OF	ME	 IS	 THE	MOST	 PROFOUND	EXPERIENCE	OF
MY	LIFE.
IT	IS	ALSO	THE	MOST	TRIVIAL.	PLEASE	CLARIFY.
The	question	is	from	Dhruva,	and	the	question	is	really	significant.	The	question
has	arisen	out	of	an	insight,	almost	a	mini-satori.
That's	how	life	is,	profound	and	trivial	at	the	same	time,	simultaneously.	There	is
no	contradiction,	Dhruva,	 in	the	profundity	of	life	and	its	 trivialness.	You	have
been	taught	that	the	sacred	is	far	away	and	it	is	never	the	profane.	You	have	been
taught	a	distinction	between	 the	profane	and	 the	 sacred,	between	 the	profound
and	 the	 trivial.	 In	 fact,	 there	 is	 no	 distinction.	 The	 trivial	 is	 the	 profound,	 the
ordinary	is	the	extraordinary,	and	the	temporal	is	the	eternal.
So	this	is	a	great	insight.	Don't	lose	sight	of	it.	More	possibility	is	there	that	you
will	 lose	 it,	 because	 it	will	 go	against	 the	grain.	Your	whole	 training	has	been
such	 that	 you	 are	 always	 dividing:	 into	 good	 and	 bad,	 into	 the	 pure	 and	 the
impure,	 the	 perfect	 and	 the	 imperfect,	 into	 virtue	 and	 sin,	 the	 holy	 and	 the
unholy.	 You	 have	 always	 been	 making	 these	 distinctions,	 and	 because	 of
distinctions	you	have	missed	the	reality	of	that	which	is.
This	 cuckoo	 singing	 there	 and	Christ	 speaking	 to	you	are	not	different.	A	 leaf
falling	from	the	tree	and	a	word	falling	from	the	lips	of	Buddha	are	not	different.
The	very	dust	is	divine.
The	distinction	is	man-made,	it	is	a	mind	trick.
And	 because	 of	 these	 distinctions,	 these	 categories,	we	 are	 never	 together,	we
cannot	be	together.	How	can	you	be	together	if	you	make	such	an	unbridgeable
gap	between	the	profound	and	the	trivial?	Then	you	will	find	your	whole	life	is
trivial.	Eating,	drinking,	sleeping,	walking,	going	to	the	office	or	to	the	farm	--
all	is	trivia.
Then	where	will	you	find	the	profound?	In	the	church,	in	the	temple,	sometimes
praying	and	meditating,	sometimes	listening	to	me?	Then	the	profound	will	not
be	 much	 in	 your	 life,	 and	 the	 profound	 will	 be,	 in	 a	 way,	 false.	 It	 will	 not
permeate	 your	 whole	 life.	 It	 will	 not	 be	 there	 always	 with	 you.	 It	 will	 not
surround	you	like	a	climate.	Sometimes	you	will	have	to	make	an	effort	to	have
that	 quality	 of	 profundity,	 and	 again	 and	 again	 you	will	 lose	 it.	And	 you	will
become	divided,	 schizophrenic;	 you	will	 become	 two,	 split,	 and	 you	will	 start
condemning	yourself.
Whenever	you	will	see	something	trivial	you	will	condemn	yourself,	that	"I	am
just	trivial,	ordinary."	And	whenever	you	will	see	something	profound	you	will
start	 feeling	 holier	 than	 thou;	 you	 will	 start	 feeling	 very	 egoistic.	 Both	 are
dangerous.
To	feel	that	you	are	trivial	is	a	condemnation.	It	creates	an	inferiority	complex.	It
pulls	you	down	into	sadness.	It	forces	you	to	remain	depressed.	And,	naturally,
you	cannot	love	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
125
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
yourself:	you	are	so	trivial.	You	are	so	ordinary,	how	can	you	love	yourself?	You
fall	too	short	from	the	ideal	of	perfection.	So	a	great	condemnation	arises	in	your
being,	and	the	moment	you	condemn	yourself	you	are	in	hell.	Then	nobody	can
take	you	out	of	it.	Even	if	somebody	comes	and	says	you	are	beautiful,	you	will
not	trust	him.	You	will	think	he	is	trying	to	cheat	you,	bribe	you.	He	is	trying	to
exploit	you.	How	can	you	be	beautiful?	You	know	yourself	better	than	he	knows
you.	You	are	not	beautiful;	you	are	ugly.	You	are	the	ugliest	person	in	the	world.
Because	of	this	condemnation,	love	will	not	happen.	How	can	you	love	anybody
if	you	are	feeling	so	condemned	in	yourself?	And	how	can	you	allow	somebody
to	love	you	if	you	are	feeling	so	condemned?	Love	is	impossible.	When	you	live
in	self-condemnation	you	 live	 in	hell.	Hell	 is	not	somewhere	else:	 it	 is	 in	your
attitude;	it	is	a	condemning	attitude.
When	you	accept	yourself	and	you	enjoy	yourself,	you	are	in	heaven.	Heaven	is
also	an	attitude.
And	you	can	move	from	heaven	and	hell	any	moment	you	decide!	And	you	go
on	moving;	you	swing	between	heaven	and	hell.	Just	understand	that	 it	 is	your
creation.
So	if	you	feel	condemned	because	of	your	trivia,	you	will	be	in	hell.	And	then
sometimes	 you	will	 start	 feeling	 very	 holy	 because	 you	 have	 done	 something
great.	You	have	saved	a	life
--	 somebody	was	 drowning	 in	 the	 ocean	 and	 you	 saved	 him,	 and	 a	 child	was
caught	in	a	house	on	fire	and	you	jumped	in	and	you	risked	your	life,	you	have
done	something	great	--	then	you	will	feel	very	egoistic.	Ego	is	again	hell.
To	 feel	 superior	 is	 to	 be	 in	 hell,	 to	 feel	 inferior	 is	 to	 be	 in	 hell.	 To	 drop	 all
superiority,	inferiority,	and	just	to	be	is	to	be	in	heaven.
The	 idea	of	 condemnation	 is	 also	ego-oriented.	People	have	 impossible	 ideals.
Just	 the	 other	 night	 Vishnu	 came;	 he	 writes	 again	 and	 again	 that	 "I	 am	 not
perfect.	What	should	I	do?"
that	 "I	 am	 imperfect,"	 that	 "Whatsoever	 I	 do	 is	 imperfect."	 He	 is	 torturing
himself	because	he	is	imperfect.	But	who	is	not	imperfect?	The	very	idea	that	"I
should	 be	 perfect,"	 is	 very	 egoistic.	 The	 very	 effort	 is	 egoistic.	 Nobody	 is
perfect.
In	 fact,	 perfection	 cannot	 exist,	 by	 its	 very	 nature.	 To	 be	 perfect	means	 to	 be
dead.	Then	there	will	be	no	evolution,	when	you	are	perfect.	Then	how	can	you
survive?	For	what?	If	God	is	perfect	then	God	is	dead.	If	God	is	imperfect	only
then	is	he	alive	and	can	be	alive.
I	preach	 the	 imperfect	God,	and	I	preach	 the	 imperfect	existence,	and	I	preach
the	 beauty	 of	 imperfection	 and	 the	 life	 of	 imperfection.	 The	 very	 idea	 that	 "I
have	 to	be	perfect,"	 that	 "No	 flaw	should	be	 there	 in	my	 life"	 is	egoistic.	And
certainly	you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	flaws.
So	 on	 one	 hand	 you	 are	 on	 an	 ego	 trip,	 which	 creates	 trouble,	 makes	 you
miserable,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 perfect;	 and	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 the	 same	 trip
creates	 condemnation.	 You	 want	 to	 be	 superior	 and	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are
inferior:	both	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
You	remain	in	hell.
Enjoy	your	imperfection.	Enjoy	the	way	you	are.
And	drop	all	distinctions	between	the	holy	and	the	unholy,	sin	and	virtue,	good
and	bad,	God	and	devil.	Destroy	all	 those	distinctions.	Those	are	 the	 traps	you
are	caught	in.	Those	are	the	traps	which	don't	allow	you	to	live,	don't	allow	you
freedom.	You	cannot	dance:	one	foot	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
126
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
is	encaged	in	inferiority,	another	foot	is	encaged	in	superiority.	You	are	chained.
How	can	you	dance?	Drop	all	these	chains.
That's	what	 Zen	 people	 say:	 "A	 hair's	 distinction,	 and	 heaven	 and	 hell	 are	 set
apart."	That's	what	Tilopa	says.	A	little	distinction,	a	hair's	distinction,	and	hell
and	heaven	are	set	apart,	and	you	are	caught	in	the	duality.	No	distinction,	and
you	are	free.	No	distinction,	is	freedom.
The	 profundity	 of	 the	 trivial	 and	 the	 trivialness	 of	 the	 profound,	 that's	what	 I
teach.
Eating	 is	 trivial	 if	 you	 look	 from	 the	outside.	 If	 you	 look	 from	 the	 inside	 it	 is
profound,	 it	 is	 a	miracle	 --	 that	you	can	eat	bread	and	 the	bread	 is	 turned	 into
blood,	 that	 it	 becomes	 your	 flesh,	 that	 it	 becomes	 your	 bones,	 that	 it	 even
becomes	 your	 marrow.	 You	 eat	 bread,	 and	 the	 bread	 becomes	 your	 thoughts,
dreams.	It	is	a	miracle.	It	is	the	profoundest	thing	that	is	happening.	When	you
are	eating,	it	is	no	ordinary	thing.	God	is	at	work.	It	is	creative.	While	chewing
bread	 you	 are	 creating	 life,	 unknowingly,	 unconsciously.	 You	 are	 making	 a
thousand	and	one	things	possible.	Tomorrow	you	may	paint:	and	that	bread	that
you	had	eaten	has	become	painting.	Tomorrow	you	may	sing,	or	right	now	you
may	do	something	which	would	not	be	possible	if	the	bread	was	not	there.
The	Christian	prayer	is	beautiful;	it	says,	"God,	give	us	our	daily	bread."	Looks
very	trivial!	What	does	Jesus	mean	when	he	says,	"Pray	every	day,	'Give	us	our
daily	bread'"?
Couldn't	he	think	of	anything	more	profound?	Bread?	You	just	change	the	word
"bread"	and	say	every	day	in	your	prayer,	"Lord,	give	us	our	daily	tea,"	and	you
will	see	how	foolish	it	looks.	But	the	bread	or	tea	or	coffee	--	or	Coca-Cola!	...
yes,	Coca-Cola	too	is	divine.
Everything	is	divine	--	because	how	can	it	be	otherwise?
The	 prayer	 says,	 "Give	 us	 our	 daily	 bread."	 It	 is	 raising	 the	 trivial	 to	 the
profound.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 statement.	 The	 Hindus	 have	 always	 been	 saying,
"ANNAM	 BRAHMA"	 --	 "Food	 is	 God."	 Raising	 the	 trivial	 to	 the	 profound.
Looking	into	the	trivial	so	deeply	that	it	changes	into	the	profound.
You	 are	 taking	 a	 shower.	 It	 is	 trivia,	 everyday	 business,	 but	 it	 can	 become
profound.	Just	 look	deep	 into	 it.	 Just	standing	under	 the	shower,	and	 the	water
goes	on	flowing,	and	the	body	feels	fresh	and	young	and	alive,	and	the	water	is	a
blessing.	 Because	 we	 are	made	 out	 of	 water.	 A	man	 is	 almost	 eighty	 percent
water,	and	the	first	glimpse	of	life	happened	in	the	sea.
The	first	thing	that	existed	was	the	fish,	and	even	now,	in	the	mother's	womb,	the
child	 floats	 in	 seawater,	 with	 almost	 the	 same	 ingredients,	 the	 same	 saltiness.
That's	 why	 when	 a	 woman	 is	 pregnant	 she	 starts	 eating	more	 salt;	 she	 needs
more	salt	because	the	child	needs	seawater	around	him.	The	child	is	still	a	fish	in
the	beginning,	primary	 stage.	Water	 is	 life,	 and	when	you	are	 taking	a	 shower
life	is	showering	on	you	--	eighty	percent	of	life	is	showering	on	you,	the	most
necessary	element	for	life.	No	life	is	possible	without	water.	These	trees	will	not
be	there	if	the	water	is	not,	and	these	birds	won't	sing,	and	these	animals	won't
be	 there	 and	 these	 men	 will	 not	 be	 there.	 All	 life	 will	 disappear	 if	 water
disappears.
There	is	a	profound	experience	when	you	are	touched	by	water.	You	can	make	it
so	profound!	It	depends	on	you,	how	you	go	into	it.	It	can	become	a	meditation,
a	prayer.	You	can	feel	grateful,	that	God	is	great,	that	water	is	still	available.
To	 breathe	 is	 so	 trivial,	 who	 bothers	 about	 it?	 But	 breath	 is	 your	 life.	 All
languages	 have	 words	 for	 "life"	 which	 really	 mean	 "breath".	 Sanskrit	 has
PRANA	for	"life";	it	means
"breath".	The	word	"soul"	means	"breath";	the	word	"psyche"	means	"breath".
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
127
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
And	 the	Bible	 says	God	made	man	and	breathed	 life	 into	him.	Life	 started	by
breathing	into	man;	otherwise	man	was	just	dust.	"Adam"	means	"dust,"	"earth".
God	made	Adam	out	of	mud.	"Adam"	is	the	Hebrew	word	for	"earth".	Then	he
breathed	life	into	him.	And	that's	how	life	happens	always.	A	child	is	born	and
the	first	thing	we	wait	expectantly	for	is	that	he	should	cry.	Why?	Because	only
through	 crying	will	 he	 start	 breathing.	 For	 two,	 three	 seconds	 even	 the	 doctor
cannot	breathe,	 the	nurse	cannot	breathe.	Whether	the	child	is	going	to	breathe
or	not,	who	knows?	He	may	not	breathe.	If	he	is	not	going	to	breathe	then	there
will	be	no	life.
If	he	breathes	there	will	be	life.	Still	the	same	happens	as	it	happens	with	Adam:
God	breathes	in	the	child,	in	each	child.
God	 is	 the	 invisible	 force,	 the	 life	energy	 that	surrounds	you.	 It	enters	 through
breath	in	you,	and	the	day	you	die	you	will	die	through	exhalation.	You	start	life
with	inhalation,	you	stop	life	with	exhalation;	then	you	will	not	breathe	anymore.
Again	Adam	is	adam,	again	dust	is	dust,	dust	unto	dust.
Breath	 is	 life,	 but	 have	 you	 looked	 into	 it?	 Standing	 under	 the	 sun	 in	 the
morning,	breathe.
It	is	God	you	breathe	in.	And	then	it	becomes	profound.	It	is	your	attitude.
The	trivial	and	the	profound	are	not	two	separate	things.	They	are	one,	they	are
together,	they	are	two	aspects	of	one	energy.	Your	life	is	trivia	if	you	don't	look
deep.	If	you	start	looking	deep	your	life	is	profound.
So	 Dhruva,	 it	 is	 a	 great	 insight.	 You	 say,	 "My	 experience	 of	 me	 is	 the	 most
profound	experience	of	my	life.	It	is	also	the	most	trivial.	Please	clarify."	Don't
get	 confused.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 clarify.	 It	 is	 how	 life	 is:	 the	 trivial	 is	 the
profound.
The	 question	 has	 arisen	 because	 Dhruva	 must	 have	 been	 thinking	 these	 are
contradictions,	the	trivial	and	the	profound.	No,	they	are	not	contradictory;	they
are	 complementary.	The	 trivial	hides	 the	profound.	The	 trivial	 functions	 like	 a
cover,	like	a	crust;	it	protects	the	profound.	It	is	almost	like	a	seed.	The	seed	is
protecting	 the	 possibility	 of	 the	 tree.	 That	 possibility	 is	 very	 soft;	 the	 seed	 is
hard.	 The	 hard	 seed,	 the	 hard	 crust	 of	 the	 seed,	 is	 protecting	 the	 softest
possibility,	of	flowers,	of	a	big	tree.	And	the	seed	will	protect	it	till	the	seed	finds
the	right	soil.	Then	the	seed	disappears,	then	the	sheath	disappears,	then	the	hard
crust	dissolves	into	the	earth	and	the	soft	life	arises.
The	profound	is	hidden	in	the	trivial,	so	look	deep.	Wherever	there	is	the	trivial
there	 is	 the	 profound.	 Don't	 escape	 from	 the	 trivial;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be
escaping	from	the	profound.
And	don't	seek	the	profound	AGAINST	the	trivial;	otherwise	you	will	never	find
it.
Question
A	 PLAY	 QUESTION:	 IF	 YOU	 WERE	 TO	 COME	 HERE	 NOW	 TO	 THIS
ASHRAM	AS
A	 YOUNG	 UNENLIGHTENED	 MAN,	 HOW	 WOULD	 YOU	 RESPOND?
WOULD	YOU
BECOME	 PART	 OF	 THE	 ASHRAM?	 WHAT	 WORK	 WOULD	 YOU	 DO?
WHERE
WOULD	YOU	SIT?
The	question	is	from	Somendra.	A	beautiful	question.
First,	 he	 asks,	 "If	 you	 were	 to	 come	 here	 now	 to	 this	 ashram	 as	 a	 young
unenlightened	man,	how	would	you	respond?
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
128
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
Even	 if	 I	was	 unenlightened	 I	would	 not	 be	 so	 unenlightened	 to	 come	 to	 this
ashram.	That	much	is	certain.
Mulla	Nasrudin's	wife	was	dying,	and	of	course	he	was	consoling	her	 in	every
way,	 and	 the	wife	opened	her	 eyes	 and	 said,	 "It	 seems	almost	 certain	 that	 this
night	will	be	my	last.	I	will	not	be	able	to	see	the	sunrise	again.	Mulla,	how	will
you	react	to	my	death?"
The	Mulla	said,	"How	will	I	react	to	your	death?	I	will	go	mad!"
Even	in	 that	serious	moment	 the	wife	started	 laughing:	she	said,	"You	cunning
fellow.
You	will	not	go	mad.	I	know	within	a	week	you	will	be	remarried."
And	Mulla	said,	"No.	I	will	go	mad	--	but	I	will	not	go	THAT	mad."
So	even	if	I	was	unenlightened	I	would	not	be	THAT	unenlightened.
Second	thing,	you	say,	"Would	you	become	part	of	the	ashram?"
Even	now	I	am	not	part	of	the	ashram.	I	cannot	be	part	of	any	institution	or	any
organization,	 even	 my	 own.	 And	 if	 I	 had	 come	 as	 an	 unenlightened	 man,
naturally,	 the	 ashram	will	 not	 be	mine,	will	 be	 somebody	 else's.	 I	 cannot	 be	 a
part	 even	 of	 my	 own	 organization,	 so	 how	 can	 I	 be	 a	 part	 of	 anybody	 else's
organization?	Impossible.
And	then	you	ask,	"What	work	would	you	do?"
I	have	never	done	any	work.	I	am	the	laziest	man	in	the	world	you	can	find.
And	the	last,	you	ask,	"Where	would	you	sit?"
I	would	escape	immediately!	I	would	see	some	organization,	some	ashram	and	I
would	run!	You	are	asking,	"Where	will	you	sit?"	I	will	not	sit	at	all.
Question
USUALLY	I	AM	"THIS	WAY"	OR	"THAT	WAY".	BUT	FOR	SOME	TIME	I
HAVE
EXPERIENCED	ALL	KINDS	OF	CONTRADICTIONS,	SIMULTANEOUSLY.
I	SEE
WOMEN	AS	OBJECTS	OF	WORSHIP,	AND	AT	THE	SAME	TIME	I	LUST
AFTER
THEM.	I	AM	CONTENT	TO	LET	LIFE	FLOW,	AND	I	AM	AFRAID	OF	THE
FUTURE.	I	CRAVE	TO	BE	ALONE,	AND	I	CRAVE	TO	BE	ALWAYS	WITH
PEOPLE.	I	FEEL
BIZARRE	 BECAUSE	 THESE	 CONTRADICTIONS	 ALL	 SEEM	 EQUALLY
REAL	AND
TRUE.	 IS	THERE	ANYTHING	TO	BE	UNDERSTOOD	OR	DONE	ABOUT
THIS?
Whenever	you	come	across	a	contradiction,	watch	very	carefully.	There	is	bound
to	be	something	of	great	significance.	Never	avoid	contradictions,	because	life	is
contradictory.	Life	exists	through	the	tension	of	contradiction.	So	whenever	you
come	across	a	contradiction	you	are	very	close	to	the	source	of	life.	Let	that	be
always	remembered.
The	 ordinary	 reaction	 is	 whenever	 you	 come	 across	 a	 contradiction	 you	 start
trying	 to	 solve	 it,	 start	 finding	 explanations	 for	 it,	 or	 start	 dropping	 it	 into	 the
unconscious	so	you	need	not	worry	about	it.	You	start	doing	something	about	it
immediately	 the	moment	 you	 feel	 some	 contradiction	 because	 you	 have	 been
taught	 to	 live	 noncontradictorily.	 You	 have	 been	 taught	 a	 Osho	 -	 The	 First
Principle
129
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
very	 dangerous	 thing.	Nobody	 can	 live	 noncontradictorily.	 If	 you	want	 to	 live
you	have	to	live	through	contradiction,	AS	contradiction.
You	have	been	taught	to	be	consistent;	that's	why	you	have	become	false.	This	is
the	whole	trick.	How	does	such	great	hypocrisy	exist	in	the	world?	Why?	Why
has	the	whole	world	turned	out	to	be	hypocritical?	There	is	a	trick	to	it,	a	great
trick;	 a	 great	 technology	 is	 behind	 it.	 The	 technology	 is:	 teach	 people	 to	 be
consistent,	and	they	will	become	hypocrites.
Because	life	exists	through	contradiction.
Life	is	inconsistent.	One	moment	this,	another	moment	that;	life	is	that	way.	One
moment	you	are	feeling	loving,	another	moment	you	hate	the	same	person;	life	is
like	 that.	 Now,	 you	 have	 been	 taught	 if	 you	 love,	 then	 love	 always.	 What
happens?	 You	 cannot	 love	 always,	 so	 only	 one	 thing	 is	 possible:	 when	 hate
comes	you	hide	 the	hate,	you	repress	 the	hate,	and	you	go	on	pretending	 love.
This	is	what	hypocrisy	is.	When	you	don't	love	you	pretend.
You	are	full	of	hate	for	your	wife,	but	you	come	home	and	you	hug	her	and	you
kiss	her	and	you	 inquire,	 "How	are	you,	honey?"	and	all	 that.	And	deep	down
you	are	hating	her	and	you	want	to	kill	her.	In	fact,	the	whole	day	you	have	been
fantasizing	how	to	kill	this	woman.
But	you	have	been	taught	to	be	consistent.	So,	once,	you	had	fallen	in	love,	and
you	have	said	things	in	those	love	moments	and	you	have	promised	that	"I	will
love	you	forever	and	ever"	--
now	you	have	to	be	consistent.
What	 will	 you	 do	 with	 your	 hate	 that	 is	 bound	 to	 arise?	 Each	 love	 object	 is
bound	to	be	 the	hate	object	 too.	 If	you	want	not	 to	hate,	 then	you	will	have	 to
stop	loving.	If	you	really	want	not	 to	hate	anybody,	 then	you	will	have	to	stop
loving,	but	you	cannot	love	consistently.	The	inconsistency	will	come	up	again
and	again.
It	is	as	if	somebody	has	told	you,	"If	you	see	the	day,	don't	see	the	night.	That	is
inconsistent."	So	what	will	you	do?	In	the	day	you	keep	your	eyes	open,	in	the
night	you	keep	your	eyes	closed	and	believe	that	it	is	day.	But	the	night	comes;	it
doesn't	 follow	 your	 ideas.	 It	 has	 to	 come.	 The	 night	 follows	 the	 day;	 the	 day
follows	the	night.
You	have	been	taught,	"Be	consistent."	Your	so-called	character	is	nothing	but	an
effort	to	be	consistent.
A	real	man	cannot	have	any	character.	A	real	man	is	bound	to	be	characterless
because	 to	 have	 a	 character	 means	 to	 have	 consistency.	 To	 be	 characterless
means	to	be	free.
I	said	something	yesterday.	Now,	if	I	have	a	character,	I	will	try	to	be	consistent
with	my	past;	whatsoever	 I	 said	yesterday,	 I	have	 to	say	 the	same	 thing	 today.
But	then	I	have	to	repeat	my	past.	I	cannot	live	in	the	moment	and	I	cannot	live
in	the	present.
In	 fact,	a	consistent	man	 is	one	who	goes	on	changing	his	past	 into	his	 future,
who	goes	on	putting	his	past	as	his	future,	ahead	of	himself.	That	is	the	man	of
character,	consistent	man.
An	inconsistent	man	is	one	who	never	allows	the	past	to	become	his	future,	who
remains	 free	 for	 the	 future,	 who	 has	 no	 promises	 to	 keep,	 who	 has	 no
commitment	with	the	past.	Whenever	it	was,	he	lived	it	totally;	gone,	it	is	gone.
A	real	man	will	 love	you	and	will	hate	you	too.	And	sometimes	he	will	say,	"I
will	 love	 you	 always";	 and	 sometimes	 he	 will	 say,	 "I	 cannot	 love	 you	 again.
Impossible."	 Sometimes	 he	 will	 be	 in	 a	 deep	 honeymoon	 with	 you	 and
sometimes	in	a	deep	divorce,	and	both	things	will	go	like	day	and	night.	A	real
marriage	is	a	continuous	honeymoon	and	divorce,	and	honeymoon	and	divorce.
Mini	 honeymoons,	mini	 divorces;	 big	 honeymoons,	 big	 divorces.	 It	 continues
like	day	and	night.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
130
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
So	whenever	you	come	across	a	contradiction,	be	watchful,	be	very	alert.	You
are	very	close	to	life.	And	when	you	are	consistent	you	are	just	false,	a	plastic
thing,	you	are	not	real.
I	don't	 teach	consistency.	 I	 teach	 the	freedom	of	being	 inconsistent.	 I	 teach	 the
freedom	of	being	contradictory.	That's	my	whole	approach	towards	life.
Of	course,	you	are	afraid	of	being	contradictory	because	then	you	will	not	know
who	 you	 are.	 With	 character	 there	 is	 something,	 something	 very	 secure:	 you
know	who	you	are.	You	have	a	label:	a	good	man,	a	bad	man,	a	saint,	a	sinner.
You	can	believe	in	your	identity	when	you	are	consistent	--	that	you	are	a	good
husband,	 a	 good	 Christian,	 a	 churchgoer,	 and	 this	 and	 that.	 With	 the
inconsistency	 your	 identity	 disappears;	 you	 don't	 know	 who	 you	 are.	 You
become	an	opening,	you	are	no	more	closed,	you	have	an	open	future.	You	don't
know	what	you	are	going	to	do	the	next	moment;	only	the	next	moment	will	tell.
To	live	in	that	insecurity	needs	courage.
Sannyas	 is	 what	 I	 propose.	 Sannyas	 means	 to	 remain	 in	 insecurity;	 sannyas
means	not	to	allow	your	past	to	influence	your	future,	not	to	allow	your	past	to
project	itself	into	the	future.
Let	 the	dead	bury	the	dead.	The	past	 is	gone,	gone.	Don't	cling	to	it,	and	don't
help	it	to	cling	to	you.
The	moment	something	has	passed	it	has	passed.	Be	completely	clean	of	it	and
be	free	and	fresh	again;	then	you	will	be	real,	authentically	real,	and	there	will	be
joy,	and	there	will	be	celebration	and	song.	I	am	not	saying	you	will	not	ever	be
sad,	no.	You	will	be	sad.	The	false	man	is	never	sad	--	because	he	is	never	happy.
The	false	man	just	remains	in	the	middle,	never	happy,	never	sad.	He	is	simply
so-so,	 lukewarm;	he	is	never	 too	cold	and	never	too	hot.	He	is	 just	"okay".	He
somehow	manages.	He	has	a	comfortable	life,	but	no	real	life.
I	am	not	saying	that	the	real	man	will	always	be	happy.	I	am	saying	the	real	man
will	always	be	real.	When	he	is	sad	he	will	be	really	sad.	He	will	sing	a	song	--
of	sadness.	He	will	accept	his	sadness	as	part	of	life,	as	part	of	growth.	He	will
not	 reject	 it.	 If	 he	 feels	 like	 crying	 he	 will	 cry;	 he	 will	 not	 say,	 "What	 am	 I
doing?	This	is	not	good.	Only	women	cry,	and	I	am	a	man."	He	will	not	say	that.
He	will	say,	"If	my	eyes	want	to	cry	and	the	tears	are	rolling	down,	good.	I	have
to	be	real.	I	am	only	whatsoever	I	am."	He	will	cry.	His	tears	will	be	true.
Your	smiles	are	false,	your	tears	are	false.	You	manage	to	smile,	and	you	manage
to	cry	too.	So	you	live	an	empty	life.	The	real	man's	life	will	be	full,	sometimes
full	of	joy	and	sometimes	full	of	sadness.
And	the	real	man	one	day	becomes	enlightened.	The	unreal	man	never	becomes
enlightened.	When	 the	real	man	becomes	enlightened,	 then	 there	 is	no	 joy	and
no	sadness.
Then	his	being	 is	 just	 a	witness.	 Joy	comes:	he	watches	 it.	Sadness	comes:	he
watches	it.
Now,	these	are	the	three	stages.	The	false	man:	his	joy	is	just	a	show,	a	mask,	his
sadness	 too;	 he	 pretends.	 The	 real	 man,	 the	 second	 stage:	 he	 is	 natural,
spontaneous;	his	joy	is	 true,	his	sadness	is	 true.	You	can	trust	him.	When	he	is
crying,	his	whole	heart	is	crying;	and	when	he	smiles,	his	whole	heart	is	smiling.
And	the	second	stage	is	a	must	 to	attain	to	the	third,	 the	enlightened	man.	The
enlightened	man	is	neither	sad	nor	happy.	He	has	attained	to	the	witnessing	soul;
he	simply	watches.	He	knows	the	sadness	has	come,	the	happiness	has	come,	but
these	are	like	climates	that	come	and	go	and	change,	and	he	remains	centered.
The	false	man	cannot	jump	to	the	enlightened	state;	hence	I	teach	the	real	man,
but	the	real	man	is	not	the	goal.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
131
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
That's	why	my	work	goes	beyond	the	Encounter	ideology,	Gestalt	ideology.	The
Gestalt	 ideology	or	 the	Encounter	 ideology	stops	at	 the	real	man.	Good.	Better
than	the	unreal.	But	not	enough.	Something	has	yet	to	happen.	I	use	Encounter
groups,	Gestalt	groups,	 and	all	 the	 therapies	 that	have	become	available	 in	 the
West.	They	are	perfectly	beautiful;	they	bring	you	from	the	first,	false	state	to	the
authentic,	real	state.	But	my	work	goes	beyond	them.	But	I	can	go	beyond	only
if	you	have	gone	through	the	second	stage.	From	the	first	there	is	no	way,	from
the	false	there	is	no	way,	to	enlightenment;	only	from	the	real	is	there	a	way.
You	will	 have	 to	go	 through	 the	 ecstasy	of	 the	 real	 and	 the	 agony	of	 the	 real.
When	 you	 have	 lived	 deeply	 all	 the	 realities	 of	 life,	 the	witness	 will	 arise.	 It
arises	naturally,	out	of	being	real.
So	you	say,	"Usually	I	am	'this	way'	or	'that	way'."	That	is	not	a	good	way.	You
get	fixed	with	one	thing,	this	way	or	that.	Become	more	fluid,	remain	more	fluid,
because	life	is	not	solid;	it	is	fluid,	it	is	flow.	And	that's	what	is	happening	and	is
confusing	you.
"But	 for	 some	 time	 I	 have	 experienced	 all	 kinds	 of	 contradictions,
simultaneously."	Good.
You	 are	 blessed.	 This	 confusion	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 great	 journey,	 a	 great
pilgrimage.	If	you	become	afraid	you	will	go	back	to	the	false.
The	false	is	secure.	Let	me	remind	you	again	and	again:	the	false	is	comfortable.
A	good	way	to	die	is	the	false,	but	not	a	good	way	to	live.	Even	your	death	will
be	 false,	 because	 how	 can	 the	 death	 be	 real?	When	 you	 have	 not	 lived	 really,
how	can	you	die	really?
So	many	people	die,	but	rarely	does	a	real	death	happen.	When	a	Buddha	dies	it
is	a	real	death,	or	when	Lin	Chi	dies	it	is	a	real	death.	There	are	very	few	deaths
which	are	real,	because	there	are	very	few	lives	which	are	real.	You	only	pretend
to	live,	and	then	one	day	you	pretend	to	die.
I	have	heard,	a	man	met	an	old	friend	on	the	road,	and	the	old	friend	was	a	very,
very	fanatical	Christian	Scientist.	The	old	friend	asked	 this	man,	"How	is	your
father	 now?"	 and	 the	 man	 said,	 "He	 is	 very	 ill."	 The	 Christian	 Scientist,	 of
course,	to	be	consistent	with	his	philosophy,	said,	"He	is	not	ill.	He	only	thinks
he	is	ill."
That	 is	 the	 Christian	 Scientists'	 ideology,	 that	 you	 only	 think	 that	 you	 are	 ill,
that's	why	you	are	ill.	You	are	not	really	ill.	He	said,	"He	only	thinks	he	is	ill.	He
is	not	really	ill."
After	 eight	 days,	 these	 two	men	met	 again,	 and	 the	 Christian	 Scientist	 asked
again,	"How	is	your	father	now?"
And	 the	 young	man	 hesitated	 a	 little,	 and	 then	 he	 said,	 "Now	 he	 thinks	 he	 is
dead."	--	to	be	consistent	with	this	old	man's	ideology.
The	father	has	died,	but	this	is	a	reality.
You	go	 on	 living	 in	 a	 fantasy	world.	Your	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 your	 thinking,	 a
pseudo	 thing;	 and	 so	 is	 your	 death.	Your	 illness,	 your	 health,	 your	 happiness,
your	sadness	are	all	so	bogus	that	how	can	you	die	a	real	death?	A	real	death	has
to	be	earned.	One	has	to	become	worthy	of	real	death.	And	one	becomes	worthy
only	by	living	truly.
Now	you	are	very	close	to	a	great	source	of	light.	That's	why	you	are	feeling	all
sorts	of	contradictions	simultaneously.	That	means	your	solidity	is	melting.	Your
hate	and	love	are	not	categorized	as	two	anymore.	They	are	not	put	 into	boxes
separately	 anymore;	 they	 are	 merging	 with	 each	 other.	 The	 profound	 and	 the
trivial	are	coming	together,	and	you	are	confused	because	now	you	cannot	label
what	is	what.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
132
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
"I	have	experienced	all	kinds	of	contradictions,	simultaneously.	I	see	women	as
objects	 of	 worship,	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 I	 lust	 after	 them."	 That's	 what	 has
happened	down	the	ages.
There	are	two	things	man	has	done	with	woman:	either	he	has	worshiped	woman
as	a	goddess	or	he	has	condemned	woman	as	a	witch.	Either	he	has	exploited	the
woman	for	his	lust	or	he	has	touched	her	feet	and	said,	"You	are	divine.	Divine
mother."	Either	the	woman	has	been	a	prostitute	or	a	divine	mother.	Man	has	not
accepted	woman	just	as	human.
And	woman	is	human,	as	human	as	you	are.	She	is	neither	a	divine	mother	nor	is
she	 a	 prostitute,	 but	 that's	 how	 the	 mind	 goes	 on.	 The	 mind	 makes	 things
different,	 separate,	 puts	 them	 in	 categories.	 You	 have	 killed	 the	 real	 woman,
because	 the	 real	woman	 is	both,	 the	prostitute	and	 the	divine	mother,	 together,
simultaneously.	If	you	fall	in	love	with	a	prostitute	you	will	find	a	divine	mother.
Even	a	prostitute	will	turn	into	a	divine	mother	if	you	are	in	love	with	her;	you
will	not	 find	 the	prostitute.	And	fall	 in	 love	with	a	divine	mother	and	you	will
find	the	prostitute	too.
What	I	am	saying	is	that	life	is	not	so	small	as	to	be	put	into	boxes	--	that	this	is
a	 prostitute	 and	 this	 is	 a	 divine	 mother.	 Life	 is	 vast,	 so	 big.	 It	 contains
contradictions.	And	that	is	the	beauty	of	life	and	that	is	the	richness	of	life.
Man	has	been	changing	between	these	polarities.	Sometimes	he	calls	the	woman
the	divine	mother.	That	 too	 is	 inhuman,	because	 then	you	put	 the	woman	on	a
pedestal	and	you	don't	allow	her	to	be	human.	Watch.	When	you	force	a	woman
to	 be	 a	 divine	 mother,	 what	 are	 you	 doing?	 You	 are	 not	 allowing	 her	 to	 be
human.	And	she	will	pretend	that	she	is	a	divine	mother,	so	if	you	want	to	make
love	to	her	she	will	be	reluctantly	ready.	She	will	say	no,	and	she	will	mean	yes.
She	has	to	say	no;	she	is	the	divine	mother.
A	good	woman	has	to	be	a	dead	woman.	Even	while	you	are	making	love,	she
will	 lie	 down	 there	 like	 a	 corpse.	 A	 slight	 movement,	 and	 you	 will	 become
afraid:	 so	 are	 you	 wrong,	 she	 is	 not	 so	 good,	 not	 so	 virtuous?	 If	 she	 starts
enjoying	 your	 lovemaking,	 you	will	 think	 that	 she	 is	 a	 bad	woman.	Only	 bad
women	enjoy	lovemaking,	not	good	women.	Good	women?
They	don't	think	of	sex	at	all.
Look	at	 the	 trick.	You	put	 the	woman	 so	high;	 then	you	don't	 allow	her	 to	be
human.	You	have	made	her	"superhuman".	That	is	a	way	to	make	her	inhuman.
Or	 you	 force	 her	 to	 be	 a	 prostitute;	 that	 is	 again	 a	way,	 to	 put	 her	 below	 the
human,	to	make	her	again	inhuman.	Then	you	go	to	the	prostitute,	you	give	her
the	money,	 you	make	 love	 to	 her	 --	with	 no	 responsibility,	with	 no	 love.	 It	 is
simple,	pure	lust,	but	you	know	that	that	woman	is	a	bad	woman.	How	can	you
love	her?	You	feel	good,	there	is	no	problem.	You	can	lust	after	this	woman	and
you	can	use	her	as	a	thing.	She	is	just	a	prostitute,	not	a	human	being;	you	don't
relate	to	her.	You	just	go	and	do	things	to	her,	pay	the	price,	and	you	are	finished.
Next	day	in	the	marketplace,	you	will	not	even	recognize	her.
In	both	 these	ways	you	have	 turned	 the	woman	 into	 inhuman	beings.	Both	are
ugly.
The	woman	is	both:	 the	divine	mother	and	 the	prostitute.	Just	as	you	are	both:
God	and	animal.
Let	me	repeat:	the	profane	is	the	sacred,	the	samsara	is	the	nirvana.
Through	these	categories	 ...	The	reality	is	so	complex	and	so	deep	it	cannot	be
categorized,	 it	 cannot	 be	 demarked	 into	 definitions.	 No	 woman	 is	 just	 a
prostitute	and	no	woman	is	just	a	divine	mother.	And	that	is	true	about	man,	the
same	 way.	 Once	 you	 see	 this,	 you	 are	 freed	 from	 categories,	 logical	 boxes,
pigeonholes,	and	you	can	see	reality	as	it	is.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
133
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
A	woman	is	a	human	being,	as	you	are	a	human	being.	Yes	sometimes	she	is	a
witch;	just	as	sometimes	you	are	mean,	ugly,	horrible,	she	is	too.	And	sometimes
she	is	ecstasy,	pure	ecstasy.	Sometimes	she	is	the	most	beautiful	phenomenon	on
the	earth,	just	as	you	are.
In	 India	we	 have	 the	 right	 representation,	 the	 symbol	 of	Kali.	You	must	 have
seen	 the	 pictures	 of	 Kali	 or	 the	 statues	 of	 Kali.	 That	 is	 really	 a	 great
understanding	 about	women.	Kali	 is	 painted	 as	 black,	 as	 black	 as	 the	 devil	 --
"kali"	 means	 "black"	 --	 and	 yet	 she	 is	 the	 divine	 mother.	 And	 she	 is	 most
beautiful.	She	is	black,	as	black	as	the	devil,	but	her	form	is	that	of	the	divine.
She	has	 a	 beautiful	 face,	 a	 beautiful	 body,	 absolutely	 in	 proportion;	 but	 she	 is
black.	And	then,	she	is	dancing	on	the	chest	of	her	husband,	almost	killing	him.
Shiva	 is	 her	 husband,	 and	 she	 is	 dancing	on	 his	 chest	 and	 almost	 killing	 him.
And	 she	 loves	 him	 too.	 She	 loves	 and	 kills	 together.	 All	 contradictions	 put
together.
The	 mother	 gives	 you	 birth,	 the	 woman	 gives	 you	 birth,	 and	 by	 and	 by	 the
woman	kills	you	too.	She	brings	your	death	closer;	hence	the	attraction	and	the
fear.	You	are	attracted	with	the	divine,	and	you	are	afraid	with	the	devilish.
So	you	say,	"I	see	women	as	objects	of	worship,	and	at	the	same	time	I	lust	after
them."
Both	 are	 complementaries.	Accept	 them.	 That's	 how	 reality	 is.	 The	woman	 is
both,	and	you	are	both.	And	if	you	accept	this	contradictory	reality,	one	day	you
will	go	beyond	it,	you	will	transcend	it.
There	 is	 a	 transcendental	 element	 too,	 but	 that	 transcendental	 element	 can	 be
understood	 only	 when	 you	 pass	 through	 contradictions.	 If	 you	 avoid
contradictions	 you	 will	 never	 attain	 the	 transcendental.	 Go	 through	 the
contradictory,	and	by	and	by	you	will	become	just	a	witness	to	them	both.
How	does	it	work?	It	works	in	a	simple	way.	If	you	think	you	are	good,	you	are
identified	with	good.	If	you	think	you	are	bad,	you	are	identified	with	the	bad.
But	 if	 you	 allow	 both	 good	 and	 bad	 together,	 you	 cannot	 get	 identified	 with
either.	You	remain	unidentified,	and	that	is	the	fundamental,	the	radical	change.
You	remain	unidentified.	You	cannot	figure	out	who	you	are,	good	or	bad,	day	or
night,	life	or	death,	beautiful	or	ugly.	You	cannot	identify	with	anything,	so	you
remain	unidentified.
Good	comes	and	passes,	and	you	know	you	cannot	be	good,	because	the	bad	is
coming.
And	 the	 bad	 comes	 and	 passes,	 and	 you	 know	 you	 cannot	 be	 the	 bad.	 either,
because	the	good	is	coming.	So	you	cannot	be	good	and	you	cannot	be	bad;	then
who	are	you?	You	are	a	witness.	a	witness	who	watches	everything	come	and	go,
a	watcher	on	the	hills.
"I	am	content	to	let	life	flow,	and	I	am	afraid	of	the	future."	The	same.	The	same
contradiction	on	so	many	levels.
"I	crave	to	be	alone,	and	I	crave	to	be	always	with	people."	The	same.
"I	feel	bizarre	because	these	contradictions	all	seem	equally	real	and	true."	They
are.	And	when	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	 recognize	 that	 they	are	 true	and	 real,	one
feels	bizarre.	That's	what	 the	Zen	people	say:	 first	 the	rivers	are	 rivers	and	 the
mountain	are	mountains,	then	the	rivers	are	no	more	rivers	and	the	mountains	are
no	 more	 mountains	 --	 bizarre,	 confusion,	 clouds,	 everything	 topsy-turvy,	 all
disturbed	 --	 and	 then	 one	 day	 mountains	 are	 again	 mountains	 and	 rivers	 are
again	 rivers,	 everything	 settled	 again,	 on	 a	 higher	 plane	 of	 course,	 on	 the
transcendental	plane	of	course.
You	will	have	to	go	through	this	bizarreness.	To	be	sane	one	has	to	pass	through
many	insanities.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
134
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
"Is	there	anything	to	be	understood	or	done	about	this?"	Just	understood,	nothing
to	be	done	about	it.	I	don't	teach	doing.	Nothing	has	to	be	done.	You	just	watch.
Watch	more	 and	more	 carefully,	watch	 in	 detail.	Watch	 the	 subtlest	 nuance	 of
any	change	in	you.	Watch	all	--
which	no	prejudice,	with	 no	 judgement.	And	 that	watching	will	 integrate	 you,
will	make	you	more	and	more	aware.
And	that	is	the	whole	purpose	of	life:	to	create	more	intelligence,	to	create	more
awareness.
Question
IS	THERE	ANYTHING	I	CAN	GIVE	YOU	BACK?
Nothing,	because	that	is	what	I	give	to	you.	I	give	you	nothing,	and	only	nothing
can	you	give	me	back.
In	fact,	don't	start	thinking	of	giving	me	anything	back,	because	I	am	not	giving
you	anything.	 I	 am	simply	making	you	aware	of	 things	 that	you	already	have.
You	don't	 owe	anything	 to	me,	not	 even	a	 thank-you.	 If	 you	 thank	me,	 that	 is
simply	 generous	 of	 you,	 you	 are	 just	 being	 polite	 and	 gentlemanly;	 otherwise
there	is	nothing.	You	don't	owe	anything	to	me.	I	have	not	given	anything	to	you
and	I	am	not	going	to	give	anything	to	you,	and	nothing	can	be	given,	in	the	very
nature	of	things.
In	fact,	if	you	are	not	angry	at	me,	I	will	be	happy	enough.	Because	I	take	away
many	things.	I	don't	give	anything	to	you.	I	take	away	your	ego,	and	I	don't	give
anything	 instead.	 I	 take	 away	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things.	 And	 when	 those
thousand	and	one	things	have	been	taken	away,	suddenly	you	become	aware	of
that	which	has	always	been	there	from	the	very	beginning.
So	let	me	say	it	in	this	way:	I	give	you	that	which	you	already	have,	and	I	take
away	 things	 which	 you	 don't	 have	 but	 you	 think	 you	 have.	 I	 take	 away	 that
which	is	not	there	but	you	believe	is	there.	I	take	away	your	illusions.
But	 I	 cannot	 give	 reality.	 Reality	 is	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 given;	 it	 is	 already
there.	I	eliminate	the	illusion,	and	the	reality	is	there.	I	simply	give	you	back	to
yourself.
There	is	no	need	to	be	worried	--	"Is	there	anything	I	can	give	you	back.?"	Just	if
you	 are	 not	 angry,	 that	 will	 be	 enough.	 If	 you	 can	 forgive	 me,	 that	 will	 be
enough.
I	 know	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 forgive	me.	 That	 is	 the	 greatest	 danger	 a	Master
takes	on	his	 shoulders.	 It	 is	very	difficult	 for	 the	disciples	 to	 forgive	him,	 and
they	are	always	watching	from	the	corner	of	their	eyes	to	find	some	fault.	They
are	always	waiting	to	find	some	loophole	so	they	can	jump	upon	it	and	they	can
say,	 "So,	 I	 have	 found	 the	 reality.	 This	man	 is	 nothing,"	 and	 they	 can	 go	 and
condemn.	It	is	a	very	dangerous	game.
The	 disciples	 are	 continuously	 watchful.	 They	 are	 like	 spies,	 spying	 on	 the
Master,	if	they	can	find	something.
Just	 the	other	question-answer	day,	when	I	 talked	about	Dr.	Kovoor,	 two,	three
persons	got	almost	mad	about	me.	They	have	written	letters	that	"Why	did	you
do	 this?	 It	 is	cheap!"	And	I	go	on	 telling	you	 the	cheap	 is	 the	costly!	And	 the
trivial	is	the	profound!	And	the	world,	the	samsara,	is	nirvana!	Do	you	hear	me,
or	 not?	 And	 they	 have	 demanded,	 almost	 it	 is	 a	 demand,	 Osho	 -	 The	 First
Principle
135
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
that	"You	have	to	answer	it,	why	you	attacked	him."	I	have	not	attacked	him;	I
have	attacked	these	three	people	who	have	written	to	me.	What	have	I	to	do	with
Kovoor?	He	is	not	going	to	come	here,	I	am	not	going	to	go	there.	We	are	not
going	to	meet	anyway.	I	have	attacked	these	three	persons,	and	I	have	got	them,
trapped	them,	they	are	trapped.	I	have	attacked	their	idea	of	me.
One	has	written,	"It	is	inconceivable	that	a	man	of	your	height	should	come	so
low."	But	who	 in	 the	 first	 place	 has	 told	 you	 that	 I	 am	 a	man	 of	 height?	You
yourself	project,	and	if	your	projections	are	destroyed,	you	are	angry	at	me?
I	go	on	repeating,	just	to	be	safe,	that	I	am	a	very	ordinary	man.	Otherwise	you
will	hang	me	in	the	sky.	You	will	say,	"You	are	so	high."
If	you	find	me	eating	or	if	you	find	me	taking	a	bath	...	Do	you	know?	In	heaven
there	is	no	provision	for	God's	bathroom.	No	provision.	I	have	gone	through	all
the	scriptures.
Can	you	believe	God	farts?	 Impossible.	So	high,	and	farting?	Belching?	These
things	are	good	for	human	beings,	not	for	gods.
Who	has	told	you	I	am	so	high?	But	you	project.
And	I	am	not	so	foolish	as	to	accept	your	projections.	If	you	want	to	project	such
things,	you	will	have	to	find	some	other	people.	You	are	not	allowed	to	project
anything	 on	me.	 I	will	 go	 on	 throwing	 it.	 I	 am	not	 here	 to	 fulfill	 any	 of	 your
expectations.	That	is	the	very	trouble	you	have	to	tolerate	with	me.	You	would
like	me	to	be	dead	and	sitting	on	a	golden	throne,	and	then	you	can	worship	me
easily.	But	I	am	alive.
And	 I	 go	 on	 doing	 things	 that	 I	 like.	 I	 don't	 care	 what	 you	 think.	 If	 you	 are
disturbed	 it	 is	your	problem;	 it	 is	none	of	my	business.	Then	you	have	 to	 look
into	yourself	and	find	ways	not	to	be	disturbed.
These	things	come	again	and	again	in	your	mind,	and	you	don't	see	that	they	are
YOUR
problems.
Somebody	 else	 has	 asked,	 "Why	do	we	have	 to	 pay	money	here?"	 "I	 have	no
money,"	he	says,	"and	I	want	to	be	here."	But	then	who	is	going	to	pay	for	you?
You	will	need	money,	you	will	need	food,	you	will	need	a	shelter,	you	will	need
clothes,	 sometimes	you	will	be	 ill,	you	will	need	 the	hospital:	who	 is	going	 to
pay	for	you?	Now,	he	thinks	that	this	ashram	is	money	obsessed.	If	people	who
don't	 have	money	 are	 allowed,	 then	Laxmi	will	 have	 to	 go	 even	more	money
obsessed	because	 for	 them	also	 she	will	 have	 to	 arrange.	 Just	 to	 avoid	money
obsession,	money	has	to	be	arranged.	There	are	many	people	who	would	like	to
be	 here,	 but	 then	 who	 is	 going	 to	 arrange	 for	 them?	 And	 if	 somebody	 else
arranges	for	them,	he	will	demand	something	in	return.
The	person	says,	 "Even	Christians	don't	 ask	 for	money;	even	 they	are	not	 that
bold."	I	know	they	are	not	that	bold.	They	need	not	be;	they	have	enough	money.
The	Vatican	has	enough	money;	 that	 is	 the	richest	party	 in	 the	world.	But	 then
you	have	to	pay	--	not	 in	money,	money	is	 there	--	you	have	to	pay	with	other
things:	you	have	to	pay	with	your	freedom.
Here	I	want	you	to	be	free.	I	don't	want	to	hinder	your	freedom.
If	you	want	to	stay	here	without	money,	then	I	will	have	to	ask	some	people	who
have	money	to	give	money	to	 the	ashram.	But	 then	 they	have	 their	conditions.
Then	their	conditions	have	to	be	fulfilled.	Otherwise	why	should	they	give	their
money?	 They	 give	money	 in	 return	 for	 something.	 Then	 you	will	 not	 be	 free
here.	And	I	will	not	be	free	here.	I	will	not	be	able	to	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
136
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
say	what	I	want	to	say.	Then	they	will	dictate	to	me	that	this	has	to	be	said	and
this	has	not	to	be	said.
Nobody	 is	money	 obsessed.	But	 the	 questioner	 is	money	 obsessed:	 he	 has	 no
money	and	he	wants	to	be	here.	But	what	is	money?	Money	is	just	that	you	have
to	pay	for	everything.
You	 eat:	 you	 have	 to	 pay	 for	 it.	 You	 live:	 you	 have	 to	 pay	 for	 it.	 You	 need
clothes:	you	have	to	pay	for	it.
And	why	 should	 you	 not	 pay?	Then	 somebody	 else	will	 have	 to	 pay	 for	 you.
Why	exploit	somebody	else?
If	 you	 don't	 have	money,	 then	 go	 and	 earn	money	 and	 come	 back.	 YOU	 are
money	obsessed!	But	you	 think	 that	Bhagwan	 is	 demanding	money.	 It	 is	 your
problem.
Somebody	has	said,	"I	can't	see	the	point	why	I	have	to	pay	when	I	come	to	the
lecture.
When	 I	 have	 to	 pay	 ten	 rupees	 for	 the	 lecture,	 then	 I	 cannot	 think	 of	 you	 as
God."	So	the	price	of	thinking	of	me	as	God	is	ten	rupees!	If	he	does	not	have	to
pay,	he	will	think	of	me	as	God.
What	do	you	think?	You	are	trying	to	bribe	me?	Pay	twenty	rupees	and	think	of
me	as	the	devil,	perfectly	okay!
Why	should	you	not	pay?	Why	should	you	like	to	exploit?
And	this	is	my	understanding,	that	you	hear	only	when	you	pay;	otherwise	you
don't	hear.
When	you	have	nothing	to	pay,	there	is	no	need	to	hear.	The	more	you	pay,	the
more	alert	you	are	--	because	those	ten	rupees	are	gone.	If	you	don't	listen	it	is
your	business;	you	remain	a	little	alert.	J	know	you	are	money-minded;	those	ten
rupees	will	keep	you	awake.
And	my	godhood	is	not	in	danger,	because	I	don't	care	what	you	think	about	me.
That	 is	not	 the	point	at	all.	 It	 is	not	 that	you	have	made	me	a	god.	This	 is	my
declaration;	it	is	not	your	recognition.	If	nobody	believes	in	me,	then	too	I	am	a
god.	If	only	I	believe	in	me,	that's	enough.	I	don't	need	a	single	witness.	This	is
MY	understanding.
Then	 again,	 the	moment	 you	 think	 that	 this	man	 is	 Bhagwan,	 then	 he	 should
behave	in	such	a	way	and	in	such	a	way.	Then	he	should	be	on	a	high	pedestal.
He	should	not	behave	like	a	human	being.
Then	you	don't	understand	my	concept	of	Bhagwan.	My	concept	of	Bhagwan	is
not	that	a	Bhagwan	is	a	special	being,	that	a	Bhagwan	is	a	perfect	being,	that	a
Bhagwan	is	not	of	this	world.	My	concept	of	Bhagwan	is	that	God	is	a	normal
quality	of	existence.	Just	by	being,	you	are	God.
You	are	not	 a	painter	by	 just	being.	For	painting,	you	will	 have	 to	 learn	 some
skill,	you	will	have	to	go	to	an	art	school.	And	then	too	your	being	a	painter	will
depend	on	so	many	recognitions	--	people	will	recognize,	may	not	recognize;	the
critics	 will	 appreciate,	 may	 not	 appreciate;	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things.	 If	 you
want	 to	be	a	musician,	 just	by	being,	you	are	not	a	musician.	You	will	have	to
learn;	this	is	something	which	has	to	be	learned.
When	I	say	God,	I	mean	you	ARE	God,	just	by	being.	It	is	not	a	specialization.
Then	what	is	 the	difference	between	me	and	you?	The	only	difference	is	 that	I
recognize	 my	 godhood	 and	 you	 don't	 recognize	 yours.	 Otherwise	 there	 is	 no
distinction.	 I	am	as	 imperfect	as	you	are!	Then	what	 is	 the	difference	between
me	and	you?	The	difference	is	that	I	enjoy	my	imperfection	and	you	don't	enjoy
yours,	that	I	am	perfectly	happy	with	all	my	imperfections	and	you	are	not	happy
with	yours.	You	have	a	notion	of	perfection	and	I	have	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
137
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
none.	I	am	perfect	 in	my	imperfections.	I	have	accepted	them	totally,	 in	 toto.	I
am	not	trying	to	improve	myself;	I	am	simply	the	way	I	am.	And	I	am	happy	the
way	I	am.
The	day	you	are	also	happy	the	way	you	are,	the	day	you	are	also	happy	with	all
your	imperfections,	you	are	God.	You	are	still	God,	whether	you	recognize	it	or
you	don't	recognize	it,	but	you	have	your	ideas	about	God,	and	then	you	project
those	ideas.	And	if,	sometimes,	 they	are	shattered	--	and	they	will	be	shattered
again	and	again	because	I	cannot	keep	to	your	expectations	...
I	 am	 a	 free	 man.	 I	 live	 the	 way	 I	 live.	 And	 see	 the	 whole	 point:	 I	 am	 not
expecting	 anything	 from	 you;	 still	 you	 go	 on	 expecting	 things	 from	 me.	 My
whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	yourself,	and	your	whole	effort	here	is	to
make	me	something	that	you	want	me	to	be.	Drop	all	this	nonsense.
That's	why	I	say	even	if	you	can	forgive	me,	that	will	be	enough.	You	need	not
even	say	a	thank-you.
It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 be	 safe	 amongst	 disciples;	 hence	 I	 need	 bodyguards.
Because	a	disciple	has	"surrendered,"	now	he	will	take	revenge.	And	of	course,
if	he	surrenders	to	me,	he	will	take	revenge	on	me.	Where	else	will	he	go	to	take
the	revenge?
Watch	all	these	tendencies	in	you.
It	was	 not	Kovoor,	 it	was	 not	my	 criticism	of	Kovoor,	 that	 has	 hurt	 you.	 It	 is
your	 idea	of	me,	 it	 is	your	expectation	of	me,	 that	 is	 feeling	hurt.	So	drop	 the
expectations;	 otherwise	 you	will	 feel	 hurt	 again	 and	 again	 --	 I	will	 find	 other
Kovoors.	Sometimes,	even	if	they	are	not	there,	I	can	invent!	But	I	am	going	to
destroy	 all	 your	 expectations	 of	 me	 because	 if	 you	 cannot	 drop	 expectations
about	me,	how	can	you	drop	expectations	about	yourself?	It	will	be	impossible.
And	 my	 whole	 work	 consists	 in	 a	 simple	 thing:	 to	 live	 a	 life	 without
expectations,	without	hope,	to	live	a	life	moment	to	moment,	with	no	ideals.
Two	men	were	chatting	when	the	name	of	a	mutual	friend	was	mentioned.	"Are
you	a	friend	of	Harry's?"	the	first	asked.
"Are	we	friends?"	the	man	said.	"Twenty	years	we	are	friends.	There	is	nothing	I
would	not	do	for	Harry	and	there	is	nothing	he	would	not	do	for	me.	In	fact,	for
twenty	years	we	have	gone	 through	 life	 together,	 doing	 absolutely	nothing	 for
each	other."
I	 am	 doing	 nothing	 to	 you.	 You,	 please,	 do	 nothing	 to	 me.	 Even	 if	 this	 can
happen,	there	will	arise	a	great	friendship.	You	need	not	feel	obliged;	you	don't
owe	anything	to	me.
Question
MEHER	BABA	REMAINED	SILENT	FOR	THE	LAST	FORTY-FIVE	YEARS
OF	HIS
LIFE.	PLEASE	COMMENT	ON	ITS	IMPLICATIONS.
There	 is	 nothing	 much	 in	 it.	 He	 just	 got	 fed	 up	 with	 the	 questions	 of	 his
disciples.
And	sometimes	the	idea	arises	in	me	too.	So	watch.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
138
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
Question
OSHO,	 THERE	 ARE	 A	 FEW	 WORDS	 YOU	 ALWAYS	 PRONOUNCE
WRONGLY.
WHY?
So	that	you	can	say	to	people	that	at	least	in	one	thing	Osho	is	consistent.
My	 English	 is	 not	 that	 of	 the	 Englishman;	 my	 English	 is	 not	 that	 of	 the
American;	it	is	not	even	of	the	Indian.	My	English	is	just	MINE.	So	you	have	to
tolerate	it.	And	I	am	very	reluctant	to	improve	about	anything.
And	my	English	has	been	of	a	great	help	 to	me.	 I	used	 to	 live	 in	Jabalpur,	 for
many	years.
The	first	day	I	was	driving	to	the	university,	a	woman,	who	lived	next	to	me,	an
American	woman,	she	wanted	a	lift.	Now,	this	was	going	to	be	dangerous.	This
was	the	first	day	--	and	every	day	then	I	will	have	to	carry	her	and	tolerate	her
chattering	for	almost	half	an	hour,	going	to	the	university	and	coming.
I	 had	 heard	 the	American	 expression	 "Can	 I	 drop	 you	 off	 somewhere?"	 but	 I
managed	 it	 into	 my	 English	 and	 I	 asked	 her,	 "Can	 I	 throw	 you	 down
someplace?"	And	finished!	She	never	asked	again.
Once,	 another,	 an	Englishwoman,	 got	 interested	 in	me.	 I	 don't	 know	what	 she
saw	 in	 me,	 but	 she	 was	 almost	 in	 a	 fantasy.	 She	 was	 a	 lecturer	 in	 the	 same
university,	in	the	English	department.	She	was	after	me.	I	was	simply	surprised
as	 to	 what	 she	 saw	 in	 me	 because	 I	 don't	 see	 anything	 in	 myself;	 it	 is	 just
emptiness	there.	But	my	English	helped.
You	know	the	expression	...?	I	had	read	somewhere,	in	a	novel,	that	a	young	man
gazes	into	the	eyes	of	his	woman	and	says	to	her	 that	"Your	face,	your	beauty,
your	joy,	your	presence	make	time	stand	still."	So	I	did	the	same	to	this	woman.
I	told	her,	"You	have	such	a	face	that	it	would	stop	a	clock."	And	finished!	My
English	helped	me.
Sometimes	you	will	find	it	difficult	too,	because	my	structure	of	the	sentences	is
mine,	and	sometimes	 the	meaning	I	put	 into	words	 is	mine,	 the	pronunciations
are	mine;	sometimes	you	can't	even	get	what	I	am	saying.	That	helps	you	to	keep
awake.	 You	 have	 to	 listen	 attentively;	 you	 can	miss.	 You	 cannot	 take	me	 for
granted.
One	man	was	discussing	with	me	about	a	politician,	and	I	 told	 the	man,	"That
politician	is	a	spherical	S.O.B."
The	man	was	puzzled;	he	 said,	 "I	have	come	across	many	S.O.B.'s	 in	my	 life.
But	what	do	you	mean	by	'spherical'?"
"I	mean,"	I	said	to	him,	"he	is	an	S.O.B.	any	way	you	look	at	him."
"Spherical,"	that	is	my	own	word.
And	my	English	has	a	certain	reputation,	and	I	am	not	going	to	destroy	it.
A	 little	 lady	 from	 Fresno,	 visiting	 San	 Francisco,	 got	 quite	 a	 thrill	 out	 of
attending	a	daring	party	in	the	Bohemia	known	as	Telegraph	Hill.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
139
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
A	friend	who	was	showing	her	 the	sights	pointed	out	a	 familiar-looking	young
couple	and	whispered,	"Don't	look	now,	but	those	two	artists	there	are	living	in
sin."
"Sin,	my	 foot!"	 exclaimed	 the	 Fresno	 lady.	 "I	 know	 them.	 It	 is	 just	 Lois	 and
Maurice,	and	they	were	married	in	the	Fresno	Baptist	Church	five	years	ago."
The	young	couple	overheard	and	quickly	drew	the	Fresno	lady	aside.	"For	God's
sake	 don't	 tell	 anybody	 we	 are	 married,"	 said	 the	 young	 man	 in	 a	 tense
undertone.	"It	would	ruin	our	artistic	reputation."
I	have	a	certain	reputation	of	my	English,	hmm?	And	I	am	not	going	to	change	it
in	any	way.
Question
WHAT	 IS	 PORNOGRAPHY,	 AND	 WHY	 DOES	 IT	 HAVE	 SO	 MUCH
APPEAL?
Pornography	is	a	by-product	of	religious	repression.	The	whole	credit	goes	to	the
priests.
Pornography	has	nothing	to	do	with	pornographers.	The	pornography	is	created,
managed	by	the	Church,	by	the	religious	people.
In	a	primitive,	natural	 state,	man	 is	not	pornographic.	When	human	beings	are
naked	and	nude	and	man	knows	the	woman's	body	and	woman	knows	the	man's
body,	 you	 cannot	 sell	 PLAYBOY.	 It	 is	 impossible.	 Who	 will	 purchase
PLAYBOY?	And	who	will	look	into	all	that	crap?
They	have	repressed	so	much	that	man's	mind	is	fascinated	of	pornography.	The
whole	 credit	 goes	 to	 them.	 They	 have	 repressed	 so	 much	 that	 man's	 mind	 is
boiling.	The	man	wants	to	see	the	woman's	body.	Nothing	wrong	in	it,	a	simple
desire,	a	human	desire.	And	the	woman	wants	to	know	the	man's	body.	A	simple
desire,	nothing	wrong	about	it.
Just	think	of	a	world	where	trees	are	covered	with	clothes.	There	are	people	...	I
have	 heard	 about	 some	 English	 ladies	 who	 cover	 their	 dogs	 and	 cats	 with
clothes.	Just	 think,	cows	and	horses	and	dogs	dressed.	Then	you	will	 find	new
pornography	arising.	Somebody	will	publish	a	NUDE	picture	of	a	tree	--	and	you
will	hide	it	in	a	Bible	and	look	at	it!
This	whole	foolishness	is	out	of	religious	repression.
Make	 man	 free,	 allow	 people	 to	 be	 nude.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 they	 should
continuously	 be	 nude,	 but	 nudity	 should	 be	 accepted.	 On	 the	 beach,	 at	 the
swimming	pool,	in	the	home	...
nudity	should	be	accepted.	The	children	should	take	a	bath	with	the	mother,	with
the	father,	in	the	bathroom.	There	is	no	need	for	the	father	to	lock	the	bathroom
when	he	goes	in.	The	children	can	come	and	have	a	talk	and	chitchat	and	go	out.
Pornography	will	disappear.
Each	 child	 wants	 to	 know.	 "How	 does	my	 daddy	 look?"	 Each	 child	 wants	 to
know,	 "How	does	my	mother	 look?"	And	 this	 is	 simply	 intelligence,	 curiosity.
And	 the	 child	 cannot	 know	what	 the	mother	 looks	 like,	 and	 the	 child	 cannot
know	what	the	father	looks	like;	now	you	are	creating	illness	in	the	child's	mind.
It	is	YOU,	that	YOU	are	ill,	and	the	illness	will	be	reflected	in	the	child's	mind.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
140
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
I	am	not	saying	sit	nude	in	the	office	or	in	the	factory.	If	it	is	hot,	it	is	okay,	but
there	is	no	need	to	be	naked,	it	should	not	be	an	obsession;	but	this	continuous
obsession	of	hiding	your	body	is	just	ugly.
And	one	thing	more.	Because	of	the	clothes,	bodies	HAVE	become	ugly,	because
then	 you	 don't	 care.	 You	 care	 only	 about	 the	 face.	 If	 your	 belly	 goes	 on
becoming	 bigger	 and	 bigger,	 who	 bothers?	 You	 can	 hide	 it.	 Your	 body	 has
become	ugly	because	it	is	not	exposed;	otherwise	you	will	think	a	little:	the	belly
is	getting	 too	big.	 Just	 let	one	hundred	people	stand	nude,	and	 they	all	will	be
ashamed,	and	they	will	squirm	and	they	will	start	hiding	themselves.
Something	 is	wrong.	Why	 is	 it	 so?	They	know	only	about	 their	 face.	The	 face
they	take	care	of;	the	whole	body	is	neglected.
This	is	bad.	This	is	not	good.	It	is	not	in	favor	of	the	body,	either.
Any	country	where	people	are	allowed	a	little	freedom	to	be	nude	becomes	more
beautiful;	 people	 have	more	 beautiful	 bodies.	 If	 American	women	 are	 getting
more	beautiful	and	have	more	beautiful	bodies	 there	 is	no	wonder	 in	 it.	 Indian
woman	will	have	to	wait	long;	they	can	hide	their	ugly	bodies	in	the	saries	very
carefully.	The	sari	is	a	great	help.
Nudity	should	be	natural,	should	be	as	natural	as	animals,	as	trees,	as	everything
else	is	nude.	Then	pornography	will	disappear.
Pornography	is	 there	as	a	sort	of	mental	masturbation;	 it	 is	mind	masturbation.
You	are	not	allowed	to	 love	women,	you	are	not	allowed	to	 love	men,	you	are
not	allowed	to	make	as	many	contacts	as	possible;	the	mind	is	boiling	and	starts
a	sort	of	inner	masturbation.
Pornography	helps	you;	 it	 gives	you	visions	of	 beautiful	women	and	beautiful
men,	to	dream	about,	and	it	gives	you	a	thrill.
Your	alive	wife	does	not	give	you	any	thrill.	With	your	alive	wife	you	suddenly
go	dead.
There	are	people,	even	while	making	love	to	their	wife,	they	are	imagining	some
other	woman;	they	are	imagining	some	PLAYBOY	picture.	They	can	make	love
to	their	woman	only	when	in	their	imagination	there	is	some	other	woman,	some
fantasy.	Then	they	get	thrilled.	They	are	not	making	love	to	their	woman,	and	the
woman	is	not	making	love	to	them.
She	may	be	 thinking	of	some	actor	or	some	hero	or	somebody.	There	are	 four
people	in	each	bed!	Of	course,	it	is	too	crowded,	and	you	never	contact	the	real
person;	those	imaginary	ones	are	standing	in	between.
You	should	know	that	masturbation	--	mental	or	physical	is	a	perversion.	It	does
not	exist	in	nature.	Homosexuality	does	not	exist	in	nature,	but	in	zoos	it	comes
into	 existence.	 In	 zoos	 animals	 start	 masturbating.	 In	 zoos	 animals	 even	 start
becoming	homosexually	interested.
Wherever	the	situation	is	unnatural,	unnatural	perversions	enter.	In	the	military,
in	 the	 army,	 people	 become	 homosexual,	 because	 it	 is	 an	 "all-boys"	 club,	 no
woman	 available.	Their	 pent-up	 energies	 start	making	 them	 insane;	 they	 think
they	will	go	mad	if	they	don't	allow	some	outlet.	In	the	boys'	hostels,	in	the	girls'
hostels,	where	no	boy	can	come,	no	girl	can	come,	the	other	sex	is	not	allowed,
naturally	pornography	will	be	greatly	enjoyed.	It	will	help	masturbation.
But	these	things	have	not	been	talked	of	directly.	Now	many	will	be	offended	--
why	am	I	talking	about	these	things?	I	am	here	to	make	everything	clear	to	you
so	 that	 you	 can	 become	more	 and	 more	 natural.	 The	 appeal	 for	 pornography
simply	 says	 that	 your	mind	 is	 in	 an	 abnormal	 state.	 It	 is	 perfectly	 good	 to	 be
interested	in	a	beautiful	woman,	nothing	wrong,	but	to	have	a	picture	of	a	nude
woman	and	 to	get	 excited	about	 it	 is	 just	 stupid.	That's	what	people	are	doing
with	pornography.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
141
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
I	have	heard	a	beautiful	joke.	Listen	attentively,	don't	miss	it.
A	husband	was	suspicious	of	his	wife,	so	he	hired	a	private	detective	to	find	out
whether	she	had	a	lover	or	not.	The	detective,	a	Chinese	immigrant,	came	back
to	report	after	only	 two	days.	His	arm	and	nose	were	broken	and	his	head	was
tied	up	in	bandages.
"What	happened?"	the	husband	inquired	eagerly.	"Any	proof	yet?"
"Well,"	 the	detective	answered,	 "I	hid	outside	your	house	when	you	 left	 in	 the
morning.
After	half	an	hour	a	man	came	and	let	himself	in	with	a	key.	I	climbed	a	tree	to
see	 into	 the	bedroom,	and	 there	was	he	holding	 she	and	 she	kissing	he.	So	he
play	with	 she	 and	 she	 play	with	 he;	 I	 play	with	me	 and	 I	 fall	 down	 from	 the
tree."
That's	what	pornography	is.
Beware	 of	 all	 sorts	 of	 perversions.	To	 love	 is	 good;	 to	 dream	about	 it	 is	 ugly.
Why?	When	 the	 real	 is	 available,	why	 go	 for	 the	 unreal?	Even	 the	 real	 never
satisfies!	 So	 how	 can	 the	 unreal	 satisfy?	 Even	 the	 real,	 in	 the	 final	 analysis,
proves	to	be	illusory,	so	what	to	say	about	the	illusory?
Let	me	repeat:	Even	 the	real,	one	day,	proves	 to	be	 just	unreal,	 so	what	 to	say
about	the	unreal?
Go	into	the	real	love,	and	you	will	become	so	aware	one	day	that	even	the	real
love,	 the	 so-called	 real	 love,	 will	 disappear.	 And	 when	 a	 man	 is	 completely
beyond	sexuality	...	Not	that	I	am	saying	"TRY	to	go	beyond,"	no,	not	at	all,	God
forbid.	What	I	mean	when	I	say	when	a	man	"goes	beyond"	is	that	when	a	man
has	gone	deeper	into	sex,	 into	love,	and	has	known	and	has	found	that	 there	is
nothing,	that	very	finding	takes	him	above.	He	starts	floating	above	the	earth,	he
grows	wings.	That	transcendence	is	BRAHMACHARYA,	that	 transcendence	is
celibacy.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your	 effort;	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
repression.
A	 repressed	 person	 can	 never	 attain	 BRAHMACHARYA;	 he	 will	 become
pornographic.
And	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	ways	of	being	pornographic.	In	the	old	Indian
scriptures	 there	 are	 descriptions	 of	 great	 RISHIS	 sitting	 in	 meditation	 and
beautiful	women	 trying	 to	 seduce	 them,	dancing	 around	 them,	naked.	And	 the
stories	say	they	are	sent	by	the	God	of	heaven	to	corrupt	them	because	the	God
in	 heaven	 is	 afraid	 if	 they	 attain	 to	 their	 SAMADHI	 they	 will	 become
competitors.	The	God	of	heaven	is	afraid	of	their	competition,	so	when	they	are
attaining	 closer	 and	 closer,	 coming	 closer	 to	 SAMADHI,	 he	 sends	 beautiful
women	to	seduce	them.
Now,	there	is	no	God,	and	no	beautiful	women	come	from	heaven;	this	is	mind
pornography.	These	RISHIS,	these	so-called	seers,	have	repressed	sex	so	much
that	 at	 the	 last	moment,	when	 they	 are	 really	 getting	 closer	 to	 their	 innermost
center,	that	repressed	sex	bursts	forth,	explodes.	And	in	that	explosion	their	own
images,	mind	 images	 ...	 It	 is	 a	mind	panorama,	 it	 is	very	colorful,	 and	 it	 is	 so
colorful	and	looks	so	real	that	even	they	are	deceived;	they	think	really	women
are	there.
Just	go	in	a	cave	for	three	months	and	be	celibate	and	force	celibacy.	After	three
months	you	will	be	a	great	seer	--	and	you	will	start	seeing	things.	That	is	what	a
great	seer	is.	You	will	start	seeing	damsels	and	beautiful	APSARAS	from	heaven
coming	and	dancing	around	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
142
Chapter	8	-	The	Profound	and	the	Trivial
you	seducing	you.	They	are	 just	your	mind	picture.	When	you	are	deprived	of
reality,	 your	 dreams	 start	 almost	 looking	 like	 reality.	 That's	 what	 we	 call
hallucination.
In	those	old	days	PLAYBOY	magazine	was	not	available,	so	the	RISHIMUNIS
had	to	depend	on	their	own.	Now	you	can	have	some	support	from	the	outside.
But	beware:	even	the	real	is	proved,	finally,	to	be	unreal.	So	don't	move	into	the
realms	 of	 the	 unreal.	 Go	 into	 the	 real,	 let	 it	 be	 a	 great	 experience.	 I	 am	 not
against	 it,	 I	 am	 all	 for	 it,	 go	 into	 it,	 because	 only	 by	 going	 into	 it,	 one	 day,
BRAHMACHARYA,	one	day,	you	simply	get	out	of	it.
Not	 that	 love	will	 disappear.	 In	 fact,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 love	will	 appear,	 but	 a
totally	different	kind	of	love.	Buddha	calls	it	compassion	--	a	cool	love,	with	no
sexual	heat	in	it.
Your	being	will	become	a	benediction.	Your	very	presence	will	make	people	feel
your	love.
Your	love	will	fall	and	shower	on	them.	In	your	very	presence,	people	will	start
moving	into	the	unknown.
Yes,	great	 compassion	will	 arise	 in	you.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 sexual	 energy,	 released
from	 the	 sexual	 objects.	 Not	 repressed.	 Released.	 Not	 forcibly	 repressed,	 but
understandably	released.
The	same	sexual	energy	becomes	love,	compassion.
And	when	love,	compassion,	arises	you	are	fulfilled.	Buddha	has	said	two	things
are	the	goals:	awareness	and	compassion.	And	both	come	out	of	the	sex	energy;
both	 are	 born	 out	 of	 it.	 Those	 two	 are	 the	 flowers,	 ultimate	 flowers,	 of	 sex
energy.
That	 lotus	 is	 waiting	 in	 you	 to	 flower.	 Don't	 waste	 your	 energies.	 Use	 your
energies	to	understand	them,	go	into	them	deeply,	meditatively,	so	that	one	day
that	lotus	opens.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
143
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
9
You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
19	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
THE	 OFFICIAL,	 RIKO,	 ONCE	 ASKED	 NANSEN	 TO	 EXPLAIN	 TO	 HIM
THE	OLD
PROBLEM	OF	THE	GOOSE	IN	THE	BOTTLE.
"IF	 A	 MAN	 PUTS	 A	 GOSLING	 INTO	 A	 BOTTLE,"	 SAID	 RIKO,	 "AND
FEEDS	HIM
UNTIL	 HE	 IS	 FULL	 GROWN,	 HOW	 CAN	 THE	MAN	 GET	 THE	 GOOSE
OUT	WITHOUT
KILLING	IT	OR	BREAKING	THE	BOTTLE?"
NANSEN	 GAVE	 A	 GREAT	 CLAP	 WITH	 HIS	 HANDS	 AND	 SHOUTED,
"RIKO!"
"YES,	MASTER,"	SAID	THE	OFFICIAL	WITH	A	START.
"SEE,"	SAID	NANSEN,	"THE	GOOSE	IS	OUT!"
"I	do	not	seek,	I	find",	says	Pablo	Picasso.	And	I	say	to	you:	You	need	not	seek,
because	 if	 you	 seek,	 you	 will	 never	 find	 it.	 And	 you	 need	 not	 find	 it,	 also,
because	if	YOU	find	it,	it	will	not	have	been	found	at	all.
Seeking	means	the	truth	is	not	and	you	have	to	seek	it.	Seeking	means	the	truth
is	hidden	and	you	have	to	seek	it.	Seeking	means	the	truth	is	far	away,	distant,
and	you	have	 to	 journey	 to	 it.	And	 truth	 is	herenow.	No	pilgrimage	 is	needed;
one	has	not	to	go	anywhere.	Truth	is	not	THERE	and	truth	is	not	THEN.	Truth	is
here	and	now,	so	all	seeking	is	going	astray.
Seek,	 and	you	will	 not	 find,	 because	 in	 the	very	 seeking	you	have	missed	 the
point,	you	have	missed	the	first	principle.	In	the	very	effort,	you	have	gone	away
from	the	truth.
Seeking	 is	 a	 desire.	With	 the	desire	 comes	 in	 the	mind	 --	mind	 is	 nothing	but
desire.
Seeking	 is	 in	 the	 future,	 and	 the	 future	 is	not.	Truth	 is	 always	present,	 always
present.	Truth	is	always	now;	there	is	no	other	way	for	truth	to	be.	You	cannot
say	about	truth,	"Truth	was,"
and	you	cannot	say	about	truth,	"Truth	will	be."	That	will	be	absolutely	wrong.
Truth	IS	--	and	it	is	always	so,	and	it	will	be	always	so,	and	it	has	always	been
so.	Truth	IS.
How	can	you	seek	that	which	is?	One	seeks	that	which	is	not	yet.	Seeking	is	in
the	future.
Seeking	 assumes	 it,	 that	 it	 is	 not	 here.	You	 seek	money,	 you	 seek	 power,	 you
seek	prestige,	you	seek	heaven;	but	how	can	you	seek	truth?	That's	why,	let	me
repeat.	seeking,	you	go	astray.	Seeking,	you	become	a	victim	of	desire.	Seeking,
the	mind	becomes	predominant.
Seeking,	the	secondary	becomes	primary	and	the	primary	is	lost	track	of.
And	I	say	if	YOU	find	it	you	have	not	found	it	at	all.	Because	if	YOU	remain	to
find	it,	then	it	cannot	be	truth.	Truth	is	found	only	when	you	are	not.	When	truth
is,	you	are	not.	You	both	cannot	be	present	together.	You	are	the	greatest	lie	there
is.	If	you	are	still	there,	then	you	will	go	on	missing	the	truth.	The	very	presence
of	you	functions	as	a	barrier.	"I"	cannot	find;	when	the	"I"	is	not	there	it	is	found.
That's	why	I	say	Picasso's	statement	 is	a	half-truth.	Half	of	 it	 is	 true:	"I	do	not
seek."	But	that	half	is	untrue	when	he	says,	"I	find."	It	looks	almost	Zenlike,	but
it	is	not.	A	half-truth	is	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
144
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
more	dangerous	than	a	plain	lie	because	you	can	see	the	lie	as	the	lie	sooner	or
later,	 but	 the	 half-truth	 can	 go	 on	 pretending	 to	 be	 the	whole	 truth;	 at	 least	 it
appears	 like	 the	 truth.	Many	 have	 been	 deceived	 by	 Picasso's	 statement.	 It	 is
almost	Zen:	"I	do	not	seek,	I	find."
If	he	had	said,	"I	do	not	seek,	and	it	is	found,"	it	would	have	been	Zen.	If	the	"I"
remains,	then	truth	will	remain	clouded.	The	"I"	functions	as	a	cloud,	and	the	sun
goes	behind.	The	"I"
functions	 as	 a	 darkness,	 as	 a	 vale	 of	 darkness.	 The	 "I"	 is	 very	 noisy,	 and	 the
voice	of	truth	is	very	small,	still.	If	 the	"I"	is	there	beating	its	drums,	then	it	 is
almost	impossible	to	hear	the	whispering	of	truth.
Yes,	 truth	 is	 a	whisper.	You	 feel	 it	 only	when	 you	 are	 absolutely	 not.	 In	 your
absence	it	is	present.
So	this	is	the	whole	thing:	if	you	are	present,	 truth	is	absent;	if	you	are	absent,
truth	is	present.	To	be	absent	is	all	that	meditation	is.	To	be	absent	is	all	that	is
involved	in	meditation.
How	to	become	absent?	How	not	to	be?	Yes,	"To	be	or	not	to	be"	is	the	question.
And	ordinarily	we	decide	to	be.	The	moment	we	decide	to	be,	the	samsara.	The
moment	we	 decide	 not	 to	 be,	 the	 nirvana.	 Yes,	 that	 is	 the	 basic	 question	 that
encounters	every	human	being:	to	be	or	not	to	be.	A	Buddha	decides	not	to	be.
And	the	paradox	is	that	those	who	decide	not	to	be,	they	become	true,	and	those
who	decide	to	be,	they	become	a	lie.	The	lie	can	persist;	you	can	go	on	feeding
it.
Truth	is,	just	is,	only	is.	Seeking,	you	miss	it.	Seeking,	you	have	started	looking
somewhere	else.	Seeking,	you	don't	 look	HERE.	Seeking,	your	eyes	are	turned
upwards	 towards	 the	 sky.	 That's	 why	 whenever	 we	 think	 of	 God	 we	 look
upwards	 towards	 the	 sky.	 It	 is	 very	 significant:	God	 is	 far	 away,	 sitting	 in	 the
seventh	heaven,	up.	It	is	a	long	journey;	only	very	rare	people	can	do	it	--	saints,
mahatmas,	ascetics.	All	nonsense.
God	is	where	you	are	right	now!	Not	in	the	seventh	heaven,	but	within	you.
But	about	those	seven	heavens,	the	metaphor	of	"seven"	is	beautiful.	God	is	not
in	 the	 seventh	 heaven	 somewhere,	 but	 is	 hidden	 behind	 seven	 layers	 of	 lies.
There	is	a	very	strange	incident	in	Bodhidharma's	life,	the	founder	of	Zen.	It	is
said	 that	 Bodhidharma	 collapsed	 seven	 times	 and	 arose	 eight	 times,	 when	 he
realized	 enlightenment.	 Collapsed	 seven	 times	 and	 arose	 eight	 times.	 Very
significant.	Those	 are	 the	 seven	 layers	 of	 the	 ego,	 the	 seven	 layers	 of	 the	 "I".
Each	"I"	will	help	you	to	collapse,	and	if	you	cannot	rise	eight	times,	that	means
if	you	cannot	rise	at	least	one	time	without	the	ego,	you	will	not	attain.
So	the	whole	question	is	not	that	the	truth	is	very	far.	It	is	very	close,	very,	very
close.	It	is	in	you,	it	is	you,	it	is	your	intrinsic	nature,	it	is	your	DHARMA.	That
is	the	first	principle,	but	somehow,	seeking,	you	have	missed	it.
Seeking,	 you	 have	 been	 for	many	 lives.	A	 seeker	 you	 have	 been.	Nonseeking
will	reveal	it.
That's	why	 I	 say	 seeking,	you	go	astray.	Seeking,	you	go	 in	dreams.	How	can
you	seek	God?	You	have	not	known.	How	can	you	seek	the	unknown?	You	have
never	seen.	How	can	you	seek	the	unseen?	Even	if	God	comes	across	you,	you
will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 recognize	 him,	 because	 recognition	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you
have	experienced	him	before.	And	you	have	not	experienced	him.	He	may	have
come	across	you	many	 times	 in	your	 life,	and	you	will	go	on	missing	because
how	will	you	recognize	him?
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
145
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
It	is	impossible	to	seek	the	unknown.	Then	what	do	you	do?	First	you	create	a
dream	about	the	unknown	and	you	start	seeking	the	dream.	The	Hindu	has	one
dream	 of	 God,	 the	 Mohammedan	 has	 another	 dream,	 the	 Christian	 has	 still
another	--	but	those	are	all	dreams.
The	Christian	will	attain	to	his	dream.	That	is	the	misery,	because	if	you	persist
too	 much,	 your	 dream	 will	 start	 becoming	 almost	 a	 reality.	 If	 you	 pour	 your
energy	into	your	dream	too	much,	then	your	dream	will	start	becoming	a	reality;
you	will	convert	it	into	a	reality.	But	it	is	not	reality;	it	is	still	a	dream.
The	fight	between	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	and	Christians	is	not	the	fight	about
reality.
The	fight	is	about	their	different	dreams.	Hindus	have	a	certain	idea	of	God,	so
have	 others,	 and	 they	 fight.	 They	 say,	 "Our	 dream	 is	 true."	When	 a	 Christian
meditates	deeply,	he	comes	to	see	Jesus.	A	Jaina	never	comes	to	see	Jesus,	never.
A	 Buddhist	 never	 comes	 to	 see	 Jesus;	 Jesus	 never	 crosses	 his	 path.	 For	 a
Buddhist,	 Buddha	 comes	 on	 the	 path.	 For	 a	 Jaina,	 Mahavir	 crosses	 his	 path.
They	are	their	dreams;	they	are	dreams	and	projections	and	desires.	And	if	you
persist	too	much,	the	mind	has	the	faculty	to	impart	reality	to	the	dream.
You	do	it	every	day,	so	it	is	not	something	very	strange.	Every	day	in	the	night
when	you	fall	asleep	you	dream,	and	in	the	dream	you	never	recognize	the	fact
that	 it	 is	 a	 dream.	 In	 the	 dream	 it	 looks	 true.	 In	 the	 dream	 it	 looks	 real	 --
howsoever	absurd.	In	the	dream	you	see	a	dog	is	walking,	and	suddenly	the	dog
becomes	 a	 cat,	 and	 you	 don't	 even	 doubt	 that	 it	 is	 possible.	 In	 the	 dream	you
accept	even	that.	Your	acceptance,	your	capacity	to	believe,	is	tremendous.
Even	 the	people	who	 think	 they	are	skeptical,	people	who	 think	 they	are	great
doubters,	logicians,	rationalists,	even	in	their	dreams	all	their	rationalism	is	gone
and	all	their	doubt	disappears.	In	their	dreams	they	believe	absurd	things.	In	the
morning,	when	they	are	awake,	they	will	be	amazed,	but	then	it	is	too	late.
Just	think	of	a	person	who	is	in	a	coma	...	Once	a	woman	was	brought	to	me	who
had	 been	 in	 a	 coma	 for	 nine	months.	 Now	 think,	 if	 she	 is	 dreaming	 for	 nine
months,	she	must	be	thinking	they	are	realities.	A	man	can	be	in	a	coma	for	nine
years,	 or	 ninety	 years	 --	 or	 for	 nine	 lives.	Then?	The	 dream	will	 look	 real.	 In
fact,	 if	 this	woman	is	awakened	out	of	her	coma	for	one	minute	and	she	 looks
around	and	falls	 into	her	dream	again,	which	will	be	more	real,	her	dream	that
has	 lasted	 for	 nine	months,	 or	 the	 reality	 that	 she	 saw	 for	 one	 single	minute?
What	will	be	her	conclusion	if	she	can	conclude?	She	will	conclude	that	she	had
fallen	 for	 one	minute	 into	 sleep	 and	 she	 saw	 a	 dream	 and	 again	 the	 dream	 is
gone,	so	she	is	awake	and	her	reality	continues.
The	 greatest	 possibility	 of	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 greatest	 capacity	 of	 the	 mind	 is
imagination.	 It	 lives	 through	 imagination.	The	moment	 you	 start	 seeking	 truth
you	are	moving	in	the	direction	of	imagination.	What	are	you	seeking?
Zen	says	 there	 is	nothing	 to	seek,	because	you	don't	know	what	 is	 there.	So	 if
you	seek,	you	will	miss.	Now,	this	is	a	very	much	higher	standpoint.	Jesus	says,
"Seek,	and	you	will	find."	A	very	much	lower	statement,	nothing	to	be	compared
with	Zen.	Meaningful,	meaningful	for	those	who	are	starting	on	the	journey,	but
if	you	follow	Jesus,	one	day	or	other,	you	will	understand	that	by	seeking,	you
cannot	reach.	Jesus	was	talking	to	people	who	were	not	highly	evolved,	people
who	 had	 not	 even	 started	 seeking.	He	 had	 to	 teach	 them:	 "Seek	 and	 you	will
find,	knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened	unto	you,	ask	and	it	shall	be	given	to
you."
If	 you	 go	 to	 a	 Zen	 Master	 he	 will	 smile;	 he	 will	 say,	 "Start,"	 because	 his
statement	is	a	higher	statement.	When	you	have	sought	and	you	have	not	found,
when	you	have	struggled	hard	and	nothing	comes	in	your	hands	except	dreams,
then	the	Zen	Master's	approach	will	become	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
146
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
possible,	you	will	be	able	to	understand	it.	Then	he	will	say,	"Seek,	and	you	will
not	find.
Now,	please,	drop	seeking.	Drop	seeking	and	find	it	herenow!"
But	I	am	not	saying	that	Jesus	is	wrong.	I	am	saying	it	is	a	beginners'	class.	And
unless	you	 follow	Jesus	 for	 a	 time	you	will	 not	understand	Zen.	So	 Jesus	will
prepare	you,	Jesus	will	help	you.
Jesus	was	talking	to	the	Jews,	who	have	been	one	of	the	most	earthy	races	in	the
world.	To	 talk	Zen	would	have	been	 impossible	 --	 they	would	have	killed	him
even	earlier.	They	didn't	allow	him	much	life,	only	three	years	of	ministry.	At	the
age	of	 thirty	 he	 started	his	work;	 by	 thirty-three	he	was	gone.	They	 could	not
tolerate	even	a	very	primary	statement	about	religion.
It	was	not	very	rebellious,	it	was	not	very	absurd.	It	was	in	tune	with	the	Jewish
thinking,	 but	 still	 they	 could	 not	 tolerate	 it.	 It	 was	 "otherworldly".	 He	 was
talking	about	the	world	that	he	calls	the	Kingdom	of	God.	Jews	have	been	very
worldly;	 that	 is	 their	 success.	 They	 are	 very	 down	 to	 earth,	 and	 this	man	was
distracting	 them.	They	were	 seeking	money	 and	 they	were	 seeking	power	 and
prestige,	and	this	man	was	talking	about	God.	Jesus	was	trying	to	change	their
seeking	towards	religion.	It	is	religion	of	the	kindergarten	class.
Zen	people	are	talking	about	the	highest	statement.	India's	highest	consciousness
was	 transplanted	 into	 China,	 and	 China's	 highest	 consciousness,	 Taoism,	 met
with	Buddhism.
These	are	 two	of	 the	greatest	 flowerings	of	human	consciousness.	Never	again
has	humanity	 reached	 such	a	peak	as	Buddhism,	 as	 it	 reached	 in	Buddha;	 and
never	 again	 has	 it	 reached	 anything	 like	 Lao	 Tzu.	 And	 just	 think:	 Zen	 is	 a
crossbreeding	of	Taoism	and	Buddhism.	It	is	a	meeting	of	Buddha	and	Lao	Tzu.
It	is	a	meeting	of	two	of	the	highest	peaks.	Naturally	Zen	goes	still	higher.	Zen
goes	higher	than	Buddhism	and	higher	than	Taoism	because	it	contains	all	 that
was	beautiful	in	these	two	cultures,	the	ancientmost	cultures,	the	longest	seekers
in	 the	 world,	 who	 have	 staked	 all	 that	 they	 had	 for	 their	 seeking.	 Zen	 is	 the
purest	flower.
In	 fact,	 Zen	 is	 not	 a	 flower.	 It	 is	 essence,	 it	 is	 fragrance.	 Even	 a	 flower	 has
something	 gross	 in	 it,	 something	 of	 the	 earth.	 So	 remember	 it,	 when	 Zen	 is
saying	something,	it	is	to	be	understood	at	the	highest	level;	otherwise	there	will
be	no	understanding	about	it.	You	will	misunderstand	it.
Seeking,	you	go	astray;	seeking,	you	go	in	dreams;	seeking,	you	go	somewhere
else;	 and	 truth	 is	 here.	Seeking,	 you	go	 then;	 and	 truth	 is	NOW.	Seeking,	 you
are,	and	seeking,	you	are	too	much.	The	more	you	seek,	the	more	you	feel	you
are.	 The	 harder	 and	more	 arduous	 the	 seeking	 becomes,	 the	 stronger	 the	 ego
becomes.
Seeking,	you	are,	and	seeking,	you	are	too	much;	and	there	is	no	space	for	 the
truth	to	be.
You	fill	the	whole	space	of	your	being.	Seeking,	you	are	closed.
Have	you	not	seen	this	happening	in	ordinary	life	 too?	A	man	is	suddenly	told
that	his	house	is	on	fire.	He	rushes	towards	his	house	from	the	office	or	from	his
shop:	 now	 he	 cannot	 see	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 the	 market,	 on	 the	 road.
Somebody	says,	"Hello";	he	cannot	hear.
Somebody	comes	and	collides	with	him,	but	he	cannot	see	who	he	is,	and	he	will
not	 remember	 that	 somebody	 collided.	 His	 whole	 mind	 is	 narrow	 now	 --	 his
house	is	on	fire.	His	mind	is	concentrated.
Seeking	 means	 concentration,	 and	 truth	 is	 never	 achieved	 by	 concentration.
Truth	is	achieved	by	meditation.	And	the	difference	is	vital,	and	the	difference	is
great.	And	you	have	to	understand	the	difference	because	ordinarily	people	who
don't	know	anything	about	meditation,	 they	go	on	writing	books	in	which	they
write	that	meditation	is	concentration.
Meditation	 is	 not	 concentration!	 Meditation	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 state	 of
concentration.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
147
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
When	 you	 concentrate	 your	mind	 is	 narrowed	 down;	when	 you	meditate,	 you
mind	 is	 widened.	 When	 you	 concentrate,	 there	 is	 an	 object	 on	 which	 you
concentrate;	when	you	meditate,	there	is	no	object.
People	 come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 ask,	 "On	 what	 to	 meditate?"	 Then	 they	 are	 not
asking	about	meditation.	They	are	asking	about	concentration	when	 they	come
and	 they	 say	 to	 me,	 "I	 cannot	 concentrate.	 Osho,	 can	 you	 help	 me?"
Concentration	means	you	want	your	mind	to	cling	to	something,	you	want	your
mind	 to	 remain	 with	 something.	 Concentration	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 attachment,	 so
whenever	your	attachment	is	there	you	are	concentrated.
Your	wife	 is	 dying,	 and	 if	 you	 are	 attached	 to	 her,	 you	will	 forget	 the	whole
world.	Now	nothing	 exists	 except	 your	 dying	wife.	You	will	 be	 sitting	 by	 her
side	and	you	will	be	concentrated;	your	mind	will	not	go	here	and	there.
Or	if	you	are	driving	a	car	and	suddenly	you	see	an	imminent	accident	is	going
to	happen
--	some	madman	is	coming,	driving	his	car	madly,	and	on	the	turn	you	see	now	it
is	 too	 late,	 it	 is	going	 to	happen	--	suddenly	you	will	be	concentrated,	because
you	are	too	attached	to	life.
There	will	be	no	thoughts	any	more.	Just	a	moment	before,	you	were	thinking	to
see	 your	 girl	 friend,	 a	moment	 before,	 you	were	 thinking	 to	 go	 to	 the	movie
tonight,	or	do	this	or	that;	suddenly	all	has	disappeared;	there	is	no	thought	in	the
mind,	 no	 object.	 You	 are	 too	 attached	 to	 life.	 Because	 of	 this	 attachment,	 all
other	objects	have	disappeared.	You	are	concentrated	now	only	on	your	life;	only
one	thing	has	remained:	your	life.
Dostoevsky	 has	written	 a	memoir.	He	was	 young	 and	 he	was	 a	 revolutionary,
and	 he	 was	 caught	 by	 the	 czar	 with	 twenty	 other	 people,	 and	 they	 all	 were
sentenced	to	death.	The	day	came,	ditches	were	dug,	and	they	were	standing	in
front	 of	 the	 ditches	 and	 the	 man	 was	 getting	 ready	 with	 the	 machine	 gun.
Everything	was	ready.
Just	close	by	on	a	church	tower	there	is	a	clock,	and	each	moment	is	passing	fast,
and	the	life	is	disappearing.	At	exactly	six	o'clock,	they	will	be	shot	dead.	It	 is
ten	minutes	to	six.
You	can	imagine	how	concentrated	they	must	have	become.	Dostoevsky	writes,
"Never	 again	 have	 I	 been	 so	 concentrated	 in	 my	 life.	 All	 else	 disappeared.	 I
could	hear	my	heart	throbbing,	I	could	see	my	breathing	for	the	first	time,	I	felt
my	body	for	the	first	time.	I	had	never	felt	my	body,	never	heard	my	heartbeat,
never	seen	my	breath.	Everything	became	simply	concentrated	--	and	we	could
hear	the	clock	moving.
Five	minutes,	four	minutes,	three	minutes	...	and	the	concentration	is	becoming
more	and	more	and	more.	One	minute	...	and	everything	else	has	disappeared.
When	life	is	at	stake,	only	life	is	in	the	mind.
And	 then	 comes	 a	 horseman,	 running,	 and	 the	 czar	 has	 pardoned	 them;	 their
death	sentence	has	been	converted	into	a	life	sentence.
One	man,	at	exactly	six	o'clock,	fell	in	the	ditch,	Died!	without	being	shot.	Must
have	 become	 so	 concentrated	 with	 the	 idea	 of	 death.	 Died!	 Nobody	 could
believe	it.	The	officers	ran.	He	was	taken	out	of	the	ditch,	but	he	was	dead.	He
believed	 it;	 he	must	 have	 become	hypnotized	with	 the	 idea	 of	 death.	Death	 is
coming,	death	is	coming,	fifteen	minutes,	death	is	coming	...	It	was	coming	for
two,	three	months;	now	it	was	closer	and	closer	and	closer,	and	the	mind	became
concentrated.	The	man	fell	and	died.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
148
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
Another	 man	 shouted,	 "I	 am	 dead!"	 He	 became	 mad.	 For	 his	 whole	 life	 he
remained	 shouting,	 "I	 am	 dead.	 I	 have	 died,	 don't	 you	 know?"	 He	 will	 meet
people	and	say,	"Don't	you	know?	I	died	on	that	day.	Six	o'clock	they	killed	me.
I	am	a	ghost!	"
Dostoevsky	himself	could	not	believe	 it,	because	 it	was	unimaginable,	 that	 the
czar	was	going	to	forgive	them.	But	he	writes	in	his	memoirs	that	"Never	again
was	I	concentrated;	that	was	the	peak	of	concentration."
It	 is	not	meditation.	 If	 it	was	meditation,	 then	Dostoevsky	would	have	become
enlightened.	That	peak	of	concentration?
It	 happens	 to	 you.	 When	 you	 are	 studying	 for	 an	 examination,	 as	 the
examinations	 come	 closer,	 you	 become	more	 and	more	 concentrated.	 Just	 the
night	 before,	 your	mind	 functions	 so	 concentratedly.	 Once	 the	 examination	 is
gone,	the	mind	relaxes	again.
Concentration	 is	 a	 mind	 thing;	 meditation	 is	 a	 no-mind	 thing.	 Concentration
means	 pouring	 your	 whole	 energy	 onto	 one	 object.	 Meditation	 means	 not
pouring	your	energy	onto	any	object,	but	just	overflowing	in	all	directions.
For	 example,	 if	 you	 are	 listening	 to	me	 you	 can	 listen	 in	 two	ways.	 You	 can
listen	in	the	wrong	way:	the	wrong	way	is	the	way	of	concentration;	you	can	just
remain	tense,	strained.	Or	you	can	listen	in	a	relaxed,	let-go	way;	you	can	remain
relaxed.	E	you	listen	in	a	tense	way	--
that	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	"attention":	"with	tension,	concentration"	--	then
you	will	not	listen	to	the	birds	singing	in	the	trees.	Then	you	will	listen	only	to
me,	and	everything	else	will	be	blocked	out,	bracketed	out.	That	means	only	this
small	voice	that	is	here	is	in	your	concentration	and	the	whole	existence	has	been
blocked	out.
Meditation	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	 nothing	 is	 blocked	 out,	 you	 are	 open	 in	 all
directions.	You	are	listening	to	me;	you	are	listening	to	the	birds	also.	If	the	wind
blows	in	the	trees	and	the	trees	start	a	murmur,	you	will	listen	to	that	too.	And
there	will	be	no	distraction,	remember.
You	are	so	open,	you	listen	to	me	and	the	bird	and	the	wind,	and	they	all	become
one.	And	when	you	can	listen	in	that	way,	you	have	listened	to	God.
When	you	listen	meditatively,	you	listen	to	God	--	whatsoever	you	listen	to,	it	is
God,	it	is	God's	message.	He	has	reached	you	through	the	tree,	through	the	wind,
through	 the	 bird,	 through	 me.	 He	 is	 coming	 from	 everywhere,	 because	 he	 is
everywhere.	 He	 surrounds	 you.	 So	 when	 you	 are	 open	 to	 everything	 that	 is
happening,	to	all	that	is	happening,	you	are	herenow,	you	are	in	meditation.	And
this	state	is	a	state	of	nonseeking.
Concentration	 is	 part	 of	 seeking;	 when	 you	 seek	 something	 you	 become
concentrated.
When	you	don't	seek	anything	you	become	relaxed.	When	you	seek	something
and	you	are	concentrated,	you	are	going	away	from	yourself.	Your	object	will	be
the	 goal,	 you	 forget	 yourself.	 Your	 arrow	 of	 consciousness	 goes	 only	 to	 the
object.	When	you	are	not	going	anywhere,	where	will	you	be?	When	you	are	not
going	anywhere	you	will	be	where	you	are,	you	will	be	whoever	you	are.	You
will	be	simply	relaxing	and	resting	into	yourself.
Ashtavakra	says,	"Rest	 in	yourself,	and	you	will	attain	all."	Because	 resting	 in
yourself	you	will	know	who	you	are.
So	it	is	not	a	question	of	seeking.	Seeking,	you	are	too	much.	Seeking,	you	are
so	arrowed	towards	something	that	you	don't	see	anything	else,	your	eyes	don't
allow	all	to	enter	into	your	being,	and	then	there	is	no	space	for	the	truth	to	be.
Seeking,	you	become	a	cloud	and	the	sun	goes	behind.	Hence,	seeking,	there	is
night	and	darkness	and	death.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
149
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
When	you	are	not	seeking	there	is	life,	eternal	life,	and	light	and	God,	or	you	can
choose	 any	 name	which	 you	 prefer.	 Buddha	 calls	 it	 nirvana,	 nonseeking:	 you
have	 arrived.	 In	 fact,	 you	 had	 never	 gone	 anywhere	 else;	 you	 were	 only
imagining.
"Tell	us,	Master,"	a	monk	asked	Daito	...
Daito	was	a	great	Zen	Master.
"Tell	us,	Master,	when	Shakyamuni	Buddha	saw	the	morning	star,	what	did	he
see?"	...
In	Zen	 this	 is	 the	 legend,	 that	Buddha	was	 seeking	 and	 seeking	 for	 six	 years,
then	he	got	tired	and	fed	up	with	seeking,	and	one	day	he	dropped	seeking	too.
As	one	day	he	had	dropped	his	kingdom,	his	family,	his	THIS	world,	one	day	he
dropped	his	OTHER	world	too.	As	one	day	he	had	become	disinterested	in	the
material,	a	day	came	when	he	became	disinterested	in	the	spiritual	too.	And	that
was	the	night	when	he	rested	in	himself	--	because	there	was	nothing	to	seek.	So
he	 slept	 under	 a	 tree,	 the	Bodhi	 tree;	 that	 became	 the	most	 famous	 tree	 in	 the
world.	He	rested	under	the	Bodhi	tree,	slept	well.	There	was	no	seeking,	so	there
was	no	dreaming	either.	The	whole	night	was	just	a	peaceful	rhythm,	not	even	a
thought,	because	 the	material	world	was	gone,	 the	spiritual	world	was	gone.	 It
was	an	absolute	rest	into	oneself.
By	 the	morning,	 the	Zen	 legend	says,	his	eyes	opened.	Not	 that	he	opened	his
eyes,	because	there	was	nothing	to	do	now:	he	will	not	even	open	his	eyes.	The
Zen	 legend	 says	 the	 eyes	 opened	 because	 the	 rest	 was	 complete.	 See	 the
difference.	You	can	open	your	eyes;	then	there	is	strain.	You	can	close	your	eyes;
then	there	is	strain.	When	the	eyes	are	closed	by	themselves	there	is	rest;	when
the	eyes	open	by	themselves,	then	there	is	rest.
When	a	life	is	not	a	life	of	doing,	but	happening,	then	there	is	rest.
The	 eyes	 opened	 and	 he	 saw	 the	 last	 morning	 star	 setting,	 it	 was	 just
disappearing,	 the	 last	 glimpse	 of	 it,	 in	 a	moment	 it	was	 gone,	 and	 he	 became
enlightened.	The	last	trace	disappeared	with	the	disappearing	morning	star,	and
he	was	utterly	empty.	He	was	utterly	nobody.	He	became	a	nothingness,	a	pure
nothingness,	a	content-less	consciousness.
What	 is	 the	 significance	 of	 this	 last	 star	 disappearing?	When	 the	 eyes	 opened
and	he	saw	the	last	star,	 there	was	a	little	concentration,	a	slight	concentration,
must	be	 the	old	habit,	 thousands	of	 lives	of	old	habit.	He	must	have	become	a
little	strained;	a	little	concentration	must	have	arisen.	Looking	at	the	last	star,	he
must	have	become	focused,	his	consciousness	must	have	become	narrow	--	just
out	of	old	habit.	There	was	nothing	to	look	at	now.	But	then	the	star	disappeared
--	it	was	the	last	star	and	the	sun	was	going	to	rise	soon,	so	the	star	disappeared	-
-	the	star	disappeared,	and	the	last	object	of	concentration	disappeared.
Suddenly	he	was	 released	 from	all	concentration,	 suddenly	 there	was	 freedom,
there	 was	 no	 content.	 The	 last	 star	 disappearing	 took	 away	 the	 last	 trace	 of
concentration.	He	was	there
--	and	he	was	not	 there.	He	was	 there	 for	 the	 first	 time	authentically	 --	and	he
was	not	there	for	the	first	time	as	an	"I",	as	an	ego.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
150
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
Some	seeker	asked	Master	Daito	...
"Tell	us,	Master,	when	Shakyamuni	Buddha	saw	the	morning	star,	what	did	he
see?"	...
Why	did	he	become	enlightened	by	seeing	the	last	star?
Many	 people	 have	 copied	 it	 --	 people	 are	 foolish,	 people	 are	monkeys.	Many
Buddhists	sit,	they	even	go	to	Bodhgaya	--	they	come	from	China,	from	Korea,
from	Japan,	from	Ceylon	--
they	go	 to	Bodhgaya,	 they	 sit	 under	 the	Bodhi	 tree,	 they	 try	 to	 rest	 the	whole
night,	and	they	watch,	many	times	it	must	be,	in	the	night	they	must	be	looking:
whether	the	last	star	is	there	or	gone.	And	they	must	be	closing	their	eyes	again	-
-	it	is	still	night	and	there	are	so	many	stars	--	and	they	must	be	afraid	and	tense:
will	they	be	able	to	see	the	last	star,	or	will	they	miss?	And	they	have	to	see	the
last	star	disappearing.
Once	 a	 Japanese	man	came	and	 stayed	with	me.	 I	 said,	 "Why	have	you	 come
from	Japan?"
He	said,	"To	see	the	last	star	disappearing."	I	told	him,	"Can't	you	see	a	last	star
disappearing	 in	 Japan?	Don't	 the	 stars	 behave	 the	 same	way	 there?	Don't	 they
disappear	in	the	morning?
For	what	have	you	come	here?"	And	he	said,	"I	have	come	to	sit	under	the	Bodhi
tree."	But	any	tree	will	do.	Buddha	was	not	sitting	under	that	tree	specifically.	It
was	just	a	coincidence,	it	was	accidental.	He	had	not	searched	for	that	tree.	That
tree	was	in	no	way	special;	it	was	as	ordinary	a	tree	as	any	tree.
You	 can	 sit	 under	 any	 tree	 and	 under	 any	 sky	 and	 in	 any	 country,	 but	 the
question	 is	not	of	country,	not	of	 the	sky,	not	of	 the	 stars,	not	of	 the	 tree.	The
question	 is,	 "Has	your	attachment	 to	 things	 --	 and	attachment	 to	other-worldly
things	--	disappeared,	or	is	it	still	there?"
Now,	 in	 fact,	 you	 have	 come	 to	 sit	 under	 the	Bodhi	 tree	 because	 you	want	 to
become	enlightened.	The	desire.	The	seeking.	You	have	come	as	a	seeker,	and
Buddha	did	attain	because	he	was	not	a	seeker	that	night.
This	is	how	things	go	on	and	man	goes	on	imitating	and	becoming	foolish.
"Tell	us,	Master,	when	Shakyamuni	Buddha	saw	the	morning	star,	what	did	he
see?"
"Clean	blank	nothing,"	Daito	replied	at	once.	And	then	added,	"But	if	a	person
has	only	so	much	as	just	one	speck	of	dust	in	his	eyes,	he	may	look	at	a	blank
and	see	all	sorts	of	imaginary	things."
Just	a	speck	of	dust	will	do,	 just	a	small	speck	of	desire	will	do,	and	 then	you
will	start	seeing	 imaginary	 things.	 If	you	really	want	 to	see	 that	which	 is,	 then
the	eyes	have	to	be	utterly	clean,	blank.	With	those	blank	eyes	you	are	a	Buddha
--	with	those	empty	eyes.
Seeking,	 one	 never	 finds.	 Let	 it	 be	 a	 fundamental	 remembrance.	 So	 Pablo
Picasso	is	true,	but	only	half	true.
And	half-truths	are	really	dangerous.	They	can	pretend,	they	can	masquerade	as
truths,	 as	 whole	 truths.	 That's	 what	 happens.	 Whenever	 a	 man	 like	 Buddha
moves,	walks	on	the	earth,	that's	what	happens	--	his	truths	become	half-truths	in
our	minds.	A	half-truth	is	a	reflection	of	truth.	A	half-truth	is	a	shadow	of	truth.
In	our	monkey	minds,	in	our	imitative	minds,	we	start	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
151
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
imitating	half-truths.	And	there	is	something	which	has	to	be	understood.	A	half-
truth	deceives	better.
But	 Pablo	 Picasso	 could	 not	 have	 done	 better,	 because	 art	 itself	 cannot	 go
beyond	 the	half-truth.	That's	 the	difference	between	art	and	 religion.	Art	 is	 the
world	of	the	shadows,	the	world	of	the	reflections,	the	world	of	imagination,	the
world	of	dreams,	the	world	of	desires,	the	world	of	projections.	Art	cannot	give
you	the	whole	truth,	but	the	best	art	is	always	giving	you	half	of	it	--	that	too	the
best	art.	I	am	not	talking	about	the	third-rate	art.	A	third-rate	art	is	simply	a	lie,	a
fantasy,	a	fiction.	But	Pablo	Picasso	 is	one	of	 the	greatest	artists	 the	world	has
ever	produced.	The	best	art	always	give	you	half;	more	is	not	possible	through
art.
The	artist	has	glimpses	of	truth,	reflected	in	the	world	of	his	dreams,	in	the	world
of	his	imagination.	The	artist	is	a	pool	of	imagination,	a	lake	of	imagination.	In
that	lake	is	reflected	the	full	moon.	And	sometimes	the	moon	in	the	lake	looks
far	more	beautiful	than	the	real	moon.	On	the	glossy,	silent	surface	of	the	lake,
on	the	placid,	silent	surface	of	the	lake,	the	moon	looks	even	more	innocent.	But
that	is	not	a	real	moon	--	although	the	reflection	belongs	to	the	real.
That	 is	 the	 difference	between	 the	mystic	 and	 the	 artist.	The	best	 artist	 comes
closer	 to	 the	mystic	 than	 anybody	 else,	 but	 the	 artist	 is	 not	 a	mystic.	He	 is	 a
shadow,	a	shadow	mystic.
William	Blake	or	Pablo	Picasso	or	Emerson	or	Rabindranath,	they	give	beautiful
reflections	 of	 the	 truth.	And	 even	 the	 reflection	 is	 so	 enchanting,	what	 to	 say
about	the	original?
But	if	you	jump	into	the	lake	to	find	the	moon,	even	the	reflection	will	disappear.
You	are	not	supposed	to	jump	into	the	lake.	And	where	the	reflection	is,	you	are
not	 to	go	in	that	direction.	You	have	to	move	exactly	in	the	opposite	direction,
then	you	will	find	the	real.
The	artist	has	some	quality	of	the	mystic;	he	is	on	the	way	to	becoming	a	mystic
in	some	life.	The	mystic	has	all	the	qualities	of	the	artist,	plus.
Sometimes	 mystics	 have	 been	 artists,	 particularly	 Zen	 mystics.	 They	 have
painted.	 They	 have	written	 poems,	 haiku.	 They	 have	 carved	wood,	 they	 have
sculpted.	 They	 were	 great	 artists.	 In	 fact,	 all	 Zen	Masters	 have	 been	 creative
people.
That	 should	 also	 be	 remembered.	 When	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 a	 state	 of
consciousness,	 your	 consciousness	 has	 to	 create	 something,	 something	 visible.
You	have	to	materialize	something	of	your	consciousness	into	the	world	so	that
this	world	also	becomes	beautiful.	And	people	who	cannot	understand	religion	at
least	can	understand	art.	You	may	not	be	able	to	understand	the	meaning	of	the
Upanishads,	but	the	very	poetry	of	it	appeals,	and	if	the	poetry	appeals,	then	the
truth	is	making	a	way	towards	your	heart.	You	may	not	be	able	to	meditate,	but	if
somebody	is	dancing	with	deep	meditation,	that	dance	may	appeal,	and	through
the	dance,	lingering	by	the	side,	something	of	the	meditation	will	enter	into	your
being.
Gurdjieff	had	prepared	a	group	of	dancers,	and	he	took	the	dancers	to	many	great
cities	of	the	world.	It	was	a	rare	opportunity	made	available.	When	in	New	York
those	meditators	danced,	people	were	suddenly	amazed,	 they	could	not	believe
what	was	happening.	The	dancers	created	such	meditative	energy,	such	a	great
wave	of	energy,	that	those	who	had	come	just	to	see	the	dance	suddenly	forgot
the	 dance	 completely.	 Something	 else	 was	 there	 by	 the	 side,	 a	 door	 opened
through	it.
And	Gurdjieff	used	to	do	the	"stop"	exercise.	The	dancers	are	dancing,	a	group
of	twenty,	thirty	dancers,	and	they	are	going	wild	in	their	dance,	and	suddenly	he
will	shout	by	the	side,	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
152
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
"Stop!"	And	they	will	all	become	just	marble	statues,	as	they	were.	If	the	hand
was	raised,	it	will	remain	raised.	If	one	leg	was	up,	it	will	remain	up.
At	one	moment	when	he	said,	"Stop!"	they	were	in	such	a	position	that	they	all
fell	 --	 fell	 from	 the	stage,	 in	 front	of	 the	audience	 in	 the	hall.	But	not	a	 single
person	moved;	they	fell	as	if	dead.	And	one	man	who	was	watching,	something
inside	him	also	fell.	The	very	shocking	incident,	 these	people	fallen	as	if	dead,
and	 something	 changed	 in	 his	mind.	He	 became	one	 of	 the	 great	 followers	 of
Gurdjieff	and	attained	to	greater	heights	of	consciousness.
Looking	at	a	Zen	painting	you	will	be	surprised	because	 the	painting	brings	 to
you	something	of	 the	man	who	has	painted	 it.	 If	you	 look	at	modern	painting,
that	too	brings	something	to	you.	If	you	look	at	a	modern	painting	long	enough,
you	will	start	feeling	a	little	crazy.	If	you	put	too	many	modern	paintings	in	your
bedroom,	beware,	you	will	have	nightmares.	Those	paintings	will	start	entering
into	your	dreams.	You	cannot	 look	at	a	modern	painting	 for	 long;	you	have	 to
move.	You	start	feeling	weird,	something	is	wrong,	something	is	bizarre.
The	modern	painter	is	insane.	He	is	painting	out	of	his	insanity.	If	you	look	at	a
Zen	painting,	a	silence	oozes	out	of	it,	suddenly	something	beautiful	surrounds
you.	 You	 are	 transported	 to	 another	 consciousness.	 The	 painting	 carries
something	 of	 the	 touch	 of	 the	 Master.	 The	 painting	 has	 been	 done	 in	 deep
meditation;	the	painting	has	been	done	by	one	who	has	arrived.
Gurdjieff	used	to	call	such	art	"objective	art".	When	somebody	who	has	attained
to	consciousness	does	something,	that	something	becomes	objective	art.	Looking
at	 that	 thing,	you	will	have	some	glimpse	of	 the	Master.	The	Master	may	have
been	dead	for	three	thousand	years,	that	doesn't	matter.	The	painting,	the	statue,
the	carving	will	represent	him,	and	through	it	you	can	again	become	connected
to	him.	If	you	know	how	to	meditate	with	a	painting,	it	will	be	easier.
Within	these	twenty	years	a	rare	thing	has	come	to	light	because	of	too	much	use
of	drugs.
The	underground	world	of	drugs	has	stumbled	upon	a	very	significant	fact;	they
call	it
"contact	high".	It	is	exactly	the	meaning	of	SATSANG.	Let	me	explain	it	to	you.
A	"contact	high"	is	a	state.	Somebody	has	taken	LSD	and	is	turned	on,	and	you
love	the	man,	you	really	love	the	man,	or	the	woman,	you	really	relate	to	him	--
the	man	 or	 the	woman	 is	 somebody	who	 turns	 you	 on	 by	 her	 presence	 or	 his
presence.	The	person	has	taken	LSD.
You	simply	sit	by	 the	side,	and	you	 love	 the	person,	and	 the	person's	presence
turns	you	on,	and	by	and	by	you	will	start	feeling	that	the	LSD	is	affecting	you
too,	that	somehow	his	consciousness	is	infiltrating	your	consciousness,	that	your
space	is	being	overpowered.	And	you	will	start	feeling	high.	This	is	contact	high.
This	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 SATSANG	 too,	 on	 a	 different	 plane.	 If	 somebody	 has
attained,	just	being	with	him	in	deep	love.	in	deep	gratitude,	in	deep	relatedness,
and	you	will	start	feeling	that	something,	through	him,	reaches	your	heart,	stirs
your	being,	and	you	are	put	on	a	totally	different	plane,	where	you	cannot	go	by
yourself.	You	are	transported,	carried	to	it.	Yes,	it	too	is	a	contact	high.
That's	 why	 in	 the	 East	 we	 have	 praised	 SATSANG	 so	 much,	 to	 be	 in	 the
presence	of	a	Master,	to	attain	contact	high.	And	once	you	have	started	attaining
through	somebody,	by	and	by	you	can	find	your	own	way.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
153
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
This	contact	high	is	possible	even	after	thousands	of	years,	through	objective	art.
Read	some	haiku	of	Basho,	small	haiku.	Read	one	haiku,	repeat	it,	sing	it,	chew
it,	swallow	it	deeply,	and	then	sit	silently,	waiting	for	the	meaning	to	be	revealed.
Don't	think	about	it;	thinking,	you	will	go	astray.	Don't	analyze	it;	analyzing,	you
will	go	far	away.	Meditate,	just	be	with	it,	let	it	be	with	you,	and	suddenly	you
will	find	something	is	changing	in	your	consciousness.	You	are	moving	upwards,
or	you	are	moving	deeper.
The	very	small	haiku	can	turn	you	on.	It	can	almost	become	an	LSD	trip	because
the	haiku	carries	Basho's	consciousness,	condensed.	It	is	no	ordinary	poetry.	It	is
not	written	by	a	poet,	not	by	an	artist.	It	is	done	by	a	Master.
And	the	Master	has	put	it	almost	like	a	mantra.	If	you	simply	allow	it	to	spread
its	meaning	on	your	being,	its	fragrance	on	your	being,	you	will	be	in	the	state	of
contact	high.
That's	why	I	say	Picasso's	statement	 is	a	half-truth.	"I	do	not	seek"	 is	 the	half-
truth,	and	"I	find"	is	the	half-untruth,	because	it	is	never	the	"I"	that	finds	it.	"I"
is	 the	barrier,	 the	cloud,	 the	hindrance,	 the	obstacle.	Truth	 is	 found,	but	not	by
"I".	Truth	is	found	only	when	there	is	no
"I",	when	there	is	nobody	to	find	it.	Truth	is	found	only	when	there	is	nobody	to
seek	it	and	nobody	to	find	it.
Now,	 the	 "I"	 has	 seven	 layers,	 those	 seven	 times	when	Bodhidharma	 fell	 and
again	rose.
You	will	also	fall	seven	times	before	you	can	attain	to	enlightenment.	The	first
layer	consists	of	the	past:	"I"	is	memory.	Go	with	me	into	it	as	deeply	as	possible
because	this	will	lead	you	to	the	first	principle.	The	first	principle	cannot	be	said,
but	can	be	showed,	how	you	can	attain	it.
The	first	layer	of	"I"	consists	of	memory,	the	past.	If	you	want	to	get	rid	of	the
"I"	you	will	have	to	get	rid	of	the	past.	Many	people	come	to	me	and	they	say,
"We	would	like	 to	drop	this	ego."	But	 they	think	that	 the	ego	is	a	noncomplex
thing,	a	simple	thing.	It	is	not.	It	is	very	complex,	the	most	complex.	In	fact,	the
one	who	wants	to	drop	it	may	be	the	ego	itself.	That	is	so	subtle,	it	is	so	tricky.
Layer	upon	layer.	The	first	layer	is	the	memory.
If	you	really	want	to	drop	the	ego	--	and	that	is	the	only	way	to	find	the	truth;	all
religion	consists	only	of	dropping	these	seven	layers	--	don't	live	in	the	memory.
By	and	by,	 the	moment	you	catch	hold	of	yourself,	 that	you	are	moving	in	 the
memory,	immediately	slip	out	of	it.	Immediately.	Don't	waste	a	single	moment.	I
am	not	saying	repent	about	 it,	 I	am	not	saying	feel	guilty	about	 it,	no,	because
that	 too	 will	 be	 the	 past.	 I	 am	 simply	 saying	 the	moment	 you	 find	 you	were
moving	into	a	dream	about	the	past,	a	nostalgia,	the	moment	you	find	it	so,	just
slip	out	of	it.	There	is	no	need	to	fight	with	it.	If	you	fight,	you	will	be	defeated.
There	is	no	need	to	feel	angry	about	 it.	 If	you	feel	angry	you	will	be	defeated.
You	need	not	 value	 it	 in	 any	way,	 good	or	 bad.	You	 simply	 do	one	 thing:	 the
moment	you	find	out,	slip	out	of	it.
And	 the	 one	who	 finds	 it	 red-handed	 is	 your	 awareness.	Eckhart	 says	 the	 one
who	finds	is	God,	God	within	you.
Just	try.	Whenever	you	find	your	memory	is	hovering	around	you	too	much,	the
one	who	finds	this	sudden	recognition	that	"Yes,	I	am	again	in	the	memory,"	that
one,	that	awareness,	is	God	within	you.	Slip	out	of	the	memory.
And	I	say	slip	out	of	it	because	there	is	no	need	to	fight.	Fighting,	you	will	cling
to	it.
Fighting,	you	will	have	to	be	there.	If	you	have	to	fight	with	somebody	you	have
to	be	there.
Don't	fight.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
154
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
And	you	are	capable	of	slipping	out,	just	as	a	snake	slips	out	of	the	old	skin.	Go
on	slipping	out	of	the	memory.	Memory	is	an	old	skin.	In	fact,	you	have	already
slipped	out	of	it;	it	is	just	in	the	mind,	it	is	nowhere	else.
The	second	layer	consists	of	unawareness.	We	live	almost	in	a	drunken	state.	We
live	with	 the	minimum	 of	 consciousness.	 You	 go	 on	 doing	 things,	 you	 go	 on
moving,	 this	 and	 that,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 conscious.	 Have	 you	 ever	 had	 any
moments	of	consciousness	so	that	you	can	see,	you	can	compare?
For	 example	 ...	 Just	 now!	 See	what	 is	 there.	Gather	 yourself	 together.	 Just	 be
herenow	and	 see	what	 is	 there,	 and	you	will	 find	your	 consciousness	 is	more,
you	have	come	out	of	a	fog.
Soon	you	will	again	disappear	into	the	fog.	This	fog	surrounds	you.	Sometimes
you	come	out	of	 it.	Sometimes	something	penetrates	your	 fog,	brings	you	out.
But	 ordinarily,	 life	 is	 so	monotonous,	 there	 is	 no	 surprise,	 nothing	 brings	 you
out.
Whenever	you	 are	 a	 little	more	 aware,	many	 things	happen.	 If	 you	watch	you
will	 understand.	 A	 beautiful	 woman	 passes	 by;	 suddenly	 you	 become	 more
aware.	A	bird	on	the	wing,	you	were	watching	an	empty	sky	and	a	bird	passes	by
...
Ramkrishna	attained	to	his	first	SAMADHI,	to	his	first	satori,	by	seeing	a	row	of
cranes	against	the	black	clouds.	He	was	very	young,	must	have	been	thirteen.	He
was	sitting	by	 the	 lake	of	his	 town,	 it	was	cloudy,	dark	clouds	were	gathering,
the	 beginning	 of	 the	 rain,	 and	 suddenly	 a	 row,	many	white	 cranes	 against	 the
black	clouds.	Almost	 like	 lighting	 they	were	 there	and	 they	were	gone,	and	he
attained	 to	 his	 first	 SAMADHI.	For	 days	 he	was	 drunk	with	 the	 unknown,	 he
danced,	 sang.	His	 town's	 people,	 his	 family	 thought	 he	 had	gone	mad.	But	 he
was	so	happy.
That	sudden	experience.	Something	penetrated	like	a	sword.	Something	was	cut.
Sometimes	 it	 happens	 to	 you	 too.	 You	 don't	 take	 account	 of	 these	 moments,
because	you	are	afraid.	You	try	to	forget	them.	And	they	are	so	extraordinary	and
they	 are	 so	 exceptional	 and	 so	 rare	 that	 even	 to	 talk	 about	 them,	 nobody	will
believe	it.	So	you	don't	take	account	of	them;	you	think,	"Must	be	a	fantasy,	an
imagination."	But	one	day	in	the	morning	suddenly	the	world	is	beautiful	--	for
no	reason	at	all.	The	reason	IS	there:	the	reason	is	you	are	more	aware.	Maybe
you	rested	well	in	the	night,	it	was	a	good	sleep,	the	dreams	were	not	too	many,
your	 stomach	was	not	 too	 full	 of	 food	or	hungry.	Things	 somehow	went	well,
and	in	the	morning	you	felt	on	the	top	of	the	world.	It	is	nothing	but	awareness.
With	 a	 friend	 you	 have	 not	 seen	 for	many	 years,	 suddenly	 you	 become	more
aware.
Anything	that	makes	you	more	aware,	watch	it,	take	account	of	it,	remember	it,
so	that	you	can	go	more	and	more	into	it.	Don't	put	it	aside.	Don't	neglect	it.	It
has	to	be	fed	and	watered,	taken	care	of.
The	 third	 layer	 of	 "I"	 is	 ambition,	 comparison	 with	 the	 others,	 where	 I	 am,
higher	or	lower,	inferior	or	superior,	ahead	or	lagging	behind	--	who	I	am.	Watch
it:	never	compare.	You	are	you.	And	there	is	nobody	like	you,	so	comparison	is
not	 possible.	 And	 everybody	 is	 so	 unique	 and	 so	 different,	 how	 can	 you
compare?	Drop	 comparison.	Whether	 you	 find	 yourself	 caught	 in	 comparison,
immediately	drop	 it,	 then	 and	 there.	 It	 is	 not	good	 to	 carry	 these	 things	 in	 the
mind	longer;	otherwise	they	leave	traces,	they	make	grooves	in	the	mind.	Never
compare.
Somebody	 is	more	 intelligent,	 somebody	 is	more	beautiful,	 somebody	 is	more
healthy	...	Don't	compare.	You	are	you.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
155
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
And	 this	 is	 the	way	God	wanted	you	 to	be.	Feel	 fulfilled	 the	way	you	are	and
accept	yourself.	Don't	condemn	yourself.
The	 fourth	 layer	 of	 "I"	 consists	 of	 future,	 always	 thinking	 ahead,	 what	 to	 do
tomorrow	or	the	day	after	tomorrow.	Or	people	are	so	mad,	they	are	thinking	of
what	to	do	in	the	next	life:	where	to	go,	to	hell	or	heaven?
People	come	to	me	and	they	ask,	"Osho,	what	do	you	say	about	life	after	death?"
I	say,
"You	are	not	alive	even	now,	and	you	are	talking	about	life	after	death?	I	don't
even	see	life	before	death."
Man	 is	 not!	Man	 only	 thinks	 that	 he	 is.	Man	 has	 not	 happened	 yet.	 Rarely	 it
happens.	 Once	 in	 a	 while,	 in	 a	 Buddha	 or	 a	 Bodhidharma	 a	 man	 is	 there;
otherwise	 you	 are	 just	 a	 belief.	 And	 you	 are	 thinking	 about	 life	 after	 death?
Think	of	life	after	birth!	Think	of	life	before	death.
Think	of	life	now.	Don't	go	into	the	future	too	much.
I	am	not	saying	that	if	you	want	to	go	to	Bombay	don't	book	a	ticket	--	I	am	not
saying	 that.	Otherwise	 there	are	 fools	of	 that	 type	 too.	One	day	 I	 talked	 in	 the
morning,	"Don't	think	of	the	future,"	and	by	the	evening	I	received	a	letter.	One
friend	threw	his	passport	into	the	river.	"Why	bother?	'Don't	think	of	the	future,'
Osho	has	said."	I	am	not	saying	that.	There	is	a	practical	world,	but	that	is	not	a
problem	at	all.	To	carry	a	passport	is	not	a	problem.
To	carry	fantasies	about	the	future	is	a	problem.	A	passport	is	not	such	a	burden.
To	think	about	tomorrow	and	to	go	and	book	a	ticket	is	not	a	problem.	These	are
factual	things,	ordinary,	practical	things.	But	to	think	that	tomorrow	you	will	be
happy,	not	today,	that	tomorrow	you	will	love,	not	today,	that	tomorrow	you	will
sing,	not	today,	is	dangerous	--
because	tomorrow	never	comes.	Again	when	it	comes,	it	will	be	today,	and	your
old	habit	will	say,	"Tomorrow	I	will	be	happy."	Tomorrow	again	and	again,	you
will	be	happy,	and	you	will	never	be	happy.
What	I	am	saying	is	psychological	future	has	to	be	dropped.	The	ordinary	future
is	okay,	it	is	not	a	problem	at	all.
The	 fifth	 layer	consists	of	 conditionings.	You	have	been	conditioned	 --	Hindu,
Mohammedan,	 Jaina,	 Buddhist,	 English,	 German,	 Indian	 --	 these	 layers	 are
there.	Start	dropping	them.
Again,	please,	don't	throw	your	passport!
These	ideas	from	the	mind	--	that	I	am	a	German	or	a	Japanese	or	a	Chinese	--
are	 just	 foolish.	You	were	born	 just	 as	pure	consciousness	and	you	will	die	as
pure	 consciousness,	 and	 all	 these	 are	 just	 dresses,	 formalities,	 forms,	 what
Hindus	call	NAM-RUP,	name	and	form.
But	you	are	not	confined	to	them,	you	are	not	contained	in	them;	you	are	beyond
them.
The	 sixth	 layer	 consists	 of	 arrogance,	 of	 nonhumbleness.	 One	 has	 to	 learn
humbleness	 because	 that	 is	 reality.	We	 are	 interdependent,	 so	 how	 can	we	 be
arrogant?	 You	 cannot	 live	 without	 the	 air,	 you	 cannot	 live	 without	 fire,	 you
cannot	 live	without	 the	sun,	you	cannot	 live	without	 the	 trees,	you	cannot	 live
without	 the	 woman,	 woman	 without	 the	 man	 --	 you	 cannot	 live	 at	 all
independently.	 So	 all	 arrogance	 is	 just	 ignorance.	 We	 are	 interdependent,	 we
interpenetrate	each	other,	and	everything	is	required.
If	the	sun	sets	tonight	and	never	rises	again	we	will	die.	Within	ten	minutes	we
will	die.	If	all	the	forests	disappear	and	the	trees	disappear	we	will	die,	we	will
not	be	able	to	live.	We	breathe	through	the	trees,	they	are	continuously	working
for	us	and	we	are	working	for	them.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
156
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
Don't	think	that	they	are	slaves	and	we	are	masters.	Nobody	is	a	slave	here	and
nobody	 is	a	master;	everybody	 is	a	master	here	and	everybody	 is	a	slave	here.
This	is	humility.	They	go	on	releasing	oxygen	for	you;	they	serve	you.	And	you
go	 on	 releasing	 carbon	 dioxide	 for	 them,	 they	 live	 on	 carbon	 dioxide;	 so	 you
serve	them.	They	serve	you,	you	serve	them.
We	are	servants	of	each	other	or	masters	of	each	other,	but	we	are	all	in	the	same
boat.	The	animals,	the	trees,	the	birds,	the	rocks,	we	are	all	in	the	same	boat.	We
exist	in	a	togetherness;	that's	the	meaning	of	humbleness.
I	am	not	saying	become	humble	and	start	being	arrogant	about	your	humbleness
and	 start	 saying	 that	 "I	 am	 the	most	 humble	man	 in	 the	world."	 That	will	 be
arrogance	again.
Humbleness	is	an	understanding,	not	a	cultivation.
And	the	last	layer	of	"I"	consists	of	imitations.	We	learn	to	imitate	--	that's	what	I
mean	when	I	say	we	are	monkeys.	Somebody	is	doing	something:	we	start	doing
that.	 Somebody	 is	making	 something:	we	 start	making	 that.	We	 learn	 through
imitation.	Good	for	the	children	because	otherwise	children	will	never	learn,	but
when	will	you	become	mature,	when	will	you	start	not	imitating,	and	being	true
to	yourself?
If	these	seven	layers	are	dropped,	you	will	simply	become	aware	of	who	you	are.
You	are	God,	as	everybody	else	is	God.
These	seven	layers	are	the	"bottle".
Now	 let	 me	 tell	 you	 this	 beautiful	 anecdote.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful
anecdotes	 in	 the	Zen	 literature,	 and	Zen	has	many	beautiful	 anecdotes.	This	 is
one	of	the	topmost.	Listen	to	it.
THE	OFFICIAL,	RIKO,	ONCE	ASKED	NANSEN	...
Nansen	was	a	great	Master.	You	must	have	heard	another	story,	I	must	have	told
you	 sometime.	A	great	 professor	 comes	 to	 see	Nansen.	The	 professor	was	 the
head	 of	 the	 department	 of	 philosophy	 in	 a	 university.	 He	 comes,	 and
immediately	he	asks,	"Do	you	believe	in	God?	Is	there	any	life	after	death?	Has
man	a	soul?"
Nansen	 says,	 "Wait.	 Let	 me	 prepare	 tea	 for	 you.	 You	 are	 tired	 and	 you	 are
perspiring.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 hurry;	 these	 problems	 can	 wait	 a	 little.	 Let	 me
prepare	tea	for	you."	And	he	prepares	the	tea.	This	 is	 the	humbleness	of	a	Zen
Master.
He	brings	tea.	He	goes	on	pouring	the	tea	in	the	cup.	The	cup	is	full	and	the	tea
starts	overflowing	into	the	saucer,	and	then	the	saucer	is	full,	and	the	professor
shouts,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?	Are	 you	mad?	Now	 there	 is	 not	 any	 space,	 not
even	for	a	single	drop,	and	you	go	on	pouring	and	you	go	on	pouring.	It	will	start
dropping	on	your	floor!"
And	Nansen	 laughs	 and	 he	 says,	 "So	 you	 understand.	 Now	 do	 you	 have	 any
questions,	still?"
The	 professor	 says,	 "Why,	 what	 do	 you	 mean?	 How	 does	 this	 explain	 my
questions?"
And	Nansen	says,	"Have	you	any	space	in	your	head?	I	can	give	you	the	answer,
but	there	is	no	space.	I	don't	see	any	space	in	your	head.	And	you	are	alert,	very
alert;	you	can	see	that	when	the	cup	is	full,	no	more	tea	should	be	poured	in.	Go,
please,	 and	 clean	your	 skull.	Empty	your	 skull	 and	 come	back!	Because	 these
questions	are	such	that	they	can	only	be	answered	to	an	empty	skull."
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
157
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
Nansen	is	a	rare	man.
THE	 OFFICIAL,	 RIKO,	 ONCE	 ASKED	 NANSEN	 TO	 EXPLAIN	 TO	 HIM
THE	OLD
PROBLEM	OF	THE	GOOSE	IN	THE	BOTTLE.
The	problem	is	very	ancient.	It	is	a	koan;	it	is	given	to	a	disciple,	that	he	has	to
meditate	 on	 it.	 It	 is	 absurd;	 you	 cannot	 "solve"	 it.	A	koan	 is	 something	which
cannot	be	solved.
Remember,	it	is	not	a	puzzle.	A	puzzle	has	a	clue;	a	koan	has	no	clue.	A	koan	is	a
puzzle	 without	 any	 clue.	 Not	 that	 more	 intelligence	 will	 solve	 it.	 No,	 no
intelligence	will	ever	solve	it.	Even	if	it	is	given	to	God,	it	will	not	be	solved.	It
is	made	in	such	a	way	that	it	cannot	be	solved.	This	is	a	koan.
"IF	 A	 MAN	 PUTS	 A	 GOSLING	 INTO	 A	 BOTTLE,"	 SAID	 RIKO,	 "AND
FEEDS	HIM
UNTIL	 HE	 IS	 FULL	 GROWN,	 HOW	 CAN	 THE	MAN	 GET	 THE	 GOOSE
OUT	WITHOUT
KILLING	IT	OR	BREAKING	THE	BOTTLE?"
Don't	break	the	bottle	--	and	the	goose	has	 to	be	taken	out	--	and	don't	kill	 the
goose.	 Now,	 these	 are	 the	 two	 conditions	 to	 be	 fulfilled.	 The	 koan	 becomes
impossible.	 The	 bottle	 has	 a	 small	 neck;	 the	 goose	 cannot	 come	 out	 from	 it.
Either	you	have	to	break	the	bottle	or	you	have	to	kill	the	goose.	You	can	kill	the
goose,	 and	 piece	 by	 piece	 you	 can	 take	 the	 goose	 out,	 or	 you	 can	 break	 the
bottle,	and	the	goose	can	come	out	alive,	whole.	But	the	condition	is	the	bottle
has	not	to	be	broken	and	the	goose	has	not	to	be	killed.	The	goose	has	to	come
out	whole	and	the	bottle	has	to	remain	whole.	Nothing	has	to	be	destroyed;	no
destruction	allowed.
Now,	how	are	you	going	to	solve	it?	But	meditating	on	it,	meditating	on	it	...	one
day	it	happens	that	you	see	the	point.	Not	that	you	solve	the	problem,	suddenly
the	problem	is	no	more	there.
NANSEN	GAVE	A	GREAT	CLAP	WITH	HIS	HANDS	AND	SHOUTED,
"RIKO!"
"YES,	MASTER,"	SAID	THE	OFFICIAL	WITH	A	START.
"SEE,"	SAID	NANSEN,	"THE	GOOSE	IS	OUT!"
Now,	it	is	tremendously	beautiful.	What	he	is	saying	is	that	the	goose	has	never
been	in,	the	goose	has	always	been	out.	What	is	he	saying,	the	moment	he	said,
"Riko!"?	 What	 happened?	 Those	 seven	 layers	 of	 ego	 disappeared	 and	 Riko
became	aware.	The	shout	was	so	sudden,	the	sound	was	so	unexpected.	He	was
expecting	a	philosophical	answer.
That's	why	sometimes	the	Zen	Master	will	hit	you	on	your	head	or	throw	you	out
of	the	window	or	jump	upon	you	or	threaten	you	that	he	will	kill	you:	he	will	do
something	 so	 that	 those	 seven	 layers	 of	 ego	 are	 immediately	 transcended	 and
your	awareness,	which	is	the	center	of	all,	is	alert.	You	are	made	alert.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
158
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
Now,	shouting	"Riko!"	so	suddenly,	for	no	reason	at	all	--	and	he	has	brought	a
small	puzzle	to	be	solved	and	this	Master	suddenly	shouts	"Riko!"	--	he	cannot
see	the	connection.
And	that	is	the	whole	clue	to	it.	He	cannot	see	the	connection,	the	shout	startles
him,	and	he	says,	"Yes,	Master."
"See,"	said	Nansen,	"the	goose	is	out!"
Those	seven	layers	of	the	bottle	are	crossed.
"Yes,	Master"	--	in	that	moment	Riko	was	pure	consciousness,	without	any	layer.
In	that	moment,	Riko	was	not	the	body.	In	that	moment,	Riko	was	not	the	mind.
In	 that	 moment,	 Riko	 was	 just	 awareness.	 In	 that	 moment,	 Riko	 was	 not	 the
memory	of	the	past.	In	that	moment,	Riko	was	not	the	future,	the	desire.	In	that
moment,	he	was	not	 in	any	comparison	with	anybody.	 In	 that	moment,	he	was
not	 a	 Buddhist	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 or	 a	Hindu.	 In	 that	moment,	 he	was	 not	 a
Japanese	or	an	Indian.
In	 that	 moment,	 when	 the	Master	 shouted	 "Riko!"	 he	 was	 simply	 awareness,
without	 any	 content,	 without	 any	 conditioning.	 In	 that	 moment,	 he	 was	 not
young,	old.	In	that	moment,	he	was	not	beautiful,	ugly.	In	that	moment,	he	was
not	stupid,	intelligent.	All	layers	disappeared.
In	that	moment,	he	was	just	a	flame	of	awareness.
That	is	the	meaning	when	the	Master	says,	"See,	the	goose	is	out	--	and	I	have
not	broken	the	bottle,	I	have	not	even	touched	the	bottle."	The	bottle	means	the
ego,	those	seven	layers.	"I	have	not	broken	the	bottle,	it	is	there,	and	I	have	not
killed	the	goose.	And	the	goose	is	out."
Now,	there	are	three	types	of	religions	in	the	world.	One	which	will	destroy	the
bottle.
Then	you	become	very	 vulnerable,	 then	you	become	very	 insecure,	 then	great
trembling	arises	in	you,	and	then	there	is	every	possibility	you	may	go	mad.	That
sort	of	thing	happens	many	times	in	India.	There	are	methods	which	can	destroy
the	bottle,	easier	methods.	They	destroy	the	bottle,	and	the	goose	is	out;	but	then
the	goose	has	no	house	to	abide	in,	no	shelter;	then	there	is	every	possibility	the
man	 may	 go	 mad.	 And	 many	 people	 in	 India,	 seeking,	 searching,	 working
towards	 the	unknown	become	mad.	When	 the	unknown	comes	 into	 them,	 they
have	no	protection.
Remember,	you	need	protection	even	against	God	because	God	can	be	too	much
too	suddenly.	Those	protections	have	not	to	be	destroyed;	practically,	they	have
to	remain	there.
Just	think	of	a	person	who	has	no	ego.	Now,	the	house	is	on	fire:	he	will	not	run
out.	For	what?	"I	am	not.	The	fire	cannot	burn	me,	because	I	am	not."	Just	think
of	a	man	who	has	no	ego,	and	he	is	standing	in	the	middle	of	the	road,	and	there
comes	a	bus	and	the	driver	honks	and	honks,	and	he	does	not	bother.	He	is	the
immortal	soul,	he	is	not	the	ego.	This	state	can	be	dangerous.	It	happens	if	you
destroy	the	bottle.
Zen	says	don't	destroy	the	bottle.	Use	it	when	it	is	needed.	Whenever	you	feel	to
have	protection,	 the	goose	simply	goes	 inside	 the	bottle.	Sometimes	one	needs
rest,	and	sometimes	the	bottle	is	also	useful.	It	can	be	put	to	a	thousand	and	one
uses.	The	ego	can	be	used	 if	you	know	that	you	are	not	 the	ego.	Then	 the	ego
cannot	use	you,	you	can	use	it.
And	 there	 are	 methods	 which	 will	 save	 the	 bottle	 and	 kill	 the	 goose	 --	 self-
destructive	methods	are	there	--	so	one	becomes	more	and	more	unaware.	That	is
what	 I	mean	when	I	say	kill	 the	goose:	one	becomes	more	and	more	unaware.
Drugs	can	do	that.	Drugs	have	been	used	in	India	for	thousands	of	years.	They
can	kill	 the	goose.	The	bottle	remains	protected,	but	 the	goose	is	killed.	If	you
take	 some	 foreign	 chemicals	 inside	 your	 being	 and	 your	 nature	 is	Osho	 -	The
First	Principle
159
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
not	ready	to	absorb	them,	by	and	by	you	will	kill	the	goose,	your	consciousness
will	be	gone,	you	may	fall	in	a	coma.
The	 first	possibility,	 if	 the	bottle	 is	broken	and	 thrown;	you	may	go	mad.	The
second	possibility,	 if	 the	 goose	 is	 killed,	 or	 almost	 killed:	 you	will	 become	 so
unconscious	 that	 you	 will	 become	 a	 zombie.	 You	 can	 find	 zombies.	 In	 many
monasteries	 there	are	zombies,	whose	goose	 is	killed,	or	at	 least	drugged.	And
there	are	mad	people,	maniacs.
Zen	 says	avoid	both.	The	bottle	has	 to	 remain	and	 the	goose	has	 to	come	out.
This	is	a	great	synthesis.
"YES,	MASTER,"	SAID	THE	OFFICIAL	WITH	A	START.
"SEE,"	SAID	NANSEN,	"THE	GOOSE	IS	OUT!"
It	must	have	been	a	moment	of	great	discovery	to	Riko.	He	must	have	seen	it,
"Yes,	 it	 is	 out."	 He	 is	 fully	 aware.	 The	 trick	 worked,	 the	 device	 worked,	 the
shouting	and	clapping	worked.	In	fact,	Riko	must	have	been	almost	on	the	verge;
otherwise	shouting	would	not	do.
You	can	go	on	shouting.	Clapping	won't	do.	But	the	man	must	have	been	just	on
the	verge	of	it.	Just	a	small	push,	and	he	has	jumped	the	barrier.
Meditate	 over	 it.	This	 is	 the	way	 to	 attain	 the	 first	 principle:	 to	 know	 that	 the
goose	 can	 be	 out	 without	 destroying	 the	 bottle,	 that	 you	 can	 be	 God	without
destroying	 your	 humanity,	 that	 you	 can	 be	 God	 without	 destroying	 your
ordinariness.
A	 disciple	 of	 His	 Divine	Grace	 Prabhupad	 came	 to	 see	me.	 Prabhupad	 is	 the
founder	of	 the	Krishna	Consciousness	movement.	Naturally,	 to	be	respectful	 to
me,	he	also	called	me	His	Divine	Grace.	I	said,	"Don't	call	me	that;	just	call	me
'his	Divine	Ordinariness'."
The	ordinary	is	the	extraordinary.	The	ordinary	has	not	to	be	destroyed.	Once	the
ordinary	is	 in	 the	service	of	 the	extraordinary	it	 is	beautiful,	 it	 is	 tremendously
beautiful.
Let	me	 repeat:	 the	 trivial	 is	 the	profound,	 samsara	 is	nirvana.	Whatsoever	you
are,	 there	 is	 nothing	wrong	with	 it.	 Just	 something	 is	missing.	Nothing	wrong
with	it!	Something	is	simply	missing.	Just	that	missing	link	has	to	be	provided,
that	plus,	and	everything	that	you	have	becomes	divine.
Love	has	not	to	be	destroyed;	only	awareness	has	to	be	added	to	it.	Relationship
has	not	to	be	destroyed;	only	meditation	has	to	be	added	to	it.	You	need	not	go
from	the	marketplace,	you	need	not	go	to	any	cave	and	in	the	Himalayas;	only
God	has	to	be	called	there	in	the	marketplace.
The	bottle	is	beautiful,	nothing	is	wrong	in	it.	You	just	have	to	learn	that	you	can
come	out	of	 it	whenever	you	want	and	you	can	go	 into	 it	whenever	you	want,
that	 it	 is	 your	pleasure.	 It	 is	 almost	 like	 the	house.	When	you	 feel	 too	cool	or
cold	 in	 the	 house,	 freezing	 cold,	 you	 get	 out	 under	 the	 sky,	 under	 the	 sun,	 to
warm	yourself.	Then	it	becomes	too	warm	and	you	start	perspiring;	you	go	into
the	house.	You	are	free.	The	same	door	takes	you	out,	the	same	door	takes	you
in,	and	the	house	is	not	the	enemy.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
160
Chapter	9	-	You:	the	Greatest	Lie	There	Is
But	 if	 you	 cannot	 get	 out	 of	 the	 house,	 then	 something	 is	wrong.	There	 is	 no
need	to	leave	the	house,	there	is	no	need	to	drop	being	a	householder.	There	is
only	one	thing	needed:	in	the	house	become	a	sannyasin,	in	the	world	remain	in
such	a	way	that	the	world	is	not	in	you.
See,	the	goose	is	out.	In	fact,	the	goose	has	always	been	out,	just	a	recognition	is
needed.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
161
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
10
All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
20	April	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Question
THERE	ARE	MOMENTS	WHEN	I	FEEL	NO	HOPE,	WITHOUT	FEELING
DESPERATE,	 WHEN	 THERE	 IS	 RECOGNITION	 THAT	 THE	 "I"	 HAS
FOUGHT
ENOUGH	 AND	 CANNOT	 HELP	 ANYMORE.	 YET	 UNDER	 THESE
MOMENTARY
COVERS	LINGERS	THE	ONE	AND	ONLY	LONGING:	 TO	BECOME	MY
REAL
NATURE,	 TO	EXPERIENCE	TRUTH	AND	TO	LIVE	 IT	 IN	THE	WORLD.
MY	MIND
PLEASES	ITSELF	TO	CALL	THIS	LONGING	AN	AUTHENTIC,	GENUINE
THIRST.
HOWEVER,	 THE	 SUSPICION	 IS	 THERE	 THAT	 IT	 IS	 JUST	 A	 WAY	 TO
HIDE	MY
PLAIN	GREED.
The	question	is	from	Gunakar.	Yes,	Gunakar,	it	is	a	way	to	hide	the	greed.	And
not	only	that,	it	is	a	way	to	avoid	the	real.	It	is	not	a	thirst	for	the	real;	it	is	a	way
to	 escape	 from	 the	 real.	 All	 greed,	 all	 desire,	 is	 an	 escape	 from	 the	 real.	 The
desire	 is	 for	 that	 which	 is	 not.	 That	 which	 is	 already	 there;	 you	 need	 not	 be
greedy	about	it,	you	need	not	desire	it.	Whether	you	desire	or	not	does	not	make
any	difference.	It	is	there.	By	desiring,	you	will	miss,	because	you	will	create	a
cloud	around	yourself.
This	is	how	the	mind	goes	on	playing	games.	It	can	play	the	game	in	the	name	of
reality	too,	in	the	name	of	God,	in	the	name	of	enlightenment,	nirvana.
One	thing	has	to	be	remembered	always,	that	you	are	not	to	become	real,	you	are
real.	 That	 which	 you	 are	 is	 the	 reality.	 Gunakar	 has	 said:	 Only	 one	 longing
lingers,	 to	 become	my	 real	 nature.	 But	 then	 who	 are	 you?	 You	 are	 your	 real
nature.	What	else	can	you	be?	How	else	can	you	be?	There	is	no	way	to	go	away
from	 your	 reality.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 go	 against	 it.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 be
anything	else	other	than	it.
But	you	can	forget	about	 it.	You	can	start	 looking	 in	some	other	direction.	All
that	is	possible	is	to	be	forgetful.	You	cannot	lose	contact	with	reality;	you	can
only	forget	it.	You	can	start	looking	in	some	other	direction.	You	can	put	it	at	the
back.	You	can	avoid	your	eyes.
You	can	pretend	that	you	are	not	the	real.
The	first	thing:	you	are	the	real.	Whatsoever	you	are	is	your	reality.	It	has	not	to
be	attained;	it	is	already	there.	It	has	happened.	Nirvana	is	not	somewhere	in	the
future.	Either	 it	 is	now	or	never.	To	seek	it	 is	 to	miss	it.	 If	you	want	to	find	it,
don't	seek	it.	Just	be	herenow.
And	when	I	say	just	be	herenow,	don't	make	a	desire	out	of	it.	Don't	start	asking
how	to	be	here	and	now.	Don't	start	planning	that	"I	have	to	work	hard	to	be	here
and	now."	You	have	moved	away;	that	"how"	takes	you	away.
You	are	your	real	nature.	This	is	the	great	declaration	of	Zen.	Other	religions	say
you	have	to	find	God.	Zen	says	you	are.	Other	religions	say	long	is	the	journey.
Zen	says	there	is	no	question	of	any	journey	whatsoever.	You	are	already	there!
Maybe	fast	asleep,	snoring,	but	you	are	there.	The	goal	is	where	you	are.	You	are
the	goal,	you	are	the	target.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
162
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
You	want	"to	experience	 truth	and	 to	 live	 it	 in	 the	world".	That's	what	you	are
already	doing.	Drinking	tea	you	are	living	the	truth.	Talking	to	a	friend	you	are
living	the	truth.	Going	for	a	morning	walk	you	are	living	the	truth.	Even	being
angry	you	are	living	the	truth.	How	can	it	be	otherwise?
The	ordinary	is	the	extraordinary,	and	the	trivial	is	the	profound.	The	samsara	is
nirvana.
It	is	just	a	question	of	remembering.
"...	 to	 become	my	 real	 nature,	 to	 experience	 truth	 and	 to	 live	 it	 in	 the	world".
That's	what	you	are	doing,	Gunakar.	Just	the	mind	goes	on	playing	a	game.	The
mind	says	 things	can	be	better.	The	mind	says	 life	can	be	 improved	upon.	The
mind	 says	 there	 must	 be	 something	more,	 you	must	 be	missing	 something	 --
seek,	search,	do	something.	This	is	greed,	and	the	greed	is	so	subtle	that	 it	can
hide	in	millions	of	ways.	It	can	even	start	trying	not	to	be	greedy.
Now,	listening	to	me,	your	mind	will	say,	"Right.	Now	I	am	not	to	be	greedy	at
all	because	it	is	greed	that	is	destroying	my	life.	So	I	have	to	get	rid	of	greed."
Again	the	greed	has	come,	from	the	back	door.
"It	was	deep	 in	 the	woods	back	yonder,"	began	old	Herman,	 the	guide.	 "I	was
plodding	along	minding	my	own	business	when	suddenly	a	huge	bear	sneaked
up	behind	me.	He	pinned	my	arms	to	my	sides	and	started	to	squeeze	the	breath
out	of	me.	My	gun	fell	out	of	my	hands.
First	 thing	you	know,	 the	bear	had	 stooped	down,	picked	up	 the	gun,	 and	was
pressing	it	against	my	back."
"What	did	you	do?"	gasped	the	tenderfoot.
Old	Herman	sighed.	"What	could	I	do?	I	married	his	daughter."
But	the	bear	or	the	daughter,	it	makes	no	difference.	It	is	the	same.
Just	be	aware	of	the	ways	of	the	greed.	Don't	try	to	get	rid	of	it.	Don't	try	to	do
anything.
Just	be	aware	of	how	greed	takes	a	thousand	and	one	forms.	Watch	it.	There	is
no	hurry.
And	you	are	not	losing	anything.	You	are	living	the	truth.	You	cannot	lose,	in	the
very	nature	of	things.	We	are	all	winners.	Here	nobody	can	be	a	loser.	God	has
managed	the	world	in	such	a	way.	That's	why	mystics	say	this	i3	the	most	perfect
world.	God	has	managed	it	in	such	a	way	that	everybody	is	a	winner,	nobody	is	a
loser.	Everybody	is	a	victor,	nobody	is	ever	defeated.	Even	in	your	defeat	there	is
victory,	and	even	when	you	 think	you	are	 lost	you	are	not	 lost.	 It	 is	all	dream.
The	 day	 you	 become	 awake	 you	 will	 find	 you	 have	 never	 been	 outside	 your
home,	you	have	always	been	there.
The	 only	 thing	 is	 to	 become	more	 and	more	 alert.	 Just	 watch.	You	 see	 greed
arising	in	one	way,	watch	it.	Don't	try	to	stop	it;	otherwise	it	will	arise	in	another
way.	It	may	choose	just	the	opposite	so	it	can	deceive	you.	Don't	do	anything	to
it;	otherwise	it	will	find	another	way.	No	need	to	fight	with	it.	Just	watch	it,	let	it
be	there.	Watch	it.	See	it	naked,	through	and	through.
Awareness	 functions	 like	 an	X-ray.	 It	 sees	 things	 through	 and	 through,	 and	 in
that	very	seeing	there	is	freedom.	If	you	have	seen	the	greed	totally,	in	that	very
seeing	 greed	 disappears.	Not	 that	 you	make	 it	 disappear.	 It	 disappears.	 In	 that
vision	it	is	not	found.	In	that	light	that	darkness	is	no	more	there.	Suddenly	you
are	free	of	greed.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
163
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
And	when	you	are	 free	of	greed	you	know	you	have	never	 left	 the	home,	you
have	always	been	there.	You	have	never	left	God.	Adam	has	never	been	expelled
from	the	garden	of	Eden.
He	 still	 lives	 there;	 he	 just	 dreams	 that	 he	 has	 been	 expelled.	 This	 is	 the	Zen
interpretation	of	the	biblical	story.
I	must	have	given	you	a	thousand	interpretations	about	the	story.	The	story	is	so
beautiful.
Zen	says	Adam	is	still	 living	 in	 the	garden	of	Eden.	The	snake	has	not	 tricked
him	into	sin.
The	 snake	has	only	 tricked	him	 into	 a	dream.	And	God	has	not	 expelled	him.
How	can	God	expel	you?	And	to	where	can	he	expel	you?	It	 is	all	his	garden.
Where	will	you	be?	Wherever	you	will	be	it	will	be	his	garden,	so	to	where	can
he	expel	you?	And	how	can	God	expel?
Expelling	Adam,	God	will	be	expelling	himself,	a	part	of	himself.	He	will	 fall
into	parts.	No,	it	is	not	possible.
Then	what	has	happened?	Adam	has	fallen	asleep.	Eating	the	fruit	of	the	tree	of
knowledge,	Adam	has	fallen	asleep	and	is	dreaming	that	God	is	very	angry.	It	is
his	own	dream.	It	is	his	own	idea.	It	is	his	own	guilt.	It	is	his	own	mind,	that	"I
have	broken	the	rule,"
that	"I	had	promised,	and	I	have	broken	my	promise."	Now	he	is	trembling	and
feeling	 guilty,	 and	 in	 the	 sleep	 the	 guilt	 is	 creating	 a	 dream	 that	 God	 is	 very
angry.	He	is	projecting	his	guilt	on	God.	His	guilt	 is	becoming	God's	anger,	 in
his	mind.	Naturally	God	must	be	very	angry,	and	he	is	expelling	him,	and	he	has
expelled	him.	The	gates	are	closed,	and	Adam	is	thrown	into	the	world.
But	it	is	just	a	dream.	The	moment	Adam	becomes	awake,	he	will	laugh.	He	will
have	an	uproarious	laugh.	He	will	roll	down	on	the	ground.	His	belly	will	start
bursting	with	the	laughter	because	he	will	see	the	whole	absurdity	of	it:	he	had
never	been	out.
Have	you	not	dreamed	dreams	like	this?	In	a	dream	you	are	being	killed,	and	in
that	moment	when	you	are	being	murdered,	can	you	doubt	it?	It	is	so	real.	You
shriek,	you	scream,	and	because	of	the	shriek	and	the	scream	you	become	alert,
you	 become	 aware.	 The	 dream	 is	 broken.	 Even	 after	 the	 dream	 your	 heart	 is
beating	louder,	your	breath	is	not	in	rhythm,	your	hands	are	shaking.	You	know
now	it	was	a	dream,	a	nightmare,	you	are	sitting	in	your	bed	and	there	is	nobody,
just	your	poor	wife	sleeping	by	your	side	--	no	murderer	--	the	doors	are	closed,
everything	is	silent,	there	has	been	nobody	in	the	room,	nobody	was	murdering
you;	but	still	you	are	 trembling.	The	fear	has	been	so	deeply	 there,	 the	 idea	of
murder	has	penetrated	so	deeply	in	you,	that	even	when	you	are	awake,	a	little
smoke	of	it	continues	to	be	there.	But	now	you	know	you	have	never	been	out	of
the	room	and	nobody	is	trying	to	murder	you,	there	is	nobody.
This	 is	 what	 I	 say	 to	 you.	 You	 are	 still	 in	 the	 garden	 of	 Eden.	 God	 has	 not
expelled	you.
You	have	fallen	asleep.
And	the	work	of	the	Master	is	to	bring	you	back.	Back,	not	from	anywhere,	but
only	from	sleep.	Back	to	awareness.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
164
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
Question
WHY	DO	YOU	TALK	ONLY	TO	YOUR	DISCIPLES?	WHY	NOT	TO	THE
MASSES?
There	is	a	beautiful	Zen	saying.	Let	that	be	the	answer.
"I	sing	my	songs	to	him	who	understands	them.	I	drink	my	wine	with	the	friend
who	knows	me	well."
Question
IT	ALL	SOUNDS	SO	GREAT,	AS	PERFECT	AS	CAN	BE	ARTICULATED.
BUT
WHAT	THE	HELL	DO	YOU	DO	IN	THE	MEANTIME?
You	have	missed.	You	have	not	understood	what	has	been	said	to	you.	You	have
not	 heard.	 Again	 the	 greed	 has	 become	 a	 barrier.	 Listening	 to	 me	 you	 are
listening	through	the	greed.
When	you	listen	to	me,	if	I	am	talking	about	enlightenment	and	the	joy	of	it,	you
become	greedy.	You	start	thinking,	"When	am	I	going	to	become	enlightened?"
So	you	say	it	is	great
--	it	all	sounds	great,	"as	perfect	as	can	be	articulated".	Now,	this	greed	creates	a
problem.
You	put	whatsoever	I	am	saying	as	a	goal.	Of	course,	the	goal	is	far	away.	There
is	a	distance	between	you	and	the	goal,	and	the	distance	has	to	be	traveled,	so	the
second	question	arises:
"What	the	hell	do	you	do	in	the	meantime?"
But	there	is	no	meantime.	I	am	not	talking	about	the	goal;	I	am	talking	about	the
way.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 anything	 about	 the	 future	 or	 afterlife;	 I	 am	 saying
something	about	THIS
moment,	 this	 very	moment!	 This	 is	 it!	You	 think	 in	 terms	 of	 tomorrow.	 I	 am
talking	about	today.
Jesus	says	to	his	disciples,	"Look	in	the	field.	Look	at	the	beautiful	lilies.	They
don't	 think	of	 the	morrow,	they	toil	not,	 they	labor	not.	Look	at	 these	beautiful
flowers.	They	 are	 just	 herenow.	Even	Solomon	 attired	 in	 all	 his	 costly	 clothes
was	not	so	beautiful.	Look	at	these	lilies	in	the	field."
I	am	talking	about	THIS	moment.	What	do	you	mean	by	"meantime"?	There	is
no	meantime.	This	is	it!	These	birds,	this	cuckoo,	these	trees,	you	and	me:	this
moment.	This	is	the	moment	of	nirvana.
But	you	start	 thinking	 in	 terms	of	desire.	You	say,	 "It	 sounds	great."	 In	 fact,	 a
thing	 that	 could	 have	 released	your	 celebration	becomes	 a	 desire,	 and	 through
desire	you	start	feeling	sad	because	the	goal	is	far	away.
The	cuckoo	is	singing	right	now.	And	the	trees	have	flowered	right	now.	It	is	all
beautiful	 this	moment.	 It	 will	 never	 be	more	 beautiful.	 It	 has	 never	 been	 less
beautiful.	Each	moment	 is	 perfect.	But	 you	 start	 thinking	 about	 the	 tomorrow.
Then	 the	whole	glory	 is	 there,	 somewhere	away	 from	you,	and	here	you	are	a
miserable	creature,	crying	and	weeping	for	the	goal.
You	create	the	meantime.	I	am	not	talking	about	the	meantime.	I	am	not	talking
about	time	at	all,	so	what	to	say	about	meantime?	I	am	talking	about	the	eternal
moment,	about	eternity.
You	bring	time	in.	The	mind	always	brings	time	in.	Time	is	a	mind	faculty.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
165
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
The	mind	 cannot	 be	 herenow.	 The	mind	 says,	 "Right.	 Hoard	 this,	 whatsoever
Osho	is	saying.	Hoard	it.	Someday	we	are	going	to	practice	it,	and	one	day	we
are	going	to	attain	 to	 this	Buddhahood.	It	sounds	great."	Then	the	misery,	 then
the	sadness.	Then	you	will	remain	miserable	your	whole	life.	This	Buddhahood
will	never	happen,	because	you	missed	it	in	the	first	place.
You	have	become	so	miserable	 that	you	cannot	 trust	me	 that	 the	celebration	 is
possible	right	now.	You	say,	"First	one	has	to	prepare.	First	one	has	to	become
this	 and	 that.	 First	 one	 has	 to	meditate.	 First	 one	 has	 to	 become	 a	 great	 saint.
First	 one	 has	 to	 become	 virtuous."	 This	 is	 something	 which	 from	 the	 very
childhood	has	been	deeply	conditioned	on	your	mind.
The	parents,	the	teachers,	the	schools,	the	universities,	the	priest,	the	politician,
they	all	have	been	 teaching	you,	 "Get	 ready.	Get	 ready;	 something	 is	going	 to
happen."	And	then	you	go	on	getting	ready	--	and	one	day	you	simply	die,	just
getting	ready.	It	never	happens.	When	you	were	a	child	they	were	saying,	"Wait,
grow	up,	first	be	educated.	Go	to	the	university,	come	back	home."	Thrilled,	you
go	to	the	university	and	you	suffer	all	sorts	of	tortures	there,	in	the	hope	that	it	is
not	going	to	last	forever,	in	the	hope	that	now	you	are	getting	ready.	You	don't
know	what	for,	what	you	are	getting	ready	for.
To	 listen	 to	 this	 cuckoo	 singing?	 To	watch	 a	 bird	 on	 the	wing?	 To	 see	 a	 full
moon	in	the	night?	To	hold	a	friend's	hand?	To	love?	For	what?	Because	all	this
is	available	right	now.
You	go	to	the	university,	you	go	through	a	thousand	and	one	imprisonments;	by
the	time	you	come	back	home	you	are	destroyed.	It	is	very	rare;	very	fortunate
people	come	back	from	the	university	without	being	destroyed	by	the	education
system.
Then	they	come	home.	Then	the	father	says,	"Now	find	a	job	--	and	get	ready.
Get	married,	and	get	ready.	Then	everything	is	going	to	be	beautiful."	And	you
read	 the	 novels	 and	 you	 go	 to	 the	movie	 and	 you	 see	 the	 film,	 and	 once	 the
marriage	 happens,	 the	 story	 says,	 "Ever	 afterwards	 they	 lived	 in	 happiness."
Have	you	ever	seen	anybody	living	after	marriage	and	happy?	But	these	stories
circulate,	they	condition	the	mind:	Get	ready.
So	 one	 day	 you	 find	 a	 job.	 Another	 humiliation.	 One	 day	 you	 get	 married.
Another	 distraction	 from	 the	 moment.	 And	 so	 on,	 so	 forth.	 Then	 you	 go	 on
missing,	it	is	not	happening,	so	somebody	says,	"How	can	you	have	it	unless	you
have	a	child?"	Right.	So	get	ready,	have	a	child.	And	so	on,	so	forth.
Finally	you	recognize	the	fact	that	the	whole	life	has	been	a	wastage.
I	am	not	saying	don't	go	to	the	university,	and	I	am	not	saying	don't	get	married,
I	 am	 not	 saying	 don't	 get	 a	 job.	 Please,	 don't	 misunderstand	 me.	What	 I	 am
saying	is:	For	happiness	don't	get	ready,	it	is	already	here.	Go	to	the	university.
Enjoy.	Have	a	job,	but	enjoy	it.	It	is	not	going	to	lead	to	happiness.	Each	moment
is	an	end	unto	 itself;	 it	 is	not	 to	be	converted	 into	a	means	 towards	something
else.	 Love,	 and	 enjoy	 love.	Don't	 think	 that	 you	will	 be	 happy	while	 you	 are
married.	Get	married,	and	BE	happy.	Don't	think	that	when	you	will	have	a	child
and	you	will	become	a	mother	or	a	father	then	you	will	be	happy.	Have	you	not
seen	your	mother	and	your	father?	So	what	are	you	hoping	for?	And	don't	wait
and	don't	go	on	postponing.
The	greatest	calamity	that	has	happened	to	humanity	is	postponement	--	always
postponing.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 are	 always	 looking	 at	 the	 timetable	 and
thinking	about	where	to	go	on	the	holidays,	what	trains	to	catch	and	what	planes
to	go	by,	 this	place	or	 that,	 to	 the	Himalayas	or	 to	 the	Alps,	 to	Kashmir	or	 to
Switzerland.	And	 they	are	always	preparing	and	preparing,	 and	 they	never	go.
What	 will	 you	 say	 about	 these	 people?	 You	will	 think	 they	Osho	 -	 The	 First
Principle
166
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
are	mad.	They	have	all	the	guidebooks	and	all	the	maps	of	the	world	and	all	the
literature	 that	 government	 information	 services	 go	 on	 publishing.	They	have	 a
whole	library,	and	they	go	on	looking	into	it	and	they	go	on	preparing,	but	they
always	prepare	and	they	never	go.	What	will	you	think	about	them?	Will	you	not
call	them	neurotic?
This	 is	what	 the	 situation	 is	with	 everybody.	You	 always	 talk	 about	God,	 you
always	 talk	about	MOKSHA,	nirvana,	heaven,	paradise,	you	always	 talk	about
it,	but	it	is	always	tomorrow.	So	you	have	to	prepare.	"Meantime"	you	prepare.
I	am	saying	there	is	no	meantime.	God	is	available	right	now,	just	for	the	asking.
Start	 enjoying.	 Don't	 ask	 how	 to	 dance!	 Start	 dancing.	 Can't	 you	 move	 your
body?	 It	may	 not	 be	 very	 graceful.	 So	who	 bothers?	 It	may	 not	 be	 a	 trained,
disciplined	 thing.	 So	 who	 bothers?	 Start	 dancing.	 Don't	 go	 on	 consulting
manuals	about	love.	Start	loving.	Don't	go	on	and	on	in	the	mind.	Start	moving
into	existence,	be	existential.	That	is	the	message	of	Zen.
Question
OSHO,	ARE	YOU	REALLY	CRAZY?
How	can	I	be	crazy?	I	have	no	mind	out	of	which	to	go.
Question
AS	 SIN	 CAN	 BE	 DEFINED	 AS	 "MISSING	 THE	 MARK",	 COULD	 ONE
DEFINE	ZEN
AS	"HITTING	THE	MARK"?
The	question	is	from	Yoga	Anando.
No.	Sin	means	missing	the	mark.	Zen	means	there	is	no	mark	to	miss.	There	is
nothing,	no	target.	There	is	no	destiny.	It	is	all	beautiful	purposelessness.	It	is	all
beautiful	meaninglessness.	It	 is	a	song.	It	has	no	meaning.	It	has	a	rhythm,	but
no	 meaning.	 It	 has	 tremendous	 beauty	 in	 it,	 but	 no	 logic.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 a
syllogism;	there	is	no	conclusion.	It	is	an	unconcluded	existence,	and	it	remains
always	unconcluded.
We	are	always	in	the	middle.	There	has	been	no	source,	and	there	is	no	goal.
Sin	exactly	means	missing	the	mark.	That's	why	Zen	people	don't	talk	about	sin.
Christians	talk	about	sin,	because	they	think	God	has	to	be	achieved,	heaven	has
to	be	achieved,	 there	 is	some	goal.	 If	you	miss	 that	goal,	 that	 is	what	 is	called
sin;	sin	means	missing	the	goal.	Zen	people	don't	talk	about	sin.	The	word	"sin"
exists	not	for	them,	because	there	is	no	goal	to	miss.	You	are	already	at	it!	The
arrow	has	reached,	the	arrow	has	always	been	there,	not	for	a	single	moment	has
it	been	otherwise.	Zen	is	so	profound.	It	gives	you	utter	freedom	to	be.	It	does
not	yoke	you	to	some	ideology	and	doesn't	yoke	you	into	some	guilt.
The	moment	you	talk	about	sin,	guilt	arises.	The	moment	you	start	thinking	you
are	missing	the	mark,	tension	arises,	anxiety	arises,	anguish	arises:	"So	how	not
to	 miss?"	 Then	 there	 is	 great	 trembling,	 and	 then	 the	 fear	 you	 may	 go	 on
missing.	Who	knows?	--	for	so	long	you	have	been	missing.	So	who	knows,	you
may	go	on	missing.	You	may	go	astray.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
167
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
Christianity	 talks	 in	 terms	 of	 duality.	 You	 are	 separate	 from	God,	 so	 you	 can
miss	him,	you	can	move	in	a	wrong	direction,	you	can	go	astray.	Zen	is	nondual.
It	says	you	are	in	God,	you	cannot	go	astray.	See	the	beauty	of	it.	See	the	great
declaration.	See	the	declaration	of	freedom
--	utter	freedom.
Freedom	from	the	goal	is	utter	freedom	because	the	goal	keeps	you	tied	together
in	a	direction.	Zen	has	no	direction.	When	you	have	a	direction	to	move	in,	you
will	have	to	choose	where	to	go.	And	the	fear	will	always	remain,	whether	you
are	going	in	the	right	direction	or	not.	Who	knows?	--	even	your	leader	may	be
wrong.	 The	 one	 who	 is	 leading	 you	 may	 himself	 be	 misguided	 or	 may	 be	 a
cheat.	Who	knows?	And	if	you	come	close	to	your	priest	and	your	 leader,	you
will	become	more	suspicious.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	if	you	want	to	get	rid	of	religion,	live	near	the	priests.
Then	 you	 will	 get	 rid	 of	 religion	 because	 you	 will	 see	 they	 are	 trembling	 as
much	as	you	are	trembling.
Their	public	faces	are	different,	their	private	faces	are	different.	Live	close	to	a
priest,	and	you	will	be	surprised.	He	is	as	much	in	the	dark	as	anybody	else.	He
just	 pretends.	 He	 is	 as	 blind	 as	 anybody	 else,	 but	 he	 goes	 to	 the	masses	 and
pretends	to	the	blind	people	that	"I	have	eyes."
And	all	 religions	depend	on	priests.	Why	don't	 the	priests	 say	 the	 truth?	They
cannot,	because	their	whole	trade	depends	on	one	secret,	that	they	have	to	go	on
pretending	that	they	have	eyes.	That	pretension	is	very	basic	to	the	trade	of	the
priest.
And	 one	 priest	 may	 fight	 against	 another	 priest	 --	 the	 Hindu	 priest	 may	 say
something	against	Christianity	and	the	Christian	priest	may	say	something	about
Hinduism	--	but	they	never	say	anything	against	priesthood.	Never.
I	have	heard	a	beautiful	anecdote.	Meditate	over	it.
The	 little	 island	 in	 the	 South	 Pacific	 was	 in	 an	 uproar	 when	 the	 American
missionary	visited	 the	 chief	 of	 the	 tribe.	 "What	 is	 the	 commotion?"	demanded
the	missionary.
"There	is	a	white	baby	born	in	the	village,"	replied	the	savage,	"and	you	know
we	don't	 like	 no	man	messing	 around	with	 our	women.	 Since	 you	 is	 the	 only
white	man	on	the	island	they	is	fixing	to	fry	you	alive."
The	missionary	was	in	a	state	of	nervous	collapse	when	he	spied	a	flock	of	sheep
on	the	hillside	behind	the	village.	Turning	to	the	chief	he	cried,	"Look	there	on
the	hillside,	chief,	you	see	that	flock	of	white	sheep?"
"I	sure	do,"	replied	the	chief.
"Well,"	 said	 the	missionary.	 "Do	you	 see	 the	black	 sheep	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the
flock?"
"I	see	it,"	responded	the	chief.
"There	is	no	other	black	sheep	and	there	never	has	been,	has	there?"
"Well?"
"Well."
The	chief	beckoned	the	missionary	aside	and	whispered	in	his	ear,	"You	not	tell,
me	not	tell."
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
168
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
This	 is	how	it	goes	on.	They	have	 to	protect	each	other.	They	may	fight	about
dogmas,	they	may	fight	about	principles,	philosophies,	that	is	all	okay.	But	they
never	say	anything	against	the	priesthood.	The	Shankaracharya	of	Puri	will	be	as
much	in	favour	of	the	priesthood	as	the	Vatican	Pope.	There	will	be	no	problem
about	that,	no	conflict	about	that.	If	priesthood	is	at	stake,	they	will	all	fight	for
it.
When	Buddha	declared	these	ultimate	truths	in	India,	there	were	many	religions
in	India.
They	all	went	against	him.	Not	only	Hindus,	Jainas	were	against	him.	Not	only
Jainas,	Ajeevekas	were	against	him.	And	so	many	others.	Why?	Whenever	a	real
man	is	there,	all	priests	will	be	against	him	because	the	real	man	will	bring	the
message	 to	 you	 that	 you	 are	 being	 led	 by	 blind	 people:	 they	 don't	 know;	 you
don't	know.	The	blind	are	leading	the	blind.
Zen	says	there	is	no	need	to	be	led	by	anybody,	because	there	is	nowhere	to	go.
This	 is	 Cutting	 the	 very	 root	 of	 priesthood.	 Look	 at	 it.	 This	 is	 destroying
priesthood	totally.	Zen	does	not	say	that	one	priest	is	right	and	another	is	wrong.
If	it	is	said	that	way,	then	priesthood	is	still	protected.	Zen	says	there	is	nowhere
to	go.
A	man	came	to	Nansen	and	asked,	"What	do	you	say?	Is	Zen	 the	right	way	to
achieve	God?"	Nansen	said,	"Zen	is	not	a	way	at	all,	it	is	not	a	path,	because	a
path	leads	somewhere.
We	 don't	 lead.	 A	 path	 reaches	 somewhere.	 We	 don't	 lead	 you	 anywhere.	 We
simply	throw	you	to	where	you	are.	We	simply	throw	you	back	to	yourself."
If	it	is	a	path,	then	leaders	will	be	there.	If	something	has	to	be	done,	then	you
will	 find	 people	 mediating	 between	 you	 and	 God,	 between	 you	 and	 reality.
Nothing	has	 to	be	done,	 so	nobody	has	 to	 show	and	guide	you.	You	alone	are
enough.
Zen	is	not	"hitting	the	mark".	Zen	is	knowing	that	there	is	no	mark	and	nowhere
to	hit,	that	you	are	the	target,	and	the	arrow	has	always	been	in	the	target.
You	must	have	heard	the	great	Tibetan	mantra	"AUM	MANE	PADME	HUM".	It
has	many	meanings.	One	meaning	is	"Look!	The	arrow	is	already	in	the	target."
AUM	is	just	a	shout,	so	that	you	can	look;	it	is	almost	"See!"	"Look!"	--	"Aum!
mane	padme	hum."	Literally	it	means	"jewel	in	the	lotus"	"mane	padme	hum".
Jewel	in	the	lotus.	Literally	it	means	"Look!
The	jewel	is	already	in	the	lotus."	Metaphorically	it	means	"Look!	The	arrow	has
already	reached	the	target."
You	 are	 at	 home	 already,	 so	 it	 is	 not	 "hitting	 the	mark",	 because	 "hitting	 the
mark"	will	again	be	the	same	thing.	Then	you	will	ask,	"How	to	hit	it?"	Then	one
has	 to	 learn	archery,	 then	one	has	 to	go	 through	discipline,	and	 then	 the	whole
priesthood	comes	in	from	the	back	door.
I	have	heard:
One	summer's	day	when	a	man	in	a	rowing	boat	caught	a	cramp	and	fell	into	the
water	--	it	was	an	ornamental	lake	--	arms	and	legs	wildly	flailing,	he	screamed,
"Help,	Help!	 I	 can't	 swim!"	 Finally	 a	 bystander	 shouted	 back,	 "Stand	 up,	 you
bloody	fool!"	The	drowning	man	did	so	--	and	found	that	the	water	just	came	up
to	his	waist.
But	he	was	thinking	he	was	drowning.	The	water	just	came	up	to	his	waist.
You	are	not	drowning.	Just	stand	up!
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
169
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
I	have	heard	another	story.	A	traveler	lost	his	track	one	night	in	the	hills.	It	was	a
dark	 night,	 and	 he	 was	 very	 much	 afraid.	 The	 hills	 were	 very	 tricky	 and
dangerous	and	the	track	was	very	narrow,	and	he	was	afraid	he	could	miss	a	step
and	could	disappear	forever	in	the	valley.	He	could	fall	into	any	abyss;	they	were
all	 around.	 So	 he	was	 just	 creeping	 on	 his	 hands.	 Still	 he	 fell,	 he	 slipped.	He
caught	 hold	 in	 time	of	 the	 roots	 of	 a	 tree.	Now,	 he	was	 very	much	 afraid.	He
tried	hard	somehow	to	get	out	of	that	hole	he	was	hanging	in,	but	he	could	not.
And	it	was	getting	colder	and	colder	and	his	hands	started	becoming	frozen,	and
now	he	was	 certain	 that	 it	was	 a	 question	 of	minutes.	Once	 the	 hands	 are	 too
cold,	he	would	not	be	able	to	hold	onto	the	roots,	and	he	would	die.	That	became
certain.	Now	there	was	no	way	to	escape.
He	started	crying	and	weeping,	and	he	started	praying,	and	he	had	never	been	a
theist,	but	in	such	moments	nobody	bothers	about	principles.	He	started	saying
to	God,	"Save	me,"	this	and	that,	and	"I	will	not	do	this	sin	or	that	sin,	and	I	will
be	straight	now;	I	will	not	drink	and	I	will	not	smoke,"	and	all	sorts	of	things	he
was	promising.	But	no	help	came,	and	by	and	by	his	hands	started	slipping,	and
a	moment	came	when	he	thought,	"Now	it	is	finished."	And	he	fell.
And	to	his	surprise,	he	was	standing	on	his	feet.	There	was	no	abyss	there;	it	was
just	plain	ground.	For	hours	he	was	hanging	between	life	and	death.
Once	you	stop	planning,	you	will	suddenly	be	on	plain	ground.	Once	you	stop
thinking	about	the	target	and	how	to	hit	it,	you	will	be	at	home.	Zen	says	drop	all
ways,	because	all	ways	lead	astray,	because	to	God	there	is	no	need	of	any	way.
He	is	there	in	your	heart.	It	is	he	who	is	listening	to	me,	it	is	he	who	is	talking	to
you.	It	is	he	who	is	breathing	in	you,	it	is	he	who	is	beating	in	your	heart.	God	is
not	far	away.	God	is	not	even	outside.	God	is	the	innermost	core	of	you.
So	 drop	 this	 sin-oriented	 idea	 of	 hitting	 or	 missing.	 Both	 are	 in	 the	 same
category;	both	will	create	anxiety.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	make	you	free	of	anxiety,	free	of	guilt.	Free	of	guilt,
free	of	anxiety,	you	are	a	saint,	because	you	are	 innocent	 then,	you	are	a	child
again.	You	are	born	again.
Question
YOU	CONFUSED	ME	VERY	MUCH	BY	SAYING	THAT	THE	SAMSARA	IS
THE
NIRVANA.	NOW,	FROM	WHERE	TO	BEGIN?
There	is	no	need	to	begin.	I	am	not	sending	you	on	a	journey.	Not	even	the	first
step	is	needed.	Take	the	step,	and	you	have	moved	in	the	wrong	direction.	It	is
not	that	any	direction	is	wrong;	all	directions	are	wrong.	Movement	is	wrong.	It
is	not	that	a	few	people	go	astray	and	a	few	don't,	no.	All	going	is	going	astray.
Let	this	sink	in	your	heart	as	deeply	as	possible.
When	I	say	 the	world	 is	samsara,	 I	mean	don't	divide	 into	 the	profane	and	 the
profound.
Live	the	profound	in	a	profound	way,	live	the	profane	in	a	profound	way.	Don't
divide	 into	 the	material	 and	 the	 spiritual.	Live	 the	material	 in	 a	 spiritual	way;
bring	the	quality	of	the	spirit	to	matter.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
170
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
What	do	I	mean	when	I	say	live	in	the	ordinary	world?	I	mean	live	the	profane
life	 in	 a	new	way,	with	 a	new	being,	with	 a	new	 style,	with	 a	new	 flavor,	 the
flavor	of	meditation.
I	am	not	telling	you	to	go	away	anywhere.
I	am	for	God,	but	I	am	not	against	anything.	And	God,	my	God,	 is	so	vast,	he
includes	all.
Yes,	you	can	sip	your	tea	in	such	a	meditative	way	that	it	becomes	prayer.	Try	it.
You	can	love	your	woman	in	such	a	meditative	way	that	love	becomes	ecstasy,
that	when	you	are	lost	with	your	woman	or	with	your	man,	suddenly	you	are	lost
in	God.	Those	moments	become	of	 tremendous	value.	Those	moments	become
the	first	glimpses	of	divinity.
Start	living	your	ordinary	life	in	an	extraordinary	way.	What	is	the	extraordinary
way?	To	bring	awareness.	Whatsoever	you	do,	let	it	be	soaked	in	awareness,	let
it	be	showered	with	awareness.
Question
WHAT	IS	MATURITY?	HOW	CAN	I	BE	MATURE?
You	will	have	to	understand	first	what	immaturity	is.	That	will	give	you	the	idea
of	what	maturity	is.	Immaturity	has	a	few	ingredients	in	it.	One,	immaturity	is	a
sort	of	dependence.	A	child	depends	on	the	parents;	he	is	 immature.	If	you	are
still	depending,	you	are	immature.
You	may	depend	on	God	or	you	may	depend	on	me,	but	it	is	immaturity.	You	are
still	 seeking	your	parents.	Maybe	your	parents	are	gone	and	 lost;	now	you	are
projecting	your	parents.
There	are	many	people	who	come	to	me	and	I	can	see	immediately	in	their	eyes
they	are	searching	for	their	father.	It	is	not	accidental	that	the	pope	is	called	the
pope.	"Pope"	means
"papa".	People	are	looking	for	a	divine	daddy,	continuously.	This	is	immaturity.
When	 are	 you	 going	 to	 stand	 on	 your	 own	 feet?	 How	 long	 are	 you	 going	 to
remain	a	dependent	on	the	mother,	on	the	father,	on	this	and	that?
These	 dependent	 people	 are	 very	 dangerous	 people	 because	 they	 can	 be
exploited	easily.
Anybody	who	pretends	to	be	their	father,	they	will	become	victims	to	him.	They
will	follow	Adolf	Hitler;	the	fuhrer	will	become	their	father.	The	Germans	used
to	call	their	country	the
"fatherland",	others	call	 their	 countries	 the	 "motherland",	but	 it	 is	 all	 the	 same
nonsense.	We	 go	 on	 projecting.	 The	 country	 becomes	 the	mother,	 the	 country
becomes	the	father,	or	God	the	Father,	or	Kali	the	Mother.	You	go	on	projecting.
You	want	 to	 remain	 a	 child;	 you	don't	want	 to	grow.	Growth	 is	 responsibility,
and	you	don't	want	to	take	any	responsibility.
People	 come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 say,	 "Osho,	 we	 surrender	 to	 you.	 Now	 you	 are
responsible."
How	can	I	be	responsible	for	you?	Surrender	can	only	mean	that	you	have	come
to	me	to	learn	responsibility.	Now	you	want	to	avoid	responsibility.	Surrendering
to	me	can	only	be	a	way,	a	means,	 to	 learn	 to	be	 responsible.	But	 if	you	want
surrender	as	a	substitute	for	responsibility,	your	surrender	is	wrong,	ill.	It	is	not
healthy,	it	is	dangerous.	And	then	you	will	start	getting	angry	at	me.	If	nothing	is
happening	you	will	get	angry.	Because	nothing	is	happening,	you	will	think	I	am
not	doing	anything.
Only	you	can	do	something.	I	can	indicate,	but	the	real	thing	is	going	to	happen
within	you.	Nobody	else	can	do	it.	If	I	can	do	it,	then	I	can	undo	it	also.	That	will
not	be	much	of	a	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
171
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
gain.	 If	Buddha	 can	 deliver	 you	 from	your	 ignorance,	 then	 one	 day	 if	 he	 gets
angry	with	you	he	will	release	all	your	ignorance	again,	back	to	you.	That	will
not	 be	 of	 much	 use.	 Freedom	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 you	 learn	 responsibility,
when	you	start	standing	on	your	own	feet.
Of	course,	one	feels	very	helpless.	So	what?	It	is	how	life	is.	That	helplessness	is
not	bad.
It	teaches	you	that	ego	is	wrong,	that	you	have	to	be	humble,	helpless.	And	yet
there	is	no	other	way	to	stand:	you	can	stand	only	on	your	own	feet.	Nobody	can
take	you	on	his	shoulders	 to	God.	You	will	have	 to	enter	 into	divinity	on	your
own.
So	maturity	has	to	be	understood	through	understanding	immaturity.	First	thing:
we	 are	 taught	 to	 be	 dependent	 on	 the	 parents,	 on	 the	 leaders,	 on	 the	 priests.
Nobody	wants	you	to	be	free,	because	people	are	afraid,	the	society	is	afraid,	of
free	people.	Free	people	will	be	rebellious.	Free	people	will	start	doing	THEIR
thing,	and	the	society	is	very	much	afraid	of	such	people.	The	society	wants	you
to	 do	 things	 that	 the	 society	wants.	The	 society	wants	 you	 to	 follow	 a	 certain
pattern.	The	society	has	its	own	goals;	they	have	to	be	fulfilled.	The	society	does
not	want	you	 to	become	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ,	because	 they	have	always	been
dangerous	people.	The	society	wants	just	zombies.	And	an	immature	person	can
easily	become	a	zombie	because	he	is	an	imitator.
Have	you	watched	small	children	imitating,	and	by	imitation	they	think	they	are
becoming	grown-ups?	Small	children	start	smoking.	Not	that	they	feel	very	good
about	smoking,	not	that	it	 is	great	or	anything.	When	a	child	starts	smoking	he
cannot	 even	believe	why	people	 smoke,	 because	his	 eyes	 start	 getting	 red,	 his
throat	 feels	 irritated,	 and	he	 starts	coughing,	 tears	come	down	his	cheeks.	 It	 is
really	painful,	but	he	will	tolerate	the	pain	because	the	cigarette	gives	a	certain
feeling	 that	 he	 is	 a	 grown-up.	 Only	 grown-ups	 are	 allowed	 to	 smoke,	 so	 the
smoking	becomes	a	symbol	of	grown-upness.
I	have	heard:
A	man	walking	down	the	street	noticed	a	small	boy	about	ten	years	old	sitting	on
the	front	doorstep	of	a	house,	smoking	a	cigarette.	"Aren't	you	a	little	young	to
be	smoking?"	he	asked.
"Of	course	I	ain't,"	replied	the	lad.	"I	got	a	girlfriend	and	all."
"A	girlfriend!"	said	the	man.
"Yeah,	Picked	her	up	last	night,	I	did.	Smashing	it	was."
"Good	Lord!	How	old	was	she?"
"I	dunno.	I	was	too	drunk	to	ask	her."
There	are	symbols	of	grown-upness.	You	need	to	have	a	girlfriend,	you	have	to
smoke,	 you	 have	 to	 drink,	 and	 even	 small	 children	 start	 learning	 these	 tricks.
And	 then	 they	 never	 grow	 up,	 They	 only	 imitate,	 They	 imitate	 other,	 false
grownups.	And	their	children	will	imitate	them,	and	so	on	it	goes.
This	world	 is	 a	world	 of	 imitators,	monkeys	 all.	 And	 it	 does	 not	make	much
difference	--
you	 can	 be	 a	 chairman	 of	 the	 board	 of	 monkeys,	 that	 doesn't	 make	 much
difference;	or	you	can	be	a	president	of	a	monkey	country,	that	doesn't	make	any
difference	 --	 all	 the	 same	 you	 remain	 the	 monkey.	 Maybe	 you	 are	 more
monkeyish	than	others.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
172
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
A	grown-up	person	is	one	who	does	not	imitate,	who	starts	feeling	his	own	way,
who	starts	being	in	his	own	way,	who	starts	looking	into	his	nature:	"Who	am	I?
And	what	REALLY	do	I	feel?"
One	woman	came	home,	driving,	she	got	out	of	her	car,	and	fell	down	flat	on	the
ground.
The	husband	rushed,	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?	What	happened?	Why	did	you
faint?"
She	said,	"It	was	too	hot."
The	 husband	 looked	 at	 the	 car	 and	 he	 said,	 "But	 why	 didn't	 you	 open	 the
windows?"
She	said,	"What!	Open	the	windows,	and	let	the	neighbours	know	that	our	car	is
not	air	conditioned?"
One	 can	 die	 but	 cannot	 allow	 the	 neighbours	 to	 know	 that	 the	 car	 is	 not	 air
conditioned.
She	had	 to	keep	 the	windows	closed.	She	was	fainting,	but	 that	 is	okay,	but	 to
keep	the	windows	open	hurts	much	more.
Listen	to	your	being.	It	is	continuously	giving	you	hints;	it	is	a	still,	small	voice.
It	does	not	shout	at	you,	that	is	true.	And	if	you	are	a	little	silent	you	will	start
feeling	your	way.	Be	the	person	you	are.	Never	try	to	be	another,	and	you	will
become	 mature.	 Maturity	 is	 accepting	 the	 responsibility	 of	 being	 oneself,
whatsoever	the	cost.	Risking	all	to	be	oneself,	that's	what	maturity	is	all	about.
If	you	imitate	you	will	again	and	again	fall	into	a	ditch	because	whatsoever	you
imitate	never	fits	reality.	Reality	is	continuously	changing,	it	is	a	flux,	nothing	is
ever	the	same.	It	is	a	river;	it	goes	on	flowing.
If	you	imitate	your	father	...	Just	see,	your	father	lived	many	years	before.	Your
father	was	 a	 child	maybe	 thirty	years	before	or	 forty	years	before.	He	 learned
things	in	a	different	world.
For	example,	your	father,	when	he	was	a	child,	was	not	sitting	five	hours	glued
to	the	chair	before	the	TV.	Now,	you	don't	know	how	much	the	TV	has	done	to
the	 small	 children.	 The	 father	 does	 not	 know.	 His	 childhood	 was	 not	 at	 all
influenced	by	the	TV.	Five	hours	sitting	before	a	TV	is	no	ordinary	phenomenon.
In	fact,	before	TV	happened,	down	the	centuries,	people	had	never	looked	into	a
source	of	light	for	five	hours	continuously.	Now	the	scientists	say	that	the	whole
nervous	system	changes	because	of	those	five	hours	of	looking	directly	into	the
source	of	light.	The	TV	goes	on	throwing	strong	rays	on	your	eyes.	It	has	never
happened	before.	Five	hours	is	too	much.
Scientists	may	if	you	sit	near	a	color	TV,	four	feet	away,	you	will	get	cancer,	you
will	 suffer	 from	many	 diseases	which	 your	 parents	 had	 not	 known,	 ever.	 The
eyes	are	eighty	percent	of	your	life.	Five	hours	of	just	strong	light	rays	reaching
into	your	head	--	your	sleep	will	be	disturbed.	If	America	suffers	from	insomnia,
it	is	natural.	The	TV	is	one	of	the	basic	causes.
Ordinarily	man	has	lived	with	light,	natural	light.	In	a	primitive	society,	the	sun
rises,	people	rise,	and	the	sun	sets	and	people	set,	people	go	to	sleep.	A	natural
rhythm	with	light.
Now	we	are	living	too	much	with	the	light;	the	eyes	are	not	made	for	that	much
light.	The	inner	nervous	system	is	disturbed;	it	becomes	too	loaded.
And	a	 thousand	and	one	things	will	happen.	In	America	a	new	phenomenon	is
happening.
Many	places	 it	has	happened,	and	people	have	become	really	worried	about	 it,
what	 to	 do?	 In	 one	 place	 a	 woman	 was	 murdered,	 and	 twenty	 persons	 were
standing	 there,	 almost	 paralyzed,	 not	 doing	 anything.	 A	 psychological
investigation	 was	 done.	 What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Twenty	 young,	 healthy	 people
standing	there,	and	a	woman	was	killed	just	in	front	of	them	and	they	Osho	-	The
First	Principle
173
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
didn't	 do	 anything	 --	 they	 didn't	 even	 shout,	 they	 didn't	 call	 the	 police.	What
happened?	 And	 you	 will	 be	 surprised.	 The	 finding	 is	 that	 it	 is	 because	 these
twenty	people	have	lived	on	TV
for	too	long.
On	the	TV	screen	murder	happens	so	many	times.	What	do	you	do?	You	don't	do
anything;	you	remain	glued	to	your	chair.	They	have	become	accustomed	to	it.	It
was	another	TV	scene.	They	have	lost	track	of	reality.	The	TV	has	become	more
real.	 For	 five	 hours	 you	 are	 not	 with	 anything	 else	 --	 and	 a	 continuous
bombardment	of	light,	and	strong	light,	and	things	are	moving	in	your	head.	You
become	a	watcher.	They	were	standing	there	just	glued	to	their	spots,	paralyzed	-
-	just	watching.	They	could	not	do	anything,	because	they	are	no	more	doers.
Now,	 your	 father,	 who	 had	 a	 different	 kind	 of	 childhood,	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
understand	it.
You	 are	 living	 in	 a	 different	world,	 in	 a	world	which	 is	more	 of	TV	watchers
than	of	participants.	Whatsoever	he	says	will	not	be	fit	for	your	world;	hence	the
generation	 gap.	 The	 father	 speaks	 a	 different	 language,	 you	 speak	 a	 different
language.	You	live	in	a	different	world,	he	lived	in	a	different	world.	Now,	those
two	worlds	never	coincide.
If	you	are	an	imitator	you	will	always	be	taking	false	moves.	You	have	to	learn
to	 live	 in	YOUR	world;	you	have	 to	 respond	 to	 the	reality	 that	surrounds	you.
Things	 have	 changed	 dramatically.	 They	 have	 always	 been	 changing,	 but	 the
change	has	been	too	fast	in	this	century.	And	it	will	be	faster	and	faster.
You	have	to	become	aware	of	the	situation	and	respond	accordingly.
An	experienced	plumber	was	giving	instructions	to	his	apprentice.
"Working	 in	 other	 people's	 homes,"	 he	 said,	 "can	 sometimes	 lead	 to
embarrassing	situations,	but	you	can	always	get	out	of	 them	by	using	 tact.	For
example,	the	other	day,	I	walked	into	a	bathroom	and	found	a	lady	taking	a	bath.
I	backed	out	saying,	'Excuse	me,	sir.'
In	that	way,	the	lady	thought	I	had	not	gotten	a	good	look	at	her	and	it	was	all
right."
The	 following	 afternoon,	 the	 apprentice	 staggered	 into	 the	 office	 in	 a	 beat-up
condition.
"What	happened	to	you?"	asked	the	boss.
"You	and	your	tact,"	cried	the	apprentice.	"I	went	to	the	bridal	suite	of	the	Etter
Plaza	Hotel	to	fix	a	faucet.	I	was	halfway	through	the	bedroom	before	I	realized
there	was	 a	 couple	making	 love	 in	 the	 bed.	 The	 husband	 cussed	 at	me,	 but	 I
remember	 what	 you	 had	 said,	 so	 I	 tipped	 my	 hat	 and	 said,	 'Excuse	 me,
gentlemen!'"
If	you	simply	follow	and	you	don't	understand,	you	are	immature.	Never	follow.
Try	to	understand.	Let	understanding	be	your	basic	law	of	life.	Let	things	come
out	of	your	understanding,	not	out	of	your	memory.
The	immature	person	functions	through	memory.	Whenever	there	is	a	situation
he	 looks	 into	 his	memory,	 into	 his	 past,	 and	 finds	 a	 clue.	 The	mature	 person
looks	 into	 the	 situation,	 puts	 his	 past	 aside,	 because	 the	 past	 is	 irrelevant.	He
brings	his	total	attention	to	the	present	situation	and	functions	out	of	that	totality.
His	action	 is	 in	 the	present.	The	 immature	person	 is	 always	 living	 through	his
past;	the	immature	person	is	always	turning	his	future	into	his	past.
He	is	repetitive,	he	is	parrotlike,	he	is	a	shadow,	a	reflection.	He	is	not	real.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
174
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
When	a	party	of	tourists	climbed	to	the	top	of	a	famous	echoing	mountain,	they
saw	an	old	man,	sitting	on	a	rock,	an	enormous	telescope	in	his	hands.	Every	few
moments	he	let	out	a	series	of	shouts.
The	puzzled	tourists	watched	him	for	some	time.	Then	one	of	them	went	up	to
the	old	man	and	asked,	"Why	do	you	keep	looking	through	that	thing	and	then
calling	out	as	if	you	were	in	pain?"
The	 old	 man-answered	 impatiently,	 "Don't	 talk	 to	 me.	 You	 will	 distract	 my
attention	and	I	will	lose	my	job.	I	am	the	echo	for	this	hill."
Many	people	have	become	just	echoes.	Watch	yourself	when	something	happens
and	you	react.	Are	you	reacting	the	same	way	as	your	father	used	to	react	in	such
a	situation?	Are	you	saying	the	same	thing	as	your	mother	would	have	said	if	she
were	in	this	situation?	Are	your	gestures	the	same	as	your	teacher's	in	the	school
you	loved	so	much?	Just	watch	--	your	gestures,	your	words,	your	actions	--	and
you	will	be	surprised.	Ninety-nine	percent	they	are	just	echoes,	they	are	not	true.
How	can	you	be	fulfilled	with	such	echoes?
Your	father	is	living	through	you,	not	you.	Your	parents	are	living	through	you,
not	you.
Your	parents'	 parents	 are	 living	 through	you,	 not	 you.	The	whole	of	 humanity
and	its	past	is	living	through	you,	but	not	you.	This	is	immaturity.
Maturity	means	you	discontinue	with	your	 past.	With	one	 stroke	of	 the	 sword
you	 become	 discontinuous	with	 your	 past	 and	 your	 heritage	 and	 the	 tradition,
and	you	start	 living	 independently.	The	gesture	 is	yours;	 then	 it	 is	meaningful,
then	 it	 is	 full	 of	 significance,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 an	 empty	 gesture.	 The	 words	 are
yours,	 not	 borrowed,	 not	 somebody	 else's;	 then	 your	 life	 becomes	 more	 and
more	authentic	and	real.
To	 live	 in	 immaturity	 is	 to	 live	 in	a	kind	of	dream.	It	 is	a	shadow	world.	Your
eyes	are	so	full	of	fog,	you	don't	have	clarity.
A	frustrated	young	man	went	to	see	his	doctor.
"Doc,"	he	explained,	"every	night	I	have	the	strangest	dreams.	Beautiful	blondes,
brunettes,	and	redheads	appear,	and	one	by	one	they	try	to	kiss	me	and	put	their
arms	around	me."
"So?"	answered	the	doctor.
"So	nothing,	Doc.	I	keep	pushing	them	away	--	every	one	of	them."
"What	would	you	like	me	to	do?"
"Doc,	please,"	pleaded	the	patient,	"break	my	arms."
People	 are	 living	 in	 their	 dreams.	 They	 are	 ready	 to	 break	 their	 real	 arms	 for
their	unreal	dreams.
Watch!	You	will	find	many	times	the	same	happening	in	your	life.	You	are	ready
to	 kill	 your	 reality	 for	 some	 unreal	 ideal,	 some	 utopia,	 some	 ideology,	 some
scripture.	Somebody	 insults	 the	Bible.	Are	you	 ready	 to	 fight?	Then	you	are	a
fool.	Somebody	says	something	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
175
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
against	Ram,	and	you	are	Hindu	and	you	are	ready	to	be	killed	or	kill.	Then	you
are	a	fool.
Then	you	are	living	in	shadows	and	you	have	become	too	attached	to	shadows.
In	 fact,	 a	 really	alert	man	will	not	 feel	offended	even	 if	 somebody	 insults	him
personally.
Even	 if	 somebody	says	 something	against	his	name,	he	will	not	 feel	offended,
because	 he	will	 know,	 "I	 am	not	my	 name.	The	 name	 is	 just	 an	 appendage,	 a
label	--	useful,	but	not	real,	 just	a	make-believe.	Any	other	name	would	be	the
same."	He	will	not	feel	offended.
A	really	alert	man,	even	if	you	hit	his	body,	will	not	feel	offended,	because	he
will	know	he	is	not	the	body.	He	will	know	he	is	not	his	mind.	He	will	know	that
he	is	something	transcendental,	and	he	will	remain	in	that	transcendentalness.	In
that	transcendence	is	his	being.
Then	life	will	have	a	 totally	new	quality	and	 it	will	become	a	new	experience.
That	experience	is	divine.	Maturity	is	the	door	to	divinity.	Immature,	you	remain
asleep.	Mature,	you	become	awake.
The	question	 is	 from	Prem	Anam.	He	has	many	 things	which	are	 immature	 in
him.	His	 question	 is	 relevant,	 relevant	 to	 his	 being,	 and	 it	 is	 good	 that	 he	 has
asked.
Now,	 Anam,	 watch,	 become	 more	 careful.	 Drop	 your	 childishness	 more	 and
more.
I	say	again	and	again,	I	quote	again	and	again,	Jesus'	saying	that	"Unless	you	are
like	a	child,	you	will	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	God."	But	remember,	he	does
not	mean	childishness.	Childishness	is	just	the	opposite	of	being	LIKE	a	child.	A
childish	 person	 is	 never	 like	 a	 child.	 He	 pretends	 to	 be	 a	 grown-up;	 he	 is	 a
pretender.	 A	 childlike	 person	 is	 one	 who	 has	 become	 so	 mature,	 so	 alive,	 so
aware,	 that	 he	 drops	 all	 pretensions.	 He	 is	 nude	 and	 naked,	 he	 is	 true,	 he	 is
innocent.
Drop	childishness,	and	become	a	child;	and	you	will	be	mature.	And	you	will	be
ready,	ready	to	take	the	jump	into	yourself.
Question
I	SEEM	TO	BE	MORE	INTERESTED	IN	HELPING	OTHERS	REACH
ENLIGHTENMENT	 THAN	 REACHING	 IT	MYSELF;	 HAVING	GRASPED
IT
INTELLECTUALLY.	I	LOSE	NO	OPPORTUNITY	OF	TALKING	ABOUT	IT.
THE	 EASE,	 THE	 JOY,	 THE	 PEACE,	 AND	 THE	 ENERGY	 THAT	 I	 FEEL
MAKE	ME	BELIEVE	THAT
I	AM	ON	THE	RIGHT	 TRACK.	 BUT	AM	 I?	OR	 SHOULD	 I	 BETTER	BE
SILENT
TILL	...?
The	question	is	from	Ajit	Saraswati.
For	Ajit	 Saraswati	 it	 is	 perfectly	 right.	 He	 can	 continue.	 But	 remember,	 I	 am
saying	so	only	to	him,	not	to	anybody	else.	It	is	a	very	personal	question.
He	 has	 nothing	 of	 the	 ego.	 He	 can	 go	 on.	 In	 fact,	 this	 too	 is	 part	 of	 his
humbleness,	that	he	has	asked.
It	 is	good	 to	help	others,	because	 there	 is	nobody	 really	who	 is	other.	Helping
others,	you	are	helping	yourself	because	we	are	parts	of	each	other,	members	of
one	another.	We	are	joined	together.	If	I	help	you	to	be	happy,	I	become	happy.	If
I	help	you	to	be	miserable,	I	Osho	-	The	First	Principle
176
Chapter	10	-	All	Going	Is	Going	Astray
become	 miserable.	 Our	 life	 is	 together	 here;	 it	 is	 a	 togetherness;	 we	 are	 not
separate.	On	the	periphery	we	may	be	separate;	at	the	center	we	are	one.
Nothing	 to	 be	 worried	 about.	 If	 you	 have	 the	 feeling	 that	 you	 enjoy	 sharing
whatsoever	you	have	understood,	howsoever	 little	 it	 is,	 if	you	have	 the	feeling
that	you	enjoy,	you	feel	blissful,	you	feel	joyful	--	and	no	ego	arises	out	of	it	...
Let	that	be	the	criterion:	if	ego	arises	out	of	it,	then	you	are	not	helping	others,
and	you	are	destroying	yourself	meanwhile.	If	no	ego	arises	--
you	simply	 feel	peaceful	and	 silent	 and	happy	 that	you	shared	 something	with
somebody,	a	grace	descends	on	you	--	then	you	are	perfectly	right.	Then	go	on
the	housetops	and	shout.
When	you	have,	share	it.
And	there	is	no	need	to	wait,	that	when	you	have	the	whole	of	it,	then	you	will
share	it.
Then	you	will	not	have	the	whole,	ever.	Share	it,	and	you	will	get	more.	Give	it,
and	you	will	get	more.
But	remember	only	one	thing:	the	ego	should	not	enter	in.	The	moment	you	see
ego	arising,	the	moment	you	see	you	are	feeling	great,	superior	to	others,	holier
than	others,	then	something	is	going	wrong.	Then	it	is	better	to	wait.	You	are	not
to	wait	for	the	whole	of	God	to	happen	to	you,	but	you	are	to	wait	for	the	whole
of	the	ego	to	go.
With	Ajit	Saraswati,	it	is	already	the	case.	The	ego	is	not	there.	Slowly,	slowly
that	 rock	has	disappeared.	 I	have	been	falling	on	him	like	a	waterfall.	Yes,	 the
ego	was	there	one	day.
And	the	water	is	very	soft,	so	the	rock	never	feels	worried,	but	the	water	goes	on
falling,	 goes	 on	 falling,	 goes	 on	 falling,	 and	 by	 and	 by,	 unaware	 what	 is
happening,	 the	 rock	 slowly,	 slowly	disappears,	 becomes	 sand,	 and	 is	 taken	 far
away.
The	rock	was	there,	but	it	is	not	there.	So	enjoy	it,	delight	in	it,	rejoice,	share.
Question
OSHO,	 CAN	 YOU	GIVE	ME	 TWO	VERY	 FUNDAMENTAL	 RULES	 FOR
THE
SEEKERS?
Here	are	two	ancient	rules,	very	ancient:
First,	that	you	must	be	like	a	man	who	has	been	bitten	by	a	snake	and	knows	he
has	not	a	moment	to	lose.
And	 second,	 that	 you	must	 be	 like	 a	man	who	 has	 awakened	 to	 find	 that	 his
horse	has	been	stolen	and	it	is	too	late	to	lock	the	door	and	there	is	no	hurry.
Question
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	THE	FIRST	PRINCIPLE?
If	I	were	to	tell	you,	it	would	become	the	second	principle.
Osho	-	The	First	Principle
177
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
Chapter	6	-	The	Irrational	Rationalist
