
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Talks	on	the	Baul	Mystics
Talks	given	from	01/07/76	am	to	10/07/76	am
English	Discourse	series
10	Chapters
Year	published:	1976
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:The	Roots	And	The	Flowers	Are	One
1	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607010
ShortTitle:
BELOV201
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
87
mins
THE	MILK	OF	THE	LIONESS
IS	SEEN	AT	ITS	BEST
WHEN	STORED
IN	A	GOLDEN	CUP.
WORSHIPPING	PROSPERS
IN	A	PROPER	CONTAINER.
THE	LOVER	WHO	WHOLLY	LOVES,
CAN	REACH	REALITY,
COMPREHENDING	THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
THE	SECRETS	OF	DEATH
ARE	REVEALED	TO	HIM
WHILE	HE	IS	FULLY	ALIVE.
WHAT	DOES	HE	CARE
FOR	OTHER	SHORES	OF	LIFE...?
Humanity	 is	 split.	The	very	human	mind	 is	 split	 because	of	 two	extremist	 life
philosophies.	Both	are	exaggerations;	both	are	logical	extremes.
One	 is	 what	 people	 call	 the	 philosophy	 of	 èat,	 drink	 and	 be	 merry',	 the
materialist	standpoint	that	life	is	just	an	accident.	It	is	not	going	anywhere.	There
is	 no	meaning	 in	 it,	 no	 significance,	 no	 coherence.	 You	 are	 not	 preparing	 for
something.	Nothing	is	going	to	happen,	so	you	are	left	in	the	moment;	make	the
most	 of	 it.	Death	 is	 going	 to	 destroy	 utterly,	 nothing	will	 survive,	 so	 don't	 be
bothered	 about	 the	 other	 shore.	Don't	 think	 in	 terms	of	 goals.	Don't	 think	 that
God,	truth,	liberation,	MOKSHA,	NIRVANA	have	to	be	achieved.	These	are	all
just	illusions;	they	don't	exist	--	empty,	dreams	of	the	human	mind.	They	are	not
substantial,	so	squeeze	out	of	 the	moment	whatsoever	you	can.	But	 there	 is	no
undercurrent	of	meaning	 in	 life.	Life	 is	accidental:	you	are	not	created	 for	any
purpose.
Many	live	that	way	and	miss	much	--	because	there	IS	purpose,	because	life	is
not	 an	 accident,	 because	 there	 is	 a	 running	 thread	 in	 each	moment	of	 eternity,
because	life	 is	an	unfoldment.	Something	is	going	to	happen.	The	future	 is	not
barren,	it	is	going	to	be	creative.	Preparation	is	needed	so	that	you	can	unfold,	so
that	your	seed	can	become	manifested,	so	that	your	essence	is	achieved,	so	you
can	know	who	you	are	and	what	this	existence	is.
Life	is	not	just	a	madman's	thought.	It	is	very	systematic.	It	is	not	chaos,	it	is	a
cosmos.
There	 is	 order.	 Even	 behind	 disorder	 there	 is	 order;	 only	 eyes	 are	 needed	 to
penetrate	 to	 that	 depth.	On	 the	 surface	maybe	you	can	 see	only	 a	 sequence	of
moments	and	you	cannot	see	eternity.	On	the	surface	maybe	you	can	see	only	the
body	and	nothing	more.
Just	as	when	you	go	to	the	ocean,	standing	on	the	beach	you	cannot	see	the	depth
of	 the	 ocean,	 only	 the	waves.	But	 the	 ocean	 is	 not	 just	waves.	 In	 fact,	waves
cannot	exist	without	the	ocean;	the	ocean	can	exist	without	the	waves.	Waves	are
not	separate	from	the	ocean.	Waves	are	nothing	but	ocean	waving,	and	ocean	has
tremendous	depth.	But	to	know	that	depth	one	has	to	go	into	that	depth,	one	has
to	dive	deep.
The	 materialist	 standpoint	 makes	 life	 absolutely	 empty	 of	 meaning.	 Then
whether	you	 live	or	you	commit	suicide	makes	no	difference,	because	 life	and
death	are	just	the	same.
Life	is	nothing	but	a	way	of	dying.	You	are	going	to	die;	how	you	die	does	not
matter,	when	you	die	does	not	matter.	How	long	you	live	and	then	die	does	not
matter.	 Nothing	 matters.	 This	 standpoint	 is	 a	 half-truth	 --	 and	 half-truths	 are
dangerous,	more	 dangerous	 than	 lies	 because	 they	 have	 something	 of	 truth	 in
them.	 That	 something	 can	 be	 very,	 very	 deceiving.	 A	 complete	 lie	 is	 not	 so
dangerous	because	it	cannot	deceive	for	long.	Sooner	or	later	you	will	come	to
know	that	 it	 is	a	 lie.	Half-truths	are	very	dangerous	because	something	 is	 true,
and	 that	 something	 true	may	 keep	 you	 hooked	 and	 you	may	 never	 be	 able	 to
know	the	lie.
The	other	extreme	 is	 that	of	 the	spiritualist.	He	says,	"This	moment	 is	useless.
Time	 is	 useless,	 only	 eternity	 has	 meaning.	 So	 don't	 waste	 this	 moment	 in
rejoicing,	delighting.
Don't	 waste	 this	 moment,	 prepare	 for	 the	 future.	 Sacrifice	 the	 present	 for	 the
future.
Sacrifice	all	that	you	have	for	that	which	the	future	holds	in	itself	as	a	promise.
Make	 life	 a	 constant	 approach	 towards	 truth.	 Make	 life	 a	 constant	 effort	 to
realize	oneself,	or	God,	or	NIRVANA.	This	is	not	significant,	but	THAT.	HERE
is	not	significant,	but	THERE.
The	other	shore	is	significant.	This	shore	is	to	be	used	only	as	a	jumping	board.
But	you	have	 to	go	 to	 the	other	 shore.	Real	 life	 is	on	 the	other	 shore.	On	 this
shore	 there	 is	 only	 illusion,	MAYA,	 so	 don't	waste	 your	 time	 in	 anything	 that
keeps	you	on	this	shore.	Don't	be	happy	on	this	shore,	because	if	you	are	happy
on	 this	 shore,	 how	will	 you	be	 able	 to	 leave	 it?	Become	 sad,	 become	 serious.
This	shore	is	the	shore	of	sorrow.	This	shore	is	not	the	shore	of	life,	but	death.
This	 shore	 is	 nothing	 but	 accumulated	 sin,	 so	 be	 sad	 that	 you	 are	 here,	 be
indifferent	 to	 whatsoever	 this	 shore	 can	 give	 to	 you.	 Don't	 be	 attached	 to
anything	here.	Don't	fall	in	love	with	someone.	Don't	fall	in	love	with	the	beauty
of	this	shore.	Be	alert	and	remember	the	other	shore,	keep	your	eyes	on	the	other
shore."
This	too,	is	another	extreme.	It	also	carries	half	of	the	truth,	and	is	as	dangerous
as	the	first	extreme.
This	moment	is	also	part	of	eternity,	and	this	shore	belongs	to	the	river	as	much
as	the	other	shore.	And	the	beauty	on	this	shore,	and	the	song	and	the	poetry	of
this	shore	 is	as	divine	as	 the	song	and	 the	poetry	of	 the	other	shore.	This	very
moment	 is	 eternity	 available	 to	 you.	 So	 just	 sacrificing	 this	 moment	 for	 the
future	is	foolish,	because	the	future	will	always	come	as	this	moment.	The	other
shore	will	always	come	as	this	shore.
And,	if	you	have	learned	a	trick	that	spiritualists	have	learned,	and	that	they	have
taught	 to	 the	 whole	 humanity	 and	 corrupted	 the	 mind	 --	 how	 to	 destroy	 this
moment,	how	to	be	negative	on	this	shore	--	then	you	will	be	negative	anywhere.
Wherever	 you	 are	 you	 will	 be	 negative.	 Wherever	 you	 are	 you	 will	 be
destructive.	Wherever	 you	 are	 you	will	 remain	 sad	 and	 sorrowful.	 This	 is	 not
religion.
THE	BAUL	attitude	is	a	great	synthesis	between	these	two	polarities.	The	Baul
understanding	uses	both	half-truths	and	makes	a	whole	truth	out	of	it.	The	Bauls
say,
"This	moment	is	not	all,	right;	but	to	say	that	this	moment	is	nothing	is	wrong."
The	Bauls	 say,	 "Life	 is	 a	 preparation,	 but	 the	 preparation	 is	 nothing	 but	 to	 be
blissful	in	this	moment."	They	are	not	materialists	and	they	are	not	spiritualists.
They	 are	 religious	 people.	 Religion	 is	 a	 great	 synthesis.	 And	 if	 you	 don't
understand	this,	you	will	be	a	victim	of	either	this	extreme	or	that.	Or,	you	can
be	a	victim	of	both,	half-half.	That's	how	schizophrenia	arises.
Schizophrenia	 is	not	a	disease	 that	happens	 to	a	 few	people	 --	 it	 is	 the	normal
state	of	humanity.	Everybody	is	divided,	split.	You	can	watch	it	in	your	own	life.
When	 you	 are	 not	 with	 a	 woman,	 with	 a	 man,	 not	 in	 love,	 you	 think,	 you
fantasize	 about	 love.	 Love	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 goal.	 That	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 very
meaning	 of	 life.	 When	 you	 are	 with	 a	 woman	 or	 with	 a	 man	 and	 in	 love,
suddenly	you	start	thinking	in	terms	of	spiritualism:
"This	is	attachment,	this	is	possessiveness,	this	is	lust."	A	condemnation	arises.
You	 cannot	 be	 alone	 and	 you	 cannot	 be	with	 somebody.	 If	 you	 are	 alone	 you
hanker	for	the	crowd,	for	the	other.	If	you	are	with	somebody	you	start	hankering
to	be	alone.	This	is	something	to	be	understood,	because	everybody	has	to	face
this	 problem.	 You	 are	 born	 in	 a	 schizophrenic	 world.	 You	 have	 been	 given
double	standards.	You	have	been	taught	materialism,	and	you	have	been	taught
spiritualism,	 together.	 The	 whole	 society	 goes	 on	 teaching	 you	 contradictory
things.
I	was	staying	with	a	Vice	Chancellor,	and	he	told	me	that	he	was	very	worried
about	 the	 new	 generation.	 He	 has	 two	 young	 boys	 and	 he	was	worried	 about
them.	He	wants	them	to	be	humble.	He	wants	them	to	be	true,	honest;	he	wants
them	to	be	religious,	prayerful.
I	said,	"That's	okay.	What	else	do	you	want	them	to	be?"
He	said,	"Of	course,	I	would	like	them	to	succeed	in	life."
I	insisted,	"What	do	you	mean	by	success?"
He	 said,	 "At	 least	 I	 have	 become	 a	Vice	Chancellor.	 I	would	 like	 them	 to	 be
well-educated,	 to	 reach	 to	high	posts,	 to	 succeed	materially	as	 far	as	wealth	 is
concerned:	a	good	house,	a	good	car,	a	good	wife,	respect	 in	the	society."	And
then	he	became	a	little	uneasy,	and	he	said,	"But	why	are	you	asking	this?"
I	 said,	 "I	 am	asking	 this	 because	both	 are	 contradictory.	On	 the	one	hand	you
want	your	son	 to	be	humble,	on	 the	other	hand	you	want	him	to	be	ambitious.
Now	both	will	make	him	just	split.	On	the	one	hand	he	will	try	to	carry	the	ideal
of	humility,	humbleness,	simplicity;	on	the	other	hand,	the	ideal	to	succeed,	to	be
ambitious,	 to	 achieve.	 An	 ambitious	 man	 cannot	 be	 humble;	 a	 humble	 man
cannot	be	ambitious.	And	you	want	him	to	be	prayerful?	And	you	want	him	to
be	 true	 and	 honest?	A	man	who	 is	 trying	 to	 succeed	 in	 the	world	HAS	 to	 be
dishonest.	 Of	 course,	 he	 has	 to	 be	 dishonest	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 nobody	 ever
discovers	it.	He	has	to	be	very	cunningly	dishonest.	He	has	to	pretend	to	honesty
and	remain	dishonest.	He	has	to	pretend	to	humbleness	and	remain	egoistic.	But
these	 are	 such	different,	 diametrically	opposite	goals,	 and	you	put	 them	 inside
one	person
--	 that	 person	 will	 always	 remain	 divided.	 If	 he	 succeeds	 he	 will	 think,'What
happened	to	my	humbleness,	what	happened	to	my	prayer,	what	happened	to	my
compassion?'	 If	 he	 becomes	 humble	 he	 will	 think,'What	 happened	 to	 my
ambition?	I	am	nowhere'."
You	are	born	 in	 a	 schizophrenic	world.	Your	parents	were	 schizophrenic,	 your
teachers	 were	 schizophrenic,	 your	 priests,	 your	 politicians	 are	 schizophrenic.
They	 go	 on	 talking	 about	 two	 diametrically	 opposite	 goals,	 and	 they	 go	 on
creating	the	split	m	you.
The	Bauls	are	very	healthy	people	--	not	schizophrenic,	not	split.	Their	synthesis
has	to	be	understood;	the	very	understanding	will	help	you	tremendously.
They	say,	"This	world	and	the	other	world	are	not	opposite."	They	say,	"To	eat,
drink	and	be	merry,	and	to	be	prayerful,	are	not	opposite."	They	say,	"This	shore
and	 the	 other	 shore	 belong	 to	 the	 same	 river	 of	 God."	 So	 they	 say	 that	 each
moment	 has	 to	 be	 lived	 as	 a	materialist,	 and	 each	moment	 has	 to	 be	 given	 a
direction	 as	 a	 spiritualist.	 Each	 moment,	 one	 has	 to	 be	 delightful,	 rejoicing,
celebrating,	and	at	the	same	time,	remaining	alert	and	conscious,	remaining	fully
aware	 about	 the	 future	 unfoldment.	 But	 that	 unfoldment	 is	 not	 against	 this
moment's	 rejoicing.	 In	 fact,	 because	 you	 rejoice	 in	 this	 moment,	 the	 next
moment	your	flower	opens	more.	The	more	you	are	happy	m	this	moment,	 the
more	you	will	become	capable	of	being	happy	in	the	next	moment.	If	today	has
been	a	heaven,	tomorrow	cannot	be	a	hell	because	it	will	be	born	out	of	today.	If
today	 has	 been	 tremendously	 beautiful,	 a	 day	 of	 song,	 a	 day	 of	 dance	 and
laughter.	then	how	can	tomorrow	be	a	day	of	sorrow?	From	where	can	sadness
enter	in?	It	is	going	to	be	YOUR
tomorrow.	 And	 whenever	 it	 will	 come,	 it	 will	 come	 as	 today,	 and	 you	 have
learned	the	secret	of	how	to	live	today.
The	 Bauls	 say,	 "Learn	 from	 the	 materialist	 the	 way	 to	 live.	 "Learn	 from	 an
Epicurean,	a	CHARVAK;	learn	from	him	the	way	to	live	this	moment.	Learn	the
direction	 from	 real	 spiritual	 people	 --	 a	 Buddha,	 a	Mahavir,	 a	 Krishna	 --	 and
make	a	synthesis	out	of	both.
Don't	divide	time	and	eternity;	don't	divide	matter	and	mind;	don't	divide	earth
and	sky.
Don't	divide	the	roots	and	the	flowers;	they	are	together.
This	 togetherness	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 the	 Baul.	 And	 when	 inside	 you	 divisions
disappear,	and	 inside	you	 there	 is	no	conflict,	and	 inside	you	you	are	one,	you
become	 luminous.	A	 great	 grace	 arises	 in	 you.	 Then	 you	will	 be	 as	 happy	 as
Epicurus	and	as	silent	as	Buddha.
IN	the	soul	of	a	Baul,	Buddha	and	Epicurus	embrace	each	other.	And	this	is	my
goal	also,	and	this	 is	my	teaching	also.	If	somehow	you	can	become	a	Buddha
without	 becoming	 an	 Epicurus	 simultaneously,	 you	 will	 miss	 much.	 You	 will
become	a	stone	Buddha;	you	will	not	be	alive.	Or	if	you	can	become	an	Epicurus
without	becoming	a	Buddha,	you	will	miss	much.	You	may	enjoy	a	few	fleeting
moments	of	life,	but	that's	not	enough.	Life	has	more	to	give	and	you	live	only
on	the	waves,	you	never	reach	the	depths.
I	would	like	you	to	become	capable	of	living	on	the	waves,	with	the	sun	shining
and	 the	 storm	 raging	 and	 great	winds	 blowing,	 and	 to	 go	 into	 the	 depth	 also,
where	all	storms	cease,	where	deep	darkness	exists	without	any	penetration	from
the	 sun,	 where	 everything	 is	 silent	 and	 peaceful	 and	 tranquil,	 and	 there	 is	 no
disturbance.	But,	I	would	like	you	to	become	capable	of	both.	If	one	makes	you
incapable	of	the	other,	then	you	are	not	a	very	rich	human	being.	Then	you	are
half-human.	Then	half	of	your	being	is	dead.
Then	you	are	paralyzed;	then	you	are	not	fully	alive.
You	must	have	heard	what	the	existentialists	say.	They	have	a	very	basic	dictum:
that	existence	precedes	essence.	They	say	that	man	is	born	first,	and	then,	by	and
by,	he	creates	his	own	essence,	his	own	soul.	Man	is	born	empty,	with	no	content
in	 him,	 just	 a	 blank	 paper.	 Then,	 by	 and	 by,	 he	 has	 to	 write	 his	 own
autobiography	 on	 it.	 He	 has	 to	 make	 his	 own	 signature;	 he	 brings	 none.	 He
comes	as	an	emptiness.
The	Bauls	say	just	the	opposite	thing.	They	say:	Man	is	born	with	essence,	the
ADHAR
MANUSH.	The	essential	man	is	always	there,	maybe	manifest	or	not	manifest.
The	 tree	 is	already	in	 the	seed.	Essence	precedes	existence,	not	otherwise.	The
Bauls	say	that	life	is	not	a	creation	of	something	new,	it	is	just	unfoldment.	You
already	 have	 it;	 it	 just	 has	 to	 be	 unfolded,	 barriers	 just	 have	 to	 be	 removed.
Obstacles	just	have	to	be	put	aside	and	your	life	starts	unfolding.	You	are	like	a
bud:	when	obstacles	are	no	more	there,	you	start	flowering,	your	lotus	opens.
BUT	that	which	you	are	going	to	become	you	already	are,	in	essence	--	"Because
if	 you	 are	 not	 already,"	 the	 Bauls	 say,	 "then	 you	 cannot	 become."	 You	 can
become	only	that	which	you	are.	You	can	become	only	your	being.	There	is	no
other	way	of	becoming,	 there	 is	nothing	else	you	can	become.	A	rosebush	will
grow	 roses,	 a	 lotus	 plant	 will	 grow	 lotuses.	 You	 are	 already	 carrying	 your
destiny;	just	obstacles	have	to	be	removed.
This	 is	 what	 Bauls	 call	 preparation.	 To	 prepare	 oneself	 means	 to	 remove	 the
obstacles	 on	 the	 path.	 If	 you	 remove	 hate,	 love	 starts	 flowing.	You	 are	 not	 to
create	love;	nobody	can	create	love.	If	you	were	to	create	love	then	it	would	be
impossible.	 Just	 remove	 the	 hate	 and	 you	 will	 see	 love	 streaming.	 Remove
unconsciousness,	and	you	will	see	knowing	arising	in	you.	Remove	the	negative,
and	 the	 positive	 starts	 unfolding	 itself.	 Then	 the	 whole	 preparation	 is	 just
negative.	It	is	almost	as	if	a	rock	is	blocking	a	small	stream:	you	remove	the	rock
and	the	stream	starts	moving.	With	the	rock	blocking	her	path,	 it	may	not	ever
have	been	possible	for	her	to	come	and	be	manifested.
We	are	carrying	many	rocks	within	our	beings	--	call	them	blocks	in	your	energy
--	but	those	blocks	have	to	be	dissolved	and	removed.
The	methods	of	the	Bauls	are	very	simple.	They	say	that	if	you	can	dance,	many
blocks	 will	 disappear	 from	 your	 being	 --	 because	 when	 a	 person	 dances	 and
really	moves	into	dance,	and	becomes	movement,	then	he	becomes	liquid.	Have
you	not	seen	it?	If	you	have	seen	somebody	lost	in	dancing,	can't	you	see	it?	that
he	is	no	longer	solid?	He	is	flowing.	The	solidity	is	gone;	he	has	become	liquid.
This	liquidity	melts	the	blocks.	So	dancing	is	the	Yoga	of	the	Baul;	he	dances	for
hours	 together.	When	the	moon	is	 in	 the	sky	in	 the	night,	 the	Bauls	will	dance
the	 whole	 night	 --	 because	 for	 them	 the	 moon	 is	 a	 symbol	 of	 their	 Beloved,
Krishna.	They	call	Krishna	'the	moon'.	When	the	moon	is	there	they	will	dance,
and	 they	will	 dance	madly.	And	 this	 dance	 is	 not	 a	 performance.	 It	 is	 not	 for
somebody	else	to	see.	If	somebody	sees	it	and	watches,	that's	another	thing.	The
Baul	dances	for	himself,	for	his	own	pleasure.
Somebody	 asked	Tulsidas,	 a	 great	 poet,	 "Why	 have	 you	written	RAMAYAN?
Why?"	--
because	 he	 devoted	 his	 whole	 life	 to	 it.	 Said	 Tulsidas,	 "SWANTAHSUKHAI
TULSI	RAGHUNATH	GATHA":	for	my	own	pleasure	I	have	been	singing	the
story	of	Ram	--
SWANTAHSUKHAI;	 for	my	own	pleasure,	 for	my	sheer	pleasure,	but	 for	my
own	pleasure.	It	is	not	a	performance,	it	is	not	for	somebody	else.
The	Bauls	dance	SWANTAHSUKHAI,	for	their	own	pleasure.
Singing	is	another	of	 their	methods,	They	have	chosen	very	aesthetic	methods,
not	hard,	but	very	 soft	methods,	 feminine	methods,	Taoist	methods.	They	 sing
and	 they	 are	 lost	 completely	 in	 their	 singing.	 Singing	 is	 chanting	 for	 them;
singing	 is	 prayer	 for	 them.	And	 they	 sing	 about	 their	 Beloved,	 and	 they	 sing
about	their	Lord,	about	their	God.	If	you	are	lost	in	your	singing	you	are	lost	in
NADABRAHMA,	you	are	 lost	 in	 'the	 soundless	 sound'.	And	 their	 singing	and
dancing	is	not	a	ritualized	thing.	There	is	no	ritual.	Each	Baul	is	individual.	You
will	not	find	two	Bauls	singing	the	same	song	or	singing	in	the	same	way.	And
you	will	not	 find	 two	Bauls	dancing	 the	same	dance	or	dancing	 the	same	way.
They	don't	follow	any	ritual.
This	has	to	be	understood,	because	this	is	very,	very	fundamental	for	them.	And
this	I	would	like	you	to	remember:	if	anything	becomes	a	ritual,	then	drop	it;	it	is
useless	now	-
-	 because	 a	 ritual	 means	 a	 repetition.	 Mohammedans	 do	 their	 NAMAJ	 in	 a
certain	way	every	day;	it	becomes	a	ritual.	Christians	do	their	prayer.	 the	same
prayer	again	and	again.	They	become	so	habitual	with	it	that	no	consciousness	is
required.	They	can	do	it	and	they	can	think	many	thoughts	in	the	background.	It
has	become	robot-like.	They	can	repeat	 the	words.	They	know	the	words,	 they
have	repeated	them	so	many	times.	It	is	a	dead	ritual.
Bauls	say,	"Let	your	prayer	arise	in	each	moment.	What	is	the	need	to	carry	the
past?
Can't	 you	 talk	 to	 your	God	 directly?	What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 repeating	 the	 same
thing	again?"
Today	 is	 different	 from	 yesterday	 --	 the	 prayer	 has	 to	 be	 new,	 as	 new	 as	 the
morning	sun	or	the	morning	dewdrop.	Say	something	that	arises	in	your	heart.	If
nothing	 arises,	 bow	 down	 in	 deep	 silence,	 because	 He	 knows.	 He	 will
understand	your	silence.	Some	day	you	feel	 like	dancing	--	dance.	Now	that	 is
the	 prayer	 for	 that	 moment.	 Some	 day	 you	 want	 to	 sing	 --	 but	 don't	 repeat
anybody	else's	song,	because	that	is	not	your	heart,	and	that	is	not	the	way	you
can	pour	your	heart	into	the	divine	feet.	Let	your	own	song	arise.	Forget	about
metre	and	grammar.	God	is	not	too	much	of	a	grammarian,	and	He	is	not	worried
about	what	words	you	use.	He	is	more	concerned	about	your	heart;	He	is	more
concerned	about	your	intention.	He	will	understand.
So	Bauls	make	 their	own	 songs	on	 the	 spur	of	 the	moment.	 It	 is	 spontaneous.
They	 just	 relax	 in	 the	moment:	 they	 let	 the	dance	happen,	 they	 let	 the	 singing
happen.	That's	why	 they	are	known	as	mad	people,	because	on	some	day	 they
may	be	quarrelling	with	God!
It	has	to	be	so.	When	you	love	God	you	can	quarrel	also.	Some	day	they	may	be
very	angry	and	they	will	say,	"No,	I'm	not	going	to	pray	to	you	today.	What	have
you	done	to	me?	I	am	very	angry."	But	this	is	beautiful;	this	is	prayer.	This	will
be	 heard.	 This	 will	 reach	 to	 the	 very	 core	 of	 existence.	 When	 you	 love,
sometimes	you	are	annoyed	also.
When	 you	 love,	 sometimes	 you	 are	 angry	 also,	 sometimes	 you	 dance	 also,
sometimes	 you	 complain	 also.	Man	 is	 very	 helpless,	 and	 a	Baul	 lives	 in	 total
helplessness.	That's	why	he	leaves	all	possessions	and	becomes	a	beggar	on	the
road.	He	leaves	himself	in	the	hands	of	God.	He	says,	"I	will	trust	you."
JUST	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 reading	 one	 prayer	 of	 a	 Baul,	 and	 the	 Baul	 says,
"Okay,	if	you	want	to	test	me,	test.	And	if	you	want	to	give	me	pain,	give.	I	will
try	 to	 tolerate	 as	 much	 as	 I	 can.	 Okay."	 But	 his	 talk	 is	 not	 mere	 talk;	 it	 is	 a
communication.	And	he's	not	repeating	scripture.	He	creates	his	scripture.	And
when	you	CREATE	your	scripture,	only	then	do	you	live	it.	If	it	is	borrowed	you
cannot	 live	 it.	A	 borrowed	 song	 is	 not	 a	 song,	 and	 a	 borrowed	 dance	 is	 not	 a
dance.	Let	 it	arise	 in	you.	Don't	be	worried	about	performance,	because	we	do
performance	because	we	are	too	concerned	about	the	opinion	of	others.	The	Baul
is	 not	 performing	 anything;	 his	 approach	 is	 direct.	He	 talks	 to	God	 as	 a	 small
child	talks	to	his	father	or	to	his	mother,	or	a	lover	talks	to	his	beloved:	it	is	alive.
The	song	for	today:
THE	MILK	OF	THE	LIONESS
IS	SEEN	AT	ITS	BEST
WHEN	STORED	IN	A	GOLDEN	CUP.
WORSHIPPING	PROSPERS
IN	A	PROPER	CONTAINER.
So	Bauls	 say,	 "Prepare	 yourself."	But	when	 they	 say	 to	 prepare	 yourself,	 they
don't	mean	 to	be	against	 the	world.	Their	preparation	 is	 life-affirmative.	When
they	 say	 'prepare',	 they	 don't	 mean	 it	 as	 other	 spiritualists	mean	 it.	 The	 other
spiritualists	 say,	 "Prepare";	 they	 are	 saying:	 drop	 enjoying,	 drop	 delighting	 in
life,	move	against	 life.	Start	destroying	all	attachment,	all	 love,	all	celebration.
These	spiritualists	seem	to	be,	in	some	deeper	way,	very	masochistic.	Suffering
becomes	 a	 very	 great	 value	 for	 them.	 They	 start	 creating	 suffering	 for
themselves.
No,	a	Baul	is	a	lover	of	life.	When	he	says	prepare,	he	says	to	enjoy	this	moment
so	you	are	 ready	for	 the	next	moment.	Make	 this	moment	golden.	Let	all	your
moments	be	a	series	of	golden	moments,	and	you	will	become	a	golden	cup.
THE	MILK	OF	THE	LIONESS
IS	SEEN	AT	ITS	BEST
WHEN	STORED	IN	A	GOLDEN	CUP.
BECOME	a	golden	cup	before	you	invite	God	to	pour	Himself	into	you.	Enjoy,
delight,	rejoice,	so	that	you	can	become	capable	of	higher	rejoicings.	Celebrate
this	shore	so	that	you	can	learn	the	ways	of	celebration	and	you	can	be	called	to
the	other	shore.	Only	those	who	are	ready	will	be	called.	If	you	are	sad,	gloomy,
masochistic,	 torturing	 yourself,	 you	 are	 putting	 the	 other	 shore	 farther	 away.
Because	that	shore	belongs	to	those	who	can	penetrate.	That	shore	comes	closer
the	more	you	celebrate.	 In	fact,	 if	your	celebration	comes	 to	a	peak,	 this	shore
turns	to	be	that	shore.	When	you	are	really	at	the	peak	of	your	celebration,	when
your	 dance	 is	 at	 the	 ultimate	 climax,	 immediately	 this	 shore	 is	 no	 more	 this
shore;	you	are	on	the	other	shore.	You	are	no	more	in	the	world,	you	are	in	God.
WORSHIPPING	PROSPERS
IN	A	PROPER	CONTAINER.
A	right	container	is	needed.	If	you	are	desiring	to	become	a	container	for	God,	if
you	have	 invited	Him	 to	be	your	guest	and	you	want	 to	be	His	host,	 then	you
will	 have	 to	 learn	 the	ways	 of	 paradise.	You	will	 have	 to	 live	 in	 such	 a	way,
herenow,	 that	 this	 very	moment	becomes	 a	paradise,	Only	 then	 can	you	 invite
God.	 Many	 people	 go	 on	 inviting	 without	 ever	 thinking	 if	 they	 are	 ready	 to
receive.
If	He	comes,	will	He	find	you	ready?	If	He	comes,	will	you	be	able	to	welcome
Him?
Have	 you	 the	 golden	 cup	 ready	 if	He	 pours	 down	 upon	 you?	Where	will	 you
collect	Him?
Is	your	heart	ready,	open	to	receive	Him?	Are	you	receptive,	sensitive?	Nobody
asks	this.
Many	people	come	to	me	and	they	say,	"Where	is	God?"	--	as	if	it	is	God's	duty
to	prove	Himself,	 to	prove	where	He	is.	And	if	He	cannot	prove	Himself,	 then
they	cannot	trust.
God	is	surrounding	you	herenow.	He	is	within	and	without.	Nothing	else	is;	only
God	is.
But	you	are	not	ready.	The	golden	cup	is	missing.	You	don't	have	the	eyes	to	see
Him,	and	you	don't	have	the	ears	to	listen	to	Him,	and	you	don't	have	the	hands
to	touch	Him.
You	are	not	 ready,	and	you	can	receive	only	 that	 for	which	you	are	ready.	Not
even	 a	 single	moment	 is	 lost.	 Once	 you	 are	 ready,	 immediately	 --	 not	 even	 a
single	 moment's	 gap,	 immediately	 the	 moment	 you	 are	 ready	 --	 He	 happens.
Because	He	has	already	happened;	only	your	readiness	has	to	happen.
Even	if	sometimes	we	try	to	be	ready,	our	efforts	are	very	half-hearted.
THE	songwriter,	Bob	Dylan,	gives	us	a	modern	parable	that	expresses	quite	well
what	 I	 wish	 to	 say	 to	 you.	 On	 the	 backside	 of	 his	 album,	 JOHN	WESLEY
HARDING,	we	read	of	three	kings	who	visit	a	man	named	Frank.	The	first	king
explains	their	mission	to	Frank:
"Mr.	Dylan	 has	 come	 out	with	 a	 new	 record.	 This	 record,	 of	 course,	 feature's
none	but	his	own	songs,	and	we	understand	that	you	are	the	key."
"That's	right,"	said	Frank,	"I	am."
"Well	then,"	said	the	king	in	a	bit	of	excitement,	"could	you	please	open	it	up	for
us?"
Frank,	 who	 all	 this	 time	 had	 been	 reclining	 with	 his	 eyes	 closed,	 suddenly
opened	them	both	as	wide	as	a	tiger.	"And	just	how	far	would	you	like	to	go	in?"
he	asked.
The	chief	of	the	kings	replied,	"Not	too	far,	but	just	enough	so	we	can	say	that
we	have	been	there."
Even	when	people	are	seeking	God,	they	want	only	to	go	this	far	--	so	that	they
can	 say	 to	 the	 world	 that	 they	 have	 seen	Him.	 But	 they	 don't	 want	 to	 go	 far
enough	--	because	 if	you	go	 far	enough	 into	God,	you	never	come	back.	They
don't	want	to	take	another	step	--
because	if	you	go	deep,	then	there	comes	a	point	of	no	return.	They	only	want	to
go	a	little	bit,	so	that	they	can	come	back	into	the	world	and	say	to	people	that,
"We	 have	 seen	 God	 also."	 But	 their	 whole	 interest	 is	 in	 the	 world	 and	 the
respectability	 that	 the	world	 can	 give	 to	 them.	They	 have	 a	 big	 bank	 balance,
they	have	a	big	palace	today;	now	they	even	possess	God	in	their	homes.
This	parable	is	beautiful.
Replies	the	chief	of	the	kings,	"Not	too	far,	but	just	enough	so	we	can	say	that
we	have	been	there."
WHEN	you	go	 to	 the	 temple	 you	 are	 still	 not	 going;	 your	 face	 is	 towards	 the
marketplace.
Have	you	seen	it	sometimes	in	you	or	in	others?	--	if	you	are	alone	in	the	temple,
you	don't	enjoy	your	prayer	very	much.	If	there	are	many	people	watching,	then
there	 is	 great	 enthusiasm.	 Then	 you	 are	 so	 full	 of	 spirit.	 Then	 your	 prayer	 is
great,	you	feel	very	high	--
not	because	of	the	prayer,	but	because	the	whole	town	is	watching	you.	And	they
will	 think	how	 religious,	 how	virtuous,	how	close	 to	God	you	are.	You	would
like	them	to	feel	jealous.	It	is	a	performance.	But	your	performance	is	before	the
people;	God	is	out	of	it.	You	are	not	contacting	Him.
Contact	 Him	 alone,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 performance.	 You	 are	 not	 to	 prove
anything	to	anybody,	you	are	just	to	open	your	heart.
The	Bauls	say,
As	you	wonder,	sitting	alone,
the	time	approaches	for	death.
Heedless	of	all,	O	my	insane	heart,
you	have	travelled	eight	million	times
the	painful	ways	of	life	to	death,
to	find	the	measured	land,
the	body	of	the	man.
Why	did	you	let	such	human
earth	turn	to	wasteland?
Cultivated,	it	could	have	yielded
a	harvest	of	gold.
Take	up,	my	heart,	the	spade	of	devotion,
wrench	out	the	weeds	of	sin;
the	seed	of	faith	will	grow.
Just	destroy	obstacles.
Take	up,	my	heart,	the	spade	of	devotion,
wrench	out	the	weeds	of	sin;
the	seed	of	faith	will	grow.
You	are	carrying	the	seed	within	you.	It	is	already	treasured	in	the	deepest	core
of	your	being,	waiting	and	waiting	and	waiting	for	obstacles	 to	be	removed	so
that	it	can	unfold.
God	is	your	intrinsic	quality;	God	is	your	destiny.	You	are	the	seed	and	God	is
going	to	be	the	flower	out	of	this	seed.
Human	limbs	are	held	together
by	a	pair	of	lotus	blossoms
growing	in	the	lower
and	the	upper	regions	of	the	body.
But	the	lotuses	burst	open
in	search
as	the	sun	in	the	body
rises	and	sets.
As	your	awareness	rises	and	sets,	your	innermost	lotuses	open	and	close.	Just	as
in	the	morning	the	sun	rises	in	the	sky	on	the	horizon	in	the	East,	and	the	lotuses
bloom,	when	night	comes	and	the	sun	sets	in	the	West,	the	lotuses	close	again.
The	Bauls	say,	Human	limbs	are	held	together
by	a	pair	of	lotus	blossoms...
...	What	the	yogis	call	CHAKRAS:	the	vortexes	of	energy,	the	wheels	of	energy,
the	seven	CHAKRAS.	Bauls	call	them	the	seven	lotuses.
...growing	in	the	lower
and	the	upper	regions	of	the	body.
But	the	lotuses	burst	open
in	search
as	the	sun	in	the	body
rises	and	sets.
On	which	of	these	blooms
is	the	full	moon	born,
and	on	which
the	darkest	night	of	the	month?
The	lowest	lotus	is	the	sex	lotus.	If	you	remain	there	you	will	remain	in	a	dark
night.	 The	 last	 lotus,	 the	 seventh,	 SAHASRAR,	 is	 the	 lotus	 where	 the	 moon
becomes	full.	Move	from	sex	to	love.	Love	is	the	quality	or	the	function	of	the
man	who	has	come	 to	SAHASRAR;	 sex	 is	 the	quality	and	 the	 function	of	 the
man	who	lives	at	the	lowest	lotus.
And	don't	be	worried,	the	Bauls	sing,.
My	worries	continue
for	my	crumbling	boat
that	can	no	longer	carry.
Water	rushes	through	her	hulk
and	salt	eats	at	her	keel.
My	boat	can	bear	no	more
the	burden	of	water.
O	Master	of	my	life,
open	your	eyes.
Show	me	your	kindness
and	hold	me	as	I	die.
Passions	like	bandits	raided	my	boat
and	went	off	with	the	spoils.
They	cut	the	mooring	rope
and	left	me	adrift.
The	Master	says:
Wash	away	the	stains	of	your	heart
and	your	boat	will	thrive
in	tranquility.
Just	the	stains	on	your	heart	have	to	be	washed	away.	The	heart	just	has	to	drop
doubts,	the	heart	has	to	drop	suspicions.	Once	trust	arises,	you	are	washed	clean.
Trust	is	a	tremendous	cleansing	of	the	heart.	Then	the	lotuses	open.
Sown	on	a	slab	of	stone,
the	seed	of	faith	dries	day	by	day,
never	sprouting.
You	may	cultivate	the	arid	earth,
but	the	hardened	seed
will	yield	no	harvest.
Great	is	the	woodland	where	the	sandal	grows,
and	the	breeze,	bearing	the	scent	of	sandal
perfumes	the	neighboring	trees
turning	them	into	sandalwood.
If	on	a	very	hard	heart	you	want	 to	sow	the	seed	of	God,	 it	will	not	grow.	Let
your	heart	be	soft,	let	it	become	receptive.	Then	it	will	be	like	the	soft	soil	of	the
woodland	where	sandals	grow.	And	these	lines	are	beautiful:
Great	is	the	woodland	where	the	sandal	grows,
and	the	breeze,	bearing	the	scent	of	sandal
perfumes	the	neighboring	trees
turning	them	into	sandalwood.
AND	when	one	man's	seed	flowers	not	only	is	he	perfumed,	all	those	who	come
in	 contact	with	 him	 become	 sandalwood.	Hence,	 the	 glory	 of	 SATSANG,	 the
glory	of	the	presence	of	a	Master.	He	has	become	a	sandalwood.	Just	coming	in
contact	with	him	you	will	be	perfumed,	and	your	own	seed	will	start	sprouting.
Gathering	planks	and	pieces	of	metal
you	build	a	boat	to	float	on	the	sea,
but	the	elements	are	alien	to	water.
The	boat	sails	and	the	boat	sinks
but	the	tie	of	love	is	never	torn.
If	the	vehicle	is	not	right,	if	the	preparedness	is	not	right,	then	the	whole	effort
will	be	lost.	You	can	make	a	heavy	boat,	but	then	it	will	sink.	It	will	not	float	in
the	sea.	The	Bauls	say	that	only	in	the	boat	of	love,	in	soft,	feminine	passivity,	in
the	boat	of	songs	and	dances,	does	one	reach	to	the	other	shore.	Become	more
feminine,	more	soft,	like	soft	soil,	and	throw	out	all	hard	stones	from	your	heart.
We	ordinarily	do	 just	 the	opposite:	we	go	on	gathering	doubts	 and	 suspicions.
We	go	on	destroying	our	own	soil.
WORSHIPPING	PROSPERS
IN	A	PROPER	CONTAINER.
THE	LOVER
WHO	WHOLLY	LOVES,
CAN	REACH	REALITY,
COMPREHENDING	THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
"The	lover	who	wholly	loves,	can	reach	reality,	comprehending	the	unattainable
man...."
Love	is	the	path	of	the	Baul;	love,	and	nothing	else	--	wholly	in	love,	totally	in
love,	total	trust.
To	find	nectar,
stir	the	cauldron	on	the	fire,
and	unite	the	act	of	loving
with	the	feeling	for	love.
ORDINARILY	 people	 love,	 but	 they	 don't	 have	 a	 FEELING	 for	 love.	 They
exploit	love.
They	even	act	 like	 lovers,	but	 their	 love	 is	 in	 the	service	of	gratification.	They
don't	 have	 a	 feeling	 for	 love.	 They	 don't	 love	 love.	 They	 don't	 have	 respect,
reverence	for	love.	Love	remains	a	lust;	it	never	becomes	worship,	prayer.
TO	FIND	NECTAR,
STIR	THE	CAULDRON	ON	THE	FIRE,
AND	UNITE	THE	ACT	OF	LOVING
WITH	THE	FEELING	FOR	LOVE.
DISTILL	THE	SWEETNESS
OF	THE	HEART
AND	REACH	THE	TREASURES,
DEVOTING	YOURSELF
TO	THOSE	WHOLLY	DEVOTED.
If	you	can	find	a	person	who	is	wholly	devoted	to	God,	then	devote	yourself	to
that	person	--	because	love	cannot	be	taught,	it	can	only	be	caught.	Nobody	can
teach	 you	 the	ways	 of	 love;	 you	will	 have	 to	 live	 in	 close	 vicinity	 of	 a	 lover.
Nobody	can	teach	you	how	to	pray:	you	will	have	to	live	in	close	vicinity	of	one
who	 is	 in	 prayer.	Watching	 him,	 feeling	 him,	moving	 around	 him,	 tasting	 the
flavor	of	his	being,	will	teach	you	what	prayer	is.	Then	prayer	will	not	become	a
ritual.	 Then	 prayer	will	 be	 a	 flowering	within	 you,	 a	 spontaneous	 arising	 of	 a
new	vision.
Distill	the	sweetness
of	the	heart
and	reach	the	treasures,
devoting	yourself
to	those	wholly	devoted.
That	is	the	relationship	between	a	Master	and	a	disciple.	Bauls	move	in	search	of
a	 Master.	 Whenever	 they	 find	 somebody	 whose	 song,	 whose	 dancing	 is
prayerful...and	there	is	no	intellectual	criterion	for	knowing	it;	you	have	just	to
be	 with	 someone.	 How	 do	 you	 know	 that	 a	 person	 is	 in	 love?	 What	 is	 the
criterion?	Just	be	with	him	and	see:	see	how	he	behaves,	see	how	he	responds.
See	his	tears	and	his	songs.	Watch	his	moods	in	different	moments.	By	and	by,
you	will	be	able	to	feel	what	worship,	what	love,	what	prayer	is.	Yes,	it	cannot
be	taught,	but	it	can	be	caught.
Will	the	day	ever	dawn
when	the	treasured	man	of	my	heart
will	become	my	own?
Though	not	cast	in	any	shape,
the	man	is	evidenced
in	the	ways	of	love.
There	is	no	proof	for	God,	but	there	is	enough	proof	in	those	people	who	have
loved	Him.	There	 is	no	proof	 that	God	exists,	but	 there	 is	enough	proof	 that	a
Meera	existed,	 that	Chaitanya	existed.	There	 is	enough	proof	because	we	have
seen	 a	 transfiguration	 happening	 in	 Meera,	 we	 have	 seen	 the	 transmutation
happening	 in	 Chaitanya.	 We	 have	 seen.	 They	 were	 ordinary	 metal	 suddenly
becoming	 gold.	We	 don't	 know	 God	 exists;	 there	 is	 no	 proof	 --	 but	 is	 it	 not
enough	proof?	The	Bauls	say,	"The	man	is	evidenced	in	the	ways	of	love."	That
is	the	only	evidence.
VIVEKANANDA	 went	 to	 Ramkrishna.	 He	 wanted	 a	 proof	 for	 God,	 and
Ramkrishna	 started	 laughing	 in	 his	 mad	 way.	 And	 suddenly,	 he	 touched
Vivekananda's	heart	with	his	feet.	Vivekananda	fell	into	a	swoon,	a	trance.	The
friends	 that	 had	 come	 with	 Vivekananda	 were	 all	 worried:	 "What	 has
happened?"	And	Vivekananda	was	 not	 the	 sort	 to	 fall	 easily	 into	 a	 trance.	He
was	 an	 intellectual,	 atheistic,	 skeptical,	 well	 trained	 in	 logic	 and	 philosophy.
What	 had	 happened?	What	 had	 this	man	 done?	And	when	Vivekananda	 came
back,	 he	was	 a	 totally	 different	man.	 Then	Vivekananda	 tried	 in	 thousands	 of
ways	to	escape	from	this	man	Ramkrishna,	but	it	was	impossible.	It	was	as	if	a
great	magnet	was	pulling	him.	He	would	escape	for	a	few	days	and	then	come
back,	almost	against	his	will.	One	day	he	would	again	find	himself	sitting	before
Ramkrishna,	 and	 he	 would	 tell	 Ramkrishna,	 "Leave	 me	 alone.	 Why	 are	 you
haunting	me?"	Ramkrishna	said,	"What	can	I	do?	You	asked,'Is	there	any	God,	is
there	any	proof?'	I	don't	know	any	proof.	All	that	I	know	is	that	He	is	in	me,	so	I
allowed	 Him	 to	 touch	 you.	What	 else	 can	 I	 do?	 Now	 it	 is	 for	 you	 to	 decide
whether	God	is	or	not."
There	is	no	proof,	but	there	are	enough	proofs;	no	direct	proof,	but	many	indirect
evidences.
Will	the	day	ever	dawn
when	the	treasured	man	of	my	heart
will	become	my	own?
Though	not	cast	in	any	shape,
the	man	is	evidenced
in	the	ways	of	love.
Those	who	are	absorbed
by	the	flavours	of	feelings
and	are	wholly	living
with	the	knowledge	of	death
have	won	their	foes	--
pride	and	envy,
lust	and	anger,
ignorance	and	greed.
If	your	life,
flowing	with	life,
longs	for	the	man,
the	man	will	come	with	kindly	steps.
Look	at	the	worlds	of	gods,	demons	and	man	--
all	held	in	your	body.
He	is	already	there.
God	has	already	penetrated	you:	the	news	may	not	have	reached	yet,	the	gospel
may	not	have	been	heard	yet.
The	English	word	'gospel'	is	very	beautiful.	In	the	old	English	it	was	'godspell',
then	it	became	'gospel'.	Godspell	is	even	better.
He	has	already	penetrated	you.	He	is	already	there	but	the	news	has	not	reached
you.
Your	head	is	too	far	away	from	your	heart.	Bring	your	head	a	little	closer.
The	man	is	evidenced	in	the	ways	of	love,	and	the	worlds	of	gods,	demons	and
man	--	all	are	held	 in	your	body.	He	 is	already	 there,	holding	all	 together.	The
Bauls	go	on	crying	and	weeping;	 their	 tears	are	 the	proof.	Their	weeping	 is	so
authentic,	 their	crying	 is	so	authentic	 that	once	coming	 in	contact	with	a	Baul,
you	will	never	ask	whether	God	exists	or	not.
I	shall	not	open	my	eyes	again
if	I	don't	see	Him	at	first	sight.
Can	you	then	tell	me
through	the	sense	of	smelling
and	through	my	listening	ears
that	He	has	come	--
that	He	has	come	to	the	sky	in	the	East	--
that	your	friend	has	come	to	the	sky	of	the	East?
"I	shall	not	open	my	eyes	if	I	don't	see	Him	at	first	sight":	 they	go	on	singing,
praying.
Their	song	 is	so	 true,	 their	prayer	 is	so	penetrating.	How	it	 is	possible	without
God?	Yes,	God	is	evidenced	in	the	ways	of	love.
THE	LOVER
WHO	WHOLLY	LOVES,
CAN	REACH	REALITY,
COMPREHENDING	THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
The	emphasis	 is	on	wholly,	 totally,	utterly,	completely.	 Immediately,	when	you
are	total	you	are	ready,	the	golden	cup	is	ready.
THE	SECRETS	OF	DEATH
ARE	REVEALED	TO	HIM
WHILE	HE	IS	FULLY	ALIVE.
WHAT	DOES	HE	CARE
FOR	THE	OTHER	SHORES	OF	LIFE...?
"The	secrets	of	death	are	revealed	to	him	while	he	is	fully	alive"...and	the	lover
knows	what	death	 is.	The	 lover	knows	 that	death	 is	not.	Only	 the	 lover	knows
that	death	is	the	most	false	thing	in	existence.	Why?	How	does	the	lover	come	to
know	that	death	is	not?	-
-	because	the	lover	has	already	died	in	his	love.	And	he	finds	himself,	he	is	still
there	--
not	only	there	but	more	so,	so	much	so	that	he	has	never	been	before.	Dying,	he
is	for	the	first	time	living	totally.	He	dies	in	the	love	of	God,	in	the	love	of	the
Beloved.	He	surrenders	himself	utterly,	unconditionally.
JUST	 a	 few	days	 ago	Girisha	wrote	me	 a	 letter.	 She	 thinks	 she	 has	 too	much
work	in	the	ashram.	Maybe	that's	true,	maybe	it	is	not	true.	But	in	the	letter	she
wrote	something	which	is	very	meaningful.	She	wrote	in	the	letter,	"I	have	too
much	work	and	it	is	not	surrender,	it	is	sacrifice."	Now	surrender	knows	nothing
about	sacrifice.
If	you	have	known	surrender,	you	are	sacrificed	already.	You	are	no	more	there
to	be	sacrificed.	Surrender	means	you	have	died	already.	If	you	have	surrendered
to	me,	then	there	is	no	problem.	Then,	more	work	or	less	work	--	it	has	nothing
to	do	with	you.	It	is	irrelevant.	Then	I	have	to	look	after	it,	I	have	to	decide	what
work	is	more	and	what	work	is	less.	And	I	have	to	decide	how	much	you	have	to
be	put	into	work	and	how	long,	and	how	much	you	have	to	be	forced	and	pushed
in	 a	 certain	 direction.	 But	 for	 you,	 it	 is	 not	 any	 longer	 a	 problem	 --	 you	 are
surrendered.	But	if	you	think	that	it	is	becoming	a	sacrifice	and	not	a	surrender,
then	 you	 are	 not	 surrendered	 at	 all.	 Then	 anything	will	 look	 like	 sacrifice.	 A
lover	knows	nothing	of	sacrifice.	When	you	are	surrendered,	you	are	dead	as	far
as	your	ego	is	concerned.	Then	whatsoever	happens,	you	not	only	accept	it,	you
accept	in	deep	gratitude.
The	lover	knows	the	secrets	of	death,	because	he	has	moved	into	death	already
through	his	love.	There	are	two	deaths:	one	that	happens	at	the	end	of	your	life,
and	 the	 other	 that	 can	 happen	 between	 death	 and	 birth	 --	 the	 death	 of	 love,
lovedeath.	One	who	dies	 in	 love	never	dies	again.	Then	all	deaths	are	 finished
for	him.	He's	already	resurrected.	He	has	come	to	know	that	only	the	ego	dies.	If
you	drop	the	ego	then	you	are	deathless.
THE	SECRETS	OF	DEATH
ARE	REVEALED	TO	HIM
WHILE	HE	IS	FULLY	ALIVE.
WHAT	DOES	HE	CARE
FOR	THE	OTHER	SHORES	OF	LIFE...?
In	that	tremendous	moment	of	surrender	--	this	shore	turns	to	be	the	other	shore,
this	world	becomes	the	other	world	--	what	cares	he	for	the	other	shore?
I	have	been	reading	a	very	significant	story:
Four	hundred	years	ago	a	gardener	planted	a	small	pine	in	one	inch	of	soil	in	a
shallow	dish.	He	trimmed	each	root	and	branch	as	the	tree	grew.	When	he	died,
his	 son	 took	up	 the	 task,	and	so	on	down	 through	nineteen	generations.	Today
that	tree	stands,	never	having	outgrown	the	original	dish,	in	the	Kovala	Gardens
of	Tokyo.	After	four	hundred	years	it	is	only	twenty	inches	high,	and	a	twisted
top	some	thirty-six	inches	across.
That	 little	 tree	 shouts	 a	warning	 to	 everybody.	 The	mind	 and	 soul	 can	 be	 cut
back	just	like	the	tree,	always	with	the	same	result	--	a	dwarf.
If	you	are	not	growing	your	roots	into	life,	if	you	are	not	growing	your	roots	and
spreading	your	 roots	 in	 love,	 in	 trust,	you	will	 remain	a	dwarf.	You	will	never
become	 the	 essential	man,	ADHAR	MANUSH.	Grow,	 grow	 towards	 depth	 --
because	 when	 your	 roots	 grow	 towards	 depth,	 your	 branches	 grow	 towards
height.	Depth	 and	height	 grow	 together.	The	deeper	 you	go	 into	 the	 earth,	 the
higher	 you	 go	 into	 the	 sky.	 The	 deeper	 you	 go	 into	 this	 shore,	 the	 closer	 you
reach	to	the	other	shore.
LOVE,	love	life,	love	all	that	surrounds	you,	and	let	your	roots	spread	as	far	and
as	wide	as	possible.	You	will	start	 touching	 the	feet	of	God.	Your	flowers	will
start	being	offered	to	the	divine	feet.	Otherwise,	remember	--	you	will	remain	a
dwarf.
Love	is	a	must.	It	is	the	only	nourishment	for	the	soul.	The	body	can	exist	with
food;	the	soul	can	exist	only	with	love.	Let	it	not	remain	just	a	word;	allow	it	to
become	a	penetrating	experience.
Love	is	worship	for	the	Bauls,	love	is	prayer	for	the	Bauls,	love	is	God	for	the
Bauls.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	When	Doubt	Is	Not,	Trust	Is
2	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607020
ShortTitle:
BELOV202
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
73
mins
Question	1
THE	FIRST	QUESTION:
WHY	DOESN'T	TRUST	ARISE	OUT	OF	THE	DECISION	TO	TRUST?
TRUST	 IS	 NOT	 A	 DECISION	 ON	 YOUR	 PART.	 You	 cannot	 decide	 for	 it.
When	you	are	finished	with	doubting,	when	you	have	come	to	see	doubt	through
and	through	and	you	are	completely	convinced	of	the	futility	of	the	doubt,	trust
arises.	You	have	to	deal	with	the	doubt,	you	are	not	to	do	anything	about	trust.
Your	trust	will	not	be	of	much	importance	because	your	trust,	your	decision,	will
always	be	against	doubt.	And	 trust	 is	not	contrary	 to	doubt;	 trust	 is	simply	 the
absence	of	doubt.	When	doubt	is	not,	trust	is.
Trust	is	not	the	opposite,	remember.	Notwithstanding	what	the	dictionaries	say,
trust	is	not	opposite	to	doubt,	just	as	darkness	is	not	opposite	to	light.	It	appears
opposite,	but	 it	 is	not	--	because	you	cannot	destroy	light	by	bringing	darkness
in.	You	cannot	bring	darkness	in.	There	is	no	way	to	destroy	light	by	throwing
darkness	on	it.	Darkness	has	never	been	able	to	destroy	the	small	flame	of	a	very
small	 candle.	 The	whole	 darkness	 of	 the	 existence	 is	 impotent	 before	 a	 small
candle.
Why	 is	 it	 so?	 If	 darkness	 is	 opposite,	 inimical,	 antagonistic,	 then	 it	 should	 be
capable	 sometimes	 of	 defeating	 light.	 It	 is	 sheer	 absence.	Darkness	 is	 because
light	 is	 not.	When	 light	 is,	 darkness	 is	 not.	When	 you	 put	 a	 light	 on	 in	 your
room,	have	you	watched	what	happens?	Darkness	does	not	go	out	of	the	room;	it
is	not	that	darkness	escapes	out	of	the	room.	It	is	found	simply	not	to	be	there.	It
never	was	--	it	is	pure	negativity.
Doubt	is	like	darkness,	trust	is	like	light.	If	you	have	doubt,	then	you	will	decide
for	trust.
Otherwise	there	is	no	need	to	decide	for	trust.	Why	decide	for	it?	You	must	be
having	 tremendous	doubt.	The	greater	 the	doubt,	 the	greater	 the	need	 is	 felt	 to
create	trust.	So	whenever	somebody	says,	"I	trust	very	strongly,"	remember	that
he	 is	 fighting	against	 a	very	 strong	doubt.	That's	how	people	become	 fanatics.
The	 fanaticism	 is	 born	 because	 they	 have	 created	 a	 false	 trust.	 Their	 doubt	 is
alive,	 their	 doubt	 is	 not	 finished.	 The	 doubt	 has	 not	 disappeared,	 the	 doubt	 is
there.	And	to	fight	with	the	doubt	they	have	created	a	trust	against	it.	If	the	doubt
is	very	strong,	they	have	to	cling	fanatically	to	their	trust.
Whenever	somebody	says	that,	"I	am	a	staunch	believer,"	remember,	deep	down
in	his	heart	he	 is	carrying	disbelief.	Otherwise,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	be	a	 strong
believer.	Simple	 trust	 is	enough	--	why	strong?	When	you	say	 to	somebody,	"I
love	you	VERY	strongly,"
something	is	wrong.	Love	is	enough.
Love	is	not	a	quantity.	When	somebody	says,	"I	love	you	very	much,"	something
is	wrong,	because	love	is	not	a	quantity.	You	cannot	love	less	and	more.	Either
you	love	or	you	don't	love.	The	division	is	very	clear-cut.
Just	a	 few	days	ago	a	new	book	had	come,	and	 the	first	copy	I	always	give	 to
Vivek.	I	wrote	 'With	 love	to	Vivek'.	She	told	me,	"Why	not	MUCH	LOVE?"	I
said,	"That	is	 impossible.	I	cannot	write	that"	--	because	to	me,	more	or	less	is
not	 possible.	 I	 can	 simply	write	 'love';'much	 love'	 is	 absurd.	Quantity	 is	 not	 a
question,	but	simple	quality.
When	 you	 say	 'much',	 you	 must	 be	 hiding	 something	 behind	 that	 'much';
something	of	hatred,	something	of	anger,	something	of	jealousy,	but	something
which	 is	not	 love.	To	hide	 that,	you	have	 to	 show	your	over-enthusiasm,	what
you	call	 'gung-ho':	MUCH	 love,	STRONG	 trust,	STAUNCH	belief.	Whenever
you	 are	 too	much	of	 a	Christian,	 you	 are	 not	 a	Christian	 at	 all.	 If	 you	 are	 too
much	of	a	Hindu,	you	have	not	understood	at	all.
Just	the	other	night	a	young	girl	was	saying	to	me	that	she	was	afraid.	She	wants
to	take	SANNYAS	but	she	is	afraid,	"Because	it	will	be	putting	Christ	as	number
two;	you	will	become	the	first."	She	was	very	puzzled.	"It	will	be	putting	Christ
behind	you,"	she	told	me.	I	told	her,	"Just	look	into	my	eyes.	If	you	really	love?
Christ	then	you	will	find	Christ	in	me.	You	will	not	find	two	persons.	But	if	you
are	a	Christian,	then	it	is	difficult.	Then	forget	all	about	SANNYAS."
One	who	loves	Christ	can	love	me;	there	is	no	conflict.	One	who	loves	Krishna
can	love	me;	there	is	no	conflict.	But	if	one	is	a	Hindu,	one	is	a	Mohammedan,
one	is	a	Christian,	then	it	is	difficult.	A	Christian	is	not	a	lover	of	Christ.	To	be	a
Christian	is	a	decision	on	your	part;	doubt	has	not	disappeared,	doubt	has	been
repressed.
Don't	 repress	 doubt.	 Rather,	 just	 on	 the	 contrary,	 watch,	 look	 deeply	 into	 it,
analyze	it.
Don't	leave	any	part	of	it	unanalyzed,	unknown.	Become	acquainted	with	all	the
layers	of	the	doubting	mind.	That	very	acquaintance,	the	penetration	into	doubt,
will	dissolve	doubt.	One	day	suddenly	you	will	awake	one	morning	full	of	trust	-
-	not	as	your	decision.
It	cannot	be	a	decision	because	trust	is	something	you	are	born	with;	doubt	is	a
learned	thing.	Trust	is	tacit,	inborn.
Every	child	trusts.	As	he	grows,	doubt	arises.	Doubt	is	learned.	So	trust	is	there
always	 as	 an	undercurrent	 in	your	being.	You	 just	 drop	doubt,	 trust	will	 arise.
And	then	trust	has	a	tremendous	beauty	because	it	is	pure.	It	is	not	against	doubt,
it	 is	 simply	 absence	 of	 doubt.	The	 rock	has	 been	 removed	 and	 the	 stream	has
come	bubbling	up,	flowing.
So	please,	don't	 try	 to	make	a	decision	about	 it.	Your	decision	will	be	a	delay;
and	the	more	you	decide,	the	more	you	will	find,	deep	inside,	the	worm	of	doubt
increasing.	Then	you	will	be	divided	in	two	and	you	will	never	be	at	ease,	and
there	will	be	continuous	agony.
So	many	 people	 believe	 in	 God,	 and	 deep	 down	 is	 doubt	 --	 throbbing,	 alive,
waiting	for	its	opportunity	to	destroy	the	trust.	And	the	trust	is	bogus	because	the
trust	 is	on	 the	periphery,	and	 the	doubt	has	 reached	almost	 to	 the	very	core	of
your	being.	Never	decide	 about	 love,	 about	 trust,	 about	God.	These	 things	 are
not	your	decisions.	They	are	not	arguments,	they	are	not	conclusions.
When	doubt	is	no	more	there,	trust	is.	It	happens.	It	flows.	It	arises	out	of	your
innermost	core,	from	the	innermost	shrine.	You	start	listening	to	a	new	music	of
being,	a	new	style	of	being,	a	new	way	of	being.	It	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	of	the
being.
The	second	question:
Question	2
WHAT	REALLY	IS	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	A	BAUL,	A	TANTRIKA,
A	 BHAKTA,	 AND	A	 SUFI?	 DO	 THEY	ALL	 BELONG	 TO	 THE	 PATH	OF
LOVE?
THEY	SEEM	TO	BE	INTERMINGLED.	PLEASE	ENLIGHTEN.
THE	boundaries	are	overlapping.	They	are	all	on	the	path	of	love,	but	still	there
are	 subtle	distinctions.	Even	with	overlapping	boundaries	 they	have	 something
special:	a	Tantrika,	a	Baul,	and	a	Bhakta.	Sufi	is	not	different	from	Bhakta.	Sufi
is	the	Bhakta	on	the	Mohammedan	path;	Bhakta	is	the	Sufi	on	the	Hindu	path.
There	is	no	difference	between	a	Bhakta	and	a	Sufi,	so	we	will	not	discuss	that
The	difference	is	only	of	terminology.
The	 Sufis	 use	 the	 Mohammedan	 terminology,	 the	 Bhakta	 uses	 the	 Hindu
terminology.
The	difference	 is	not	of	 any	 importance;	 it	 is	 just	 language.	But	 these	 three:	 a
Baul,	a	Tantrika	and	a	Bhakta	have	to	be	understood.
Love	has	 three	possibilities:	 sex,	 the	 lowest;	 love,	higher	 than	sex;	and	prayer,
the	highest.
The	 Tantrika	 remains	 sex-oriented.	 The	 Tantrika	 in	 fact	 avoids	 love,	 because
love	will	become	an	entanglement.	He	remains	a	pure	technician	of	sex.	With	the
sex	energy	he	works	like	a	scientist:	aloof,	detached.	He	does	not	bring	love	into
it.	 He	 transforms	 the	 energy.	 Love	 arises	 in	 him,	 prayer	 also,	 but	 those	 are
consequences.	They	follow	like	shadows,	but	 the	orientation	is	sex	energy.	His
whole	work,	his	whole	lab,	is	there	at	the	sex	center.	He	works	there,	unattached,
aloof,	 almost	 indifferent	 to	 the	person.	With	whomever	 the	Tantrika	 is	making
love,	 he	 remains	 completely	 aloof,	 far	 away.	 That	 is	 part	 of	 the	 Tantra
methodology:	 that	 you	 should	 not	 be	 attached	 to	 the	 person.	 That's	 why
Tantrikas	say:	"Don't	do	Tantra	techniques	with	your	wife	or	with	your	beloved.
No,	 find	 somebody	 with	 whom	 you	 are	 not	 attached	 at	 all,	 so	 that	 you	 can
become	a	pure	technician."	It	is	scientific.
It	is	just	like	this:	you	may	be	a	great	surgeon	and	you	may	have	done	thousands
of	surgeries,	but	when	it	comes	to	operating	on	your	own	wife	your	hands	will
start	trembling.	If	it	comes	to	operating	on	your	own	child	you	will	have	to	call
another	surgeon.	He	may	be	not	so	expert	as	you,	but	still	you	will	have	to	call
somebody	else	--
because	the	surgeon	needs	to	be	completely	aloof,	not	concerned.	Only	then	can
surgery	be	perfectly	scientific.
The	Tantrik	 is	 absolutely	 of	 the	 scientific	 attitude.	He	will	 find	 a	woman	or	 a
man	 with	 whom	 he	 is	 not	 attached	 at	 all.	 And	 before	 he	 even	 moves	 into	 a
Tantric	 relationship	 with	 somebody,	 months	 are	 needed	 to	 prepare.	 And	 the
whole	preparation	is:	how	to	avoid	love,	how	not	to	fall	into	deep	contact	with
the	other	person.	Otherwise,	the	whole	method	will	not	be	of	any	use.
The	Baul	is	love-oriented.	If	sex	comes	into	a	Baul's	life,	it	is	just	like	a	shadow.
It	is	part	of	his	love.	He's	not	afraid	of	sex,	but	he	is	not	sex-oriented.	He	loves	a
woman:	because	he	 loves	 the	woman	he	wants	 to	 share	 all	 that	he	has,	 sexual
energies	included.	But	sex	is	not	his	lab;	his	lab	is	love,	deep	contact,	care	for	the
other	 person	 --	 so	 much	 so	 that	 you	 become	 less	 important	 and	 the	 other
becomes	more	important.	That	which	is	a	hindrance	on	the	path	of	the	Tantrika	is
the	path	of	the	Baul.	If	sex	comes,	it	is	okay.	If	it	doesn't	come,	that	too	is	okay.
Sex	 is	 not	 the	 goal.	And	 he	 is	 not	working	 on	 the	 crude	 energy	 of	 sex,	 he	 is
working	on	the	subtle	energy	of	love.	As	the	Tantrika	is	working	on	a	seed,	the
Baul	is	working	on	the	flower,	 the	Bhakta	or	Sufi	 is	working	on	the	fragrance.
They	become	more	and	more	subtle.
Prayer	 is	 the	 highest	 form	of	 sex	 energy,	 higher	 than	 love.	 It	 is	 the	 fragrance;
very	 subtle,	 all	 grossness	 gone.	 The	 Bhakta	 or	 the	 Sufi	 works	 on	 prayer.	 If,
following	prayer,	love	enters,	it	is	allowed.	There	is	no	problem	about	it.	Even	if,
following	love,	sex	enters,	it	is	allowed	--	but	the	whole	attention	is	focused	on
prayer.	So	 if	a	Bhakta	 falls	 in	 love	with	 somebody,	 it	 is	a	 form	of	prayer.	The
other	is	divine,	the	other	is	a	god	or	goddess.	He	makes	love	sacred.	The	Baul	is
just	in	the	middle	of	the	Tantrika	and	the	Bhakta	or	Sufi.
He	is	a	bridge.
There	are	difficulties	with	the	Tantrika.	The	difficulty	is:	it	is	very	gross,	and	the
possibility	is	that	you	may	be	lost	in	that	grossness.	It	may	overpower	you.	Sex
is	tremendous	energy,	wild	energy,	very	stormy,	and	you	are	moving	in	an	ocean.
The	 ocean	 is	 in	 deep	 storm,	 and	 you	 have	 a	 very	 small	 boat,	 and	 it	 is	 very
dangerous.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 enter	 on	 the	path	of	Tantra,	 it	 is	 very	difficult	 to
come	 out	 of	 it.	 If	 a	 hundred	 enter,	 only	 one	 may	 survive	 --	 because	 you	 are
playing	with	wild	energy.	The	energy	is	so	great	that	you	may	be	overpowered
by	it;	the	very	possibility	is	there.
Prayer	 is	very	difficult	 --	 fragrance	--	you	cannot	see	 it,	 it	 is	very	elusive.	It	 is
very	difficult	to	enter	on	the	path	of	prayer.	If	you	enter,	you.	come	out	of	it.	It	is
very	 easy	 to	 enter	 on	 the	 path	 of	 Tantra,	 but	 going	 is	 easy,	 coming	 is	 very
difficult.	On	the	path	of	prayer	entering	is	very	difficult,	coming	out	is	very	easy.
The	entry	is	almost	impossible	-
-	you	don't	even	know	anything	about	love;	what	to	say	about	prayer?	It	is	just	a
word	with	no	content.	It	is	too	abstract,	it	is	too	far	away.	You	cannot	make	any
contact	with	it,	with	what	prayer	is.	So,	at	the	most,	you	can	become	a	victim	of
a	 certain	 ritual.	You	can	 repeat	 a	prayer:	 that	will	 be	 just	verbal,	mind-stuff,	 a
mind	game.	It	will	not	be	possible	ordinarily	to	enter	on	the	path	of	prayer.
The	path	of	the	Baul	is	just	in	the	middle.	Entry	is	not	as	easy	as	on	the	path	of
Tantra,	and	not	as	difficult	as	on	the	path	of	prayer.	It	is	humanly	possible.	The
Baul	 is	 very	 realistic,	 very	 down-to-earth,	 and	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 safest	 path
possible.	Just	in	the	middle,	balancing	both	--	on	the	one	hand	sex,	on	the	other
hand	prayer,	and	the	Baul	walks	just	in	the	middle.
The	third	question:
Question	3
YOU	 TELL	 ME	 TO	 FOLLOW	 MY	 FEELINGS,	 AND	 WHEN	 I	 FINALLY
DARE	TO
AND	AM	FEELING	MUCH	FREER	AND	SIMPLER	AND	HAPPIER,	YOU
SAY	I	AM	IMMATURE.	WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN?
IT	is	from	Madhuri.
It	 means	 exactly	 what	 it	 says:	 you	 are	 immature.	 What	 is	 immaturity?
Whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing,	 you	 are	 doing	 almost	 unconsciously.	Yes,	 I	 say	 be
spontaneous,	but	I	don't	mean	be	unconscious.	I	mean	be	alert	and	spontaneous.
By	 'being	spontaneous'	you	immediately	understand	to	become	a	driftwood;	so
whatsoever	happens,	whatsoever	and	wheresoever	 the	mind	 leads	you,	you	are
led	by	it.	You	become	accidental.	Immaturity	makes	a	man	accidental;	maturity
gives	man	a	direction.
Maturity	comes	from	a	Latin	root,	MATURAS,	which	means:	to	be	ripe.	A	fruit
is	mature	when	 the	 fruit	 is	 ripe,	when	 it	 has	become	 sweet	 and	 is	 ready	 to	be
digested,	can	be	eaten,	can	become	part	of	anybody's	life.	A	mature	person	is	one
who	has	come	to	know	what	love	is,	and	love	has	made	him	sweet.
Now	what	Madhuri	 is	doing	 is	not	 love,	 it	 is	 just	 sexual	 fantasy	 --	 so	one	day
moving	with	one	man,	another	day	moving	with	another	man.	This	can	be	very
destructive.
Remember,	 what	 I	 say	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 very	 accurately,	 otherwise	 my
sayings	will	not	be	helpful.	They	will	become	harmful.
It	happened:
Mulla	Nasrudin	 came	 home.	His	wife	 asked	 him,	 "What	 happened,	 Nasrudin,
when	you	asked	your	boss	for	a	raise	today?"
"He	was	like	a	lamb,"	said	Mulla	Nasrudin.
"Really?	What	did	he	say?"
"Bah!"
Please	 listen	 to	what	 I	 say	carefully,	 and	don't	give	 it	your	own	 interpretation.
Don't	 distort	 its	 meaning.	 Be	 spontaneous,	 but	 you	 can	 be	 spontaneous	 only
when	you	are	very	aware.	Otherwise	you	will	become	an	accident	--	one	moment
going	 to	 the	 north,	 another	 moment	 going	 to	 the	 south.	 You	 will	 lose	 all
direction.	A	spontaneous	man	 is	 ready	 to	 respond	 to	each	moment.	Sometimes
some	may	see	that	he	is	moving	to	the	north,	and	sometimes	others	may	see	that
he	is	moving	to	the	south,	but	his	inner	direction	remains	absolutely	certain.	His
inner	 direction	 remains	 arrowed.	He	may	 have	 to	 adjust	 to	 circumstances,	 but
once	adjusted,	he	again	gains	energy,	momentum,	and	starts	moving	towards	his
direction.	He	has	a	feel	for	the	direction,	but	that	feel	comes	only	when	you	are
very,	very	alert.	Otherwise,	just	spontaneity	will	reduce	you	to	being	animals.
Animals	are	spontaneous,	but	they	are	not	Buddhas.	So	just	spontaneity	cannot
make	one	a	Buddha	 --	 something	more,	 something	plus	 is	needed:	 spontaneity
plus	 awareness.	 Then	 you	 are	 not	 a	mechanism,	 and	 you	 are	 not	 a	 driftwood
either.
The	 doctor	 on	 an	 ocean	 liner	 notified	 the	 steward	 that	 a	man	 had	 died	 in	 the
stateroom	number	forty-five.	The	usual	instructions	to	bury	the	body	were	given.
Some	time	later	the	doctor	peeped	into	the	cabin	and	found	the	body	still	there.
He	called	the	steward's	attention	to	the	matter,	and	the	latter	said,	"I	thought	you
said	cabin	forty-nine.	I	went	to	that	cabin	and	noticed	that	one	of	them	was	in	the
bunk.'Are	you	dead,'	says	I?'Pretty	nearly,'	says	he;	so	I	buried	him."
Even	if	a	person	says	that	he	is	pretty	dead,	he	is	alive.	Don't	be	too	linguistic,
don't	be	too	literal.	I	say	listen	to	your	feelings,	but	I	don't	mean	that	you	should
become	 fragmented.	 I	mean:	 listen	 to	 your	 feelings,	 but	 your	 feelings	 have	 to
become	a	garland.
Your	feelings	should	not	be	like	a	heap	of	flowers.	Your	feelings	should	be	like	a
garland,	a	thread	running	inside	the	flowers.	Maybe	nobody	is	able	to	see	it,	but
a	 thread	 is	 joining	 them	in	a	continuity:	 that	continuity	 is	 the	direction.	Unless
your	feelings	are	a	garland,	you	will	disperse	 into	fragments,	you	will	 fall	 into
pieces,	you	will	lose	your	togetherness.
Yes,	 I	had	 told	Madhuri	 to	be	spontaneous,	 to	move	according	 to	her	 feelings.
But	 I	have	been	 insisting	continuously	 to	do	everything,	but	always	 remember
that	awareness	is	a	requirement,	a	basic	requirement	--	then	do	whatsoever	you
want	to	do.	If	there	is	something	you	are	doing	for	which	awareness	becomes	a
hindrance,	 then	don't	do	 it.	 If	 there	 is	 something	you	are	doing	and	awareness
does	not	become	a	hindrance	to	it	but	on	the	contrary	helps	it,	do	it.
That	is	the	whole	definition	of	the	right	and	the	wrong.	The	wrong	is	that	which
cannot	be	done	with	awareness,	 for	which	unawareness	 is	a	must.	The	 right	 is
that	which	can	be	done	only	with	awareness,	 for	which	unawareness	has	 to	be
dropped;	otherwise	it	cannot	be	done.	Awareness	is	a	must.	The	right	is	that	for
which	awareness	is	a	must,	the	wrong	is	that	for	which	unawareness	is	a	must.
That	 is	 my	 definition	 of	 sin	 and	 virtue.	 And	 YOU	 are	 to	 decide;	 the
responsibility	is	yours.
It	happened:
A	worried	woman	went	to	see	her	doctor	and	told	him	that	her	husband	appeared
to	have	no	virility,	and	had	no	interest	in	her	whatsoever.
He	gave	her	a	prescription,	saying	"These	will	help	him.	Next	time	you	and	your
husband	are	having	a	quiet	meal	together,	just	slip	a	couple	of	these	pills	into	his
coffee	and	they	will	make	him	spontaneous.	And	then	come	and	see	me	again."
Two	weeks	later	she	went	to	see	her	doctor	again,	and	he	asked	her	if	his	remedy
had	been	successful.
"Oh	 yes,	 doctor,"	 she	 said.	 "Absolutely	marvelous.	 I	 slipped	 the	 pills	 into	my
husband's	coffee	and	after	two	sips	he	began	making	love	to	me."
The	doctor	smiled.	"Fine.	No	complaints	then?"
She	said,	"Well,	there	is	one.	My	husband	and	I	can't	ever	show	ourselves	in	that
restaurant	again."
Now	remember,	Madhuri,	what	I	say	has	to	be	understood,	because	finally,	you
will	decide	where	to	slip	those	pills.	I	cannot	follow	you.	You	will	decide	where
to	 be	 spontaneous,	 how	 to	 be	 spontaneous	 --	 and	 unconsciousness	 is	 not
spontaneity,	 Spontaneity	 is	 very	 alert,	 very	 responsible,	 very	 caring.	 You	 are
simply	fooling	around.
"You	 tell	me	 to	 follow	my	 feelings	 and	when	 I	 finally	 dare	 to	 and	 am	 feeling
much	 freer	 and	 simpler	 and	 happier,	 you	 say	 I	 am	 immature.	 What	 does	 it
mean?"
I	 give	 you	 a	 certain	 rope	 to	 see	 what	 you	 do	 with	 my	 assertions,	 with	 my
statements.	I	give	you	a	certain	rope,	but	when	I	see	you	are	going	crazy,	then	I
have	to	pull	you	back.
I	 have	 been	 watching,	 waiting	 to	 see	 what	 Madhuri	 is	 doing,	 but	 enough	 is
enough.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote:
Abdul	the	Arab	was	marooned	in	the	desert.	His	camel	had	sat	down	and	flatly
refused	to	get	up.	At	long	last	another	Arab	dropped	by,	and	Abdul	told	him	his
problem.
"I	can	fix	that,"	said	the	second	Arab,	"only	it	will	cost	you	five	shekels."
"That's	cheap	at	the	price,"	said	Abdul,	"so	you	go	ahead."
So	without	further	ado	the	Arab	crouched	down	by	the	side	of	Abdul's	camel	and
whispered	a	few	words	in	its	ear.	Suddenly	the	camel	leapt	 to	its	feet	and	took
off	across	the	desert	like	a	greyhound.
Abdul	was	amazed	and	delighted.	"That	trick	is	worth	more	than	five	shekels,"
he	said.
"I	 know,"	 said	 the	 second	 Arab,	 "and	 I	 want	 five	 hundred	 shekels	 from	 you
before	I	tell	you	the	magic	words	--	you	have	got	to	catch	him."
That	 is	only	half	 the	story:	now	you	will	have	to	catch	him...now	five	hundred
shekels	are	needed.	Unless	the	second	Arab	utters	the	same	mantra	into	Abdul's
ear,	he	cannot	catch	the	camel.
Madhuri,	your	desires	are	running	like	greyhounds.	It	was	easy;	it	cost	you	only
five	 rupees,	 but	 now	 you	 will	 have	 to	 catch	 your	 camel	 and	 it	 will	 cost	 five
hundred	rupees.	It	will	be	more	arduous.
To	just	move	with	desires	one	always	feels	simple,	because	one	becomes	almost
like	 an	 animal.	 It	 is	 almost	 felt	 like	 happiness	 because	 there	 is	 no	 tension,	 no
responsibility.	You	don't	care	a	bit	about	the	other	person.	Now	the	camel	has	to
be	caught.
Oh	yes,	I	 told	you	to	be	free	with	your	feelings;	now	I	 tell	you	to	be	aware.	It
will	be	more	arduous,	but	if	you	can	be	aware,	then	you	will	REALLY	become
simple.	 This	 simplicity	 is	 nothing:	 this	 is	 just	 regression	 into	 childhood,	 or
regression	into	animality.
The	 simplicity	 I	 want	 you	 to	 attain	 is	 the	 simplicity	 of	 a	 Buddha;	 not	 a
regression,	but	the	very	climax	of	life.	This	simplicity	is	not	going	to	help	much.
It	has	not	helped	anybody.
This	simplicity	is	very	primitive,	childish,	immature.
But	 I	 wanted	 to	 see	what	 you	 do,	 and	 I	 have	 seen	what	 you	 are	 doing.	 Now
become	more	 alert.	 Bring	 a	 discipline	 to	 your	 life,	 a	 direction.	 Become	more
caring,	more	 loving,	more	responsible.	Your	body	has	 to	be	respected;	 it	 is	 the
very	 shrine	 of	 God.	 You	 are	 not	 to	 treat	 it	 the	 way	 you	 are	 treating	 it;	 it	 is
disrespectful.	But	 it	will	be	hard,	 I	know.	But	I	create	situations	 in	which	hard
things	have	to	be	done,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	grow.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
WHAT	 IS	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 PATIENCE,	 POSTPONEMENT,
AND
SHEER	STUPIDITY?
YES,	 the	 question	 is	 significant	 because	 people	 can	 get	 confused	 about	 these
three.
Patience	is	very	alert,	patience	is	very	active,	patience	is	very	expectant.	If	you
are	waiting	for	somebody	--	a	friend	is	to	call	--	you	may	be	sitting	just	by	the
door,	but	you	are	very	attentive,	alert.	Any	noise	on	the	road,	any	car	passing	by,
and	 immediately	 you	 start	 looking:	maybe	 the	 friend	 has	 come?	The	wind	 on
your	doors,	and	suddenly	you	are	alert:	maybe	he	has	knocked....	Dead	leaves	in
the	garden	moving	hither	and	thither,	and	you	come	out	of	your	home;	maybe	he
has	come....	Patience	is	as	active	as	that.	It	is	a	waiting.	It	is	not	dull,	it	is	very
radiant.	 It	 is	 not	 unconscious;	 it	 is	 not	 like	 a	 stupor.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 flame	burning
bright.	One	waits.	One	can	wait	infinitely,	but	one	waits,	expectant,	active,	alert,
watchful.
Just	 the	 opposite	 is	 sheer	 stupidity.	 You	 can	 just	 be	 dull,	 idiotic,	 stupid,	 in	 a
stupor,	 and	 you	 can	 think	 that	 you	 are	waiting,	 you	 are	 patient.	 And	 you	 can
enjoy	 that	 others	 who	 are	 working	 hard	 to	 reach	 somewhere	 are	 impatient
people;	you	are	very	patient.	But	remember,	patience	needs	work.	Patience	is	not
inactivity.	A	 patient	 person	works	 patiently.	He	 does	 not	 demand,	 he	 does	 not
demand	 too	 much,	 he	 does	 not	 demand	 in	 a	 hurry,	 he	 does	 not	 demand	 for
instant	 SATORI	 or	 SAMADHI.	 He	 knows	 it	 is	 arduous,	 the	 path	 is	 hard.	 He
knows	 it	 is	difficult;	 a	 thousand	and	one	are	 the	pitfalls.	To	be	 lost	 is	 easy,	 to
achieve	is	difficult.	It	is	almost	impossible	to	achieve,	and	he	knows	it	--	but	that
is	the	attraction,	that	is	the	challenge,	God	is	impossible,	but	that's	the	beauty	of
it,	that's	the	challenge.	The	challenge	has	to	be	accepted.	He	works	hard	at	it	and
yet	 remains	 patient,	 knowing	 well	 his	 limitations,	 knowing	 well	 the	 very
impossibility	of	the	desire.
It	 is	 an	 impossible	passion:	 to	know	God,	 to	be	God.	 It	 is	 unbelievable	 that	 it
happens.
That's	 why	 people	 go	 on	 denying	 that	 Buddha	 ever	 existed	 --	 that	 Jesus	 is	 a
myth,	that	Krishna	is	just	the	imagination	of	the	poets.	Why	do	so	many	people
insist	 that	Buddha	 is	 just	 a	myth,	 that	 Jesus	 and	Krishna	never	 existed?	Why?
They	are	 simply	saying	 that	 the	whole	 thing	seems	 to	be	 impossible;	 it	 cannot
happen.
In	a	way	 they	are	 right:	 it	 cannot	happen;	but	 still	 it	 happens.	 It	 happens	very
rarely.	It	happens	so	rarely	that	you	can	say	that	it	does	not	happen	at	all.	Once	in
a	 while,	 thousands	 of	 years	 pass,	 then	 somebody	 becomes	 enlightened	 --
ALMOST	as	if	it	never	happens.
Knowing	 this,	 one	waits;	 but	 one	does	not	wait	 in	 inactivity,	 because	 then	 the
waiting	will	be	futile.	The	waiting	has	to	be	just	like	the	farmer	waiting.	He	sows
the	 seeds;	 they	will	 come	 in	 season.	 It	 cannot	be	hurried.	There	 is	no	point	 in
going	again	 and	again	 to	 the	 field,	 digging	and	 seeing	whether	 the	 seeds	have
sprouted	yet	or	not,	because	that	will	be	very	destructive.	That	will	not	allow	the
seeds	to	sprout	at	all.	That	impatience	will	destroy	the	seeds.	He	waits,	he	waters
--	nothing	is	seen	for	months.	Nothing	comes	above	the	earth,	but	he	waits	with
deep	 patience,	 goes	 on	working,	 caring	 about	 the	 field,	 praying	 and	 expectant
that	they	are	coming,	that	they	are	on	the	way.	And	one	day,	they	are	there.
Sheer	stupidity	is	hiding	your	inactivity,	your	inertia,	your	lethargy,	in	beautiful
terms.	A	lethargic	person	can	say,	"I'm	not	in	a	hurry,	I'm	waiting,"	and	he	will
not	do	anything.
Then	you	are	waiting	in	vain;	it	is	not	going	to	happen.	Yes,	the	seeds	will	sprout
in	season,	but	the	seeds	have	to	be	sown;	otherwise	they	will	not	sprout.
So	watch	 inside	you.	These	distinctions	 are	 not	 distinctions	of	 one	man,	 these
distinctions	exist	in	each	man.	These	are	not	categories,	that	somebody	is	'sheer
stupid'	 and	 somebody	 is	 'very	 patient'.	 No,	 these	 moods	 exist	 together	 in
everybody.	There	 is	a	stupid	moment	 in	your	 life,	 there	 is	a	patient	moment	 in
your	life,	and	postponement	is	just	in	the	middle	of	these	two.	Postponement	is
very	cunning.
Patience	 is	 alert,	 stupidity	 is	 inactive,	 unconscious.	 Patience	 is	 conscious,
postponement	is	subconscious.	Postponement	has	a	double-bind	in	it:	you	want
to	 do	 something	 and	 yet	 you	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 do	 anything	 for	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 very
cunning	state	of	affairs.	You	want	to	meditate,	but	you	say,	"Tomorrow."	If	you
really	want,	then	today	is	the	right	time,	because	tomorrow	never	comes.	If	you
really	want,	then	meditate	right	now,	because	there	is	no	point	in	postponing	it.
How	can	you	be	certain	that	tomorrow	will	ever	come?
It	may	never	come.	And	if	it	is	really	important	to	you	and	your	desire	is	intense
for	 it,	 then	 you	 will	 not	 waste	 a	 single	 moment	 in	 postponing	 it.	 You	 will
postpone	everything	else,	but	you	will	meditate.	You	postpone	only	that	which	is
not	 significant	 to	 you,	 or,	 you	 are	 playing	 with	 yourself,	 being	 cunning	 with
yourself.	One	part	of	your	mind	says,
"Yes,	it	is	important."	Another	part	of	mind	says,	"Yes,	it	is	important,	I	know;
that's	why	tomorrow	we	will	start."	You	are	satisfied.
A	man	challenged	by	his	good	friend	as	to	who	was	the	more	energetic	person:
the	first	said	he	got	up	at	six,	went	for	a	walk,	breakfasted	at	eight,	did	an	hour's
work,	then	to	the	office,	half	an	hour	for	lunch,	and	so	on.	The	detailed	work	and
alternating	exercise	stretched	out	till	eleven	p.m.
"Well,"	said	the	friend,	"how	long	have	you	been	doing	this?"
"I	start	on	Monday."
God	 is	 always	 postponed,	 love	 is	 always	 postponed,	 meditation	 is	 always
postponed.
Anger,	greed,	hatred,	never;	the	devil,	never.	When	the	devil	invites	you,	you	are
IMMEDIATELY	 ready.	 Immediately,	 instantly	 you	 stand	 up.	 You	 say,	 "I'm
coming!"
When	somebody	insults	you,	you	don't	say	that	"Tomorrow	I	will	be	angry";	but
for	 love	 you	 always	 go	 on	 postponing.	 For	 prayer	 you	 say,	 "Yes,	 it	 has	 to	 be
done."	This	is	a	very	cunning	state.
You	don't	want	to	recognize	the	fact	that	you	don't	desire	prayer,	you	don't	desire
love,	you	don't	desire	meditation.	You	don't	want	to	recognize	the	fact	that	you
don't	have	any	passion	for	God,	so	you	postpone	in	this	way.	You	manage	well	--
you	 go	 on	 doing	 that	which	 you	 really	 desire,	 and	 you	 go	 on	 postponing	 that
which	you	don't	desire	at	all,	but	you	are	not	courageous	enough	to	recognize	the
fact.	At	least	be	honest.	Postponement	is	dishonest,	very	dishonest.	Watch	inside
yourself,	 at	what	 you	 have	 been	 postponing,	 and	 you	will	 find	 that	 all	 that	 is
beautiful	you	have	been	postponing.
It	 is	 a	 double-bind;	 you	 are	 divided,	 or	 you	 are	 playing	 very	 devilry	 with
yourself.
I	have	heard....
A	rabbi	had	the	misfortune	to	run	his	car	into	the	side	of	Father	Murphy's	car.	He
jumped	out	and	went	to	the	other's	door,	loud	with	apologies.
"My	dear	Father	Murphy,	so	sorry	I	am.	Oi	vay!	that	I	should	be	so	silly	as	to	do
this	to	you	of	all	people,	a	fellow	man	of	God!	Are	you	all	right?"
"Oh	yes,	no	injuries,	Rabbi,"	said	Father	Murphy.	"But	I	am	a	bit	shaken	up."
"Of	course	you	are,"	said	the	Rabbi,	solicitously.	"Here,	have	a	sip	of	this	--	it	is
good	whiskey."	And	he	handed	a	hip	flask	to	the	priest	who	drank	heartily.	"Go
on,	Father,	have	another.	 It	 is	all	my	fault.	Drink	deeply,	don't	worry	about	 the
cost."
The	priest	needed	no	second	bidding,	and	 took	another	deep	swig.	 "Won't	you
have	one,	Rabbi?"	he	asked.
"With	the	police	already	arriving!"	exclaimed	the	Rabbi.
The	mind	is	very	cunning.	Everybody's	mind	is	the	mind	of	the	Jew.'Jew'	is	not	a
race;	 it	 is	 the	 innermost	core	of	all	minds.	And	when	you	are	playing	cunning
games	with	others,	by	and	by	you	learn	the	trick	of	playing	with	yourself.	This	is
the	greatest	problem	that	every	human	being	has	to	face.	You	have	been	cunning
with	 others;	 that	 pays	 in	 the	world.	 By	 and	 by,	 you	 have	 learned	 the	 trick	 so
deeply	that	you	forget	 that	now	you	are	playing	the	cunningness	with	yourself.
The	mind	is	very	worldly,	very	Jewish.	It	knows	no	other	business	than	business.
I	have	heard....
Abe	had	reached	retirement	a	very	worried	man.	Most	of	his	life	he	had	enjoyed
to	 the	 full	 and	 his	 savings	 left	 a	 lot	 to	 be	 desired.	 On	 the	 morning	 of	 his
retirement	he	turned	to	Rachel	with	a	worried	frown:	"I	don't	know	how	we	are
going	to	afford	it.	I	don't	know	how	we	can	retire."
Rachel	 reached	for	a	bottom	drawer	and	pulled	out	a	bankbook	which	showed
regular	 deposits	 over	 the	 last	 forty	 years.	Not	 only	 could	 they	 retire,	 but	 they
were	rich.
"But	how	did	you	do	it?"	said	Abe.
Rachel	said	shyly,	"Well,	every	time	you	made	an	advance	to	me	in	our	married
life,	I	put	ten	shillings	away,	and	look	how	it	has	mounted	up."
Overjoyed,	 he	 put	 his	 arms	 around	 his	 wife,	 "Oi	 vay,	 this	 is	 wonderful!	 But
Rachel,	why	on	earth	did	you	not	tell	me	before?	If	only	I	had	known	I	would
have	given	you	all	my	business."
Get	it?
The	mind	 is	 always	 thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 business.	 Even	when	 it	 is	 love,	 it	 is
business.
Even	when	it	 is	prayer,	 it	 is	business.	Even	when	it	 is	God,	it	 is	business.	And
once	you	have	become	too	accustomed	to	the	business	world,	you	start	playing
games	with	yourself.	Be	alert.	Postponement	is	one	of	the	most	dangerous	games
that	a	man	can	play	with	himself.	If	you	want,	do	it.	If	you	don't	want,	be	honest;
who	is	forcing	you?	Just	be	honest.	Don't	do	it,	but	know	well	that	you	are	not
going	to	do	it	because	you	don't	want	to	do	it.	Why	be	deceptive?	This	sincerity
will	help.
As	 I	 see,	 no	man	 can	 live	without	 love	 if	 he	 is	 sincere.	But	many	millions	 of
people	live	without	love	because	they	go	on	postponing.	One	day	they	die,	their
lives	completely	dry	and	desert-like.
As	I	see	it,	no	man	can	live	without	God	--	but	millions	live	because	they	have
created	 a	 false	God,	 a	 substitute	God,	 a	God	which	 is	 always	 postponed.	 It	 is
easy	now;	you	can	live	without	God	because	you	have	a	false	feeling	that	God	is
there,	you	believe	in	Him,	and	one	day	you	are	going	to	devote	your	whole	life
to	Him.	That	'one	day'	will	never	come.	If	you	want	that	one	day	to	come,	it	has
already	arrived	--	it	is	today.	This	moment	is	that	moment	of	transformation.
The	fifth	question:
Question	5
SOMEONE	 HAS	 DARED	 ME	 TO	 ASK	 YOU	 THIS	 IMPERTINENT
QUESTION	--
WHAT	DO	YOU	DO	WITH	VIVEK?	ANYTHING	I	COULD	POSSIBLY
UNDERSTAND	THROUGH	TELLING?
IT	will	be	difficult.
Vivek	 is	so	close	 to	me	 that	she	 is	constantly	on	 the	cross.	She	has	 to	be;	 it	 is
difficult.	 To	 be	 so	 close	 to	me	 is	 arduous.	The	more	 you	 are	 close	 to	me,	 the
more	the	responsibility.
The	more	 you	 are	 close	 to	me,	 the	more	 you	 have	 to	 transform	 yourself.	 The
more	you	feel	the	unworthiness,	the	more	you	start	feeling	how	to	become	more
worthy	 --	 and	 the	 goal	 seems	 almost	 impossible.	 And	 I	 go	 on	 creating	many
situations.	 I	have	 to	create	 them	because	only	 through	friction	does	 integration
happen.	Only	through	harder	and	harder	situations	does	one	grow.	Growth	is	not
soft;	growth	is	painful.
You	ask	me,	"What	do	you	do	with	Vivek?"
I	am	killing	her	slowly.	That	is	the	only	way	for	her	to	get	a	totally	new	being,	to
be	reborn.	It	is	a	cross	to	be	with	me,	and	hard	is	the	task.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote:
An	 unruly,	 problem	 son	 of	 a	 Jewish	 family	 was	 causing	 his	 parents	 much
heartache	by	his	behavior.	He	had	been	expelled	from	a	state	school,	so	finally,
in	desperation,	they	sent	him	to	a	Roman	Catholic	school.	On	his	return	from	his
first	day,	he	went	straight	to	his	room	and	began	to	do	his	homework.
His	 father	 came	 back	 from	 work	 and	 asked,	 "Momma,	 well,	 tell	 me	 the	 bad
news."
"No	bad	news,	Poppa,"	said	momma.	"He	came	in	as	quiet	as	a	lamb,	and	is	now
in	his	room	doing	his	homework	yet."
"Homework?"	exclaimed	Poppa.	"He	has	never	done	homework	in	his	 life!	He
must	be	ill!"	So	Poppa	went	to	the	boy's	room	and	said,	"What	is	this	Momma
telling	me,	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 homework?	Why	 this	 change	 of	 heart,	 all	 of	 a
sudden?"
And	 the	boy	 replied,	 "Poppa,	 I	 am	 the	only	 Jewish	boy	 in	 that	 school.	On	 the
wall	opposite	my	desk	is	a	picture	of	the	last	Jewish	boy	they	had	there.	Oi,	you
should	see	what	they	did	to	him!"....
Jesus	crucified.
To	be	very	close	to	me	is	to	be	on	the	cross.	So	Vivek	has	to	do	her	homework,
that's	all.
That's	what	I	go	on	doing	to	her.	Of	course,	she	has	to	do	more	homework	than
ANY	of	you.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
IN	A	RECENT	LECTURE	YOU	WERE	SAYING,'ON	THE	PATH	OF	LOVE,
FORGET	 ALL	 ABOUT	MEDITATION;	 ON	 THE	 PATH	 OF	MEDITATION,
FORGET
ALL	ABOUT	LOVE.'	I	BELIEVE	MYSELF	TO	BE	RATHER	ON	THE	PATH
OF
MEDITATION,	AND	WHAT	YOU	ARE	SAYING	NOW	ABOUT	THE
INDISPENSABLE	 VALUE	 OF	 LOVE	 IS	 CONFUSING	 TO	 ME.	 I
UNDERSTAND
THAT	SPEAKING	OF	THE	BAULS	YOU	HAVE	BECOME	A	BAUL,	AND
ARE
FULLY	IN	THE	PATH	OF	LOVE.	HOW	SHOULD	I	THEN	HEAR	THOSE
LECTURES?	 AND	WHAT	 IS	 THE	 IMPORTANCE	OF	 LOVE,	 EMOTIONS
AND
FEELINGS	ON	THE	PATH	OF	MEDITATION?
IF	I	am	talking	about	the	Bauls	and	love	and	devotion	and	prayer,	and	you	are	on
the	 path	 of	 meditation,	 listen	 to	 me	 meditatively,	 that's	 all.	 Just	 listen	 to	 me
meditatively;	 then	 you	will	 be	 growing	 in	meditation	 through	 listening.	 Don't
listen	 through	 the	 intellect.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 because	 you	 are	 on	 the	 path	 of
meditation,	so	you	need	not	worry	about	the	details	of	what	I	am	saying.	You	can
listen	very	silently	without	being	at	all	worried	about	what	I	am	saying,	what	the
details	are.	You	can	simply	listen	in	deep	meditation.
Let	 listening	 be	 your	meditation,	 and	 that	 will	 do.	 But	 if	 you	 listen	 from	 the
intellect	that	will	create	confusion.	If	I	am	talking	on	the	path	of	meditation	and
you	are	on	the	path	of	 love,	 listen	 to	me	lovingly.	You	don't	 lose	 track	of	your
path.	 And	 then,	 whether	 I	 am	 talking	 on	 love	 or	 on	 meditation,	 you	 will	 be
fulfilled.	Your	own	path	will	be	strengthened.	Your	will	will	be	made	stronger.
The	last	question:
Question	7
BELOVED	OSHO,	PLEASE	HELP	ME.	SHOW	ME	MY	PATH:	LOVE	OR
MEDITATION.	GIVE	ME	ONE	SUTRA	SUITABLE	TO	MY	NATURE.
It	 is	from	Neelam.	I	know	her.	I	have	known	her	long	enough,	not	only	in	this
life,	 but	 in	 other	 lives	 also.	Her	 path	 is	 absolutely	 certain:	 it	 is	 love.	Through
love	she	is	going	to	achieve.	Through	love	she	is	going	to	be.	Through	love	all
that	can	happen	will	happen	to	her,	and	I	can	say	it	absolutely.	I	may	not	be	so
certain	when	others	ask	me.	Somebody	who	has	come	very	 recently,	 I	have	 to
know	better,	to	penetrate	him	more,	to	watch	him	in	different	situations,	to	watch
his	 moods,	 subtle	 layers	 upon	 layers	 of	 being,	 then...	 but	 about	 Neelam	 it	 is
absolutely	certain.	I	have	known	her	in	this	life,	I	have	known	her	in	other	lives.
Her	direction	is	absolutely	clear:	love	is	her	meditation.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Close	Your	Eyes	And	Try	To	Catch	Him
3	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607030
ShortTitle:
BELOV203
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
84
mins
NEVER	PLUNGE	INTO	THE	RIVER	OF	LUST,
YOU	WILL	NOT	REACH	THE	SHORES.
IT	IS	A	RIVER	OF	NO	COASTS	WHERE	TYPHOONS	RAGE.
GO	TO	THE	HOME	OF	BEAUTY	AND	FORM,
SHOULD	YOU	WISH	TO	SEE	THE	MAN	WITHIN.
HIS	WAYS	CROSS	THE	SPHERE
WHERE	LIFE	LIVES	WITH	DEATH,
AND	SENSE	WITH	INSANITY.
CLOSE	YOUR	EYES	AND	TRY	TO	CATCH	HIM.
HE	IS	SLIPPING	BY.
JEAN-PAUL	SARTRE	says	 that	man	is	a	useless	passion.	Meaningless.	Futile.
He	is	right	if	there	is	nothing	beyond	man;	if	there	is	nothing	transcendental	to
man,	he	 is	 right	because	 the	meaning	always	comes	from	a	higher	source.	The
meaning	is	never	in	the	thing	in	itself;	it	always	comes	from	the	beyond.
For	example,	you	can	watch	a	seed;	in	itself	it	is	meaningless	unless	it	sprouts.
Once	 it	 sprouts	 it	 becomes	meaningful.	 The	 tree	 is	 the	meaning	 for	 the	 seed.
Now	 the	 seed	 exists	 for	 a	 certain	 reason.	 Its	 existence	 is	 not	 accidental,	 it	 is
meaningful.	 It	 has	 to	 give	 birth,	 it	 has	 to	 create	 something;	 something	 that	 is
beyond	 it,	 something	 that	 is	 bigger	 than	 it,	 something	 that	 is	 more
comprehensive.
But	 then,	what	 is	 the	meaning	of	 the	 tree	 in	 itself?	Again	meaning	disappears
unless	the	tree	can	flower.	The	meaning	of	the	tree	is	in	the	flowering.	When	it
flowers,	yes,	there	is	meaning:	the	tree	has	become	a	mother,	the	tree	has	given
birth,	the	tree	has	become	significant.	It	was	not	there	without	any	purpose;	the
flower	is	the	proof.	It	was	there	meaningfully,	it	was	there	waiting	for	the	flower.
But	what	is	the	meaning	of	the	flower	in	itself	unless	the	fragrance	is	released	to
the	winds?	Once	 the	 fragrance	 is	 released	 the	 flower	 is	meaningful,	 and	 so	on
and	so	forth.
The	meaning	is	always	in	a	higher	state.	The	meaning	is	always	of	the	beyond.
The	 meaning	 is	 transcendental.	 If	 there	 is	 nothing	 beyond	 man,	 Sartre	 is
absolutely	 right:	 then	 man	 is	 a	 useless	 passion	 running	 here	 and	 there,	 but
doomed	to	failure.	He	cannot	reach,	cannot	arrive,	because	there	 is	nowhere	to
arrive.	 He	 cannot	 become,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 beyond	 to	 become.	 He	 cannot
spread,	 cannot	 flower,	 cannot	 release	 the	 fragrance.	 If	man	 ends	with	 himself,
then	man	is	certainly	useless.
But	man	doesn't	end	with	himself;	he	is	a	growth.	Man	is	a	becoming,	a	growing,
a	continuous	transcendence.	Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	said,	"That	day	will	be	the
most	unfortunate	day	when	man	will	not	aspire	to	become	higher,	when	man	will
not	aspire	to	transcend	himself.	That	day	will	be	the	most	unfortunate	when	the
arrow	of	man's	desire	will	not	be	moving	higher	than	man,	when	there	will	be	no
target	to	reach,	when	man	will	be	confined,	closed	in	himself.	That	day	will	be
the	most	unfortunate	day."
It	 seems	 the	modern	man	 is	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 that	 unfortunate	 day.
That	doomsday	is	coming	closer	and	closer	every	moment,	and	Sartre	is	going	to
be	true	if	you	allow	him	to	be	true.	If	you	allow	him	and	you	remain	a	seed	and
don't	 sprout,	 if	 you	 allow	 him	 and	 you	 remain	 a	 tree	 and	 don't	 flower,	 if	 you
allow	 him	 and	 you	 remain	 a	 flower	 and	 don't	 release	 your	 fragrance,	 then,	 of
course,	life	is	hell	--	just	absurd,	not	worth	living.	Then	to	be	born	is	to	be	born
in	misery.	Then	death	is	a	blessing	and	life	is	a	curse.
But	 it	 is	 not	 so;	 it	 depends	 on	 you	 whether	 your	 life	 will	 be	 meaningful	 or
meaningless.	It	depends	on	you.	That	is	the	whole	point	of	religion:	that	meaning
is	not	already	given,	it	has	to	be	created.	That	meaning	is	not	already	transferred
to	you;	only	 the	potentiality,	only	 the	possibility,	only	 the	opportunity	 is	 there.
You	 can	 flower	 into	 a	meaningful	 existence,	 or	 you	 can	wither	 away,	 useless.
Great	is	the	responsibility.	If	you	don't	do	it,	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.	You
cannot	 rely	 on	 servants.	Life	 is	 so	 valuable;	 you	 cannot	 rely	 on	 anybody	 else.
You	will	have	to	take	control	of	 the	whole	situation,	and	you	will	have	to	take
the	responsibility	on	your	shoulders.
YOU	become	 a	man	 really,	 the	 day	 you	 become	 responsible	 for	 your	 growth.
You	become	a	man	really,	the	day	you	decide	that	you	have	to	create	meaning	in
your	life.
You	are	given	a	blank	page:	you	will	have	to	sign	it,	and	you	will	have	to	write
your	song	on	 it.	The	song	 is	not	already	 there.	You	are	 there;	 the	possibility	 is
there	--	but	the	song	has	to	be	sung,	the	dance	has	to	be	danced.	The	dancer	is
there,	but	what	is	the	meaning	of	a	dancer	if	he	has	not	danced	yet?	Even	to	call
him	a	dancer	is	meaningless,	because	unless	he	dances	how	can	you	call	him	a
dancer?	Unless	 a	 seed	 becomes	 a	 tree	 it	 is	 just	 a	 name,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 seed.	And
unless	 a	 tree	 flowers	 it	 is	 just	 a	 name,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 tree.	 And	 unless	 a	 flower
releases	its	fragrance,	it	is	just	a	name,	it	is	not	yet	a	flower.
You	create	your	being	continuously.	And	if	you	don't	create,	you	will	be	just	a
driftwood,	accidental,	moving	here	and	there	with	no	direction.
The	Bauls	start	from	the	first	step.	They	have	a	whole	vision,	a	whole	perception
of	 all	 the	 possibilities	 of	man,	 of	 all	 the	 rungs	 of	 the	 ladder.	The	 first	 rung	 is
libido,	 lust,	 sex-energy.	 And	 sex-energy	 has	 continuously	 puzzled	 man.	 If	 it
remains	just	sex,	it	will	become	meaningless.	Then	you	will	be	in	a	rut.
SEX	is	meaningful	only	when	out	of	lust,	love	is	born.	Love	is	meaningful	only
when	out	of	 love,	 prayer	 is	 born.	 If	 your	 sex	 remains	 just	 sexuality,	 a	 circular
repetition,	 a	 mechanical	 thing	 that	 you	 go	 on	 doing,	 then	 you	 will	 remain
meaningless.	 Because	 sex	 is	 your	 energy;	 it	 has	 to	 be	 transformed.	 It	 is	 very
crude,	 it	 is	 raw	material.	Much	has	 to	be	done	on	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 raw	diamond.	you
have	to	cut	it,	you	have	to	polish	it,	you	have	to	give	it	a	shape	and	a	form.	You
have	to	give	it	beauty.	It	depends	on	you.	If	you	go	on	carrying	the	raw	stone,	it
is	valueless	--	not	only	 that,	 it	will	be	a	burden	on	you.	It	 is	better	 to	 throw	it,
better	 to	throw	it	 than	to	carry	it.	Why	carry	it	unless	something	higher	can	be
evolved	out	of	it?
Always	remember	this:	Bauls	are	not	against	sex,	against	lust.	But	they	say	that
if	you	remain	confined	to	lust,	you	will	be	lost.
NEVER	PLUNGE	INTO	THE	RIVER	OF	LUST,
YOU	WILL	NOT	REACH	THE	SHORES.
IT	IS	A	RIVER	OF	NO	COASTS
WHERE	TYPHOONS	RAGE.
What	do	they	mean?	--	'the	river	of	lust,	it	has	no	shores,	and	if	you	plunge	into
it	you	will	be	lost'.	One	has	to	rise	above	it.	It	is	not	that	something	is	wrong	in
it,	 remember	 this	point.	Don't	conclude	 that	Bauls	are	saying	 that	something	 is
wrong	 with	 sex.	 They	 are	 simply	 saying	 that	 the	 wrong	 arises	 when	 you	 are
confined	to	it.	If	you	can	use	it,	if	you	can	make	a	stepping-stone	out	of	it,	if	you
can	go	higher	than	it,	then	it	is	beautiful.	It	has	been	a	great	help.	Without	it,	it
would	have	been	impossible	to	rise	above	it.
Lust	in	itself	is	like	a	seed:	just	pure	possibility	waiting	for	the	right	soil,	waiting
for	the	right	season,	waiting	for	the	gardener,	the	skillful	man	who	can	help	it	to
sprout.	A	seed	is	not	actual,	just	potential.	There	is	no	necessity	for	it	to	become
a	tree.	It	may	not	ever	become;	it	may	be	lost	completely.	If	you	put	that	seed	on
a	stone,	it	will	remain	a	seed.
Ages	can	pass	and	the	seed	will	not	sprout.	Many	people	are	like	that	seed:	those
who	 have	 not	 found	 their	 soil	 yet,	who	 have	 not	 found	 their	 right	 season	 yet.
These	are	the	worldly	people.	A	religious	person	is	one	whose	seed	has	reached
to	the	right	soil,	and	is	disappearing.	When	the	seed	disappears,	the	tree	is	born.
When	you	disappear,	then	the	soul	is	born.	When	the	soul	disappears,	the	God	is
born.
You	exist	like	the	hard	shell	of	a	seed	--	that	is	the	ego	of	man.	The	worldly	man
is	the	egoistic	man;	the	non-worldly	man	is	the	humble	man.	By	'humble'	a	very
simple	 thing	 is	meant:	he	 is	disappearing	as	a	 seed,	he	 is	 ready	 to	die	 into	 the
earth.	The	word	'humble'
comes	from	HUMUS.	HUMUS	means	'the	earth'.	The	humble	man	is	one	who	is
ready	 to	disappear	 into	 the	earth.	The	humble	man	 is	one	who	 is	 ready	 to	 lose
himself.
Jesus	says	again	and	again	that	if	you	don't	lose	yourself	you	will	not	regain,	if
you	don't	 lose	yourself	you	will	never	be:	"Blessed	are	 those	who	are	ready	 to
lose."	What	does	he	mean?	He	means,	blessed	is	the	seed	that	loses	its	hard	shell,
becomes	vulnerable,	opens	its	soft	heart	to	the	soil	so	the	soil	can	work	on	it,	and
moves	 into	 the	 unknown;	 drops	 the	 confinement	 with	 the	 known,	 drops	 the
commitment	 with	 the	 known,	 and	 becomes	 committed	 with	 the	 unknown.
Dangers	are	there	--	storms	will	be	there,	clouds	and	thunder	and	lightning.
For	a	small	plant	the	whole	world	is	a	crisis,	a	thousand	and	one	risks.	For	the
seed	there	is	no	danger.	The	seed	is	closed,	windowless.	It	is	in	an	imprisonment
--	protected,	well-protected.	But	a	small	plant	is	very	fragile.	Watch	it:	a	seed	is
very	hard,	secure;	the	plant	is	fragile	and	soft,	and	can	be	destroyed	very	easily.
And	the	flower	is	still	more	fragile	--
as	fragile	as	a	dream,	as	fragile	as	a	poem.	And	the	fragrance	is	still	more	fragile
--	it	almost	disappears,	becomes	indefinable.	All	growth	is	towards	the	unknown,
towards	the	soft,	towards	the	fragile,	towards	the	indefinable.
GROWTH	is	 towards	disappearance.	Only	 the	gross	appears;	God	 is	 invisible.
Only	 matter	 appears;	 mind	 is	 invisible.	 Only	 the	 gross	 can	 be	 touched,	 is
tangible,	but	the	subtle	is	intangible.	That's	why	God	cannot	be	seen	--	because
God	is	the	fragrance	of	the	flower	--	very	subtle,	very,	very	subtle.
Remember,	with	the	gross	there	is	more	security.	Lust	is	more	secure	than	love;
love	 is	more	 secure	 than	 prayer.	And	 if	 you	 are	 looking	 for	 security	 you	will
remain	confined	in	lust.
Many	people	are	born	in	sex.	Nothing	is	wrong	with	that;	everybody	has	to	be
born	in	sex.	The	problem	arises	when	many	people	live	only	in	sex,	and	die	also
in	sex.	That	means	 that	 there	has	been	no	growth,	no	evolution.	Being	born	 in
sex	is	perfectly	natural,	but	to	die	in	it?	Then	what	is	the	point?	Then	what	is	the
meaning	of	being	born?	Then	you	have	not	grown;	then	nothing	has	happened	to
you.
I	was	 reading	 about	 one	 old	man,	 an	 old	man	 of	 almost	 eighty-five	 years.	He
went	to	his	doctor,	and	he	said,	"Doctor,	I	am	becoming	impotent."
The	doctor	looked	at	him	and	said,	"Oh?	And	when	did	you	first	notice	this?"
The	old	man	said,	"Last	night	and	again	this	morning."
People	live...	the	longer	you	live	in	lust,	the	uglier	becomes	your	being.	And	if
you	have	 to	 also	die	 in	 it,	 then	 the	whole	 life	was	 a	wastage.	You	never	 even
went	a	step	further	than	your	birth.	Birth	is	of	course	natural;	it	has	to	be	in	sex.
But	death	need	not	be.
I	have	heard....
Little	Sammy	was	busy	doing	his	homework	while	waiting	with	his	Mummy	in
the	 baby	 clinic.	He	 turned	 to	 his	Mum	 and	 said,	 "Mummy,	where	 did	 I	 come
from?"
She	said,	"Ach...ah,	the	stork	brought	you,	darling."
"Where	did	you	come	from?"
"Oh,	the	stork	brought	me	too."
"And	where	did	Grandmamma	come	from?"
"Why,	Grandmamma	was	found	under	a	gooseberry	bush."
So	he	continued	his	essay	and	wrote,	"It	seems	that	there	has	not	been	a	natural
birth	in	our	family	for	three	generations!"
To	be	born	in	sex	is	natural;	one	need	not	be	defensive	about	it.	But	to	die	in	sex
is	unnatural.	From	sex	one	should	step	higher.	From	the	seed	to	the	fragrance	is
the	evolution.
But	many	people	live	a	repetitive	cycle:	they	go	on	moving	in	a	routine.	They	go
on	doing	things,	not	even	aware	of	what	they	are	doing,	not	even	aware	of	how
many	 times	 they	 have	 done	 the	 same	 thing,	 not	 being	 aware	 that	 it	 brings
nothing.	 But	 they	 go	 on	 doing	 it,	 not	 knowing	 what	 else	 to	 do.	 They	 remain
occupied	in	the	same	circular	way.
That's	why	in	the	East	we	call	it	SAMSAR,	the	wheel.	The	world	is	called	'the
wheel'.
Just	as	when	a	wheel	goes	on	moving	and	the	same	spokes	go	on	turning	up	and
down,	 up	 and	 down,	 up	 and	 down:	 if	 your	 life	 is	 like	 a	 wheel	 and	 the	 same
spokes	go	on	moving,	your	life	will	not	have	any	meaning	--	because	meaning
arises	only	when	you	take	a	step	beyond	yourself.	And	remember	this	too:	if	you
take	a	step	beyond	and	then	you	are	stuck	there,	again	meaning	disappears.
SO	 meaning	 is	 in	 the	 new.	 And	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 constantly	 meaningful,
eternally	meaningful,	then	you	have	to	go	on	growing	and	growing	and	growing.
If	you	are	stuck	anywhere,	meaning	immediately	disappears.	Meaning	is	not	in
being	stuck,	meaning	is	in	flow,	meaning	is	in	evolving	--	so	remember	it.	You
can	 get	 stuck	 at	 love;	 then	 again	meaning	 disappears,	 then	 again	 you	 become
stale.	Then	the	river	is	moving	no	more.
Again	you	will	 become	dirty;	 flow	 is	 lost.	And	when	 the	 river	 is	 flowing	 it	 is
fresh;	when	the	river	is	not	flowing	it	becomes	stagnant.
The	same	is	true	about	life.
If	 you	 get	 stuck	 at	 love,	 again	 flow	 is	 lost.	 Again	 you	 are	 in	 a	 rut.	 Prayer	 is
needed...and	 there	 are	 higher	 things	 than	 prayer.	 Prayer	 is	 the	 last	 that	 can	 be
defined;	prayer	is	the	last	that	can	be	talked	about	--	that	too,	not	adequately,	but
very	inadequately.	But	prayer	is	the	last,	the	horizon.	Not	that	on	the	horizon	the
earth	stops;	not	that	on	the	horizon	the	sky	finishes.	The	horizon	simply	shows
our	limitation:	our	eyes	cannot	go	beyond	it,	 that's	all.	Prayer	 is	 the	horizon	of
the	libido	energy,	but	it	 is	not	the	end.	There	are	higher	things	than	prayer,	but
words	don't	exist	for	those	things.	When	you	reach	to	prayer	then	you	will	know
that	there	are	higher	things	than	prayer,	and	growth	is	eternal.
People	 are	 almost	 dead	 because	 they	 are	 stuck.	 They	 go	 on	 seeking	 the	 same
thing	again	and	again.	Watch	it.
One	 should	 be	 in	 search	 of	 the	 new.	The	 very	 search	 renews	 you,	 rejuvenates
you.	 If	 you	 have	 some	 beautiful	 experience	 today,	 don't	 ask	 again	 for	 it
tomorrow	because	now	it	is	meaningless	--	you	have	known	it,	it	is	finished.	Ask
for	 something	more,	 seek	 for	 something	new,	grope	 for	 the	unfamiliar	 and	 the
unknown.	 Go	 beyond	 it.	 It	 was	 beautiful	 but	 don't	 try	 to	 repeat	 it,	 because
repetition	 kills	 beauty.	 Repetition	 makes	 everything	 boring.	 And	 once	 you
become	 accustomed	 to	 boredom	 you	will	 become	 dead.	 Then	 you	will	 go	 on
revolving.
I	have	heard....
It	was	a	gay	party.	Wine,	whiskey	and	wit	flowed	freely.	An	obsequious	waiter
offered	 a	 tray	 with	 drinks	 to	 a	 solemn,	 stern-looking	 man,	 obviously	 a
clergyman.	 The	 Father	 looked	 sternly	 at	 him	 and	 said,	 "No	 thanks,	 I	 do	 not
drink."
The	waiter	 left,	but	 soon	enough	another	appeared	on	 the	 scene	with	a	 second
tray.	The	God's	good	man	gave	him	a	withering	glare.	"Don't	you	know	I	do	not
drink	at	all?"	And	he	added	as	an	afterthought,	"I	would	rather	commit	adultery
than	imbibe	alcohol.
Mulla	Nasrudin,	his	neighbor,	leisurely	sipping	his	scotch,	got	up	with	alacrity,
put	 down	 the	 glass	 and	 exclaimed,	 "Good	 heavens,	 I	 had	 no	 idea	 there	was	 a
choice!"
People	 are	 continuously	 obsessed	 with	 sex.	 And	 there	 are	 two	 ways	 to	 be
obsessed	with	sex:	one	is	the	ordinary	man's	way.	But	both	remain	obsessed	with
lust	 --	 one	 for,	 the	 other	 against.	 Their	 constant	 fixation	 is	 sex;	 neither	 goes
beyond	it.
Bauls	 don't	 belong	 to	 either	 category.	 They	 don't	 belong	 to	 the	 worldly	 man
because	they	go	beyond	sex.	They	don't	belong	to	the	austere	man	because	they
are	not	against	sex.
They	don't	 belong	 to	 the	 so-called	 religious	man,	 the	monk,	 because	 they	 say,
"Sex	is	your	energy;	it	has	to	be	used.	Of	course,	it	has	to	be	refined,	but	it	has
not	to	be	condemned."	How	can	you	refine	a	stone	and	make	a	diamond	of	it	if
you	are	condemnatory	about	it,	if	you	throw	it?	And	if	you	start	escaping	from	it,
how	can	you	refine	it,	how	can	you	polish	it,	how	can	you	make	a	valuable	thing
out	of	it?	So	there	are	two	types	of	fixations	in	the	world:	the	people	who	think
sex	 is	 life,	 and	 the	 people	who	 think	 to	 fight	 with	 sex	 is	 life	 --	 and	 both	 are
wrong.	To	use	sex	creatively;	that	is	the	goal	of	the	Baul.
MULLA	NASRUDIN	constantly	irritated	his	friends	with	his	eternal	optimism.
No	 matter	 how	 bad	 the	 situation,	 he	 would	 always	 say,	 "It	 could	 have	 been
worse."	 To	 cure	 him	 of	 this	 annoying	 habit	 his	 friends	 decided	 to	 invent	 a
situation	so	completely	black,	so	dreadful	that	even	Nasrudin	could	find	no	hope
in	it.
Approaching	him	at	the	club	bar	one	day,	one	of	them	said,	"Mulla,	did	you	hear
what	happened	to	George?	He	went	home	last	night,	found	his	wife	in	bed	with
another	man,	shot	them	both,	then	turned	the	gun	on	himself."
"Terrible,"	said	the	Mulla,	"but	it	could	have	been	worse."
"How	in	the	hell,"	asked	his	dumbfounded	friend,	"could	it	possibly	have	been
worse?"
"Well,"	said	Nasrudin,	"if	it	had	happened	the	day	before,	I	would	be	dead	now."
People	are	in	a	rut,	repeating	the	same	again	and	again	and	again	and	again.	It
seems	 their	 eyes	 are	 completely	 closed.	 It	 seems	 they	have	no	 idea	of	what	 is
possible.	It	seems	nobody	has	given	them	even	a	glimpse	of	the	beyond.	It	seems
that	 they	 have	 never	 looked	 towards	 the	 heights.	 They	 have	 not	 seen	 the	 sky;
they	go	on	crawling	in	the	mud.
Nothing	 is	wrong	 essentially	 in	 the	mud;	 it	 is	 beautiful	 if	 you	 can	 stand	 in	 it,
rooted,	grounded,	 and	your	 eyes	can	move	 towards	 the	heights.	Then	 the	very
quality	of	the	mud	is	transformed.
NEVER	PLUNGE	INTO	THE	RIVER	OF	LUST,
YOU	WILL	NOT	REACH	THE	SHORES.
IT	IS	A	RIVER	OF	NO	COASTS
WHERE	TYPHOONS	RAGE.
And	 you	 all	 must	 have	 felt	 that	 whatsoever	 you	 call	 love	 brings	 misery	 and
nothing	else:	conflict,	agony,	suffering.	Whatsoever	you	have	called	 love	gives
you	hell	and	nothing	else.	But	still,	 somehow	you	manage	 to	 remain	 in	 it,	you
manage	not	to	see	beyond	it.
It	happened:	A	very	wise	old	man	was	approached	by	his	son.	"Father,"	said	the
son,	"I	want	to	get	married."
"No,	my	boy.	You	are	not	wise	enough,"	said	the	old	man.
"When	will	I	be	wise	enough?"	asked	the	lad.
The	old	man	said,	"When	you	get	rid	of	the	idea	that	you	want	to	get	married,
then	you	will	be	wise	enough,	and	then	you	can	get	married."
IT	seems	paradoxical;	it	is	true:	when	you	are	no	longer	occupied	with	sex,	when
it	 is	 no	 longer	 an	 obsession,	 a	 neurosis,	 you	 are	 wise	 enough	 to	 go	 into	 it	 --
because	 then	you	can	use	all	 the	possibilities	 that	become	available	 through	 it.
Then	it	is	not	just	fun;	then	it	is	not	just	passing	time;	then	it	is	not	just	a	search
for	oblivion.	Then	it	becomes	a	creative	act	on	your	part.	Then	you	are	creating
something	out	of	this	tremendous	energy.	It	is	God's	gift.	Bauls	call	it	 lust	--	if
you	remain	confined	in	it.	If	you	can	go	beyond	it,	it	starts	changing	its	form,	it
starts	changing	its	quality.
The	Bauls	sing,
Plough-man,	are	you	out	of	your	wits
not	to	take	care
of	your	own	land?
A	squadron	of	six	birds
is	picking	at	the	rice,
grown	golden	and	ripe,
in	the	field	of	your	limbs.
Farming	the	splendid
measured	land
of	this	human	body,
you	raise	the	crop,
the	devotion	to	God.
But	passions	eat	at	it
like	sparrows.
The	fence	of	consciousness
is	down	to	dust,
leaving	open	gaps.
Cattle	clamber	up
and	feast	on	your	harvest....
Shame	to	you,
my	shameless	heart,
what	now	can	I	say?
You	have	gathered	a	piece	of	glass
at	the	price	of	gold.
In	spite	of	a	pair	of	eyes
you	miss	the	valuable	jewels,
caring	only	for	artificial	stones.
Wandering	blindfolded,
you	could	not	see
that	the	house	overflowed
with	the	choicest	rubies,
and	diamonds,
and	gems	of	fire.
Hugging	a	sickle
in	your	waistband,
what	do	you	search
from	field	to	field?
What	is	the	use?
My	heart,
will	you	not	explode	for	once
the	home	of	beauty...?
Whatsoever	 you	 go	 on	 seeking	 in	 the	mechanical	ways	 of	 sexuality	 is	 not	 the
search	for	beauty.	It	is	not	the	search	of	love,	it	is	not	the	search	of	God.	At	the
most,	 it	 is	 a	 natural	 device,	 a	 biological	 device	 to	 drown	 yourself	 in
forgetfulness.	It	is	a	natural	arrangement	in	your	body:	you	can	drown	yourself
in	it.	It	can	become	your	alcohol,	it	can	become	your	drug,	it	can	become	your
acid.
Sex	is	chemical;	it	releases	certain	hormones	in	your	body.	It	gives	you	a	certain
illusory	euphoria.	 It	gives	you	a	 few	moments	when	you	 feel	at	 the	 top	of	 the
world.	But	 then	again	you	are	back	 in	 the	valley,	and	 the	valley	 is	darker	 than
before,	 and	 the	 valley	 is	 uglier	 than	 before	 --	 as	 if	 you	 have	 been	 tricked,
cheated.	Sex	gives	you	an	 illusion	as	 if	something	 is	happening.	 If	you	remain
confined	to	sex,	then	you	will	simply	waste	your	energy.	By	and	by,	the	energy
will	ooze	out	of	you,	and	you	will	remain	just	a	dead	shell.
The	Bauls	say,
What	color	is	your	cottage?
On	the	shore	of	this	bogus	world
the	frame	of	your	home	is	made	of	bones,
and	the	roof	is	thatched	with	skin.
But	the	pair	of	peacocks
on	the	landing	pier
hardly	know	that	they	will	end	one	day.
As	the	childhood	passed	in	play,
passion,	the	age	of	passionate	sport	passes.
The	old	age,	too,	is	going	away,
calling,	calling
for	the	Master	and	the	Lord.
Your	teeth	are	dropping	down,
and	the	hair	is	growing	gray,
the	age	of	manhood	is	at	a	low	ebb,
the	plaster	of	your	painted	house	will	be
crumbling	now
softly,	softly....
The	 energy	 oozes	 out,	 by	 and	 by.	 Very	 few	 are	 in	 the	 world	 who	 use	 this
tremendous	opportunity	 for	growth.	Watch	your	 steps.	You	are	given	a	 certain
opportunity	to	grow.	If	you	don't	grow	you	will	simply	waste;	life	will	be	just	a
vegetation.	You	cannot	call	yourself	alive	if	you	are	not	aware.	If	awareness	 is
not	 crystallized	 in	 you,	 you	 are	 fast	 asleep,	 in	 a	 stupor	 --	 a	 somnambulist,	 a
sleepwalker.	And	sex	is	one	of	the	great	tranquilizers.	Many	people	use	it	exactly
like	 a	 tranquilizer:	 they	make	 love	 and	 then	 they	go	 to	 sleep.	Then	 they	 sleep
better.	Energy	released,	empty,	they	fall	into	deep	stupor.
That	sleep	is	not	real	sleep	--	it	 is	just	exhaustion,	it	 is	just	emptiness.	It	 is	not
full	of	energy.	That	sleep	is	like	death,	not	like	life.
The	ways	of	the	tortuous	river
slip	from	your	grasp.
Beware,	brothers,
do	not	step	into	the	stream.
The	water	rushes	down,
wrecking	the	blackened	hills.
Brothers,	beware
of	the	tortuous	stream.
The	river	was	dry
when	the	waters	of	the	flood
surged	down	the	tortuous	stream.
How	can	we	cross	the	river	now?
Even	when	 you	 are	 silent	 and	 not	 preoccupied	with	 sex,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to
cross	 the	 river.	 Even	 when	 the	 river	 is	 not	 flooded,	 even	 when	 the	 river	 is	 a
summer	stream	--	very	thin,	very	small,	very	shallow	--	then	too	it	is	difficult	to
pass	 and	go	beyond	 it.	And	when	 the	 rains	 come	 and	 the	 river	 is	 flooded	 and
when	you	are	so	full	of	lust,	it	becomes	impossible	to	cross	it.
The	river	was	dry
when	the	waters	of	the	flood
surged	down	the	tortuous	stream.
How	can	we	cross	the	river	now?
Be	on	your	guard,
O	boatman,
and	hold	tight	to	the	oars,
and	if	the	boat	tends	to	turn	over,
remember	the	Master.
BAULS	say	that	 there	is	only	one	way	to	come	out	of	the	stupor	man	lives	in,
and	that	is	remembrance	of	God:	NAM-SMARAN,	remembrance	of	His	name.
That	 has	 always	 been	 part	 of	 the	 basic	 techniques	 on	 the	 path	 of	 love	 --	 to
remember	Him.	And	when	a	devotee,	with	deep	reverence,	remembers	the	name
of	God,	his	whole	being	is	thrilled,	his	energy	starts	rushing	upwards.	Ordinarily
the	 energy	 is	 rushing	downwards;	 that	 is	 the	way	of	 sex.	 If	 you	 really	 cry	 the
name	of	God,	whatsoever	it	is	--	Ram,	Allah,	or	whatsoever,	all	names	are	His	--
the	very	cry,	 the	very	remembrance	hits	somewhere	near	 the	SAHASRAR,	 the
seventh	chakra,	in	the	head.	If	remembrance	is	not	just	ritual,	if	with	deep	love
and	 reverence	 and	 devotion	 and	 surrender	 you	 have	 called	 the	 name	 of	 God,
suddenly	there	comes	a	change	in	your	body	energies.	The	energy	that	was	going
to	the	sex	center	starts	rising	high.
The	Bauls	say,
God	has	reversed
the	acts	of	the	play.
The	land	talks	in	paradox
and	the	flowers	devour	the	heads	of	fruits,
and	the	gentle	vine,	roaring,
strangles	the	tree.
The	moon	rises	in	the	day,
and	the	sun	at	night	with	shining	rays.
The	blood	is	white,
and	on	the	lake	of	blood
float	a	pair	of	swans,
copulating	continuously
in	a	jungle	of	lust	and	love.
All	the	great	mystics	have	described	it:	when	the	energies	start	rushing	upwards,
when	gravitation	no	longer	affects	your	energy,	when	your	energy	is	functioning
under	 another	 Law,	 the	 law	 of	 grace;	 when	 you	 are	 pulled	 up,	 when	 you	 are
falling	up,	when	you	are	rushing	upwards	as	if	the	sky	is	pulling	you,	then	man
comes	to	know	a	totally	different	world.	Everything	is	upside-down	--	or	maybe
it	is	really	rightside-up	--	but	everything	changes.
Kabir	has	said	that	when	it	happened	to	him,	he	saw	the	ocean	burning,	and	the
fire	very	cold.	He	saw	fishes	running	on	dry	land,	and	he	saw	trees	whose	roots
were	 in	 the	 sky	 and	whose	 branches	were	 coming	 to	 the	 earth.	These	 are	 just
symbolic	sayings.
EVERYTHING	 we	 had	 known	 while	 sex-energy	 was	 running	 downwards	 is
affected	by	 it.	When	 the	 sex-energy	 rushes	up,	 a	TOTALLY	different	world	 is
revealed.	Then	you	don't	see	this	world	because	your	eyes	are	no	more	the	same.
You	are	in	a	new	dimension,	just	diametrically	opposite	to	the	old.
But	ordinarily	our	whole	concept	of	life	is	centered	on	sex.	Whatsoever	we	do:
we	earn	money,	we	earn	money	for	sex;	we	try	to	earn	fame,	but	we	earn	fame
for	sex.	Even	sometimes	very	innocent	activities	which	you	cannot	connect	with
sex	are	connected	with	sex	if	the	person	is	still	infatuated	with	lust.	It	is	difficult
to	see	how	a	person	who	is	running	after	fame	is	running	after	sex.
Ask	 the	 psychologists.	 They	 say	 women	 are	 more	 attracted	 by	 fame	 than	 by
anything	else.	They	are	not	so	attracted	by	the	face,	handsomeness,	as	they	are
attracted	 by	 achievement.	 An	 achiever,	 one	 who	 has	 much	 money,	 power,
prestige,	 is	more	 attractive	 to	women	 than	 anybody	else,.	 because	 a	woman	 is
constantly	in	search	of	somebody	to	lean	upon.	You	may	be	beautiful,	but	if	you
have	no	power	you	cannot	give	any	guarantee	and	security	to	the	woman.	If	you
are	 powerful,	 maybe	 you	 are	 not	 beautiful,	 you	 are	 not	 intelligent,	 but	 that
doesn't	matter.	But	 it	 you	 are	 powerful,	 reliable,	 the	woman	 can	 lean	 on	 your
shoulders.	There	is	a	certain	guarantee	in	you.
Men	 are	 attracted	 by	 physical	 proportions,	 body-beauty;	 a	 woman	 is	 more
attracted	 by	 fame,	 prestige,	 power,	 achievement.	 So	 if	 men	 are	 too	mad	 after
power,	the	arithmetic	is	simple.	Even	in	the	face	of	death	or	in	the	face	of	danger
people	go	on	lusting.
Jeevan	has	sent	me	a	beautiful	joke.
Isador	Ginsberg	was	instructed	by	his	physician	to	take	a	holiday	after	years	of
hard	 work	 building	 up	 his	 clothing	 business.	 On	 his	 holiday	 he	 met	 a	 young
blonde	 who	 spent	 much	 time	 with	 him.	 Returning	 to	 his	 office,	 he	 felt	 and
looked	like	a	new	person;	love	had	entered	his	life.
A	few	weeks	 later	a	distinguished	gentleman	asked	 to	see	Mr.	 Isador	Ginsberg
alone.
Smilingly,	excitedly,	Isador	read	the	card	handed	to	him.	His	caller	was	attorney-
at-law	of	a	very	reputable	law	firm.
"I	represent	Miss	Mamie	Lottery.	You	remember	her,	from	Hotel	Carleton?"
"Yes,	yes,"	Isador	panted	excitedly.
"Well,	Mr.	Ginsberg,	what	do	you	think	of	these?"	And	he	lays	out	on	the	desk	a
number	 of	 photographs	 of	 Isador	 and	 Mamie	 in	 decidedly	 compromising
positions.
Isador	was	absolutely	flabbergasted.	He	stared	wide-eyed	at	each	of	the	pictures
in	turn.
Many	minutes	of	silence	gripped	the	air.	Finally	he	turned	to	the	lawyer	and	said
with	a	firm	order	in	his	voice,	"Well,	I	will	take	two	of	this,	three	of	that	one,	and
four	copies	of	each	of	the	other	pictures."
THE	grip	of	lust	is	such	that	you	cannot	see	the	danger	ahead.	The	grip	of	lust	is
such	that	you	cannot	even	see	death	ahead.	In	fact,	a	very	strange	phenomenon
happens:	 the	 more	 a	 person	 comes	 close	 to	 his	 death,	 the	 more	 lustful	 he
becomes.	Because	sex	gives	a	feeling	of	life,	one	clings	more	to	sexuality.	Old
people	may	 not	 be	 physically	 able	 to	move	 into	 sexuality,	 but	 then	 they	 start
moving	in	their	fantasies.	It	almost	always	happens.
I	have	watched	many	people	die.	It	rarely	happens	that	a	person	dies	with	God
on	his	mind.	Almost	always,	nine	out	of	ten	people	die	with	sex	on	their	minds
when	they	die,	and	that	becomes	the	beginning	of	another	life.	Sex	on	the	mind
becomes	the	beginning	of	another	sex	life.
But	 it	 has	 to	 be	 so	 if	 you	 have	 not	 been	working	 hard	 to	 go	 beyond	 it,	 to	 go
beyond	its	grip.	If	you	have	not	been	struggling	hard	to	release	yourself	from	its
clutches,	 then	 it	 is	going	 to	be	 so	 --	because	at	 the	moment	of	death	you	 start
thinking	more	of	sex,	because	sex	seems	to	be	just	the	opposite	of	death.	Sex	is
birth;	mind	fantasizes	about	sex.	And	when	the	last	moment	has	come	when	the
body	 is	 going	 to	 disappear,	 a	 bout	 of	 energy,	 the	 last	 bout,	 streams	 into	 your
head,	 overpowers	 you.	 If	 you	 die	 with	 sex	 on	 the	 mind,	 you	 will	 be	 moving
again	 into	 the	 wheel	 of	 life,	 what	 the	 Hindus	 call	 ANAGAMIN,	 coming	 and
going,	coming	and	going;	a	repetitious	circle.
GO	TO	THE	HOME	OF	BEAUTY	AND	FORM,
SHOULD	YOU	WISH	TO	SEE	THE	MAN	WITHIN.
The	Bauls	say,	"Go	to	the	home	of	beauty	and	form,	should	you	wish	to	see	the
man	within."	Love	 is	more	aesthetic;	 lust	 is	almost	non-aesthetic.	Lust	 is	ugly,
and	you	can	observe	it.	When	somebody	looks	at	you	with	lust	in	his	eyes,	have
you	watched	 the	 face?	 --	 it	becomes	ugly.	Even	a	beautiful	 face	becomes	ugly
when	lust	is	there	in	the	eyes.	And	just	the	opposite	also	happens:	even	an	ugly
face	becomes	beautiful	when	there	is	love	in	the	eyes.	Love	in	the	eyes	gives	a
totally	different	color	to	the	face;	a	different	aura	arises.	Lust	gives	a	black	aura,
a	very	evilish	aura	around	you.	To	look	at	somebody	with	lust	is	ugly.	It	is	not
the	search	for	beauty.
One	of	the	greatest	Indian	poets,	Rabindranath,	has	said	that,	"Beauty	is	truth,"
and	he	is	right.	And	he	was	very	impressed	by	the	Bauls.	In	fact,	he	was	the	first
man	to	introduce	Bauls	to	the	West;	he	was	the	first	man	to	translate	a	few	Baul
poems	into	English.	He	was	a	sort	of	Baul	himself:	he	says,	"Beauty	is	truth."	If
you	seek	beauty	you	will	become	truthful.	The	more	aesthetic	you	become,	the
more	sensitive	you	become	towards	beauty,	the	more	balanced	and	harmonious
you	will	become	--	because	finally,	beauty	belongs	to	God.
LET	me	explain	it	to	you.
You	see	a	woman:	if	you	see	with	lustful	eyes,	you	see	only	the	body,	the	matter,
the	matter	part;	if	you	see	with	love,	you	see	something	that	is	not	matter,	that	is
spiritual;	and	if	you	see	a	woman	with	prayer,	then	you	see	something	absolutely
divine.	It	depends	on	your	eyes.	With	lustful	eyes	you	see	only	the	body	part	of
the	 woman;	 with	 loveful	 eyes	 you	 see	 the	 spiritual	 part	 of	 the	 woman;	 with
prayerful	 eyes	 you	 see	 the	 divine,	 God	 himself.	 Wherever	 your	 sensitivity
towards	beauty	is	perfect,	the	divine	is	revealed.
GO	TO	THE	HOME	OF	BEAUTY	AND	FORM,
SHOULD	YOU	WISH	TO	SEE	THE	MAN	WITHIN.
HIS	WAYS	CROSS	THE	SPHERE
WHERE	LIFE	LIVES	WITH	DEATH,
AND	SENSE	WITH	INSANITY.
"His	ways	cross	the	sphere	where	life	lives	with	death,	and	sense	with	insanity..."
God's	ways	are	paradoxical.	The	Bauls	say	that	in	God	all	the	opposites	meet,	all
the	 polarities	 become	 one.	 In	God,	 death	 and	 life	 are	 not	 two	 things.	 In	God,
darkness	and	light	are	not	two	things.	In	God,	the	beginning	and	the	end	are	not
two	 things.	God	means	 the	 totality;	God	 comprehends	 all.	 So	when	you	 reach
towards	God	you	will	not	be	losing	anything,	you	will	be	simply	gaining	all.	In
the	 beginning	 it	 may	 appear	 that	 you	 are	 losing	 something,	 but	 God	 is	 all-
inclusive.	 Lust	 remains	 in	 God,	 of	 course,	 but	 absolutely	 transformed.	Matter
remains	 in	God,	but	becomes	sacred,	 is	holy.	One	remains	 in	 the	world	but	no
more	of	it.	God	Himself	is	in	the	world,	but	not	of	the	world.	The	world	belongs
to	Him	but	He	does	not	belong	to	the	world.
This	 polarity	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 The	Bauls'	God	 is	 a	 greater	God	 than	 the
Christian	God,	 the	 Jewish	God	or	 the	Mohammedan	God,	because	 those	Gods
are	 of	 the	 theologians.	 The	 Bauls'	 God	 is	 more	 poetic;	 those	 Gods	 are	 more
logical.	The	Bauls'	God	is	more	illogical,	but	more	true.	Christians	say,	"God	is
only	good."	The	very	word	'God'
is	derived	 from	 the	 root	 'good'.	God	 is	good;	 then	what	happens	 to	bad?	Then
where	does	 the	bad	 exist?	To	 explain	 that	 they	have	 to	 create	 a	 devil.	But	 the
Bauls	 laugh	about	such	 theoretical	cunningness.	They	say	 that	God	creates	 the
devil,	so	He	remains	the	creator	of	the	devil.	And	if	you	say	the	devil	has	gone
against	 God,	 then	 there	 are	 only	 two	 possibilities:	 one,	 that	 God	 is	 not
omnipotent,	and	the	devil	can	go	against	Him	--	then	God	is	not	all-powerful;	the
other,	 that	God	Himself	provokes	him	to	go	against	 --	 then	He	 is	all-powerful,
but	then	He	is	the	cause	of	the	devil.
Bauls	say	that	God	is	both,	and	when	they	say	God	is	both,	they	mean	that	God
is	 incomprehensible,	 He	 is	 paradoxical.	 God	 is	 all.	 In	 Him,	 everything	 is
transfigured,	all	opposites	become	a	harmony.	God	is	the	orchestra.	He	is	one	in
the	many.	He's	the	unity	of	all.
HIS	WAYS	CROSS	THE	SPHERE
WHERE	LIFE	LIVES	WITH	DEATH,
AND	SENSE	WITH	INSANITY.
Bauls	say,	"He	 is	 the	supermost	 reason	and	 the	supermost	 irreason	also."	They
say	that	God	is	reason	and	God	is	madness	also.	For	a	logical	mind	it	becomes
difficult	to	figure	out.	But	Bauls	say	life	is	not	of	logic.	The	Bauls	say,	"We	are
simply	describing	what	 is	 the	 case.	We	are	not	 saying	what	 should	be,	we	 are
simply	describing	what	is	the	case.
This	 is	 the	way	we	 have	 known	God:	He	 is	 very	 rational	 and	 very	 irrational,
both.	 He	 is	 infinite	 compassion	 and	 infinite	 justice,	 both.	 In	 Him,	 all	 the
polarities	have	become	one."
To	 understand	 this,	 one	 has	 to	 understand	 with	 one's	 totality.	 You	 cannot
understand	 this	 assertion,	 this	 statement,	 through	 your	 intellect.	 Then	 it	 looks
absurd.	But	watch...	Look	at	life:	all	that	is	alive	must	be	somehow	His,	and	all
that	 dies	 must	 be	 somehow	 dying	 in	 Him.	 Yes,	 He	 lives	 in	 very	 reasonable
people,	but	who	lives	in	mad	people	then?	In	mad	people	also	He	lives,	and	He
loves	all	ways.
SO	Bauls	say,	"Don't	be	afraid;	you	just	be	yourself	and	you	will	find	Him.	You
need	not	become	 somebody	else	 to	 find	Him.	You	 just	 be	yourself.	 If	 you	 are
mad,	 then	 just	be	mad;	 then	 that	 is	your	way	 to	 find	Him.	 If	you	are	a	 singer,
then	go	on	singing.	He's	all-inclusive;	your	singing	will	become	a	prayer	and	a
way.	If	you	cannot	sing,	don't	be	worried;	there	is	no	need.	If	you	feel	that	just
being	silent	and	sitting	silently	you	enjoy	your	being	perfectly,	then	that	is	your
way.	All	ways	are	His.	Bauls	say,	"Wherever	you	are,	from	wherever	you	travel,
you	 travel	 towards	Him.	 Just	don't	 get	 stuck;	go	on	 travelling.	Go	on	moving,
don't	allow	movement	to	die.	Wherever	you	are	stuck,	 then	the	distance	arises.
Just	go	on	moving	and	be	yourself."	They	don't	give	you	a	certain	morality;	they
don't	 give	 you	 a	 certain	 ideal;	 they	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 shoulds.	 They	 are	 not
worried	about	the	ought.	They	say,	"This	is	the	case	--	He	loves	all	as	they	are."
Just	you	go	on	moving,	don't	get	frozen.
CLOSE	YOUR	EYES	AND	TRY	TO	CATCH	HIM,
HE	IS	SLIPPING	BY.
Beautiful..."Close	your	eyes	and	try	to	catch	Him,	He's	slipping	by."	If	you	are
stuck	somewhere	you	will	miss	Him.	You	be	on	the	move	because	He	is	on	the
move.	 He's	 always	 slipping,	 He's	 always	 moving	 into	 the	 new	 and	 into	 the
unknown.	If	you	cling	with	the	known	you	will	miss	Him.	Close	your	eyes	and
watch	 how	 swiftly	 He	 moves,	 how	 dancingly	 He	 moves.	 He	 is	 continuously
slipping	out	of	the	old.	He	is	the	constantly	new.	He	is	like	the	snake	who	comes
out	of	his	old	skin,	leaves	the	old	skin	and	slips	by.
God	 is	 continuously	 slipping	 out	 of	 history,	 because	 He	 is	 eternity.	 God	 is
continuously	slipping	out	of	that	which	has	already	happened,	because	He	is	not
repetitive.	And	 if	you	are	clinging	 to	history	 then	you	will	miss	Him,	because
then	you	will	 be	 looking	 at	 the	 past	 and	He	 is	 always	moving	 into	 the	 future.
God	is	future	and	mind	is	past;	then	the	distance	arises.
A	real	religious	man	is	one	who	has	no	past,	who	has	no	autobiography,	who	is
continuously	new,	each	moment	slipping	with	God.	He	does	not	bother;	what	has
happened	has	happened	--	finished!	Put	a	full	stop	on	it,	and	never	look	back.	Go
on...He	is	always	calling	you	ahead,	and	ahead.	He	is	always	persuading	you	to
move	into	new	territories	of	being:	from	lust	to	love,	from	love	to	prayer	--	and
there	are	higher	 realms	 than	prayer.	And	He	 is	constantly	on	 the	move.	 If	you
follow	Him,	the	only	way	is	to	be	constantly	on	the	move.
Be	a	river.
Yes,	they	are	right...
CLOSE	YOUR	EYES	AND	TRY	TO	CATCH	HIM,
HE	IS	SLIPPING	BY.
Why	close	your	eyes?	--	because	in	the	beginning	it	will	be	difficult	to	see	Him
from	without.	There	are	so	many	forms,	you	may	get	lost.	There	is	so	much	all
around,	so	complicated	is	the	world	that	you	may	get	lost.	Start	from	the	simple	-
-	start	from	yourself.	Close	your	eyes;	then	there	is	only	one	--	you!	It	is	simple
to	become	acquainted	that	way.	Close	your	eyes	and	see	Him;	He	is	continuously
slipping	by.	It	 is	your	consciousness,	the	essential	man.	The	Bauls	call	him	the
ADHAR	 MANUSH.	 He	 is	 in	 you,	 in	 your	 essence,	 but	 He	 is	 continuously
slipping	by,	going	ahead.	That's	how	He	evolves.
God	 is	 evolution	 and	 God	 is	 revolution	 also,	 because	 sometimes	 He	 moves
slowly,	and	sometimes	He	moves	very	fast.	One	has	to	be	very	alert	to	keep	pace
with	Him.	If	you	lose	your	alertness,	He	is	gone.	Then	one	never	knows	when
one	will	come	across	Him	again.	One	moment	lost	in	unawareness	and	He	will
be	at	the	farthest	end	of	the	world.
One	has	to	remain	constantly	alert,	aware.
But	first	watch	Him	inside.	Not	that	He's	not	outside;	He's	there	also	--	because
all	 is	 His,	 within	 and	without.	 But	 first	 it	 is	 easier	 to	 understand	Him	within
yourself.	 Once	 seen	 there,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 Him	 everywhere.	 Once
understood	there,	open	your	eyes,	and	He	is	standing	all	around	you:	in	the	trees,
in	 the	 birds,	 in	 the	 man,	 in	 the	 woman,	 in	 the	 rocks,	 in	 the	 rivers,	 in	 the
mountains,	in	the	clouds.	But	first,	get	introduced	to	Him.
And	 the	 best	 introduction,	 and	 the	 easiest	 possible,	 is	 to	 close	 your	 eyes	 and
look,	watch	 there.	You	will	 find	 the	 snake	 always	moving	 and	 leaving	 its	 old
skin.	This	is	the	flow	of	life-energy.
The	Bauls'	God	is	not	a	dead,	stagnant	concept.	It	is	not	a	God	sitting	somewhere
on	a	golden	throne	in	the	seventh	heaven.	The	Bauls'	God	is	a	very	alive	God,
kicking	in	you,	streaming	in	you.	The	Bauls'	God	is	nothing	but	a	synonym	for
life.	LIFE	written	with	capital	letters	is	what	the	Bauls'	God	is	all	about.
The	Bauls	say,
My	heart	is	saturated,
but	I	wish	I	knew	with	what	--
joy	or	death.
Strange	 is	 the	 feeling	when	you	become	acquainted	with	God:	you	cannot	 say
what	it	is,	you	cannot	describe	it.	It	is	so	contradictory,	so	paradoxical.
My	heart	is	saturated,
but	I	wish	I	knew	with	what	--
joy	or	death.
He	is	both:	death	and	resurrection,	cross	and	rebirth.
A	sense	of	wonder
has	overtaken	all.
Where	is	that	ocean
and	where	are	the	rivers?
And	yet	still
the	waves	are	there	for	you	to	observe,
only	if	you	unite
your	eyes	with	your	heart.
That	is	the	meaning	of	'close	your	eyes'	--	so	that	you	can	bring	your	heart	and
your	 eyes	 parallel,	 united.	 Only	 if	 you	 unite	 your	 eyes	 with	 your	 heart,	 then
suddenly	you	will	 see	 the	God	of	all	paradoxes,	 the	mad	and	 the	 source	of	all
reason,	life	and	the	source	of	all	death.
The	Bauls	say,
There	is	no	patience
in	the	core	of	my	heart.
Shivering	with	tears
it	cries	with	the	eyes,
and	in	the	silence
of	lovely	sound	forever	calls,
Come	Beloved,	come,
come,	please	come!
The	Bauls'	path	is	not	the	path	of	the	austere	man,	of	the	monk,	no.	It	is	the	path
of	the	dancer,	the	singer,	the	aesthetic	man.	His	prayer	is	full	of	beauty,	and	God
is	not	a	concept	of	philosophy,	but	Beloved.
Free	impulses	live	together
with	the	forces	of	abstinence,
and	the	feminine	energy
entwined	with	the	spirit	of	man,
resembles	the	tuned	strings
of	the	lute,	wholly	invisible.
The	heart	is	the	home
of	no	separation.
When	 you	 reach	 deep	 within	 yourself,	 when	 you	 touch	 your	 own	 core,	 your
heart,	you	have	come	to	the	land	of	no	separation.	There,	not	only	are	you	with
God,	you	are	one	with	Him	--	because	you	are	also	part	of	Him.	It	is	He	who	has
expressed	Himself	like	you.	Feel	fortunate,	feel	blessed;	He	has	also	chosen	you
to	be	one	of	His	forms.
CLOSE	YOUR	EYES	AND	TRY	TO	CATCH	HIM,
HE	IS	SLIPPING	BY.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Remember	To	Stop	In	The	Middle
4	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607040
ShortTitle:
BELOV204
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
90
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,	I	HAVE	HEARD....
A	PSYCHOLOGIST	WANTS	TO	EXPERIMENT	WITH	HIS	TWIN	SONS.	HE
TAKES	THEM	DOWN	TO	HIS	GROUP	ROOMS	AND	 PUTS	 EACH	 IN	A
ROOM	BY
HIMSELF.	 IN	 IKE'S	ROOM	HE	LOADS	 IN	A	PILE	OF	TV-ADVERTISED,
HARD-SELL	 TOYS.	 IKE	 IS	 DIAGNOSED	 AS	 A	 COMPLAINING,
NEGATIVE	PESSIMIST.
IN	MIKE'S	 ROOM	 HE	 LOADS	 IN	 AN	 ENORMOUS	 PILE	 OF	MANURE.
MIKE	IS
THE	OPTIMIST.
AN	 HOUR	 AFTER	 THEY	 ARE	 LOCKED	 IN,	 HE	 ENTERS	 IKE'S	 ROOM.
THERE	IS
IKE	 TOSSING	 OUT	 TOY	 AFTER	 TOY,	 COMPLAINING,	 "THIS	 IS	 NOT
ANY
GOOD,	THAT	ONE	WON'T	WORK."
AS	HE	OPENS	THE	DOOR	INTO	THE	SECOND	ROOM	HE	IS	UNABLE	TO
FIND
HIS	 SON	 FOR	 A	 FEW	 MOMENTS.	 BUT	 HE	 HEARS	 HIS	 VOICE;	 IT	 IS
SAYING,
"THERE'S	GOTTA	BE	A	PONY,	THERE'S	GOTTA	BE	A	PONY."	AND	AS
HE
APPEARS	 HE	 IS	 SHOWN	 FRANTICALLY	 DIGGING	 THROUGH	 THE
MANURE,	LOOKING	FOR	THE	PONY.
I	HAVE	CHANGED	ROOMS;	I	HAVE	GOT	MY	EYE	OUT	FOR	THE	PONY.
THE	QUESTION	IS	FROM	PREM	JEEVAN.
The	first	 thing	to	be	understood	about	pessimism	and	optimism	is	that	they	are
not	 different.	 They	 look	 different,	 but	 don't	 be	 deceived	 by	 their	 appearances.
They	are	 just	 two	polarities	of	 the	same	phenomenon.	A	pessimist	can	become
an	optimist;	an	optimist	can	become	a	pessimist.	A	pessimist	is	just	an	optimist
standing	on	his	head,	and	vice	versa.	They	are	not	two	different	people,	they	are
not	two	different	dimensions.
Remember,	it	is	not	worth	changing	rooms.	Get	out	of	both	the	rooms,	under	the
sky	where	neither	pessimism	nor	optimism	exist.	You	can	be	at	ease	only	when
both	are	gone,	because	both	are	wrong.
Analyze	the	situation.	The	pessimist	goes	on	looking	at	the	darker	side	of	things
and	 goes	 on	 denying	 the	 whiter	 side;	 he	 accepts	 only	 half	 of	 the	 truth.	 The
optimist	goes	on	denying	 the	darker	side	of	 things	and	accepts	only	 the	whiter
side;	he	is	also	half	true.
Neither	of	them	accepts	the	whole	truth,	because	the	whole	truth	is	both	summer
and	winter,	God	and	devil,	darkness	and	light,	good	and	evil,	life	and	death.	The
whole	truth	is	both.	Both	are	doing	the	same	exercise	--	they	are	denying	the	half
and	accepting	the	other	half.	The	other	half	is	as	much	half	as	the	first;	there	is
no	difference.	If	th!e	pessimist	is	wrong,	the	optimist	is	also	wrong.	Both	are	not
ready	to	accept	the	truth	as	it	is.	They	choose.
Move	out	of	both	the	rooms	under	the	open	sky	of	choicelessness.	Don't	choose.
Let	truth	be	as	it	is.	Don't	try	to	paint	it	in	your	own	mood.	Try	to	see	the	facility
of	 it;	 don't	 bring	 your	 mood	 in.	 Don't	 look	 through	 hope,	 don't	 look	 through
frustration.	 Don't	 be	 positive	 and	 don't	 be	 negative	 --	 that	 is	 the	 highest
consciousness	possible.
But	optimism	appeals	because	the	world	is	more	or	less	pessimistic.	People	have
long	faces;	they	are	always	complaining	and	grumbling.	It	 is	beautiful	to	come
across	the	optimist.	People	are	always	talking	about	the	thorns;	it	is	fortunate	to
meet	somebody	who	talks	about	flowers	and	fragrances.	But	he	is	also	wrong.
Let	me	tell	you	another	anecdote.
Once	I	went	to	visit	the	hospital	where	Mulla	Nasrudin	was	confined	as	a	result
of	an	automobile	accident.	The	Mulla	had	been	seriously	injured:	a	broken	leg,
both	arms	broken,	a	broken	collarbone,	terrible	cuts	over	his	face	and	head,	and
several	broken	ribs.
He	was	so	thoroughly	bandaged	and	taped	and	strapped	up	that	only	his	two	eyes
and	mouth	were	showing.
I	was	at	a	loss	for	words,	but	I	realized	that	I	must	say	something.	So	I	asked	the
Mulla,
"How	do	you	feel	today,	Nasrudin?	I	suppose	all	of	those	broken	bones	and	cuts
cause	a	great	deal	of	pain.	Do	you	suffer	very	much?"
"No,	not	much,"	said	Nasrudin.	"Only	when	I	laugh."
It	 is	 good	 to	meet	 such	 a	 person.	 It	 is	 rare,	 but	 it	 is	 as	wrong	 as	 the	 common
variety	The	pessimist	is	the	common	variety.	Out	of	a	hundred	persons,	ninety-
nine	are	pessimists.
They	 are	 looking	 for	misery,	 they	 are	waiting	 for	misery.	 They	 are	 convinced
that	something	is	going	to	happen	which	is	going	to	be	wrong.	They	are	ready
for	it.	If	it	doesn't	happen	they	will	be	very	disappointed,	but	they	are	waiting	for
the	 negative,	 for	 the	 dark	 side.	 These	 people	 are	 certainly	 wrong,	 but	 then
because	 of	 these	 people	 --	 and	 they	 are	 in	 the	 majority	 --	 the	 other	 rarity
becomes	very	valuable:	a	person	who	is	looking	for	the	morning,	who	looks	for
the	 white	 lightning	 in	 the	 darkest	 of	 clouds.	When	 the	 night	 is	 very	 dark	 he
waits,	because	he	knows	now	the	morning	is	very	close.	He	is	always	hopeful.
But	 I	 again	 insist	 that	both	are	wrong	because	 life	 is	both	black	and	white.	 In
fact,	life	is	grey.	On	one	extreme	end	it	looks	white,	on	the	other	extreme	end	it
looks	black,	but	just	in	between	the	two	it	is	nothing	but	shades	of	grey.
One	 who	 understands	 both	 becomes	 choiceless.	 He	 is	 neither	 pessimist	 nor
optimist.	You	will	 not	 find	 him	 in	 either	 of	 the	 rooms.	You	will	 not	 find	 him
unhappy,	 you	will	 not	 find	 him	 over	 enthusiastic	 about	 happiness.	 That	 is	 the
goal	of	the	Buddhas:	they	are	not	in	agony	and	they	are	not	in	any	ecstasy.	They
don't	know	any	excitement;	they	are	simply	peaceful,	silent.	That	is	what	bliss	is,
satchitananda.	Bliss	is	not	happiness,	because	happiness	has	a	certain	excitement
in	it	--	it	is	feverish.	Sooner	or	later	you	will	be	tired	of	it;	it	is	unnatural.	Sooner
or	 later	 you	 will	 have	 to	 change,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 become	 unhappy.	 Bliss	 is
neither;	 it	 is	 neither	 negative	 nor	 positive	 --	 it	 is	 transcendental,	 it	 is	 beyond
duality.	One	remains	tranquil,	calm,	quiet,	centered.	Whatsoever	happens,	good
or	bad,	one	accepts	both	because	one	knows	life	is	both.
This	is	the	real	man.	He	is	completely	without	any	attitude.	It	is	very	easy	if	you
have	been	a	pessimist	 for	 long:	one	day	you	realize	 that	you	are	unnecessarily
being	unhappy,	miserable,	 so	you	change	 the	 role.	You	slip	 into	 the	 role	of	an
optimist.	But	now,	from	one	extreme	to	the	other	you	have	moved.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
One	day	Mulla	Nasrudin	visited	a	 large	department	store	 to	buy	his	wife	some
nylon	hose.	 Inadvertently	 he	 got	 caught	 in	 the	mad	 rush	 of	 a	 counter	where	 a
bargain	sale	was	going	on.	He	soon	found	himself	being	pushed	and	stepped	on
by	frantic	women.	He	stood	it	as	long	as	he	could,	then	with	head	lowered	and
elbows	out,	he	plowed	through	the	crowd.
"You	there!"	said	a	woman.	"Can't	you	act	like	a	gentleman?'
"Not	anymore,"	said	Nasrudin.	"I	have	been	acting	like	a	gentleman	for	an	hour.
From	now	on	I	am	acting	like	a	lady."
There	 is	 a	 point	 where	 one	 gets	 fed-up	with	 one	 role.	 The	 pessimist	 one	 day
realizes	that,
"Why?	Why	go	on	seeing	the	darker	side?	Why	go	on	counting	the	thorns	on	the
rosebush?"	He	forgets	about	thorns;	he	starts	counting	the	roses	--	but	both	are
half.	 From	one	 half	 to	 another	 half	 he	 has	moved.	 The	 totality	 remains	 as	 far
away	as	before.
The	rosebush	is	both	the	thorn	and	the	rose.	They	are	both	joined	together	there.
They	are	not	against,	they	are	not	enemies.	In	fact	the	thorns	protect	the	flower.
They	are	part	of	the	whole	organic	being	of	the	rosebush.	And	so	is	life.	Good
and	 bad	 are	 joined	 together;	 sinners	 and	 saints	 are	 joined	 together;	 birth	 and
death	 are	 joined	 together.	 A	 real	 understanding	 is	 when	 you	 have	 understood
this,	this	polarity.	And	by	understanding	it,	you	have	gone	beyond	it.	Then	you
become	 tranquil	 --	 because	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 happy	 about	 and	 there	 is
nothing	to	be	unhappy	about.
Remember,	 if	you	are	happy,	 somewhere	deep	 in	 the	unconscious	you	are	 still
carrying	 the	possibility	of	unhappiness,	because	you	can	be	happy	only	 if	you
can	be	unhappy.
Both	possibilities	exist	together.	They	cannot	be	separated,	they	are	two	aspects
of	the	same	coin.	So	if	you	throw	one	aspect	the	other	is	also	thrown.	If	you	keep
one	 aspect	 the	 other	 is	 also	 kept.	 If	 you	 become	 a	 pessimist	 in	 the	 conscious
mind,	you	will	be	an	optimist	 in	 the	unconscious.	If	you	are	an	optimist	 in	 the
conscious	mind,	you	will	be	a	pessimist	in	the	unconscious.
Happiness,	 unhappiness,	 exist	 together.	 You	 can	 change	 the	 role	 anytime	 you
like.	In	fact,	people	go	on	changing:	in	the	morning	you	are	an	optimist,	by	the
evening	you	have	become	a	pessimist.	That's	why	beggars	 come	 to	beg	 in	 the
morning	 --	 because	 morning	 makes	 many	 more	 people	 optimistic.	 By	 the
evening,	 knowing	 the	 whole	 life	 and	 the	 nastiness	 of	 it,	 people	 become
pessimistic,	 tired,	 angry,	 frustrated.	 In	 the	 evening	 beggars	 don't	 come	 to	 beg
because	who	is	going	to	give?	In	the	morning	people	are	more	open;	the	morning
sun	again	brings	hope.	The	night	 is	gone:	"Maybe	today	something	is	going	to
happen."	People	are	more	positive.	By	the	evening,	people	become	negative.
In	 the	day	you	change	your	roles	many	times.	If	you	are	a	 little	alert,	you	will
see.	 A	 moment	 before	 you	 were	 an	 optimist,	 a	 moment	 afterwards	 you	 have
become	a	pessimist.
Small	things:	changes	in	the	climate,	changes	in	the	relationship,	a	small	gesture
on	somebody's	part	can	make,	you	change	your	role.	Have	you	watched	it?	You
are	sitting,	sad,	and	somebody	comes,	and	he	is	a	man	of	laughter,	and	he	laughs
and	he	 jokes	--	you	forget	 that	you	were	sad	and	you	start	 laughing.	You	were
laughing	 and	 a	 few	 friends	 come	and	 they	 are	 all	 sad;	 they	bring	 a	 climate	of
sadness,	and	you	relapse	into	it.
As	I	see	it,	every	man	is	born	with	both	possibilities.	You	have	to	go	beyond	it;
you	have	to	see	the	futility	of	both.	That's	what	silence	is:	it	is	complete	absence
of	duality.	So	please	avoid	being	extremists.	Excess	should	always	be	avoided,
because	excess	is	 the	root	of	all	untruth.	In	fact,	 there	are	no	lies	 in	 the	world,
only	half-truths	and	truth.	All	half-truths	are	lies;	and	the	truth	is	not	half,	 it	 is
whole.
The	mind	tends	to	be	always	moving	towards	the	extreme	--	so	you	are	moving
towards	 the	 height,	 then	 you	 are	 moving	 towards	 the	 valley,	 going	 up	 then
coming	down.	Like	a	yo-yo	you	go	on,	and	you	never	become	aware	that	both
are	 useless.	 Like	 a	 pendulum	 of	 an	 old	 clock	 you	move	 from	 one	 extreme	 to
another.	Once	the	pendulum	stops	in	the	middle,	the	clock	stops.	Once	you	stop
in	 the	middle,	 time	 disappears.	 Then	 you	 are	 no	more	 part	 of	 this	world.	 The
clock	stops...then	you	are	part	of	eternity.
Watch	the	pendulum	moving	from	left	to	right,	from	right	to	left.	A	very	strange
thing	is	happening.	When	the	pendulum	is	going	to	the	right,	you	see	it	as	going
to	the	right.	Ask	the	mechanic:	he	will	say	that	when	the	pendulum	is	going	to
the	right	it	is	gaining	momentum	to	go	to	the	left;	when	it	is	going	to	the	left	it	is
gaining	momentum	to	go	to	the	right.	So	when	you	are	unhappy,	you	are	gaining
momentum	to	be	happy.	When	you	are	happy,	you	are	gaining	momentum	to	be
unhappy.	When	 you	 are	 loving	 you	 are	 gaining	momentum	 to	 be	 hateful,	 and
when	you	are	hateful	you	are	gaining	momentum	to	be	loving.
Once	 you	 understand	 this	 subtle	 mechanism,	 that	 mind	 tends	 to	 be	 always
moving	 towards	 extremes,	 you	 stop	 cooperating	 with	 the	 mind.	 Pessimist	 or
optimist,	both	are	within	mind,	and	the	real	man	of	understanding	is	beyond	it.
It	 happened:	Mulla	Nasrudin	was	getting	 ready	 to	 apply	 to	 a	 local	 department
store	for	a	job.	A	friend	told	him	that	it	was	the	policy	of	the	store	to	hire	nobody
but	Catholic	Christians,	and	 that	 if	he	wanted	a	 job	 there	he	would	have	 to	 lie
about	being	a	Catholic	Christian.
Nasrudin	 applied	 for	 the	 job,	 and	 the	 personnel	 man	 asked	 him	 the	 usual
questions.	Then	he	said	to	the	Mulla,	"To	what	church	do	you	belong?"
"I	am	a	Catholic,"	said	Nasrudin,	"and	all	my	family	are	Catholics.	In	fact,	my
father	is	a	priest	and	my	mother	is	a	nun,	sir."
To	the	whole	way!
Remember	 to	 stop	 in	 the	 middle.	 That	 will	 bring	 balance,	 that	 will	 bring
centering.	For	the	first	time	you	will	feel	unperturbed,	undistracted,	and	you	will
be	able	to	accept	both.
Your	 acceptivity	 will	 become	 total.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 angry	 because	 there	 are
thorns,	and	you	will	not	be	ecstatic,	exhilarated,	excited,	because	there	are	roses.
You	will	see	that	both	are,	and	both	are	good,	both	are	needed.	But	you	remain
unaffected,	untouched,	unscratched	--	unscratched	by	the	thorns	and	unscratched
by	the	flower	also.	This	is	the	goal.
The	second	question:
Question	2
I	NEED	TO	TRUST	SO	BADLY,	AND	I	SUFFER	BECAUSE	I	DON'T.	FROM
WHERE	AM	I	TO	FIND	THE	COURAGE	TO	TRUST	MY	KILLER?
PEOPLE	 who	 trust	 themselves	 can	 trust	 others.	 People	 who	 don't	 trust
themselves	 cannot	 trust	 anybody.	 Out	 of	 self-trust,	 trust	 arises.	 If	 you	 are
distrustful	about	yourself,	then	you	cannot	trust	me	--	you	cannot	trust	anybody.
Because	if	you	don't	trust	yourself,	how	can	you	trust	your	trust?	It	is	going	to	be
your	trust.	Maybe	you	trust	in	me,	but	it	is	your	trust
--	you	trust	in	me	and	you	don't	trust	yourself.	So	it	is	not	a	question	about	me,	it
is	a	deep	question	about	yourself.
And	who	 are	 these	 people	who	 cannot	 trust	 themselves?	 Something	 has	 gone
wrong	somewhere.
First,	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 don't	 have	 a	 very	 good	 self-image;	 they	 are
condemnatory	 towards	 themselves.	 They	 always	 feel	 guilty	 and	 always	 feel
wrong.	They	are	always	defensive	and	always	trying	to	prove	that	 they	are	not
wrong,	but	they	feel	deep	down	that	they	are	wrong.	These	are	the	people	who
have	missed,	somehow,	a	loving	atmosphere.
Psychologists	 say	 that	 the	 person	 who	 cannot	 trust	 himself	 is	 bound	 to	 have
some	 deep-rooted	 problem	 with	 the	 mother.	 The	 mother-child	 relationship
somewhere	did	not	happen	as	it	should.	Because	the	mother	is	the	first	person	in
the	child's	experience;	if	the	mother	trusts	the	child,	if	the	mother	loves	the	child,
the	child	 starts	 loving	 the	mother	and	 trusting	 the	mother.	Through	 the	mother
the	child	becomes	aware	of	the	world.	The	mother	is	the	window	from	where	he
enters	existence.	And	by	and	by,	if	there	exists	a	beautiful	relationship	between
the	 child	 and	 the	 mother,	 a	 response,	 a	 deep	 sensitivity,	 a	 deep	 transfer	 of
energies,	 a	 flowering...	 then	 the	 child	 starts	 trusting	 others	 also.	 Because	 he
knows	 the	 first	 experience	 was	 beautiful,	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 to	 think	 that	 the
second	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 beautiful.	 There	 is	 every	 reason	 to	 believe	 that	 the
world	is	good.
If	 in	 your	 childhood	 there	 was	 a	 deep	 milieu	 of	 love	 around	 you,	 you	 will
become	religious,	trust	will	arise.	You	will	trust,	trust	will	become	your	natural
quality.
Ordinarily,	 you	will	 not	 distrust	 anybody	unless	 somebody	 tries	 hard	 to	 create
distrust	 in	 you	 --	 only	 then	will	 you	 distrust.	 But	 distrust	will	 be	 exceptional.
One	man	deceives	you	and	tries	hard	to	destroy	your	 trust.	Maybe	trust	 in	 that
man	is	destroyed,	but	you	will	not	start	distrusting	the	whole	humanity.	You	will
say,	 "This	 is	 one	man,	 and	 there	 are	millions	 of	men.	 Just	 for	 one	man,	 why
distrust	 all?"	 But	 if	 the	 basic	 trust	 is	 lacking,	 and	 something	 has	 gone	wrong
between	you	and	your	mother,	 then	distrust	becomes	your	basic	quality.	 ]Then
ordinarily,	 naturally,	 you	distrust.	There	 is	 no	need	 for	 anybody	 to	 prove.	You
distrust	man,	and	then	if	somebody	wants	you	to	trust	him	he	will	have	to	work
hard,	very	hard.	And	even	then,	you	will	trust	him	conditionally.	And	even	then,
that	 trust	 will	 not	 be	 very	 comprehensive.	 It	 will	 be	 very	 narrow;	 it	 will	 be
arrowed	at	one	person.
That	 is	 the	problem.	In	 the	old	 times	people	were	very	 trusting.	SHRADDHA,
trust,	was	a	simple	quality.	There	was	no	need	to	cultivate	it.	In	fact,	if	somebody
wanted	 to	 become	 a	 great	 skeptic,	 doubting,	 then	 great	 training	 was	 needed,
great	 conditioning	 was	 needed.	 People	 were	 simply	 trustful	 because	 love
relationships	were	very,	very	deep.	 In	 the	modern	world	 love	has	disappeared,
and	 trust	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 climax	 of	 love,	 the	 cream	 of	 love.	 Love	 has
disappeared.	Children	are	born	into	families	where	the	father	and	mother	are	not
in	love.	Children	are	born	--	the	mother	does	not	care,	is	not	bothered	about	what
happens	to	them.	In	fact,	she	is	annoyed	because	they	are	a	disturbance,	and	they
are	disturbing	her	life.	Women	are	avoiding	children,	and	if	they	happen	it	seems
like	 an	 accident.	 And	 there	 is	 a	 deep	 negative	 attitude.	 The	 child	 gets	 that
negative	 attitude;	 he	 is	 poisoned	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.	He	 cannot	 trust	 the
mother.
Just	three	or	four	days	ago	a	sannyasin	told	me	that	during	Primal	Therapy	here
in	 the	ashram,	he	came	across	a	childhood	memory.	He	remembered,	he	could
see	it,	that	his	mother	had	tried	to	kill	him	by	suffocating	him.	He	could	see	the
whole	memory,	again	relived.	Now	his	whole	being	is	wavering,	trembling.	And
he's	not	an	ordinary	man;	he	himself	is	a	psychotherapist.	Now,	he	understands
many	things	that	he	had	never	understood	before:	why	he	seems	to	be	so	dead,
stone-like,	 rock-like,	 unflowing,	why	 he	 cannot	 trust	 anybody,	why	 he	 cannot
move	 into	 love	easily,	why	 it	 is	 such	a	great	 effort,	 and	even	 then,	 something,
somewhere	goes	wrong.	He	is	not	streaming	--	the	mother	tried	to	suffocate	him.
The	basic	trust	lost,	the	tacit	trust	lost:	"Even	mother	tried	to	kill	me?	Then	who
can	 be	 trusted?"	 --	 impossible.	 Now	 this	 world	 is	 just	 inimical.	 One	 has	 to
struggle;	it	is	a	survival	of	the	fittest.
Many	times	I	have	wondered:	somebody	should	try	a	psychoanalytical	study	of
Charles	Darwin.	Nobody	has	 tried	 yet.	There	must	 have	been	 something	gone
wrong	between	him	and	his	mother,	hence	the	hypothesis	of	the	survival	of	the
fittest.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 one	 can	 have	 a	 psychoanalytical	 study	 of	 Prince
Kropotkin.	There	must	have	been	a	deep	love	relationship	between	him	and	his
mother,	 so	 deep	 that	 he	 contradicted	 Charles	 Darwin	 and	 tried	 to	 replace	 his
theory	of	survival	of	the	fittest	with	the	theory	of	cooperation.	He	said,	"There	is
no	 conflict	 in	 life,	 but	 there	 is	 cooperation.	 In	 fact,	when	 a	 tiger	 jumps	 on	 an
animal	and	eats	the	animal,	this	too	is	cooperation."	How	does	he	explain	it?	He
says,
"In	 fact,	 the	moment	 the	 tiger	 jumps	on	his	prey,	 the	prey	 relaxes,	dies	 easily.
There	is	no	conflict.	The	prey	becomes	food	for	the	tiger."
There	must	be	a	cooperation	when	you	pick	an	apple	from	the	tree	and	you	eat	it;
there	 must	 be	 a	 deep	 cooperation	 between	 the	 apple	 and	 you.	 Otherwise,	 the
apple	would	 create	 trouble	 in	 your	 body.	 It	would	 go	 on	 fighting	 you	 if	 there
were	a	conflict.	It	would	never	allow	itself	to	be	absorbed	by	your	body;	it	would
remain	inimical.	But	it	simply	dissolves	into	you,	becomes	your	blood,	becomes
your	bones,	becomes	your	flesh.
Kropotkin	 says,	 "There	 is	 tremendous	 cooperation	 in	 life."	 Even	when	 a	 tiger
jumps	and	kills	the	prey,	he	says	there	is	cooperation.	Ask	Charles	Darwin:	even
when	there	are	two	friends	deep	in	love,	and	they	are	ready	to	die	for	each	other,
Darwin	 says	 that	 these	 are	 just	 pretensions.	 Deep	 inside	 there	 is	 conflict,
struggle,	competition,	jealousy.
A	philosophy	 is	not	born	out	of	 the	blue.	A	philosophy	comes	 from	your	own
existence,	your	own	lived	experience.	If	the	child	has	been	deep	in	love	with	the
mother	and	the	mother	has	showered	her	 love,	 that	 is	 the	beginning	of	all	 trust
for	the	future.	Then	the	child	will	make	more	loving	relationships	with	women,
will	 make	 more	 loving	 relationships	 with	 friends,	 one	 day	 will	 be	 able	 to
surrender	to	a	Master	--	and	finally,	will	be	able	to	dissolve	himself	completely
into	God.	But	 if	 the	basic	 link	 is	missing	 then	 the	 foundation	 is	missing.	Then
you	try	hard,	but	it	becomes	more	and	more	difficult.
That's	what	I	feel	about	the	questioner.
"I	need	to	 trust	so	badly"...yes,	because	trust	 is	nourishment.	Without	 trust	you
remain	hungry,	you	remain	starved.	Trust	is	the	most	subtle	nourishment	for	life.
If	 you	 don't	 trust	 you	 cannot	 really	 live.	 You	 are	 always	 in	 fear;	 you	 are
surrounded	 by	 death,	 not	 by	 life.	 With	 a	 deep	 trust	 inside,	 the	 whole	 view
changes.	 Then	 you	 are	 at	 home	 and	 there	 is	 no	 conflict.	 Then	 you	 are	 not	 a
stranger	 in	 the	world.	Then	you	are	not	 an	 alien,	 you	are	not	 a	 foreigner.	You
belong	to	the	world,	the	world	belongs	to	you.	The	world	is	happy	that	you	are	--
the	world	is	protecting	you.	This	feeling	of	a	deep	protection	gives	courage,	and
gives	courage	to	move	into	unknown	paths.
When	the	mother	is	in	the	home	the	child	has	courage.	Have	you	watched	it?	He
can	go	out	on	the	road,	he	can	move	into	the	garden,	and	he	can	do	a	thousand
and	one	things.
When	 the	mother	 is	not	 there	he	 simply	 sits	 inside,	he	 is	 afraid.	He	cannot	go
out;	the	protection	is	not	there,	the	protective	aura	is	not	there.	The	atmosphere	is
totally	alien.
It	happened	once....
I	 was	 staying	 with	 a	 friend.	 The	 couple	 had	 gone	 to	 attend	 some	 marriage
ceremony	and	they	had	left	their	small	kid	to	play,	and	they	said	to	me,	"Just	you
watch."	 I	 was	 watching	 --	 he	 was	 playing	 just	 outside	 the	 porch.	 He	 fell,	 he
looked	all	around,	he	looked	at	me.	I	looked	at	him	very	silently.	He	waited	for	a
single	second	to	feel	whether	it	was	worth	crying	or	not.	But	I	was	so	neutral,	as
if	 I	was	 not	 there,	 so	 he	 shrugged	 his	 shoulders:	 "This	 fellow	 is	 useless."	He
started	playing	again.	After	half	an	hour	when	the	mother	and	the	father	arrived,
he	started	crying.	I	said,	"This	is	illogical.	Half	an	hour	has	passed,	now	it	can't
be	hurting."	He	said,	"That	is	not	the	question.	But	you	looked	towards	me	with
such	 stoney	 eyes,	 so	 I	 thought,'What	 is	 the	 point?	 Even	 if	 it	 hurts,	 it	 hurts.
Crying	 is	 useless.'	 Now	 my	 mother	 has	 come."	 Now	 he	 is	 in	 a	 different
atmosphere
--	now	he	can	cry	because	he	knows	somebody	is	there	to	console,	somebody	is
there	to	feel	for	him,	somebody	is	there	who	cares.
If	you	have	lived	a	childhood	of	a	deep	showering	of	love	and	trust	on	you,	you
gather	 a	 beautiful	 self-image	 about	 yourself.	 And	 if	 your	 parents	 have	 been
really	 in	deep	 love	with	 each	other,	 and	 they	were	very	happy	 in	you	because
you	 were	 the	 culmination	 of	 their	 love,	 the	 crescendo	 of	 their	 love,	 the
actualization	of	their	love;	if	they	were	deep	in	love,	then	you	are	the	song	that	is
born	out	of	their	love.	You	are	the	proof,	the	evidence	that	they	loved	each	other.
You	 are	 their	 creation:	 they	 feel	 happy	 about	 you,	 they	 accept	 you,	 and	 they
accept	 the	way	you	are.	Even	 if	 they	 try	 to	help	you,	 they	 try	 to	help	you	 in	a
very	 loving	 way.	 Even	 if	 they	 say	 sometimes,	 "Don't	 do	 this,"	 you	 don't	 feel
offended	and	you	don't	feel	insulted.	In	fact,	you	feel	cared	about.
But	when	the	love	is	missing	and	the	father	and	mother	go	on	saying,	"Don't	do
this,"
and,	"Do	this,"	by	and	by	the	child	starts	learning	that,	"I	am	not	accepted	as	I
am.	If	I	do	certain	things,	I	am	loved.	If	I	don't	do	certain	things,	I	am	not	loved.
If	I	do	some	other	things,	I	am	hated."
So	 he	 starts	 shrinking.	His	 pure	 being	 is	 not	 accepted	 and	 loved.	 The	 love	 is
conditional;	 trust	 is	 lost.	 Then	 he	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 have	 a	 beautiful	 self-
image.	Because	it	is	mother's	eyes	which	reflect	you	for	the	first	time,	and	if	you
can	see	happiness	there,	a	bliss,	a	 thrill,	a	great	ecstasy	just	watching	you,	you
know	you	are	valuable,	you	know	you	have	intrinsic	value.	Then	it	is	very	easy
to	trust,	very	easy	to	surrender,	because	you	are	not	afraid.	But	if	you	know	that
you	are	wrong,	 then	you	 are	 always	 trying	 to	prove	 that	 you	 are	 right.	People
become	argumentative.	All	argumentative	people	basically	are	people	who	don't
have	good	images	of	themselves.	They	are	very	defensive,	very	touchy.
If	 there	 is	 some	argumentative	person,	 and	you	 say	 that,	 "This	 thing	you	have
done	 wrong,"	 he	 immediately	 jumps	 on	 you,	 becomes	 very	 angry.	 He	 cannot
even	take	a	small	friendly	criticism.	But	if	he	has	a	good	image	about	himself	he
is	 ready	 to	 listen,	 he's	 ready	 to	 learn,	 he's	 ready	 to	 respect	 others'	 opinions.
Maybe	 they	 are	 right,	 and	 even	 if	 they	 are	 right	 and	 he	 is	 wrong,	 he	 is	 not
worried	because	that	doesn't	matter.	He	remains	good	in	his	eyes.
People	are	touchy	--	they	don't	want	criticism,	they	don't	want	somebody	to	say
to	them	to	do	this;	they	don't	want	somebody	to	say	to	them	not	to	do	that.	And
these	people	think	they	cannot	surrender	because	they	are	very	powerful.	They
are	just	ill,	neurotic.	Only	a	powerful	man	or	woman	can	surrender	--	weaklings,
never.	 Because	 in	 surrender	 they	 think	 their	 weakness	 will	 be	 known	 to	 the
whole	world.	They	know	they	are	weak,	they	know	their	inferiority	complex,	so
they	 cannot	 bow	 down.	 It	 is	 difficult	 for	 them,	 because	 bowing	 down	will	 be
accepting	that	they	are	inferior.	Only	a	superior	person	can	bow	down;	inferior
persons	can	never	bow	down.	They	cannot	respect	anybody	because	 they	don't
respect	themselves.	They	don't	know	what	respect	is,	and	they	are	always	afraid
of	surrender	because	surrender	means	weakness	to	them.
Remember	 it:	 surrender	 is	 possible	 if	 you	 are	 tremendously	 powerful;	 you	 are
not	worried	about	surrender,	you	know	that	you	can	surrender	and	still	you	will
not	be	weak.	You	can	surrender	and	you	will	not	lose	your	willpower.	In	fact,	by
surrendering	you	are	showing	the	greatest	willpower	there	is.
So	if	you	feel	it	difficult	to	trust,	then	you	have	to	go	back.	You	have	to	dig	deep
into	your	memories.	You	have	to	go	into	your	past.	You	have	to	clean	your	mind
of	the	past	impressions.	You	must	be	having	a	great	heap	of	rubbish	from	your
past;	unburden	it.
This	is	the	key	to	do	it:	if	you	can	go	back	not	just	as	memory,	but	as	a	reliving.
Make	it	a	meditation.	Every	day,	in	the	night,	for	one	hour	just	go	back.	Try	to
find	 out	 all	 that	 has	 happened	 in	 your	 childhood.	 The	 deeper	 you	 can	 go	 the
better	 --	 because	we	 are	 hiding	many	 things	 that	 have	happened,	 but	we	don't
allow	them	to	bubble	up	into	consciousness.	Allow	them	to	surface.	Going	every
day,	you	will	feel	deeper	and	deeper.
First	you	will	 remember	somewhere	when	you	were	at	 the	age	of	 four	or	 five,
and	you	will	not	be	able	to	go	beyond	that.	Suddenly,	a	China	Wall	will	face	you.
But	 go	 --	 by	 and	 by,	 you	will	 see	 that	 you	 are	 going	 deeper:	 three	 years,	 two
years.	People	have	reached	to	 the	point	where	 they	were	born	from	the	womb.
There	have	been	people	who	have	reached	into	the	memories	of	the	womb,	and
there	 are	 people	who	 have	 reached	 beyond	 that,	 into	 the	 other	 life	when	 they
died.
But	if	you	can	reach	to	the	point	where	you	were	born,	and	you	can	relive	that
moment,	it	will	be	of	deep	agony,	pain.	You	will	almost	feel	as	if	you	are	being
born	again.	You	may	scream	as	 the	child	 screamed	 for	 the	 first	 time.	You	will
feel	suffocated	as	the	child	felt	suffocated	when	for	the	first	time	he	was	out	of
the	womb	--	because	 for	a	 few	seconds	he	was	not	able	 to	breathe.	There	was
great	 suffocation:	 then	 he	 screamed	 and	 the	 breath	 came,	 and	 his	 passages
became	open,	his	lungs	started	functioning.	You	may	have	to	move	to	that	point.
From	 there	 you	 come	 back.	Go	 again,	 come	 back,	 every	 night.	 It	will	 take	 at
least	three	to	nine	months,	and	every	day	you	will	feel	more	unburdened,	more
and	more	unburdened,	and	trust	will	arise	simultaneously,	by	the	side.	Once	the
past	is	clear	and	you	have	seen	all	that	has	happened,	you	are	free	of	it.	This	is
the	key:	if	you	become	aware	of	anything	in	your	memory,	you	are	freed	from	it.
Awareness	liberates,	unconsciousness	creates	a	bondage.	Then	trust	will	become
possible.
When	 you	 are	 here	 with	 me,	 you	 are	 again	 in	 another	 womb,	 you	 are	 again
waiting	for	another	birth.	That	is	the	function	of	a	Master	--	to	give	you	another
birth,	 to	make	 you	DWIJA,	 twice	 born.	 One	 birth	 is	 from	mother	 and	 father,
another	 birth	 is	 from	 the	Guru,	 the	Master.	You	 are	 again	 in	 another	womb,	 a
spiritual	 womb.	 You	 have	 to	 close	 accounts	 with	 your	 physical	 womb
completely.	You	have	to	drop	all	hang-overs	with	your	physical	birth	so	you	can
be	totally	herenow	with	me.
"I	need	to	trust	so	badly..."	Yes,	that	is	the	point:	a	person	who	cannot	trust	needs
to	trust	very	badly.	And	a	person	who	can	trust	is	not	even	aware	that	he	needs.
The	need	arises	when	you	are	starving.
Psychologists	have	come	across	this	--	that	love	is	food.	Just	twenty	years	ago,	if
somebody	 had	 said	 that	 love	 was	 subtle	 vitality,	 then	 scientists	 would	 have
laughed.	 They	 would	 have	 thought,	 "You	 are	 a	 poet,	 you	 live	 in	 illusion	 and
dreams.	Love	and	food?	--
all	nonsense."	But	now	scientific	researchers	say,	"Love	IS	food."	When	a	child
is	given	food,	that	nourishes	his	body;	and	if	love	is	not	given,	then	his	soul	is
not	 nourished.	 His	 soul	 remains	 immature.	 Now	 there	 are	 ways	 to	 measure
whether	 a	 child	 is	 being	 loved	 or	 not,	 whether	 the	 warmth	 he	 needs	 is	 being
given	 to	 him	 or	 not.	 You	 can	 give	 a	 child	 all	 the	 nourishment	 he	 needs,	 all
medical	care	he	needs,	in	a	hospital.	Just	remove	the	mother
--	give	him	milk,	medicine,	care,	everything,	but	don't	hug	him,	don't	kiss	him,
don't	touch	him.	Many	experiments	have	been	done.	The	child,	by	and	by,	starts
shrinking	into	himself.	He	becomes	ill,	and	in	most	of	the	cases	he	dies,	for	no
visible	cause	at	all.	Or,	if	he	survives,	he	survives	at	the	minimum:	he	becomes
an	 imbecile,	 an	 idiot.	He	will	 live,	 but	 he	will	 live	 just	 on	 the	 fringe.	He	will
never	be	deep	 in	 life;	 he	has	no	 energy.	To	hug	 the	 child,	 to	give	your	body's
warmth	to	him	is	food,	is	very	subtle	food.	Now	this	is	being	recognized,	by	and
by.
Let	me	make	you	one	prediction:	after	twenty	or	thirty	years,	psychologists	will
come	to	reveal	that	trust	is	even	a	higher	food,	of	a	greater	potency	--	higher	than
love...	Like	prayer.	Trust	is	prayerfulness,	but	it	is	VERY	subtle.	You	can	feel	it.
If	you	have	trust,	you	will	suddenly	see	 that	with	me	you	are	going	on	a	great
adventure,	and	your	life	starts	immediately	changing.	If	you	don't	have	trust,	you
will	stand	there.	I	go	on	talking,	I	go	on	pulling	you;	you	are	stuck	--	somehow
you	go	on	missing	me.	Let	your	trust	arise.
That	 trust	will	be	a	bridge	between	me	and	you.	Then	ordinary	words	become
luminous,	then	just	my	presence	can	become	a	womb,	and	you	can	be	reborn.
"I	need	to	trust	so	badly,	and	I	suffer	because	I	don't.	From	where	am	I	to	find
the	courage	to	trust	my	killer?"
Yes,	I	am	a	killer,	 in	a	way.	I	have	to	kill	you	because	that	 is	 the	only	way	for
you	to	be	reborn.	I	have	to	cut	you	completely	from	your	past,	I	have	to	destroy
your	biography.
Then	only,	the	new	can	arise.
But	 if	 you	 have	 trust,	 you	 will	 be	 ready	 to	 die.	 If	 you	 have	 trust,	 you	 know
resurrection	is	certain.	I	cannot	guarantee	it;	there	is	no	way	to	guarantee	it.	Only
trust	 is	 the	 guarantee.	 I	 can	 talk	 about	 it,	 I	 can	 'poetize'	 about	 it,	 but	 that	will
create	only	dreams	in	you,	not	guarantees.	I	can	tell	what	has	happened	to	me,	I
can	allure	you	towards	it,	but	it	will	not	be	a	guarantee.	"Who	knows	--	this	man
may	be	 just	Lying,	or	 this	man	may	not	be	Lying,	he	may	be	 just	 in	 illusion?"
How	to	prove	it?	It	is	not	a	thing	that	I	can	show	to	you.	If	you	trust,	then	there	is
guarantee.	In	your	trust	is	your	guarantee.
You	can	trust	me	in	two	ways.	That	too	has	to	be	understood,	because	one	way	is
a	wrong	way.
You	can	trust	me	because	you	feel	insecure,	alone.	You	can	force	trust	because
you	 can	 feel	more	 secure	with	me.	 That's	 how	many	 people	 live	 in	 churches,
organizations,	religions.	Somebody	is	a	Christian,	somebody	is	a	Hindu;	it	gives
a	certain	security.	You	are	not	alone	--	millions	of	Hindus,	millions	of	Christians
--	you	are	not	alone.	"How	can	so	many	people	be	wrong?	They	must	be	right"	--
so	you	hold,	hang	with	 the	crowd,	 just	because	you	are	afraid.	Trust	 can	arise
because	of	fear	--	then	it	is	negative;	it	will	not	give	you	a	new	birth.	In	fact,	it
will	obstruct	new	birth.	Trust	can	arise	out	of	love;	then	it	is	right.
People	who	trust	because	they	are	afraid,	because	they	want	somebody	to	hang
to,	to	cling	to,	they	are	afraid	and	they	want	somebody's	hand,	they	look	at	the
sky	and	they	pray	 to	God	just	 to	feel	unafraid.	Have	you	watched?	Sometimes
passing	through	a	dark	street	in	the	night	you	start	whistling,	or	you	start	singing
--	not	that	it	is	going	to	help.
But	 it	 helps	 in	 a	 way.	 Singing,	 you	 become	 warmer.	 Singing,	 you	 become
occupied;	fear	is	repressed.	Whistling,	you	start	feeling	good.	You	forget	that	it
is	dark	and	it	is	dangerous,	but	it	makes	no	real	change	in	reality.	If	there	is	fear
and	danger	it	is	still	there.	In	fact,	it	is	more,	because	a	person	who	is	engaged	in
singing	can	be	robbed	more	easily	because	he	will	be	less	alert.	He	will	be	less
cautious	while	whistling.	He	is	creating	an	illusion	around	him	with	whistling.	If
your	trust	arises	out	of	fear,	it	is	better	not	to	have	that	trust.	It	is	false.
I	have	heard...
Mulla	Nasrudin	 climbed	 into	 a	 barber's	 chair	 and	 asked,	 "Where	 is	 the	 barber
who	used	to	work	on	the	next	chair?"
"Oh,	 that	 was	 a	 sad	 case,"	 the	 barber	 said.	 "He	 became	 so	 nervous	 and
despondent	 over	 poor	 business,	 that	 one	day	when	 a	 customer	 said	 he	 did	 not
want	 a	massage,	he	went	out	of	his	mind	and	cut	 the	 customer's	 throat	with	 a
razor.	 He	 is	 now	 in	 the	 state	 mental	 hospital.	 By	 the	 way,	 would	 you	 like	 a
massage,	sir?"
"Absolutely!"	said	Mulla	Nasrudin.
Out	of	fear	you	can	say	'absolutely',	but	that	will	not	be	trust.	Trust	is	born	out	of
love,	and	if	you	find	that	you	cannot	trust,	then	you	have	to	work	hard.	You	have
a	very	loaded	past,	wrongly	loaded.	You	have	to	clean	it,	clear	it.
The	third	question:
Question	3
I	BELIEVE	THERE	IS	A	GOD.	THERE	MUST	BE	SOMETHING	KEEPING
THE
UNIVERSE	 TOGETHER.	 BUT	 DEEP	 IN	 MYSELF	 I	 DON'T	 FEEL	 THAT
GOD	IS
THERE	 OR	 YOU	 ARE	 THERE,	 OR	 THAT	 GOD	 IS	 WITH	 ME.	 I
EXPERIENCE
MYSELF	AS	LOST	AND	UNPROTECTED	IN	A	THREATENING	WORLD.
IF	FEEL
ONLY	COMFORTABLE	WHEN	I	AM	ALONE.	I	MISS	THAT	BASIC	TRUST.
THE
KNOWLEDGE	 I	 GATHERED,	 THE	 FEELINGS	 I	 HAVE	 FELT,	 THE
EXPERIENCES
I	HAVE	HAD,	DID	NOT	LEAD	ME	TO	AN	INNER	TRUST.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	HELP	ME?
FIRST,	belief	is	a	pretension.	Never	believe	in	anything.	Belief	is	pseudo-trust.	It
gives	you	a	feeling	as	if	you	trust.	It	 is	 'as	if'	 trust;	 it	 is	very	dangerous.	If	you
have	not	experienced	anything	of	the	divine,	please	be	honest.	There	is	no	need
to	trust,	there	is	no	need	to	believe	in	God.	Don't	make	God	a	logical	exercise.
The	 questioner	 says,	 "I	 believe	 there	 is	 a	 God.	 There	 MUST	 be	 something
keeping	the	universe	together."	This	is	a	logical	thing:	the	universe	is	there	and
things	are	really	going	together,	everything	is	going	beautifully	together,	so	the
logical	 mind	 says,	 "There	 must	 be	 somebody	 who	 is	 keeping	 it	 together.
Existence	is	there,	so	somebody	must	have	created	it."
But	 God	 cannot	 be	 approached	 through	 logic.	 God	 can	 be	 approached	 only
through	love.
God	 is	 not	 a	 syllogism;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 conclusion.	That's	why	 scientists	 can	 never
reach	to	God's	truth.	And	people	who	were	real	thinkers	have	always	denied	God
--	because	if	you	are	REALLY	thinking,	you	cannot	believe	in	God.	God	seems
to	be	 improbable,	 impossible,	absurd.	But	 logic	can	give	you	a	 false	notion.	 It
simply	 says	 that	when	you	 see	 that	 the	world	 is	 going	 together,	 you	 infer	 that
somebody	is	keeping	it	together.	Just	say	that	the	world	is	going	so	tremendously
together,	 that's	 all	 --	 "I	 don't	 know	 why,	 I	 don't	 know	 who	 is	 keeping	 it	 or
whether	anybody	is	keeping	it.	"	The	conclusion	is	not	right;	remember	that	you
don't	 know.	 That	 ignorance	will	 be	 very,	 very	 helpful,	 because	 that	 ignorance
will	be	sincere,	authentic,	true.
Now	let	me	tell	you	--	you	think	that	the	world	is	going	so	together,	that's	why
there	must	be	a	God.	There	have	been	philosophers	who	say	that	just	because	the
world	is	going	so	together,	there	cannot	be	a	God.	Because	if	God	is	there,	then
sometimes	He	will	get	bored	--	just	the	same	repetitive	world.	Then	there	will	be
some	personality	in	the	world.
It	is	so	mechanical:	the	stars	go	on	moving,	the	sun	goes	on	rising,	the	earth	goes
on	moving,	the	people	are	born,	the	fruits	and	the	seeds	and	again	the	trees	and
the	seasons.
It	 seems	so	mechanical,	many	philosophers	 say,	because	 the	world	 is	going	 so
absolutely	correctly	that	there	cannot	be	a	person	behind	it.	Because	sometimes	a
person	changes	also,	and	sometimes	he	gets	fed-up	also.	One	day	he	thinks,	"No
more	sunrise	today.
Enough	 is	enough."	One	day	he	 thinks,	 "Now,	out	of	mango	seeds	apples	will
arise.	"
If	 there	 is	 a	personality	 in	 the	world,	 just	 think	 --	 a	Picasso	painting	 the	 same
painting	every	day.	If	out	of	Picasso's	house	the	same	painting	came	every	day,
would	it	prove	that	there	is	a	person	inside,	or	there	is	a	mechanism?	You	never
go	 inside	 the	 house.	You	 don't	 know	who	 is	 inside;	 just	 a	 painting	 is	 coming
every	day	on	an	assembly	line.	The	same	painting,	everything	perfect,	accurate	-
-	will	 it	prove	 that	 there	 lives	 inside	a	great	painter,	Picasso?	or	will	 it	 simply
prove	 that	 there	 is	 a	 mechanism	 which	 goes	 on	 reproducing?	 There	 are
philosophers	who	say	because	the	world	is	running	so	mechanically	there	cannot
be	a	personality	behind	it.	Now	what	to	do?
You	say,	the	world	is	there:	there	must	be	a	creator.	There	are	philosophers	who
say	 that	 if	 the	world	 needs	 a	 creator,	 then	 the	 creator	will	 also	 need	 a	 further
creator.	Who	will	 create	 the	 creator?	And	 if	 you	 say	 that	 the	 creator	 needs	no
creator	--	don't	be	foolish.
Then	they	say,	"Then	what	is	the	point?	Then	the	world	can	be	without	a	creator,
if	 the	 creator	 himself	 can	 be	 without	 the	 creator."	 So	 you	 have	 accepted	 the
principle	basically	 that	something	can	be	without	being	created	--	so	the	world
can	be	without	a	creator.	If	you	go	into	logic	you	will	be	in	trouble.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
"This	 is	a	 lesson	 in	 logic,"	said	 the	old	professor	 in	 the	 teahouse.	"If	 the	show
starts	at	nine	and	dinner	 is	at	six,	and	my	son	has	the	measles,	and	my	brother
drives	a	Cadillac,	how	old	am	I?"
"You	are	eighty-four,"	replied	Mulla	Nasrudin	promptly.
"Right,"	 said	 the	 professor.	 "Now	 tell	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 fellows	 here	 how	 you
arrived	at	the	correct	answer."
"It	is	easy,"	said	Nasrudin.	"I	have	got	an	uncle	who	is	forty-two,	and	he	is	only
half	nuts.
You	must	be	eighty-four."
If	you	make	God	an	exercise	in	logic,	you	will	go	nuts.	Nobody	has	ever	come
out	of	 the	 logical	 inquiry	 sane.	Nobody	has	ever	 come	back	 sane,	because	 the
dimension	is	totally	different	--	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	logic.	It	has	something
to	do	with	the	heart,	something	to	do	with	love.
"I	believe	there	is	a	God";	please	don't	believe,	because	that	belief	will	become	a
rock	and	it	will	not	allow	you	to	move	deeper.	Simply	know	that	you	don't	know.
Accept	your	ignorance.	Don't	hide	behind	a	belief	--	because	there	is	possibility
from	 ignorance,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 from	 false,	 borrowed,	 logical
knowledge.	Logical	knowledge	is	barren,	love	is	fertile.
"I	 believe	 there	 is	 a	 God.	 There	 must	 be	 something	 keeping	 the	 universe
together"	 --	 this	 is	not	 the	way	 to	approach	God	--	"but	deep	 in	myself	 I	don't
feel	that	God	is	there."	Of	course...how	can	you	feel,	how	can	you	feel	a	logical
proposition	in	the	heart?	Two	plus	two	are	four,	certainly	true	--	but	can	you	love
this	 proposition?	 Can	 you	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 two	 plus	 two	 is	 four?	 And	 if
somebody	denies	 it,	will	 you	 be	 ready	 to	 become	 a	martyr	 for	 it	 because	 it	 is
true?	You	will	say,	"Forget	all	about	it.	If	you	want	to	make	two	plus	two	equal
five,	make	it.	Why	should	I	lose	my	life	for	it?"
Nobody	 dies,	 stakes	 his	 life,	 for	 a	 logical	 proposition.	 It	 is	 not	 worth	 it.	 If
somebody	denies	it,	let	it	be	so.	Two	plus	two	is	perfectly	true,	but	not	a	truth	of
the	category	of	God,	not	even	a	truth	of	the	category	of	Laila	or	Majnu.	If	your
logic	is	proved	wrong,	nothing	is	proved	wrong.	You	can	change	your	logic.	But
if	your	 love	is	proved	wrong,	you	can	never	be	 the	same	person	again.	If	your
love	 is	 proved	 wrong,	 you	 are	 proved	 wrong.	 If	 your	 logic	 is	 proved	 wrong,
nothing	is	proved	wrong.	You	can	change	the	logic;	you	remain	unaffected	by	it.
"Deep	 in	 myself	 I	 don't	 feel	 God"	 --	 because	 there	 is	 no	 way	 from	 belief	 to
feeling.	 They	 are	 not	 connected,	 so	 forget	 about	 belief.	 Otherwise	 there	 is	 a
dangerous	possibility:	you	may	pretend	that	you	feel.
Many	people	pretend.	They	go	to	the	church,	to	the	temple,	to	the	mosque	and
they	pretend	that	they	are	feeling	for	God.	Their	feeling	is	not	feeling	at	all.	In
the	 temple	you	can	 see	 tears	 flowing	down	 their	 eyes.	Outside	 the	 temple	you
never	 come	 across	 that	man	 again,	 that	man	 you	 had	 seen	 in	 the	 temple.	You
never	see	him	the	same	in	the	marketplace.	That	was	just	a	mask:	he	was	trying
hard	 to	 feel.	He	was	 even	 ready	 to	 cry	 and	 shed	 false	 tears,	what	you	call	 the
'crocodile	tears'.	You	can	see	him	praying,	but	nothing	is	arising	out	of	his	heart	-
-	 there	 is	 no	 fire	 inside,	 no	 passion	 --	 the	 prayer	 is	 just	 verbal.	 He	 goes	 on
repeating	 something	 which	 he	 has	 been	 told	 to	 repeat;	 it	 is	 just	 parrot-like.
Feeling	arises	only	when	you	live	in	tremendous,	austere	sincerity.
Forget	about	belief	in	God;	there	is	no	need.	Just	know	that	you	don't	know.	This
should	be	 the	beginning:	 I	don't	know.	Maybe	God	 is	 there,	maybe	God	 is	not
there;	 I	 have	 to	 inquire.	Now	where	 to	 find,	 how	 to	 find?	 If	God	 is	 there,	He
must	be	the	God	of	the	trees	and	the	birds	and	the	animals	also,	not	only	of	man.
Trees	don't	know	any	logic,	birds	don't	know	any	logic,	animals	don't	know	any
logic.	If	there	is	God	He	must	be	the	God	of	all.	Logic	is	very	local	--	just	a	part,
a	 very	 small	 part	 of	 the	 world.	 Humanity	 has	 a	 small	 corner	 of	 the	mind	 for
mathematical	and	logical	thinking.
The	God	must	be	the	God	of	all,	so	forget	about	logic.	Start	approaching	as	the
trees	 approach.	 Start	 approaching	 as	 the	 rivers	 run	 towards	 the	 sea,	 start
approaching	as	 the	birds	approach,	 start	 approaching	 through	your	being,	your
totality.	Dance	deeply.	Forget	about	God,	just	dance	deeply	--	because	in	a	great
dancing	mood,	in	a	moment,	mind	disappears;	you	become	total.	When	you	are
really	dancing	and	the	movement	is	fast,	mind	cannot	function.	Mind	stops;	you
become	a	no-mind.	You	are,	but	you	are	not	a	mind,	and	you	don't	think	in	terms
of	logic.	You	become	a	tree,	a	tree	in	a	strong	wind,	a	flower,	a	river,	a	rock,	a
star,	 but	 you	 lose	 that	 small	 territory	 that	 is	 dominating	 you,	 the	 territory	 of
logic.	Suddenly	you	will	start	a	contact.	You	will	feel	you	have	been	contacted
by	someone	and	you	have	contacted	someone.	A	dancer	becomes	religious,	has
to	become.	Sing	--	and	I'm	not	saying	sing	a	religious	song.	If	singing	is	true,	it
is	religious.	What	the	words	are	does	not	matter.	Run,	swim,	do	something,	and
be	lost	in	doing	it.
Hence,	 I	 emphasize	 dynamic	methods	 of	meditation:	 dancing,	 singing,	music,
T'ai	Chi,	karate.	Do	something,	because	when	you	do,	you	are	part	of	the	greater
world	 of	 the	 trees,	 of	 birds,	 of	 animals.	They	 are	 doers,	 they	 are	 not	 thinkers.
When	you	do	something,	suddenly	you	fall	into	the	oceanic	unity	of	existence.
There	is	then	a	feeling	that	God	is.	But	that	God	is	not	the	God	of	Christians	and
Hindus	and	Mohammedans.	That	God	is	your	God.	That	has	nothing	to	do	with
the	Bible	and	Gita	and	Koran.	That	God	is	YOUR	God;	that	God	has	nothing	to
do	 with	 logic,	 syllogism,	 philosophy,	 dogma.	 That	 God	 is	 a	 felt,	 lived
experience.	Then...then	you	will	know,	and	there	is	no	other	way	to	know.
People	 are	 learning	 from	 scriptures,	 and	 the	 greatest	 scripture	 that	 has	 been
given	 to	 you	 by	 existence	 remains	 unopened.	 And	 through	 scriptures	 you	 get
notions.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	went	to	see	his	lawyer	about	a	divorce.
"What	grounds	do	you	think	you	have	for	a	divorce?"	the	lawyer	asked.
"It	is	my	wife's	manners,"	said	the	Mulla.	"She	has	such	bad	table	manners	that
she	is	disgracing	the	whole	family."
"That's	bad,"	the	lawyer	said.	"How	long	have	you	been	married?"
"Nine	years,"	said	the	Mulla.
"If	you	have	been	able	 to	put	up	with	her	 table	manners	 for	nine	years,	 I	can't
understand	why	you	want	a	divorce	now,"	the	lawyer	said.
"Well,"	 said	 Nasrudin,	 "I	 did	 not	 know	 it	 before.	 I	 just	 bought	 a	 book	 on
etiquette	this	morning."
You	first	read	the	books,	then	you	decide	about	life.
First	move	into	life	and	then	decide	about	books.	And	then	you	will	be	surprised
that	the	Gita	and	the	Koran	and	the	Bible	are	not	three	books,	they	are	one	book.
Then	Buddha	and	Christ	and	Krishna	are	not	three	persons,	but	three	voices	of
the	same	person.	But	if	you	are	first	caught	up	in	the	logical	structure	of	books,
then	you	will	never	be	able	to	know	life.	Try	to	become	more	natural.	Forget	all
about	God,	the	God	that	is	discussed	in	the	universities	and	in	the	churches	and
the	temples.	Forget	about	that	God.	Be	with	the	God	that	is	already	surrounding
you,	 that	 is	your	surround.	This	moment	 the	cuckoo	goes	on	doing	her	prayer,
the	birds	go	on	doing	THEIR	prayer.	Look	at	the	trees,	at	how	prayerful	they	are.
The	whole	existence	is	in	prayer,	and	what	are	you	doing	sitting	inside	your	skull
thinking	about	whether	God	exists	or	not?
"He	must	exist	because	the	world	is	going	so	beautifully	together.	"
The	 world	 IS	 going	 beautifully	 together.	 Become	 part	 of	 this	 togetherness,
dissolve	into	this	togetherness!	When	the	river	is	flowing	by,	why	not	jump	into
it?	What	are	you	doing	 sitting	on	 the	bank	with	closed	eyes	 thinking	 the	 river
must	be	there	because...?
Drop	all	these	'becauses'.
The	 inner	 trust	 arises	 only	 when	 you	 have	 a	 live	 contact	 with	 God.	 Do
whatsoever	 you	 can	do,	 but	 please	don't	 become	 just	 heads.	Nothing	 is	wrong
with	the	head	if	it	goes	together	with	your	totality.	The	wrongness	enters	when	it
becomes	a	part,	 apart,	 and	 it	 starts	dominating	 the	whole.	Get	back	down	 into
your	belly	from	the	head!	Come	back	to	your	senses,	become	more	earthly.
That's	the	message	of	the	Bauls:	become	more	true	and	real.	When	you	are	real,
God	is	real;	when	you	are	true,	God	is	true	--	because	when	you	are	true	you	are
capable	 of	 contact	 with	 the	 truth	 of	 existence.	 When	 you	 are	 real	 you	 are
suddenly	 in	 harmony	 with	 the	 whole.	 When	 you	 are	 false,	 then	 the	 problem
arises	of	whether	God	exists	or	not.
When	 the	problem	arises	of	whether	God	exists	or	not,	 that	 simply	shows	 that
you	have	lost	your	harmony	with	the	whole.	Get	into	harmony,	get	into	line,	fall
into	line	again.
Come	back,	be	more	real	and	true.
That	 is	 the	 whole	 message	 of	 all	 religions,	 of	 religion	 as	 such.	 That's	 why
Buddha	and	Mahavir	don't	talk	about	God	they	say,	"There	is	no	need."	Mahavir
talks	about	 truth:	 "Be	 true,	be	authentic,	 and	you	will	be	Gods."	 Just	by	being
true	you	come	closer	to	truth.	It's	simple.	Can't	you	see	such	a	simple	point:	that
by	being	true,	you	come	closer	to	truth?
Belief	is	false,	borrowed	knowledge	is	false.	Drop	all	that	is	borrowed.	You	may
feel	poorer	for	the	time	being,	because	your	knowledge	gives	you	very	great	ego,
that'I	know'.
Knowing	that	you	don't	know,	you	may	feel	poor	for	a	few	days,	you	may	feel
like	a	beggar.	But	If	you	are	ready	to	be	true,	suddenly	one	day	the	conversion
happens.	When	you	have	lost	all	borrowed	knowledge,	something	arises	in	you
which	was	waiting	 and	waiting.	 Something	 arises	 in	 you	 and	 fills	 your	whole
space	of	consciousness.	That	is	what	God	is.
God	is	nothing	but	life.	God	is	not	a	person;	God	is	the	energy	you	are,	God	is
the	energy	the	trees	are,	God	is	the	energy	the	stars	are.	Everything	is	made	of
the	stuff	--	God.	God	is	not	the	creator,	God	is	this	creation.	This	very	moment
you	are	in	the	ocean	of	God,	but	He	is	so	close	and	you	are	so	far	away	in	your
head	that	bridges	are	missing.
The	last	question:
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,	HOW	COME	I'M	SO	CRAZY	ABOUT	YOU?
I	attract	crazy	people;	I	am	crazy,	that's	why.
But	 crazy	 people	 are	 beautiful	 people.	 They	 are	 the	 only	 sane	 people	 is	 the
world.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	 the	word	 'Baul'.	Baul	means	crazy,	mad.	 I	am	a
Baul,	and	I	attract	Bauls	--
that's	why.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Die	Living
5	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607050
ShortTitle:
BELOV205
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
97
mins
THE	MAN	THAT	BREATHES
LIVES	ON	THE	AIR,
AND	THE	OTHER,	UNSEEN,
RESTS	ABOVE	REACH.
BETWEEN	THE	TWO
MOVES	ANOTHER	MAN
AS	A	SECRET	LINK.
WORSHIP	KNOWINGLY.
IT	IS	A	SPORT
AMONGST	THE	THREE	OF	THEM.
MY	SEARCHING	HEART,
WHOM	DO	YOU	SEEK?
BETWEEN	THE	DOORS
OF	BIRTH	AND	DEATH,
STANDS	YET	ANOTHER	DOOR,
WHOLLY	INEXPLICABLE.
HE	WHO	IS	ABLE
TO	BE	BORN
AT	THE	DOOR	OF	DEATH,
IS	DEVOTED	ETERNALLY....
DIE	BEFORE	DYING,
DIE	LIVING.
RELIGION	is	a	very	complex	phenomenon.	Its	complexity	has	to	be	understood.
There	 are	 seven	 types	 of	 religions	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 first	 type	 is	 ignorance-
oriented.
Because	 people	 cannot	 tolerate	 their	 ignorance,	 they	 hide	 it.	 Because	 it	 is
difficult	 to	know	 that	one	does	not	know,	 it	 is	 against	 the	ego,	people	believe.
Their	belief	systems	function	to	protect	 their	egos.	They	are	helpful,	but	 in	 the
long	range	 they	are	very	harmful.	 In	 the	beginning	 they	seem	to	be	protecting,
but	finally	they	are	very	destructive.	The	very	orientation	is	in	ignorance.
Religion	 is	 light,	 religion	 is	 understanding,	 religion	 is	 awareness,	 religion	 is
authenticity.
But	a	major	part	of	humanity	remains	in	the	first	type	of	religion.	It	is	simply	to
avoid	the	reality,	to	avoid	the	gap	that	one	feels	in	one's	own	being,	to	avoid	the
black	hole	of	ignorance.
The	people	of	the	first	type	are	the	fanatics.	They	cannot	even	tolerate	that	there
can	 be	 other	 sorts	 of	 religions	 in	 the	 world.	 Their	 religion	 is	 THE	 religion.
Because	they	are	so	afraid	of	their	ignorance,	if	there	is	some	other	religion	also
then	they	will	become	suspicious,	then	doubt	will	arise.	Then	they	will	not	be	so
certain.	 To	 gain	 certainty	 they	 become	 very	 stubborn,	 madly	 stubborn.	 They
cannot	read	others'	scriptures,	 they	cannot	listen	to	other	nuances	of	truth,	 they
cannot	be	tolerant	to	other	revelations	of	God.
THEIR	 revelation	 is	 the	only	 revelation,	 and	 their	prophet	 is	 the	only	prophet.
Everything	else	is	absolutely	false.	These	people	talk	in	terms	of	absolute,	while
a	man	of	understanding	is	always	relative.
These	people	have	done	great	harm	to	religion.	Because	of	these	people,	religion
itself	looks	a	little	stupid.	Remember	not	to	be	a	victim	of	this	first	sort.	Almost
ninety	 percent	 of	 humanity	 lives	 in	 this	 first	 sort	 of	 religion,	 and	 that	 is	 in	 no
way	better	than	irreligion.
Maybe	it	is	worse	--	because	an	irreligious	person	is	not	fanatic.	An	irreligious
person	 is	more	open,	 at	 least	 ready	 to	 listen,	 ready	 to	 talk	 things	out,	 ready	 to
argue,	ready	to	seek	and	inquire.	But	the	first	type	of	religious	person	is	not	even
ready	to	listen.
When	I	was	a	student	in	the	university	I	used	to	stay	with	one	of	my	professors.
His	mother	was	a	very	devout	Hindu;	completely	uneducated,	but	very	religious.
One	day	on	a	cold	winter	night,	fire	was	burning	in	the	room	in	the	fireplace,	and
I	was	reading	RIG	VEDA.	She	came	by	the	way	and	she	asked,	"What	are	you
reading	so	 late	 in	 the	night?"	Just	 to	 tease	her,	 I	said,	"This	 is	 the	Koran."	She
jumped	 over	me,	 took	 away	 the	RIG	VEDA	 and	 threw	 it	 in	 the	 fireplace	 and
said,	"Are	you	a	Mohammedan?
How	do	you	dare	to	bring	the	Koran	in	my	house!"
Next	day	I	told	her	son,	my	professor,	that,	"Your	mother	is	a	Mohammedan"	--
because	this	sort	of	thing	has	only	been	known	to	be	done	by	Mohammedans.
Mohammedans	 burnt	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 treasures	 of	 the	world,	 the	 library	 of
Alexandria.
The	library	was	the	greatest	in	the	ancient	world.	The	fire	continued	for	almost
six	months,	 the	 library	was	 so	big.	 It	 took	 six	months	 for	 it	 to	 be	burnt	 down
completely.	And	the	man	who	burnt	it	was	a	Mohammedan,	Calipha.	His	logic	is
the	logic	of	the	first	type	of	religion.	He	came	with	a	Koran	in	one	hand	and	with
a	 burning	 torch	 in	 the	 other,	 and	 he	 asked	 the	 librarian,	 "I	 have	 a	 simple
question.	In	this	big	library,	millions	of	books	are	there...."
Those	books	contained	all	that	humanity	had	learned	up	to	that	time,	and	it	was
really	more	than	we	know	now.	That	library	contained	every	information	about
Lemuria,	 Atlantis,	 and	 all	 the	 scriptures	 of	 Atlantis,	 the	 continent	 that
disappeared	into	the	Atlantic.
It	 was	 the	 ancient-most	 library,	 a	 great	 preserve.	 Had	 it	 still	 been,	 humanity
would	have	been	 totally	different	 --	because	we	are	 rediscovering	many	 things
which	had	already	been	discovered.
This	Calipha	 said,	 "If	 this	 library	 contains	 only	 that	which	 is	 contained	 in	 the
Koran,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 needed;	 it	 is	 superfluous.	 If	 it	 contains	 more	 than	 is
contained	 in	 the	 Koran,	 then	 it	 is	 wrong.	 Then	 it	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed
immediately.	 Either	way	 it	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed.	 If	 it	 contains	 the	 same	 as	 the
Koran,	then	it	is	superfluous.	Why	manage	such	a	big	library	unnecessarily?	The
Koran	 is	 enough.	 And	 if	 you	 say	 that	 it	 contains	 many	more	 things	 than	 the
Koran,	then	those	things	are	bound	to	be	wrong,	because	the	Koran	is	THE
truth."
Holding	the	Koran	in	one	hand,	he	started	the	fire	with	the	other	hand	--	in	the
name	of	 the	Koran.	Mohammed	must	have	cried	and	wept	 that	day	 in	heaven,
because	in	his	name,	the	library	was	being	burnt.	This	is	the	first	type	of	religion.
Always	remain	alert,	because	this	stubborn	man	exists	in	everybody.
I	was	reading	just	the	other	night....
The	 two	 old	 codgers	 had	 equal	 reputations	 for	 being	 stubborn.	 When	 they
encountered	 each	 other	 in	 situations	 where	 one	 had	 to	 give	 in,	 a	 third	 party
usually	had	to	settle	the	issue.	One	day	the	old	fellows,	each	driving	a	large	load
of	hay,	met	on	a	narrow	lane.
Both	determined	not	to	give	an	inch.
Finally	one	said	to	the	other,	"I	am	prepared	to	stay	here	as	long	as	you	want	to
wait."	He	took	out	his	newspaper	and	began	to	read.	The	other	filled	his	pipe	and
smoked	contentedly.	After	half	an	hour	of	silence	he	leaned	forward	and	called
out	 to	his	neighbor,	 "Would	you	mind	 letting	me	 read	 the	paper	when	you	are
through?"
THIS	stubborn	man	exists	 in	everybody,	and	 this	 is	 the	 lowest	 type	of	man.	 It
exists	 in	Hindus,	 it	 exists	 in	Mohammedans,	 it	 exists	 in	Christians,	Buddhists,
Jains	--	it	exists	in	everybody
And	 everybody	 has	 to	 be	 aware	 not	 to	 get	 caught.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 rise	 to
higher	sorts	of	religion.
The	problem	with	this	first	type	of	religion	is	that	we	are	almost	always	brought
up	in	it.
We	are	conditioned	in	it,	so	it	becomes	almost	normal.	It	looks	normal.	A	Hindu
is	 brought	 up	 with	 the	 idea	 that	 others	 are	 wrong.	 Even	 if	 he	 is	 taught	 to	 be
tolerant,	that	tolerance	is	of	one	who	knows	towards	others	who	don't	know.	A
Jain	is	ABSOLUTELY
brought	up	with	the	belief	that	only	he	is	right;	others	are	all	ignorant,	stumbling,
groping	in	darkness.	This	conditioning	can	become	so	deep	that	you	may	forget
that	this	is	a	conditioning,	and	that	you	have	to	go	above	it.
Mulla	Nasrudin	was	telling	a	friend	his	future	through	palmistry.	He	said,	"You
will	be	poor	and	unhappy	and	miserable	until	you	are	sixty."
"Then	what?"	asked	the	man	hopefully.
"By	that	time,"	said	Nasrudin,	"you	will	be	used	to	it."
That's	the	problem:	one	can	become	used	to	a	certain	conditioning,	and	one	can
start	thinking	as	if	it	is	one's	nature,	or	as	if	it	is	the	truth.	So	one	has	to	be	very
alert	and	watchful	to	find	this	lowest	possibility	in	oneself	and	not	get	caught	in
it.
Sometimes	 we	 go	 on	 working	 hard	 in	 transforming	 our	 lives,	 and	 we	 go	 on
believing	 in	 the	first	 type	of	religion.	The	revolution	 is	not	possible	--	because
you	are	trying	something	which	is	so	low	that	it	cannot	be	really	religious.	The
first	type	of	religion	is	just	religion	in	name;	it	should	not	be	called	religion.
One	man	was	saying	to	another,	"My	son-in-law,	the	doctor,	has	been	treating	a
patient	 for	 yellow	 jaundice	 for	 twenty	 years.	 He	 just	 found	 out	 the	 man	 was
Chinese."
"Ain't	that	something?"	said	the	other	man.
"What	is	terrible	is,	he	cured	him."
Twenty	 years	 treating	 a	man	 for	 yellow	 jaundice	 --	 he	may	 be	 a	Chinese,	 but
how	long	can	he	protect	himself?	 If	continuously	you	work	on	yourself	with	a
wrong	 attitude,	 your	 nature	 starts	 yielding.	You	 start	 functioning	 the	way	 you
want	 to	 function.	 Yes,	 the	 habit	 can	 become	 second	 nature.	 Unfortunately,
sometimes	it	becomes	first	nature,	and	nature	is	completely	forgotten.
The	characteristic	of	the	first	sort	of	religion	is	imitation.	It	insists	on	imitation:
imitate	Buddha,	 imitate	Christ,	 imitate	Mahavir,	but	 imitate.	 Imitate	somebody.
Don't	be	yourself,	be	somebody	else.	And	if	you	are	very	stubborn	you	can	force
yourself	to	be	somebody	else.
You	will	never	be	somebody	else.	Deep	down	you	cannot	be.	You	will	 remain
yourself,	but	you	can	force	so	much	that	you	almost	start	looking	like	somebody
else.
Each	man	is	born	with	a	unique	individuality,	and	each	man	has	a	destiny	of	his
own.
Imitation	 is	 crime,	 it	 is	 criminal.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 become	 a	 Buddha,	 you	 may
become	 an	 imitation	Buddha.	You	may	 look	 like	Buddha,	 you	may	walk	 like
Buddha,	you	may	talk	like	Buddha,	but	you	will	miss.	You	will	miss	all	that	life
was	ready	to	deliver	to	you.
Because	Buddha	happens	only	once.	 It	 is	not	 in	 the	nature	of	 things	 to	 repeat.
God	 is	 so	 creative	 that	 He	 never	 repeats	 anything.	 You	 cannot	 find	 another
human	being	in	the	present,	in	the	past,	or	in	the	future,	who	is	going	to	resemble
you	exactly.	It	has	never	happened.	Man	is	not	a	mechanism.	He	is	not	like	Ford
cars	on	an	assembly	line;	you	can	produce	millions	alike,	exactly	alike.	Man	is	a
soul,	is	individual.	Imitation	is	poisonous.
Never	 imitate	 anybody,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 a	 victim	 of	 the	 first	 sort	 of
religion,	which	is	not	religion	at	all.
Then	there	is	the	second	type.	The	second	type	is	fear-oriented.
Man	IS	afraid,	the	world	IS	a	strange	world,	and	man	wants	to	be	secure,	safe.	In
childhood	 the	 father	 protects,	 the	mother	 protects.	But	 there	 are	many	 people,
millions	of	 them,	who	never	grow	beyond	their	childhoods.	They	remain	stuck
somewhere,	and	 they	still	need	a	 father	and	a	mother.	Hence	God	 is	called	 the
Father	 or	 the	Mother.	They	need	 a	 divine	Father	 to	 protect	 them;	 they	 are	 not
mature	enough	to	be	on	their	own.	They	need	some	security.
One	psychologist,	Winnicott,	has	been	working	with	a	particular	problem	with
small	 children	 for	 many	 years,	 and	 he	 has	 discovered	 many	 beautiful	 things.
They	are	pertinent.
You	may	have	watched	 small	 children	with	 their	 teddy	bear,	or	 their	 toy,	 their
special	 toy,	 or	 their	 blanket,	 or	 something	 that	 has	 a	 special	 personality	 to	 the
child.	The	teddy	bear...you	cannot	replace	the	teddy	bear.	You	may	say	that	you
can	find	a	better	one,	but	that	doesn't	matter.	There	is	a	love	relationship	between
the	child	and	HIS	teddy	bear.	His	teddy	bear	is	unique;	you	cannot	replace	it.	It
becomes	dirty,	it	becomes	smelly,	rotten,	but	the	child	goes	on	carrying	it.	You
cannot	find	a	new	one,	a	fresh	one.	Even	parents	have	to	tolerate	it.	Even	they
have	to	respect,	because	a	child	feels	offended.	If	the	parents	are	going	to	travel,
they	have	to	tolerate	the	teddy	bear	also;	they	have	to	treat	it	almost	as	a	member
of	the	family.	They	know	this	is	foolish,	but	for	the	child	it	has	significance.
What	significance	does	the	teddy	bear	have	for	the	child?	It	is	objective	in	a	way.
It	 is	 there,	 outside	 the	 child;	 it	 is	 part	 of	 reality.	 Certainly	 it	 is	 not	 just
imagination,	 it	 is	not	 just	 subjective;	 it	 is	not	a	dream,	 it	 is	 there.	But	 it	 is	not
totally	there;	many	of	the	child's	dreams	are	involved	in	it.	It	is	object,	objective,
but	much	subjectivity	is	involved	in	it.
For	 the	 child	 it	 is	 almost	 alive.	 The	 child	 has	 projected	many	 things	 onto	 the
teddy	bear.
He	talks	to	the	teddy	bear,	sometimes	he	becomes	angry	and	throws	it	away,	then
says'I	am	sorry'	and	takes	it	back.	It	has	a	personality,	almost	human.	Without	the
teddy	bear	he	cannot	go	 to	 sleep.	Holding,	hugging,	he	goes	 to	 sleep;	he	 feels
secure.	With	 the	 teddy	bear	 the	world	 is	okay,	everything	 is	okay.	Without	 the
teddy	bear	he	is	suddenly	alone.
So	the	teddy	bear	exists	 in	a	 totally	new	dimension	which	is	neither	subjective
nor	objective.	Winnicott	calls	it	'the	transitory	realm':	a	little	objective	and	a	little
subjective.
Many	children	grow	physically,	but	 they	never	grow	spiritually,	and	 they	need
teddy	 bears	 all	 their	 lives.	Your	 images	 of	God	 in	 the	 temple	 are	 nothing	 but
teddy	bears.
So	 when	 a	 Hindu	 goes	 into	 the	 Hindu	 temple,	 he	 sees	 something	 which	 a
Mohammedan	cannot	 see.	The	Mohammedan	can	only	 see	 a	 stone	 statue.	The
Hindu	 sees	 something	 which	 nobody	 else	 can	 see;	 it	 is	 his	 teddy	 bear.	 It	 is
objectively	there,	but	not	totally	objective.	Much	subjectivity	of	the	worshipper
is	projected	on	it;	t	functions	as	a	screen.
You	go	to	a	Jain	temple.	You	may	be	a	Hindu,	but	in	a	Jain	temple	you	will	not
feel	any	reverence	arising	in	you.	Sometimes	you	may	even	feel	a	little	offended,
because	Mahavir,	his	statue,	is	nude,	naked.	You	may	feel	a	little	offended.	You
may	like	to	go	out	as	soon	as	possible;	you	may	not	feel	any	respect.	But	then
there	comes	a	Jain	with	tremendous	respect;	it	is	his	teddy	bear,	and	he	feels	very
protected.
So	whenever	 you	 are	 in	 fear,	 you	 start	 remembering	God.	Your	God	 is	 a	 by-
product	 of	 your	 fear.	When	 you	 are	 feeling	 good,	 unafraid,	 you	 don't	 bother.
There	is	no	need.
THE	second	type	of	religion	is	fear-oriented.	It	is	very	ill.
It	is	almost	neurotic	--	because	maturity	only	comes	to	you	when	you	realize	that
you	ARE	alone,	and	you	have	to	be	alone,	and	you	have	to	face	the	reality	as	it
is.	These	transitory	teddy	bears	are	just	of	your	imagination;	they	are	not	going
to	help.	 If	 something	 is	going	 to	happen,	 it	 is	going	 to	happen;	 the	 teddy	bear
cannot	protect	you.	If	death	is	going	to	happen,	it	is	going	to	happen.	You	go	on
calling	to	God,	but	protection	cannot	come	to	you.	You	are	calling	nobody,	you
are	simply	calling	out	of	fear.	Maybe	calling	loudly	gives	you	a	certain	courage.
Maybe	 praying...prayer	 gives	 you	 a	 certain	 courage,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 God	 to
respond	to	it.
There	is	nobody	who	is	going	to	respond	to	your	prayer.	But	if	you	have	an	idea
that	somebody	is	there	to	respond	to	your	prayer,	you	may	feel	a	little	relieved,
relaxed.
Once	 I	 saw	Mulla	Nasrudin	 praying	 very	 devoutly.	When	 he	 had	 finished	 his
NAMAJ,	I	asked	him,	"Mulla,	there	must	be	some	problem;	you	were	praying	so
deeply.	Please	answer	my	one	question:	is	your	prayer	ever	answered?"
He	said,	"Yes,	one	way	or	the	other."
But	if	the	prayer	is	answered	one	way	or	the	other,	what	is	the	point	of	it?	Yes,
sometimes	it	coincides	with	facts,	sometimes	it	does	not	coincide	with	the	facts,
but	your	prayer	makes	no	difference	to	the	facts.	It	may	make	a	little	difference
in	your	mind,	but	it	makes	no	difference	in	reality.
The	fear-oriented	religion	is	the	religion	of	'don't':	don't	do	this,	don't	do	that	--
because	 fear	 is	negative.	The	Ten	Commandments	are	all	 fear-oriented	 --	don't
do	this,	don't	do	that	--	as	if	religion	is	nothing	but	avoiding	--	don't	do	this,	don't
do	 that	 --	 closing	 oneself	 in	 safety	 and	 security,	 never	 taking	 any	 risk,	 never
moving	on	the	dangerous	path,	in	fact	not	allowing	yourself	to	be	alive.	Just	as
the	first	type	of	religion	is	stupid,	fanatic,	the	second	type	of	religion	is	negative.
It	gives	a	certain	stiffness,	up-tightness.	It	is	childish.
It	 is	 a	 search	 for	 security	 which	 is	 nowhere	 possible,	 because	 life	 exists	 as
insecurity.	God	exists	as	insecurity,	danger,	and	risk.
THE	key	word	for	the	fear-oriented	religion	is	"hell',	and	of	course,	repression,
continuous	repression:	don't	do	this.	The	second	type	of	person	is	always	afraid	-
-	what	to	eat,	what	not	to	eat,	whether	to	love	a	woman	or	not	to	love	a	woman,
whether	to	make	a	house	or	not	to	make	a	house.	And	whatsoever	you	repress,
you	are	never	free	of	it;	in	fact,	the	more	and	more	you	are	in	its	power.	Because
when	you	repress	a	thing	it	goes	deeper	into	your	unconscious.	It	reaches	to	your
very	roots	and	poisons	your	whole	being.
I	have	heard....
An	old-timer	was	seeing	a	movie	for	the	first	time.	He	was	known	to	be	a	very
religious	man,	a	man	who	used	 to	do	his	prayer	regularly,	 fulfill	all	 the	duties,
had	never	been	known	to	get	involved	in	any	sort	of	problematic	situations.	He
was,	in	short,	a	very	simple	man	--	but	not	so	simple	inside.	At	one	point	in	the
feature,	a	bevy	of	shapely	girls	dashed	across	the	screen.	They	crossed	a	railroad
track,	reached	a	swimming	pool	and	began	to	disrobe	for	the	plunge.	They	had
taken	 off	 their	 shoes,	 stockings,	 shirts,	 skirts,	 and	 were	 beginning	 on...and	 a
passing	freight	train	sped	across	the	screen	and	obscured	the	view.	When	it	had
passed,	the	next	scene	showed	the	girls	frolicking	in	the	water.
The	 old-timer	 saw	 the	 show	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.	 At	 length	 an	 usher
tapped	him	on	the	shoulder.	"Are	you	not	ever	going	home?"	he	asked.
"Oh,	 I	 reckon	not	yet	 for	 awhile,"	 said	 the	old-timer.	 "One	of	 these	 times	 that
darned	train	is	going	to	be	late."
Deep	inside	you	will	always	carry	whatsoever	is	repressed.	You	may	follow	the
religion	as	ritual,	but	it	will	never	become	your	heart.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:
For	centuries	European	Jews	were	 the	victims	of	organized	persecution,	called
pogroms.
These	pogroms	took	place	so	often	that	Jews	developed	a	sense	of	humor	about
them.
In	a	small	 town	in	Poland,	soldiers	broke	 into	 the	house	of	Ostrovoski	and	his
family.
Living	with	him	were	his	wife,	three	daughters,	two	sons,	and	his	very	aged	and
religious	mother.	She	was	known	around	almost	as	a	saint.
"Line	up!"	shouted	the	sergeant	in	charge.	"We	are	gonna	beat	up	all	the	men	and
rape	all	the	women!"
"Wait,"	pleaded	Ostrovoski.	 "You	can	wallop	me	and	my	sons,	 abuse	my	wife
and	daughters,	but	please	sir,	 I	beg	you,	don't	 rape	my	mother.	She	 is	seventy-
five	years	old	and	very	religious."
"Shut	up!"	yelled	the	old	woman.	"A	pogrom	is	a	pogrom!"
Remember,	repression	is	not	a	way	towards	freedom.	Repression	is	worse	than
expression,	because	through	expression	a	person	is	BOUND	to	become	free	one
day	 or	 other.	 But	 through	 repression,	 one	 always	 remains	 obsessed.	 Only	 life
gives	you	freedom.
A	lived	life	gives	you	freedom,	an	unlived	life	remains	very	attractive,	and	the
mind	goes	on	roaming	around	whatsoever	you	have	repressed.
Smulovitz,	 aged	 eighty-three	 and	 widowed,	 refused	 to	 be	 placed	 in	 just	 any
Miami	 Beach	 old-age	 home.	 "I	 won't	 eat	 anything,"	 he	 declared	 to	 his	 son,
"unless	it	is	strictly	kosher."
The	 son	 searched	 for	 weeks	 and	 finally	 found	 a	 place	 that	 served	 meals	 in
accordance	with	the	Jewish	dietary	laws.	He	placed	his	old	father	in	the	home,
secure	in	the	knowledge	that	his	father	would	be	eating	only	kosher	food.
Three	days	 later	he	came	 for	 a	visit	 and	 learned	 that	 the	old	man	had	 left	 and
checked	into	the	Fontainbleau	Hotel.	The	boy	rushed	over	to	the	hotel,	got	a	key,
went	upstairs,	opened	 the	door,	 and	 there	was	his	 father	 in	bed	with	a	blonde.
They	were	both	stark	naked.
"Poppa,	how	could	you?"	asked	the	bewildered	boy.
"But	look,"	said	the	old	man,	"I'm	not	eating."
People	who	 live	 through	 rituals	out	of	 fear	may	avoid	one	 thing,	but	 they	will
fall	 into	 another	 --	 because	 the	 understanding	 is	 not	 their	 own.	 It	 is	 just	 fear-
oriented.	It	is	hell	they	are	afraid	of.
A	real	religion	gives	you	fearlessness:	let	 that	be	the	criterion.	If	religion	gives
you	fear,	then	it	is	not	really	religion.
The	third	type	of	religion	is	out	of	greed.
It	 is	 a	 'do'	 religion.	 Just	 as	 the	 fear-oriented	 is	 a	 'don't'	 religion,	 the	 greed-
oriented	is	a	'do'
religion:	do	this.	And	just	as	the	fear-oriented	religion	has	the	key	word	'hell',	the
religion	of	greed	has	the	key	word	 'heaven'.	Everything	is	to	be	done	in	such	a
way	that	the	world
--	 the	 other	world	 --	 is	 completely	 secure	 and	your	 happiness	 beyond	death	 is
guaranteed.
'Do'	religion	or	greed	religion	is	formal,	ritualistic,	ambitious,	desire-oriented.	It
is	 full	 of	 desires.	 See	 the	Mohammedan	 concept	 of	 paradise,	 or	 the	 Christian
concept	of	paradise,	or	the	Hindu	concept	of	paradise.	Degrees	may	be	different,
but	this	is	a	very	strange	thing:	all	that	these	people	say	one	has	to	deny	oneself
in	 this	 life,	 they	 go	 on	 providing	 in	 heaven	 in	 great	 quantities.	You	 are	 to	 be
celibate	here	just	to	achieve	heaven	where	beautiful	APSARAS,	always	young,
stuck	at	the	age	of	sixteen,	are	available.
Mohammedans	say,	"Don't	take	any	alcoholic	beverage.	But	in	heaven,	rivers	of
wine!
No	need	to	be	worried."
But	 this	 seems	 to	 be	 absurd.	 If	 something	 is	 wrong,	 it	 is	 wrong.	 How	 can	 it
become	good	and	right	in	heaven?	Then	Omar	Khayam	is	right.	He	says,	"If	in
heaven	 rivers	of	wine	are	available	 then	 let	us	practice	here,	because	 if	we	go
unpracticed,	 it	 will	 be	 difficult	 to	 live	 in	 paradise.	 So	 let	 this	 life	 be	 a	 little
rehearsal,	 so	 that	 we	 have	 the	 taste,	 and	 we	 have	 the	 capacity."	 Then	 Omar
Khayam	seems	to	be	more	logical.	In	fact,	he	is	joking	against	the	Mohammedan
concept	 of	 paradise.	 It	 is	 foolish;	 the	 whole	 concept	 is	 foolish.	 But	 people
become	religious	out	of	greed.
One	 thing	 is	certain:	 that	whatsoever	you	accumulate	here	will	be	 taken	away;
death	will	 take	 it	 away.	 So	 the	 greedy	 person	wants	 to	 accumulate	 something
which	 cannot	 be	 taken	 by	 death.	 But	 the	 accumulating	 idea,	 the	 desire	 to
accumulate,	remains	there.	Now	he	accumulates	virtue.	Virtue	is	the	coin	of	the
other	world.	He	goes	on	accumulating	virtue	so	he	can	 live	 in	 the	other	world
forever	and	forever,	in	lust.
This	type	of	man	is	basically	worldly.	His	other	world	is	nothing	but	a	projection
of	this	world.	He	will	do	because	he	has	desires,	and	he	has	ambition,	and	he	has
a	 power-lust,	 but	 his	 doing	 will	 not	 be	 of	 the	 heart.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 sort	 of
manipulation.
Mulla	Nasrudin	and	his	young	son	were	driving	in	the	country	one	winter.	It	was
snowing;	their	bullock-cart	broke	down.	They	finally	reached	a	farm-house	and
were	welcomed	 for	 the	night.	The	house	was	 cold	 and	 the	 attic	 in	which	 they
were	invited	to	spend	the	night	was	like	an	icebox.	Stripping	to	his	underwear,
the	Mulla	 jumped	into	a	featherbed	and	pulled	 the	blankets	over	his	head.	The
young	man	was	slightly	embarrassed.
"Excuse	me,	Dad,"	he	said.	"Don't	you	think	we	ought	to	say	our	prayers	before
going	to	bed?"
The	Mulla	 stuck	 one	 eye	 out	 from	 under	 the	 covers.	 "Son,"	 he	 said,	 "I	 keep
prayed	up	ahead	for	situations	just	like	this	one."
Then	things	are	just	on	the	surface.	Greed	and	fear	and	ignorance	are	just	on	the
periphery.
These	are	three	sorts	of	religions	--	and	they	are	all	mixed	together.	You	cannot
find	a	person	who	is	absolutely,	purely	of	the	first	type	or	the	second	type	or	the
third	type.
Wherever	greed	is,	 there	is	fear;	wherever	fear	is,	 there	is	greed;	and	wherever
greed	 and	 fear	 exist,	 there	 is	 ignorance	 --	 because	 they	 cannot	 exist	 without
them.	So	I	am	not	talking	about	pure	types.	I	am	classifying	simply	so	that	you
can	understand	well.
Otherwise	they	are	all	mixed.
These	three	are	the	lowest	types	of	religion.	They	should	not	be	called	religions.
Then	there	is	the	fourth	type:	the	religion	of	logic,	calculation,	cleverness.
It	 is	 'do'	 plus	 'don't'	 religion:	 worldly,	 materialistic,	 opportunistic,	 intellectual,
theoretical,	 scriptural,	 traditional.	 This	 is	 the	 religion	 of	 the	 PUNDITS,	 the
learned	 scholar	 who	 tries	 to	 prove	 God	 through	 logic,	 who	 thinks	 that	 the
mysteries	of	life	can	be	understood	through	the	head.
This	type	of	religion	creates	theology.	It	is	not	really	religion	but	just	a	very	faint
carbon	copy	of	it.	But	all	the	churches	are	based	on	it.	When	a	Buddha	exists	in
the	world,	or	a	Mohammed,	or	a	Krishna,	or	a	Christ,	then	pundits	and	scholars
and	 learned	 people,	 intellectually	 clever	 and	 cunning	 people,	 gather	 together
around	 them.	 They	 start	 working	 hard:	 "What	 does	 Jesus	 mean?"	 They	 start
creating	a	theology,	a	creed,	a	dogma,	a	church.	They	are	very	successful	people
because	 they	 are	 very	 logical	 people.	 They	 cannot	 give	 you	God,	 they	 cannot
give	you	truth,	but	they	give	you	great	organizations.
They	give	you	the	Catholic	Church,	the	Protestant	Church.	They	give	you	great
theologies,	 just	 clevernesses,	 nothing	 of	 the	 real	 experience;	 just	 intellectual,
head-oriented.	 Their	 whole	 edifice	 is	 as	 if	 one	 is	making	 a	 house	 of	 cards:	 a
small	 breeze	 and	 the	 house	 is	 gone.	 Their	 whole	 edifice	 is	 such,	 as	 if	 one	 is
trying	to	sail	in	a	boat	of	paper.
It	looks	like	a	real	boat,	the	form	is	of	a	boat,	but	it	is	a	paper	boat.	It	is	doomed,
it	 is	 already	 doomed.	 Logic	 is	 a	 paper	 boat.	 And	 life	 cannot	 be	 understood
through	logic.
I	have	heard	about	one	American:
A	very	wealthy	American	was	convinced	that	an	atomic	war	was	just	around	the
corner,	and	determined	that	he	would	survive	it.	He	bought	an	acre	of	land	in	the
middle	of	 the	Arizona	desert	 and	employed	a	 labor	 force	 to	build	him	a	home
five	miles	underground.
It	was	to	be	encased	in	lead	fifty	yards	thick,	and	equipped	with	its	own	power
plant	 which	 would	 supply	 sufficient	 electricity	 to	 give	 him	 light,	 heat,	 and
purified	 air	 for	 at	 least	 ten	 years.	 Frozen	 food,	 water,	 cigars,	 alcoholic
refreshment,	for	the	same	period	of	time	had	to	be	provided,	together	with	every
conceivable	aid	 to	 luxurious	 living.	The	 job	was	completed	 in	 three	years	 at	 a
cost	of	five	hundred	thousand	million	dollars.
The	proud	owner	went	to	the	desert	to	inspect	it,	and	a	red	Indian	shot	him	in	the
back	with	an	arrow.
That's	how	life	is:	you	make	all	the	arrangements	and	just	one	arrow	is	enough	to
finish	you.	Man	is	very	fragile.	How	can	man's	logic	understand	reality?	Man	is
so	 limited,	 his	 understanding	 is	 so	 short-sighted.	No,	 there	 is	 no	way	 through
logic.	Through	logic	a	philosophy	is	born,	but	not	real	religion.
THESE	four	are	ordinarily	known	as	religion.
The	fifth,	sixth	and	seventh	are	the	real	religions.	The	fifth	is	the	religion	based
on	intelligence;	not	on	logic,	not	on	intellect,	but	on	intelligence.	And	there	is	a
lot	of	difference	between	intellect	and	intelligence.
Intellect	is	logical;	intelligence	is	paradoxical.	Intellect	is	analytical;	intelligence
is	synthetical.	Intellect	divides,	cuts	into	pieces	to	understand	a	thing.	Science	is
based	 on	 intellect,	 dissection,	 division,	 analysis.	 Intelligence	 joins	 things
together,	 makes	 a	 whole	 out	 of	 parts	 --	 because	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
understandings:	 that	 the	part	 exists	 through	 the	whole,	not	vice	versa.	And	 the
whole	is	not	just	the	sum	of	the	parts,	it	is	more	than	the	sum.
For	 example,	 you	 can	 have	 a	 rose	 flower,	 and	 you	 can	 go	 to	 a	 scientist,	 to	 a
logician.	You	can	ask	him,	"I	want	to	understand	this	rose	flower";	what	will	he
do?	 He	 will	 dissect	 it,	 he	 will	 separate	 all	 the	 elements	 that	 are	 making	 it	 a
flower.	When	you	go	next	you	will	 find	 the	flower	gone.	 Instead	of	 the	flower
there	will	be	a	few	labelled	bottles.	The	elements	have	been	separated,	but	one
thing	is	certain	--	there	will	not	be	any	bottle	on	which	will	be	the	label	'beauty'.
Beauty	 is	 not	matter	 and	 beauty	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 parts.	Once	 you	 dissect	 a
flower,	 once	 the	wholeness	 of	 the	 flower	 is	 gone,	 beauty	 is	 also	 gone.	Beauty
belongs	to	the	whole,	it	is	the	grace	that	comes	to	the	whole.	It	is	more	than	the
sum.	Then	only	parts	are	there.
You	can	dissect	a	man;	the	moment	you	dissect,	life	disappears.	Then	you	know
only	a	dead	body,	a	corpse.	You	can	find	out	how	much	aluminium	is	there	and
how	much	iron	and	how	much	water	(eighty	percent	or	something);	you	can	find
the	whole	mechanism	the	lungs,	 the	kidneys,	everything	--	but	one	thing	is	not
there:	 life.	One	 thing	 is	not	 there	 that	was	 the	most	valuable.	One	 thing	 is	not
there	that	we	wanted	to	understand	really,	and	everything	else	is	there.
Now	even	scientists	are	becoming	alert	that	when	you	take	blood	out	of	a	man's
bloodstream	 and	 you	 examine	 it,	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 same	 blood.	 Inside	 the
bloodstream	of	the	man	it	was	alive,	throbbing	with	life.	Now	it	is	just	a	corpse.
It	cannot	be	the	same	because	the	gestalt	has	changed.	You	can	take	the	color	of
the	rose	flower	from	it,	but	is	it	the	same	color?	It	looks	the	same	but	it	cannot
be	the	same.	Where	is	that	fragileness?
Where	is	that	aliveness,	that	throb	of	life?	When	it	was	in	the	rose	flower	it	was
in	a	 totally	different	arrangement	and	 life	was	present.	 It	was	 full	of	presence;
God	was	there	beating	in	its	heart.	Taken	out,	the	part	is	there	but	you	cannot	say
the	part	is	the	same.	It	cannot	be	because	the	part	exists	in	the	whole.
Intellect	 dissects,	 analyzes.	 It	 is	 the	 instrument	 of	 science.	 Intelligence	 is	 the
instrument	of	religion;	it	joins	together.	Hence,	the	greatest	science	of	spirituality
we	have	called	Yoga.	Yoga	means	the	methodology	to	join.	Yoga	means	to	put
things	 together.	 God	 is	 the	 greatest	 totality,	 all	 things	 together.	 God	 is	 not	 a
person,	God	is	a	presence,	the	presence	when	the	total	is	functioning	in	a	great
harmony	--	the	trees	and	the	birds	and	the	earth	and	the	stars	and	the	moon	and
the	sun	and	the	rivers	and	the	ocean	--	all	together.	That	togetherness	is	God.	If
you	 dissect,	 you	 will	 never	 find	 God.	 Dissect	 a	 man;	 you	 cannot	 find	 the
presence	 that	 was	 making	 him	 alive.	 Dissect	 the	 world;	 you	 cannot	 find	 the
presence	that	is	God.
Intelligence	 is	 the	method	 to	 join	 things	 together.	An	 intelligent	person	 is	very
synthetical.	He	always	looks	for	a	higher	whole,	because	the	meaning	is	always
in	the	higher	whole.	He	always	looks	for	something	higher	in	which	the	lower	is
dissolved	 and	 functions	 as	 a	 part,	 functions	 as	 a	 note	 in	 the	 harmony	 of	 the
whole,	 gives	 its	 own	 contribution	 to	 the	 orchestra	 of	 the	 whole	 but	 is	 not
separate	 from	 it.	 Intelligence	 moves	 upwards,	 intellect	 moves	 downwards.
Intellect	goes	to	the	cause.
Please	follow	it;	the	point	is	delicate.
Intellect	goes	to	the	cause;	intelligence	goes	to	the	goal.	Intelligence	moves	into
the	future,	intellect	moves	in	the	past.	Intellect	reduces	everything	to	the	lowest
denominator.
If	 you	 ask	 what	 love	 is,	 intellect	 will	 say	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 sex	 --	 the	 lowest
denominator.
If	you	ask	what	prayer	is,	the	intellect	will	say	it	is	nothing	but	repressed	sex.
Ask	intelligence	what	sex	is,	and	intelligence	will	say	it	is	nothing	but	the	seed
of	prayer.
It	 is	 the	potential	 love.	 Intellect	 reduces	 to	 the	 lowest;	 it	 reduces	everything	 to
the	lowest.
Ask	 intellect	what	 a	 lotus	 is,	 and	 it	will	 say	 it	 is	 nothing,	 just	 an	 illusion;	 the
reality	is	the	mud	--	because	the	lotus	comes	out	of	the	mud	and	again	falls	back
into	the	mud.	The	mud	is	the	real,	the	lotus	is	just	an	illusion.	Mud	remains,	the
lotus	comes	and	goes.
Ask	intelligence	what	mud	is,	and	intelligence	will	say,	"It	is	the	potentiality	of
being	a	lotus."	Then	mud	disappears	and	millions	of	lotuses	flower.
Intelligence	goes	to	the	higher	and	higher	and	the	higher,	and	the	whole	effort	is
to	 reach	 to	 the	 ultimate,	 to	 the	 pinnacle	 of	 existence.	 Because	 things	 can	 be
explained	 only	 through	 the	 higher,	 not	 through	 the	 lower.	 You	 don't	 explain
through	 the	 lower,	 you	 explain	 away.	 And	 when	 the	 lower	 becomes	 too
important,	 all	 beauty	 is	 lost,	 all	 truth,	 all	 good.	 Everything	 that	 has	 any
significance	is	lost.	Then	you	start	crying,	"Where	is	meaning	in	life?"
In	 the	West,	 science	 destroyed	 every	 value	 and	 reduced	 everything	 to	 matter.
Now	everybody	is	worried	about	what	is	the	meaning	of	life,	because	meaning
exists	in	the	higher	whole.	See,	you	are	alone;	you	feel,	"What	is	the	meaning	of
life?"	Then	you	fall	 in	 love	with	a	woman;	a	certain	meaning	arises.	Now	two
have	become	one	--	a	little	higher.	A	single	man	is	a	little.	Lower	than	a	couple.
A	couple	is	a	little	higher.	Two	things	have	joined	together.	Two	opposite	forces
have	mingled,	the	feminine	and	the	male	energies.	Now	it	is	more	of	a	circle.
That's	 why	 in	 India	 we	 have	 the	 concept	 of	 ARDHANARISHWAR.	 Shiva	 is
painted	 as	 half	 woman	 and	 half	 man.	 The	 concept	 of	 ARDHANARISHWAR
says	that	man	is	half,	and	woman	is	half.	When	a	man	and	woman	meet	in	deep
love,	 a	 higher	 reality	 arises:	 certainly	 greater,	 more	 complex,	 because	 two
energies	are	meeting.
Then	 a	 child	 is	 born;	 now	 there	 is	 a	 family	 --	more	meaning.	Now	 the	 father
feels	a	meaning	in	his	life:	the	child	has	to	be	brought	up.	He	loves	the	child,	he
works	hard,	but	work	is	now	no	longer	work.	He	is	working	for	his	child,	for	his
beloved,	for	his	home.
He	works,	but	the	hardness	of	the	work	has	disappeared.	He	is	not	dragging	it.
Tired	of	the	whole	day,	he	comes	home	dancing.	Seeing	the	smile	on	his	child's
face,	he	is	tremendously	happy.	A	family	is	a	higher	unit	than	the	couple,	and	so
on	and	so	forth.
And	God	is	nothing	but	the	communion	of	all,	the	greatest	family	of	all.
That's	why	I	go	on	calling	 these	orange	people	my	family.	 I	would	 like	you	 to
disappear	in	the	whole.	I	would	like	you	to	be	so	absorbed	in	the	whole	that	you
remain	 individual,	 but	 you	 become	 part	 of	 a	 greater	 unity,	 bigger	 than	 you.
Meaning	arises	IMMEDIATELY
whenever	you	become	part	of	a	greater	unity.
When	a	poet	writes	a	poem,	meaning	arises	--	because	the	poet	is	not	alone;	he
has	created	something.	When	a	dancer	dances,	meaning	arises.	When	a	mother
gives	 birth	 to	 a	 child,	 meaning	 arises.	 Left	 alone,	 cut	 from	 everything	 else,
isolated	like	an	island,	you	are	meaningless.	Joined	together	you	are	meaningful.
The	 bigger	 the	whole,	 the	 bigger	 is	 the	meaning.	That's	why	 I	 say	God	 is	 the
biggest	 conceivable	 whole,	 and	 without	 God	 you	 cannot	 attain	 to	 the	 highest
meaning.	God	is	not	a	person;	God	is	not	sitting	somewhere.	Those	ideas	are	just
stupid.	 God	 is	 the	 total	 presence	 of	 existence,	 the	 being,	 the	 very	 ground	 of
being.
GOD	exists	wherever	 there	 is	 union;	wherever	 there	 is	Yoga,	God	 comes	 into
existence.
You	are	walking	alone;	God	is	fast	asleep.	Then	suddenly	you	see	somebody	and
you	smile;	God	is	awakened,	the	other	has	come	in.	Your	smile	is	not	isolated,	it
is	a	bridge.
You	have	thrown	a	bridge	towards	the	other.	The	other	has	also	smiled,	there	has
been	a	response.	Between	you	both	arises	that	space	I	call	God	--	a	little	throb.
When	 you	 come	 to	 the	 tree	 and	 you	 sit	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 tree,	 completely
oblivious	to	the	existence	of	the	tree,	God	is	fast	asleep.	Then	suddenly	you	look
at	the	tree,	and	an	upsurge	of	feeling	for	the	tree	and	God	has	arisen.
Wherever	 there	 is	 love,	God	is;	wherever	 there	 is	 response,	God	is.	God	is	 the
space;	 it	 exists	 wherever	 union	 exists.	 That's	 why	 I	 say	 love	 is	 the	 purest
possibility	of	God,	because	it	is	the	subtlest	union	of	energies.
Hence	the	insistence	of	the	Bauls	that	love	is	God.	Forget	God,	love	will	do.	But
never	forget	love,	because	God	alone	won't	do.
Intelligence	 is	 discrimination,	 understanding.	 Truth	 is	 the	 key	 word,	 sat.	 The
man	who	moves	through	intelligence	moves	towards	SAT,	truth.
Higher	 than	 intelligence	 is	 the	 sixth	 type	 of	 religion.	 I	 call	 it	 the	 religion	 of
meditation.
Meditation	is	awareness,	spontaneity,	what	the	Bauls	call	SAHAJA	MANUSH,
the	spontaneous	man.	Freedom	--	it	is	non-traditional,	it	is	radical,	revolutionary,
individual.
The	 key	word	 is	CHIT,	 consciousness.	 Intelligence	 is	 still	 the	 highest	 form	of
intellect,	 intelligence	 is	 the	 purest	 form	 of	 intellect.	 The	 ladder	 is	 the	 same.
Intellect	is	going	downwards	on	the	same	ladder,	intelligence	is	going	upwards,
but	the	ladder	is	the	same.
In	meditation	the	ladder	is	thrown.	Now,	no	more	movement	on	the	same	ladder,
neither	 upwards	 nor	 downwards.	Now,	 no	more	movement,	 but	 a	 state	 of	 no-
movement	inside,	a	drowning	into	oneself,	a	sinking	in.
Intellect	 is	 other-oriented;	 intelligence	 is	 also	 other-oriented.	 Intellect	 cuts	 the
other,	 intelligence	 joins	 the	 other,	 but	 both	 are	 other-oriented.	 So	 if	 you
understand	rightly,	the	first	four	types	of	religion	I	don't	call	religion.	They	are
pseudo-religions.	Real	religion	starts	with	 the	fifth	 type,	and	that	 is	 the	 lowest,
but	REAL.	The	sixth	type	of	religion	is	that	of	meditation,	consciousness,	CHIT.
One	 simply	 moves	 into	 oneself.	 All	 directions	 are	 dropped,	 all	 dimensions
dropped.	One	simply	tries	to	be	oneself,	one	simply	tries	just	to	be.	That	is	where
Zen	exists,	in	the	sixth	type	of	religion.	The	very	word	'Zen'	means	DHYANA,
meditation.
Then	 comes	 the	 highest	 type	 of	 religion,	 the	 seventh:	 the	 religion	 of	 ecstasy,
SAMADHI.
Just	as	the	fifth	type	has	the	key	word	SAT,	truth,	and	the	sixth	type,	the	religion
of	meditation,	has	 the	key	word	CHIT,	consciousness,	 the	seventh.	 the	highest,
has	ANAND,	bliss,	ecstasy.	That	is	the	key	word:	SAT-CHIT-ANANDA,	truth,
consciousness,	ecstasy.
The	Bauls	belong	to	the	seventh	type	--	joy,	celebration,	song,	dance,	ecstasy	--
ANAND.
They	 make	 meditation	 tremendously	 joyful	 --	 because	 a	 person	 can	 be
meditative	 and	 can	 become	 sad.	 A	 person	 can	 be	meditative	 and	 can	 become
very	silent	and	may	miss	bliss.
Because	 meditation	 can	 make	 you	 silent,	 absolutely	 still,	 but	 unless	 dance
happens	in	it,	something	is	missing.	Peace	is	good,	peace	is	very	beautiful,	but
something	is	lacking	in	it;	bliss	is	lacking.	When	peace	starts	dancing	it	is	bliss.
When	peace	becomes	active,	overflowing,	it	is	bliss.	When	bliss	is	enclosed	in	a
seed	it	is	peace.	And	when	the	seed	has	sprouted,	not	only	that,	but	the	tree	has
bloomed	and	the	flowers	have	come	and	the	seed	has	become	a	bloom,	then	it	is
SAMADHI.	That	is	the	highest	type	of	religion.
Peace	 has	 to	 dance	 and	 silence	 has	 to	 sing.	 And	 unless	 your	 innermost
realization	becomes	a	laughter,	something	is	still	lacking.	Something	still	has	to
be	done.
That's	where	the	Bauls	enter.	Their	religion	is	that	of	ecstasy.	Now	the	song	for
today:	THE	MAN	THAT	BREATHES
LIVES	ON	THE	AIR,
AND	THE	OTHER,	UNSEEN,
RESTS	ABOVE	REACH.
BETWEEN	THE	TWO
MOVES	ANOTHER	MAN
AS	A	SECRET	LINK.
WORSHIP	KNOWINGLY.
The	man	that	breathes,	and	the	man	that	lives	beyond...	between	these	two	there
is	 a	 third	man,	 the	 link:	body,	psyche,	 and	 soul.	Or,	you	can	use	 the	Christian
Trinity	--	God,	the	Son,	and	the	Holy	Ghost.
Body	 is	 THE	MAN	THAT	BREATHES.	By	 breathing,	 the	 body	 is	 alive.	 The
breath	 goes	 into	 your	 body;	 it	 gives	 PRANA,	 vitality,	 to	 your	 body.	Without
breath	 the	 body	 would	 disappear,	 because	 without	 breath	 the	 body	 would	 be
disconnected	from	the	atmosphere.
The	atmosphere	is	continuously	pouring	its	own	being	into	your	being.	Exhaling,
inhaling
--	 atmosphere	 is	 continuously	 keeping	 you	 alive,	 flowing,	 streaming.	 "The
body,"	Bauls	say,	"is	the	first	man."
Then	there	is	a	beyond	which	needs	no	breathing,	which	is	eternally	there,	which
needs	 nothing.	 That	 is	 the	 God	 of	 the	 Bauls.	 They	 call	 the	 essential	 man
ADHAR	MANUSH.
And	between	the	two	is	the	psyche,	the	mind,	or	call	it	heart.	Bauls	call	it	heart;
the	Holy	Ghost.	It	exists	as	a	link.
The	whole	work	has	to	be	done	in	the	psyche.	On	one	pole	of	it	exists	the	body,
on	the	other	pole,	God.	The	whole	work	of	discipline,	of	SADHANA,	has	to	be
done	in	the	psyche.	That	is	what	meditation	is	all	about.
THE	MAN	THAT	BREATHES
LIVES	ON	THE	AIR,
AND	THE	OTHER,	UNSEEN,
RESTS	ABOVE	REACH.
BETWEEN	THE	TWO
MOVES	ANOTHER	MAN
AS	A	SECRET	LINK.
WORSHIP	KNOWINGLY.
The	Bauls	 say	 that	 just	worship	won't	 do,	 but	WORSHIP	KNOWINGLY.	The
body	has	to	worship	the	psyche,	and	the	psyche	has	to	worship	the	unseen.	This
is	what	 they	mean	by	 'worship	knowingly'.	Let	your	body	follow	your	psyche,
your	heart,	 let	your	body	follow	your	feelings,	and	let	your	feelings	follow	the
unknown,	 the	 unseen.	 Then	 you	 are	 a	 worshipper.	 Then	 worship	 is	 not	 an
ordinary	ritual	that	you	do	in	the	temple;	then	worship	is	something	that	you	do
in	your	own	being.	That	is	your	real	temple.
IT	IS	A	SPORT
AMONGST	THE	THREE	OF	THEM.
MY	SEARCHING	HEART,
WHOM	DO	YOU	SEEK?
And	the	Bauls	say	it	is	a	LEELA,	a	sport.	These	three	are	running,	chasing	each
other:	the	body,	the	psyche,	and	the	soul.
MY	SEARCHING	HEART,
WHOM	DO	YOU	SEEK?
This	word	 LEELA,	 sport,	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 It	 is	 uniquely	 Eastern.	 In	 the
West	never	has	a	concept	like	that	ever	arisen.	In	the	West	the	concept	of	God	is
that	 of	 a	worker,	 not	 of	 a	 player.	 The	 concept	 of	God	 is	 of	 a	 creator,	 and	 the
creation	seems	to	be	very	serious.
But	the	concept	of	LEELA	is	of	fun,	play.	In	the	East	we	have	known	that	God	is
not	serious,	and	religion	need	not	be	serious.	God	is	the	greatest	player;	He	is	in
a	great	play.
As	a	painter	plays	with	the	brush	and	the	paint	and	the	color	on	the	canvas,	out
of	play	something	arises.	The	painting	can	be	done	in	two	ways:	you	can	be	very
serious	about	it
--	but	then	you	will	be	just	a	technician.	You	may	do	it	perfectly	well,	but	it	will
lack	 something:	 it	will	 lack	 spirit.	 That	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 technician
and	an	artist.	An	artist	has	no	plan.	He	simply	sits	before	the	canvas	and	starts
playing.	He	is	more	childlike.	Out	of	his	play	something	arises.	That	is	the	best
way	to	understand	modern	painting.
Modern	 painting	 is	 more	 Eastern	 than	Western.	 Picasso	 is	 more	 Eastern	 than
Western,	 because	 he	 is	 playing.	 That's	 why	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 understand
modern	painting.
Classical	painting	is	very	simple	to	understand.	It	reproduces	life	exactly,	it	is	a
replica.	 It	 is	 more	 like	 photography	 --	 mechanical.	 Modern	 painting	 is	 very
difficult	to	understand.
It	is	as	difficult	to	understand	as	the	flowers.	Somebody	asked	Picasso	--	seeing
his	painting	he	asked,	"What	does	it	mean?"	Picasso	said,	"Nobody	goes	to	the
plants	 and	 asks,	 and	 nobody	 goes	 to	 the	 birds	 and	 asks,'What	 do	 you	mean?'
Why	do	you	come	 to	me,	and	me	alone?	Go	 to	 the	plants	and	ask	 the	 flowers
'why?'"
A	great	LEELA	goes	on.
BOTANISTS	have	become	aware	of	something	very	rare	and	meaningful.	They
have	 become	 aware	 that	 insects	 play	 with	 flowers	 and	 imitate	 flowers;	 they
deceive	flowers.
Butterflies	imitate	flowers	and	deceive	flowers.	And	on	the	other	hand,	flowers
imitate	 insects	and	butterflies,	and	 the	play	goes	on.	Lizards	 imitate	rocks,	and
rocks	imitate	lizards.	The	great	play	continues,	hide-and-seek.
LEELA	is	a	beautiful	concept.	It	relaxes	you	tremendously,	absolutely.	If	God	is
in	 LEELA,	 then	 don't	 be	 serious	 and	 don't	 keep	 long	 faces;	 there	 is	 no	 need.
Become	more	playful.	Life	 is	 a	 sport.	Look	at	 life	with	 the	 eyes	of	play,	 non-
seriously.	The	difference	is	tremendous.
You	go	on	a	street	to	your	office;	then	you	have	a	totally	different	mind	--	tense,
ambitious,	worried,	stressed.	On	the	same	route	you	go	for	a	morning	walk	--	the
road	 is	 the	 same,	 the	 trees	are	 the	 same,	 the	birds	are	 the	 same,	 the	 sky	 is	 the
same,	you	are	the	same,	the	people	passing	are	the	same.	But	when	you	go	for	a
morning	 walk	 you	 have	 no	 stress,	 no	 tension,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 going
anywhere	in	particular.	It	is	just	a	morning	walk	--	you	are	enjoying	it,	you	are
playful.
Prayer	 is	a	play.	So	 if	you	go	 to	 the	 temple	and	you	become	very	serious,	you
will	miss	the	temple.	Go	to	the	temple	to	laugh,	go	to	the	temple	to	enjoy,	go	to
the	temple	to	celebrate.
The	Bauls	sing,
I	have	no	knowledge
of	my	own	self.
If	for	once
I	could	know	what	I	am,
the	unknown	would	be	known.
God	is	nearby
and	yet	far	away	--
like	the	mountain	hiding
behind	my	streaming	hair.
I	travel	distant	towns
of	Dakar	and	Delhi
constantly	searching,
but	circling	round	my	own	knees.
God	is	alive
in	my	living	form.
Only	purity	of	heart
will	lead	me	to	Him.
The	more	I	study
the	wisdom	of	the	Vedas,
the	more	I	am	bewildered.
I	am	blind
in	spite	of	my	eyes.
Only	purity	of	heart
will	lead	me	to	Him.
God	is	alive
in	my	own	living	form.
Never	in	my	life
did	I	once	face	the	man
who	lives	in	my	own	little	room.
My	eyes	blinded
by	the	weight	of	storms
can	see	nothing,	even	when	He	stirs.
My	hands	fail
to	reach	His	hands
as	He	is	forever	engaged
with	the	world.
I	keep	silent	when	they	call	Him
the	word	of	life,
and	the	water
and	the	fire
and	the	earth
and	the	air,
while	no	one	is	sure.
Could	I	ever	wish	to	know
anyone	else?
I	do	not	yet	know
my	own	little	room....
THE	 Bauls	 say	 if	 you	 can	 know	 your	 own	 little	 room,	 you	 will	 know	 all	 --
because	He	is	there.	He	is	in	the	body	as	the	breathing	man.	He	is	in	the	psyche
as	 your	 intelligence,	 awareness,	 meditation.	 And	 He	 is	 beyond	 you.	 Move
slowly:	 let	 the	 body	 follow	 feeling,	 let	 the	 feeling	 follow	 the	 unknown.	Don't
move	 through	knowledge,	move	 through	 feeling,	 and	 then	you	will	 be	 in	 tune
with	God.
He	does	not	dwell
in	the	complex	of	stars,
nor	in	limitless	space.
He	is	not	found
in	the	ethical	scriptures
or	in	the	texts	of	the	Vedas.
He	lives	beyond
the	existence	of	all.
The	man	is	here,
in	his	form	without	form
to	adorn	the	hamlet	of	my	limbs
and	the	sky	above
in	the	glow	of	his	feelings,
the	platform	of	spontaneous	matter.
Even	matter,	the	body,	is	spontaneous.	That	is	his	platform.	The	man	is	here!
If	you	fail	to	recognize
your	own	heart,
can	you	ever	come	to	know
the	great	unknown?
The	farthest	away
will	be	nearest	to	you
and	the	unknown	within	your	knowing.
Fill	up	your	home
with	the	world	abroad,
and	you	will	attain
the	unattainable	man.
Open	your	heart	to	the	skies,	to	the	unknown,	to	the	unfamiliar.	Don't	move	with
knowledge,	 because	 knowledge	 means	 that	 which	 you	 have	 already	 known.
That's	why	the	Vedas	won't	help.	Veda	means	knowledge;	 the	very	word	 'veda'
means	knowledge.	 It	 comes	 from	a	 root	VED,	which	means	 'to	know'.	Hence,
the	Bauls'	continuous	criticism	of	the	Vedas.	Knowledge	is	not	going	to	help.
Move	 into	 the	 unknown,	 wait	 for	 the	 unknown	 to	 knock	 at	 your	 door.	 You
simply	wait	--
alert,	expectant,	ready	to	receive,	with	a	feeling	heart,	and	being	playful.
BETWEEN	THE	DOORS
OF	BIRTH	AND	DEATH,
STANDS	YET	ANOTHER	DOOR,
WHOLLY	INEXPLICABLE.
HE	WHO	IS	ABLE
TO	BE	BORN
AT	THE	DOOR	OF	DEATH,
IS	DEVOTED	ETERNALLY....
DIE	BEFORE	DYING,
DIE	LIVING.
A	 very	 significant	 secret:	 between	 the	 doors	 of	 birth	 and	 death,	 stands	 yet
another	door...
that	door	is	what	we	call	love.	Have	you	watched?	Between	birth	and	death	there
is	nothing	else	to	happen	but	love.	If	you	miss	love	between	birth	and	death,	you
have	missed	the	whole	opportunity	of	life.	You	may	gather	knowledge	and	you
may	gather	valuable	stones,	and	you	may	gather	money	and	prestige	and	power,
but	if	you	have	missed	love,	then	you	have	missed	the	real	door.
The	first	door,	 the	door	of	birth,	 is	simply	an	opportunity	 to	move	 through	 the
second	door,	the	door	of	love.	Between	birth	and	death	is	love.	In	fact,	life	exists
only	to	give	an	opportunity	to	love	and	be	loved.	If	that	is	missed,	all	is	missed.
If	 that	 is	not	missed,	 then	even	 if	you	have	missed	all,	nothing	 is	missed.	And
this	door	of	love	is	REAL	death.	The	other	death	that	will	come	in	the	end	is	not
real,	 because	 you	will	 survive	 it.	 You	will	 be	 reborn	 again.	 As	 death	 follows
birth,	so	birth	follows	death.	They	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	But	if	you
move	into	the	door	of	love,	then	you	die,	and	you	die	so	totally	that	then	there	is
no	birth	for	you,	and	of	course,	no	death.	Love	is	the	real	death	because	the	ego
disappears	completely.
In	 ordinary	 death	 the	 body	 disappears,	 ego	 remains,	 and	 that	 carries	 you	 into
new	lives.
That	is	the	whole	thread	of	rebirth.	Once	that	thread	is	broken	and	the	root	is	cut,
you	disappear	 from	 the	world	of	matter,	 from	 the	world	of	 the	visible	 into	 the
world	of	the	invisible,	the	beyond,	the	other	shore.
BETWEEN	THE	DOORS
OF	BIRTH	AND	DEATH,
STANDS	YET	ANOTHER	DOOR,
WHOLLY	INEXPLICABLE.
HE	WHO	IS	ABLE
TO	BE	BORN
AT	THE	DOOR	OF	DEATH,
IS	DEVOTED	ETERNALLY....
That	is	what	Bauls	call	the	real	door	of	death.
DIE	BEFORE	DYING,
DIE	LIVING.
If	you	can	die	before	dying,	that	is,	if	you	can	pass	through	the	door	of	love,	if
you	 can	 die	 living,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 death	 for	 you.	 Then	 you	 have	 become
deathless,	then	you	are	immortal,	then	you	are	a	God.	Then	you	are	no	more	part
of	the	material	world	where	bodies	are	formed	and	where	bodies	are	de-formed.
Then	you	are	no	more	into	the	world	of	forms,	of	creation,	destruction;	you	are
beyond.	That	beyond	is	already	in	you.
The	man	is	here.	It	is	right	now,	in	this	moment,	here.	But	you	will	have	to	pass
through	the	alchemy	of	love,	otherwise	you	will	never	know	it.
The	Bauls	sing,
Reaching	for	reality
is	lame	talk
to	describe	the	goal
of	the	lover-worshipper.
He	will	attain
the	great	unattainable.
Stare	at	the	face
of	the	invisible	one
bearing	the	nectar	of	love.
How	can	I	capture	the	man
who	is	not	to	be	caught?
He	lives	on	the	other	bank
of	the	river,
and	the	skin	of	my	eyes
screens	my	sight.
The	 body	 screens	 your	 sight.	 If	 you	 become	 too	 identified	 with	 the	 body,	 it
becomes	 a	 barrier,	 Reverse	 the	 process:	 let	 the	 body	 follow	 the	 heart,	 not	 the
heart	the	body.	If	the	heart	has	to	follow	the	body,	body	becomes	a	barrier.	Then
you	 cannot	 reach	 the	 other	 shore.	 If	 the	 body	 follows	 the	 heart,	 the	 body
becomes	the	boat.
Where	is	the	home
of	the	moon?
And	what	makes
the	cycle	of	the	days
wander,	encircling
the	moving	nights?
The	lunar	eclipse
in	the	night	of	the	full	moon
is	known	to	all.
But	no	one	enquires
about	the	blackened	moon
on	the	darkest	night
of	the	month.
He	who	is	able
to	make	the	full	moon	rise
in	the	sky
of	the	darkest	night,
has	a	right	to	claim
the	glory	of	the	three	worlds	--
the	heaven,	the	earth	and	the	other	spheres.
"He	who	is	able	to	make	the	full	moon	rise	in	the	sky	of	the	darkest	night"...that
is	their	description	of	love.
A	LOVER	is	capable	of	creating	life	out	of	death;	he	can	do	the	miracle.	He	can
make	the	moon	rise	in	the	darkest	night.	That's	why	there	is	a	fear	about	love.	I
have	observed	thousands	of	people	trembling	whenever	they	are	on	the	threshold
of	love,	afraid.	Why	does	so	much	fear	come	out	of	love.
Erich	Fromm	has	written	a	beautiful	book	in	which	he	says	that	love	seems	to	be
one	of	the	most	risky	things,	one	of	the	most	dangerous.	And	there	is	tremendous
fear	in	humanity	about	love.	People	talk	about	love;	they	may	be	talking	just	to
deceive	 themselves.	Their	 talk	may	be	 just	 a	 substitute	 to	 give	 them	 a	 feeling
that	they	are	lovers.
But	people	are	afraid	of	love.	It	gives	fear,	because	love	is	death.	Your	ego	has	to
be	dropped	completely,	utterly	effaced.	 It	 is	 suicide.	Fear	 is	natural,	but	 if	you
are	courageous	enough	and	you	can	pass	through	it,	if	you	can	carry	the	cross	of
love	on	your	shoulders,	resurrection	is	certain.	The	moment	ego	is	dropped,	you
are	born.
He	who	knows
the	essence	of	love,
fears	none.
Devoted	only
to	love's	own	form,
alive	before	his	eyes,
his	home	is	in
happiness	itself.
Lulling	lust
by	lust	alone
he	raids	the	heart	of	the	God
that	churns	all	hearts,
finding	himself
in	perennial	love.
Let	your	heart	be	a	caring	home
for	the	man	of	your	heart.
Focus	your	vision
through	the	eye-black	of	loving.
He	will	be	floating
on	the	mercurial	mirror.
Hours	wither	like	broken	games
on	the	playground	of	the	earth.
Abandon	search
and	join	the	carnival	of	love.
Abandon	search
and	join	the	carnival	of	love....
The	Bauls	 say	 just	 intellectual	 search,	 seeking,	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help.	 "Join	 the
carnival	of	love":	that	is	what	prayer	is,	that-is	what	worship	is.
Be	 ecstatic,	 joyful,	 celebrating,	 singing,	 dancing.	 Let	 God	 be	 allowed	 to	 be
playful	 through	you.	Let	playfulness	be	your	only	prayer.	Let	 joy	be	your	only
worship.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Now	Is	Not	Part	Of	Time
6	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607060
ShortTitle:
BELOV206
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
85
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
HOW	SHOULD	I	PRAY?	I	DON'T	KNOW	HOW	TO	PROPERLY	EXPRESS
THIS
LOVE	THAT	I	FEEL	INTO	PRAYER.
PRAYER	is	not	a	 technique,	 it	 is	not	a	 ritual,	 it	 is	not	a	 formality.	There	 is	no
pattern	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 spontaneous	 outpouring	 of	 the	 heart,	 so	 don't	 ask	 how,
because	there	is	no	how	and	there	cannot	be	any	how	to	it.	Whatsoever	happens
in	 the	moment	 is	 right.	 If	 tears	 come,	 good.	 If	 you	 sing,	 good.	 If	 you	 dance,
good.	 If	nothing	comes	and	you	simply	 remain	silent,	good.	Because	prayer	 is
not	 in	 the	expression;	 it	 is	not	 in	 the	container,	 it	 is	 in	 the	content.	Sometimes
silence	 is	 prayerful,	 sometimes	 singing	 is	 prayerful.	 It	 depends	 on	 you,	 it
depends	on	the	heart.	So	if	I	say	sing,	and	you	sing	because	I	have	told	you	to
sing,	then	the	prayer	is	false	from	the	very	beginning.	Listen	to	your	heart,	feel
your	moment,	and	let	it	be.	And	whatsoever	happens	is	good.
Sometimes	nothing	will	happen,	but	that	is	what	is	happening.	You	allow	it,	you
don't	impose	your	will	on	it.	When	you	ask	how,	you	are	trying	to	impose	your
will,	you	are	trying	to	plan.	That's	how	prayer	has	been	missed.	That's	how	all
the	 churches	 and	 religions	 have	 become	 rituals.	 They	 have	 a	 set	 prayer,	 a	 set
form:	 the	 authorized	 version,	 the	 approved.	 But	 how	 can	 anybody	 approve
prayer?	How	can	anybody	give	you	an	authorized	version?
Prayer	has	to	arise	in	you,	it	has	to	flower	in	you.	And	each	moment	has	its	own
prayer,	 and	 each	 mood	 has	 its	 own	 prayer.	 Nobody	 knows	 what	 is	 going	 to
happen	 to	 your	 innermost	 world	 tomorrow	morning.	 How	 can	 it	 be	 fixed?	 A
fixed	prayer	is	a	false	prayer:	this	much	can	certainly	be	said.	A	ritualized	prayer
is	 no	 longer	 prayer:	 this	 can	 be	 said	 in	 absolute	 terms.	 An	 unritualized,
spontaneous	gesture	--	that's	what	prayer	is.
Sometimes	you	may	feel	very	sad,	because	sadness	also	belongs	to	God.	Sadness
is	also	divine.	There	 is	no	necessity	 to	always	be	happy.	Then	sadness	 is	your
prayer.	 Then	 let	 your	 heart	 cry	 and	 let	 your	 eyes	 pour	 down	 tears.	 Then	 let
sadness	be	offered	to	God.
Whatsoever	 is	 there	 in	your	heart,	 let	 it	be	offered	 to	 the	Divine	Feet	 --	 joy	or
sadness,	sometimes	even	anger.
Sometimes	one	is	angry	with	God.	If	you	cannot	be	angry	with	God,	you	have
not	yet	known	love.	Sometimes	one	is	really	 in	a	deep	rage.	Then	let	anger	be
your	 prayer.	 Fight	 with	 God	 --	 He	 is	 yours,	 you	 are	 His,	 and	 love	 knows	 no
formality.	Love	can	survive	all	fights.	If	 it	cannot	survive	a	fight,	 then	it	 is	not
love.	So	sometimes	you	don't	feel	like	praying;	then	let	that	be	your	prayer.	You
say	to	God,	"Wait!	I'm	not	in	the	mood,	and	the	way	you	are	doing	things,	it	is
not	even	worth	praying."	But	let	it	be	a	spontaneous	pouring	of	your	heart.
Never	be	inauthentic	with	God	because	that	is	the	way	of	not	being	with	Him.	If
you	 are	 insincere	 with	 God	 --	 deep	 down	 you	 are	 complaining,	 and	 on	 the
surface	praying?	--
then	God	will	 see	 the	 complaint,	 not	 the	 prayer.	You	 have	 been	 false.	He	 can
look	 directly	 into	 your	 heart.	Whom	 are	 you	 trying	 to	 deceive?	 The	 smile	 on
your	face	is	not	going	to	deceive	God;	your	truth	will	be	known	to	Him.	He	can
only	 know	 your	 truth;	 lies	 don't	 exist	 for	 Him.	 So	 let	 the	 truth	 be	 there.	 You
simply	present	your	truth	to	Him	and	say	that	today	you	are	angry,	you	are	angry
with	His	world,	you	are	angry	with	Him,	you	are	angry	with	your	life:	"I	hate	it!
And	I	cannot	pray,	so	you	will	have	to	remain	without	my	prayer	today.	I	suffer
much;	now	you	suffer."
Talk	to	Him	as	one	talks	to	one's	lover,	one's	friend,	one's	mother.	Talk	to	Him	as
one	talks	to	a	small	child.
I	was	staying	with	a	family,	and	the	mother	ordered	the	small	child	to	pray.	He
was	very	 interested,	and	he	was	not	 ready	 to	go	 to	sleep,	and	he	wanted	 to	be
with	 me	 a	 little	 longer.	 But	 the	 family	 was	 very	 disciplinarian,	 so	 they	 said,
"Now	it	is	nine	o'clock.	You	go	and	sleep,	and	don't	forget	your	prayer."	He	was
angry;	I	could	see	it.	He	went	into	his	room.	I	followed	just	to	listen	to	what	he
was	going	to	pray.	In	the	darkness	I	heard	him	say,	"God,	make	bad	people	good
and	good	people	nice."	He	knows	his	mother	is	good,	his	father	is	good,	but	not
nice.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 another	 child.	 He	 was	 staying	 in	 a	 guest	 house	 with	 the
family.	The	first	night	he	prayed.	He	always	used	to	sleep	with	a	small	light	on,
but	 there	was	no	 light	and	 the	electricity	had	gone.	Suddenly,	as	he	prayed	 the
electricity	disappeared.	He	was	just	getting	into	his	bed,	and	he	told	his	mother,
"Let	me	get	up	again	and	let	me	pray	again	more	carefully,	because	the	night	is
going	 to	be	dark."	First	he	had	 just	prayed	by	 the	way,	but	now	 the	night	was
going	to	be	dark	and	there	was	no	light	and	he	was	more	afraid.	He	said,	"Let	me
pray	again.	Let	me	get	out,	and	let	me	pray	more	carefully,	because	now	there	is
more	danger."
Listen	to	children's	prayer	and	become	a	child.
All	the	religions	say	that	God	is	Father.	In	fact,	the	emphasis	should	be	that	man
is	the	child.	That	is	the	real	meaning	when	we	call	God	'the	Father'.	But	we	have
forgotten;	God	 is	 the	Father	but	we	are	not	His	children.	Forget	whether	He	 is
Father	or	not.	You	just	be	a	child	--	spontaneous,	 true,	authentic.	Don't	ask	me
and	don't	ask	anybody	how	to	pray.
Let	the	moment	decide,	let	the	moment	be	decisive,	and	the	truth	of	the	moment
should	be	your	prayer.
That's	my	 answer:	 the	 truth	 of	 the	moment,	 whatsoever	 it	 is,	 unconditionally,
should	be	your	prayer.	And	once	you	allow	the	truth	of	 the	moment	to	possess
you,	you	will	start	growing,	and	you	will	know	tremendous	beauties	of	prayer.
You	have	entered	on	the	path.	But	if	you	simply	go	on	repeating	a	certain	prayer,
a	technique,	then	you	will	miss.
You	will	never	enter	on	the	path,	you	will	just	remain	outside.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 TO	 STEAL	 YOUR	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 I	 AM
INCESSANTLY
PRAYING.	PLEASE	OSHO,	AT	LEAST	BLESS	ME,	SO	THAT	MY	PRAYER
MAY
BECOME	MORE	INTENSE	AND	ALIVE.
THAT'S	BEAUTIFUL.
A	 disciple	 has	 to	 steal	much	 from	 the	Master,	 because	 there	 are	 a	 few	 things
which	cannot	be	given;	only	you	can	take,	I	cannot	give.	The	nature	of	the	thing
is	 such	 that	 it	 cannot	be	given,	but	you	can	 take.	A	disciple	has	much	 to	 steal
from	the	Master.	The	question	is	very	significant,	and	I	bless	you.
But	 prayer	 alone	 won't	 do,	 because	 prayer	 belongs	 to	 one	 path,	 and
enlightenment	belongs	to	another	path.	Prayer	is	part	of	the	path	of	the	devotee,
the	BHAKTA,	the	Sufi.
He	 says,	 "I	 don't	want	 any	 enlightenment.	 I	 just	want	 to	 be	 playing	with	 you
continuously	my	Lord	--	a	thousand	and	one	games	in	a	thousand	and	one	worlds
in	a	thousand	and	one	lives.	I	don't	want	to	get	out	of	the	game,	I	don't	want	to
get	out	of	 this	LEELA;	 it	 is	 beautiful.	 I	want	 to	 remain	 a	part	 of	 it.	Make	me
worthy	so	I	can	remain	always	here	and	now,	playing	the	game	of	hide-and-seek
with	you."
Prayer	is	part	of	the	path	of	the	devotee,	the	lover.	The	lover	loves	the	bondage
of	love;	he's	not	in	any	way	trying	to	get	out	of	it.	In	fact,	his	only	prayer	is	that
he	should	be	thought	worthy	so	that	God	continues	the	game	He	is	playing.	The
play	is	beautiful;	he's	not	asking	for	freedom	from	it.
The	word	'enlightenment'	belongs	to	the	path	of	meditation.	The	meditator	says,
"Enough	is	enough.	Long	have	I	suffered;	now	let	me	be	free."	In	fact,	he	cannot
ask.	He	tries,	but	he	cannot	pray	--	because	to	the	man	on	the	path	of	meditation,
even	prayer	is	a	bondage.
Mahavir	 never	 prayed,	 Buddha	 never	 prayed.	 Prayer	 was	 meaningless	 for
Buddha;	he	made	all	efforts	to	get	out	of	it.	So	if	you	want	enlightenment	then
don't	pray	because	prayer	will	create	a	bondage.	 It	 is	a	most	 refined	 love.	The
bondage	is	very	golden,	but	it	 is	a	bondage.	If	you	choose	it	 that	way,	then	it's
okay.	But	then	enlightenment	is	not	the	right	word.
I	have	heard....
The	indignant	mother	asked	her	young	son,	"Why	didn't	you	tell	me	you	wanted
to	go	fishing?"
"Because	I	wanted	to	go	fishing,"	said	the	small	boy.
If	you	really	want	to	go	fishing,	don't	ask,	go.	Asking	won't	help.	Then	you	are
alone	if	you	want	to	be	enlightened.	Then	there	is	no	God;	then	there	is	nobody
who	can	help	you.	Because	if	you	need	anybody's	help,	that	very	help	becomes	a
bondage.	 If	 I	 help	 you	 to	 become	 free,	 you	will	 start	 depending	 on	me.	 Then
without	me	you	will	not	be	able	 to	be	 free.	No	help	 is	possible	on	 the	path	of
meditation,	only	indications.	Buddha	has	said,
"Buddhas	 only	 show	 the	 path.	 They	 cannot	 help	 in	 any	 substantial	 way.	 You
have	to	go	on	your	own,	you	have	to	be	your	own	light."
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:
"I	am	going	away	for	a	few	days,	Nasrudin,"	said	the	master	of	the	house.	"And	I
am	going	to	leave	with	you	all	my	keys.	They're	to	my	closets	as	well	as	those	to
my	chests	and	 jewel	boxes.	 I	know	they	will	be	safe	with	you	but	of	course,	 I
expect	you	not	to	touch	them."
When	the	master	returned,	the	Mulla	said	to	him,	"Master,	I	am	going	to	leave
you."
"Why,	Nasrudin?"
"Because	you	don't	trust	me."
"How	can	you	say	that	when	I	left	you	with	all	my	keys?"
"That	you	did,	master,	but	not	one	of	them	fits."
If	you	really	want	to	steal	enlightenment	from	me,	no	key	is	going	to	fit	--	not
because	I	am	giving	you	wrong	keys,	but	because	the	door	is	open	and	there	is
no	 lock...and	 you	 are	 looking	 for	 the	 lock.	 Because	 you	 have	 a	 key	 you	 are
looking	for	a	lock,	and	the	lock	does	not	exist.	So	you	can	go	on	looking	for	the
lock	because	of	your	key,	and	you	will	miss.	The	door	is	open;	you	just	enter	me
and	it	is	there.	Nobody	is	barring	the	path.
But	prayer	will	not	be	helpful,	meditation	will	be	helpful.	Meditation	will	give
you	the	clarity	to	see.
There	is	a	very	beautiful	incident	in	the	life	of	Houdini,	the	great	magician.	His
whole	life	was	a	tremendous	success;	he	was	a	miracle-monger.	He	did	so	many
miracles	 that	 if	 he	was	 a	man	 to	 cheat	 humanity,	 he	 could	 have	 cheated	 very
easily.	But	he	was	a	very	sincere	man.	He	would	say,	"Whatsoever	I	am	doing	is
nothing	but	skill;	there	is	no	miracle	in	it."	No	magician	has	ever	done	as	much
as	 Houdini	 has	 done.	 His	 power	 was	 almost	 impossible	 to	 believe.	 He	 was
thrown	in	almost	all	the	great	prisons	of	the	world,	and	within	seconds	he	would
be	out.	He	was	chained,	locked,	and	within	seconds	--	the	chains	wouldn't	work,
locks	wouldn't	work	--	something	would	happen,	and	he	would	be	out.	He	would
be	out	almost	within	seconds,	not	even	a	minute.
But	in	Italy	he	failed	--	only	once	in	his	life.	He	was	thrown	in	the	central	prison
of	Rome,	and	 thousands	of	people	had	gathered	 to	see	him	come	out.	Minutes
passed	 and	 there	was	 no	 sign	 of	 him.	 It	 was	 almost	 half	 an	 hour,	 and	 people
started	getting	restless	because	it	had	never	happened:	"What	has	happened?	Has
he	 gone	mad,	 or	 died,	 or	 what	 happened?	Or	 has	 the	 great	magician	 failed?"
After	 one	 hour	 he	 came	 out	 perspiring	 and	 laughing	 loudly.	 And	 the	 people
asked,	"What	happened?	One	hour?	We	were	thinking	that	you	had	either	gone
mad	or	you	were	dead!	Even	the	authorities	were	thinking	to	go	in	and	see.	What
happened?"
He	said,	"They	tricked	me;	they	made	me	a	fool.	The	door	was	not	locked!	All
my	skill	is	to	open	the	lock,	and	I	was	trying	to	find	out	where	the	lock	is,	and
there	was	no	lock.
The	door	was	not	 locked	at	all,	 it	was	already	open.	Tired,	exhausted,	worried,
puzzled,	I	fell,	and	when	I	fell	and	struck	the	door,	the	door	opened.	That's	how	I
am	out;	not	because	of	my	skill."
Exactly	the	same	is	the	case	with	me.
The	question	has	been	asked	by	Bodhidharma;	he	has	many	keys.	Nothing	will
fit,	and	he	is	collecting	more	and	more	keys.	He	is	very	calculating,	clever.	Now
that	 those	keys	 are	 not	 fitting	he	 is	 asking	 for	my	blessings.	My	blessings	 are
there	whether	you	ask	or	not,	but	keys	are	not	going	to	fit.	Throw	the	keys!	The
door	is	open.	Nobody	is	barring	the	path.	But	if	you	seek	enlightenment,	the	path
is	of	meditation.	If	you	seek	eternal	play,	then	there	is	no	need	to	think	in	terms
of	enlightenment.
These	two	terms	are	different,	 totally	different.	The	ultimate	result	is	the	same.
The	 BHAKTA,	 the	 devotee,	 finds	 his	 enlightenment	 in	 this	 beautiful	 play	 of
God,	 and	 the	 meditator	 finds	 this	 game	 beautiful	 when	 he	 reaches	 his
enlightenment.	 But	 they	 approach	 in	 different	 directions	 with	 different
methodology,	 with	 different	 attitudes.	 One	 has	 to	 decide	 it	 very	 clearly,
otherwise	 you	 can	 get	 confused.	 Love	 or	 meditation	 has	 to	 be	 chosen	 very
clearly,	and	then	stick	to	the	path.	Finally,	everything	that	has	happened	on	the
other	path	will	also	happen	to	you,	so	don't	be	worried.	But	it	will	happen	only
on	the	peak.	All	the	paths	meet	when	they	reach	to	the	peak	of	the	mountain,	but
all	the	paths	move	differently.
The	third	question:
Question	3
HOW	 TO	 RECOGNIZE	 PAST	 LIFE	 EXPERIENCES	 FROM	 ILLUSION,
MADNESS?
THERE	 is	 no	 need:	 all	 that	 is	 past	 is	 already	 illusion.	 There	 is	 no	 difference
between	 illusion	 and	 the	 past.	 All	 that	 is	 gone	 is	 no	 longer	 real.	 Now	 this	 is
something	to	be	understood	very	deeply.
Yesterday	is	no	more.	Now	what	is	the	difference	between	a	real	yesterday	and
an	 imagined	yesterday?	There	 is	 no	 difference	 because	 both	will	 exist	 only	 in
your	mind	--
the	real	and	the	imagined.	Both	will	be	imaginations	of	a	sort.	What	will	be	the
difference	 between	 a	 real	 yesterday	 and	 an	 unreal	 yesterday?	 There	 is	 no
difference	 because	 both	 are	 unreal.	 They	 both	 exist	 only	 in	 your	 mind	 and
nowhere	else.	All	past	is	illusory;	all	future	is	illusory	because	it	is	not	yet;	and
between	 the	 two	 is	 the	present.	Hence	 in	 the	East	we	call	 the	whole	 existence
illusory,	MAYA	 --	 because	 between	 two	 illusions	 how	 can	 reality	 exist?	 And
today	is	also	going	to	be	yesterday;	today	is	continuously	passing	into	yesterday.
The	present	is	continuously	becoming	past.	How	can	the	real	become	illusory?
The	future	is	passing	into	past,	and	the	present	is	just	a	gate,	nothing	else.	Future
is	illusory,	past	is	illusory;	just	on	the	gate	things	appear,	for	a	single	moment,	to
be	real.
What	 type	 of	 reality	 can	 this	 be?	 That	 too	 is	 illusory.	 Hindus	 say	 it	 is	 only
appearance,	not	real.
Real	is	that	which	subsists.	Real	is	that	which	is	always	eternally	there.	Real	is
that	which	is	beyond	time.	Unreal	is	that	which	is	within	time.	The	past	is	within
time.	It	will	be	difficult	to	think	of	the	present	as	unreal,	but	start	from	the	past.
It	is	easy	to	think	of	the	past	as	unreal,	because	whether	it	happened	or	not,	what
difference	does	it	make?	It	may	not	have	happened	at	all.	It	may	be	just	in	your
mind,	it	may	be	just	your	idea	that	it	happened.	It	is	very	easy	to	think	about	the
past	as	unreal,	and	about	the	future	also.
Between	the	two	is	the	narrow	bridge	of	the	present.	How	can	something	real	be
between	 two	 unrealities?	 How	 can	 the	middle	 be	 real	 when	 the	 two	 ends	 are
unreal,	 and	 when	 this	 real	 also	 is	 continuously	 turning	 into	 unreality	 and
illusion?	No,	 all	 that	 is	 experienced	 is	 imagination;	 it	 is	 dream	 stuff.	Only	 the
experiencer	 is	 real,	 only	 the	 observer	 is	 real.	 The	 observed	 is	 dream;	 the
observer,	the	witness,	is	real.
That	 is	one	of	the	greatest	discoveries	of	human	consciousness	in	the	whole	of
human	history.	There	is	nothing	to	compare	with	it.	All	other	discoveries	are	just
childish.	This	one	discovery	is	 the	base	of	all	religion:	that	you	are	--	you	as	a
witness.	Even	 for	 a	dream	 to	 exist,	 a	dreamer	 is	needed.	The	dream	may	be	 a
dream,	but	the	dreamer	cannot	be	a	dream.	Even	to	be	deceived	I	would	have	to
exist;	even	to	fall	into	error,	I	will	be	needed.	Without	me	the	error	cannot	exist.
This	witness	is	the	search	of	meditation.
So	don't	be	bothered	about	how	to	recognize	past	life	experiences	from	illusion,
madness.
There	is	nothing	to	recognize.	There	is	no	need.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	was	telling	his	wife	about	a	dream	he	had	experienced	the	night
before.
"It	was	 terrible,"	he	said.	"I	was	at	a	birthday	party	at	 Joe's	house.	His	mother
had	baked	a	chocolate	cake	three	feet	high,	and	when	she	cut	it	everybody	was
given	a	piece	that	was	so	large	that	it	hung	over	the	sides	of	the	plate.	Then	she
dipped	up	some	homemade	ice	cream.	She	had	so	much	of	it	that	she	had	to	give
each	one	of	us	our	share	in	a	soup	bowl.
"What	was	so	terrible	about	that	dream?"	asked	his	wife.
"Oh,"	said	Nasrudin,	"I	woke	up	before	I	could	get	the	first	taste."
We	are	continuously	waking	up	from	the	past.	Each	moment	is	a	wakening.	But
we	 are	 continuously	 falling	 asleep	 into	 the	 future,	 so	 each	moment	 is	 again	 a
moment	of	stumbling	into	darkness	and	sleep.	So	the	real	distinction	that	has	to
be	made	is	between	waking	and	sleeping.	No	other	distinction	is	of	any	value.
Try	 to	be	 so	wakeful	 that	you	don't	 fall	 asleep	again.	Remain	 so	 alert	 that	 the
future	 is	not	allowed	 to	deceive	you	again	as	you	had	allowed	 it	before.	What
has	become	past	is	nothing,	but	once	it	is	your	future	then	you	get	deceived	by	it.
Now	it	is	past;	now	another	future	is	arriving.	Every	moment	future	is	arriving,
and	 future	 can	 deceive	 you	 only	 if	 you	 are	 asleep.	Then	 again	 it	will	 become
past.	Now	let	me	tell	you	one	thing:	if	you	remain	alert	and	you	don't	allow	the
future	 to	 deceive	 you	 in	 the	 present,	 the	 past	 disappears.	 Then	 there	 is	 no
memory	left	of	it,	no	trace	of	it.	Then	one	is	just	a	clean	slate,	a	sky	without	any
clouds,	a	flame	without	smoke.
That's	what	the	state	of	enlightenment	is	--	so	alert	that	only	the	witness	is	real
and	everything	else	is	nothing	but	ripples	on	the	surface	of	the	water.	Everything
is	 passing,	 everything	 is	 a	 flux.	 Only	 one	 thing	 remains	 and	 remains	 and
remains,	and	that	is	your	consciousness,	your	awareness.
But	we	are	caught	in	the	net	of	the	past.	That	which	passes	somehow	remains	in
the	mind.	It	passes,	it	is	no	longer	there,	but	somehow	the	mind	clings	to	it.
I	have	heard....
A	man	 in	 the	 upstairs	 apartment	 yelled	 to	Mulla	Nasrudin	 downstairs,	 "If	 you
don't	stop	playing	that	clarinet	I	will	go	crazy!"
"Too	late	now,"	said	Nasrudin.	"I	stopped	an	hour	ago."
People	 are	 continuously	 worried	 about	 things	 which	 have	 almost	 gone	 and
disappeared.
The	 past	 makes	 you	 crazy.	 You	 go	 on	 brooding,	 you	 go	 on	 playing	 with	 the
wounds,	you	go	on	hurting	yourself	again	and	again.	You	go	on	feeding	your	ego
again	and	again.	The	past	seems	to	be	your	treasure.	It	is	nothing	--	just	bubbles,
air	bubbles.	And	the	same	is	the	future;	and	between	the	two	is	this	moment	of
the	present.	BE	ALERT,	be	awake.	No	other	distinction	 is	of	any	significance.
Only	one	distinction	is	of	significance,	and	that	is	of	being	alert	or	unalert.
Now	I	can	tell	you	this:	if	you	are	unalert,	then	whatsoever	happens	is	imaginary.
If	you	are	alert,	 then	whatsoever	happens	is	real.	Were	you	alert	in	the	past?	If
you	were	alert,	 then	 it	was	 real.	Are	you	alert	 right	now?	If	you	are	alert	 then
whatsoever	is	happening	before	you	IS	real.	Will	you	be	alert	tomorrow?	Then
whatsoever	will	happen	will	be	 real.	So	 forget	about	 reality	and	unreality;	 just
try	to	become	more	and	more	alert.
Reality	and	unreality	are	not	qualities	of	the	objective	world,	they	are	qualities	of
subjective	 consciousness.	 For	 Buddha	 everything	 is	 real.	 For	 you,	 fast	 asleep,
snoring,	everything	is	unreal.	Just	 think	of	 it	 in	 this	way:	you	are	sleeping	in	a
room	 and	 somebody	 is	 sitting	 by	 your	 side	 alert	 and	 awake.	 The	 room	 is	 the
same.	Both	are	in	the	same	room,	in	the	same	space.	One	is	fast	asleep,	the	other
is	sitting	by	the	side.	Are	they	in	the	same	room?	Can	they	be	in	the	same	room?
Because	one	who	is	asleep	 is	dreaming,	dreaming	of	a	 thousand	and	one	other
rooms	except	 this	one.	Have	you	ever	dreamed	about	 the	same	 room	 in	which
you	were	sleeping?	--	no,	never.	A	dream	is	always	somewhere	else.	That's	the
function	of	the	dream:	to	take	you	somewhere	else.
The	man	who	is	asleep	is	dreaming.	He	is	not	aware	of	this	room	and	the	reality
of	THIS
room.	He	has	his	own	imaginary	reality.	The	man	who	is	awake	and	sitting	by
his	 side	 is	 in	 this	 room.	 His	 alertness	 gives	 him	 a	 totally	 different	 quality	 of
reality.
Buddha,	walking,	moving	from	one	village	to	another	village,	and	by	his	side	is
his	 disciple,	 Anand;	 both	 are	 in	 two	 different	 worlds.	 Anand	 is	 fast	 asleep,
dreaming;	Buddha	is	awake,	non-dreaming.	When	you	are	not	dreaming,	you	are
encountering	 reality.	When	 you	 are	 dreaming,	 you	 are	 encountering	 only	 your
dream,	unreality.	What	is	the	criterion	for	reality,	alertness?
Become	more	alert;	the	world	becomes	more	real.	Become	even	more	alert;	the
world	becomes	even	more	real.	When	you	are	at	the	peak	of	your	awareness,	the
world	 is	 so	 radiantly	 real	 that	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 call	 it	matter.	One	has	 to	 call	 it
God;	nothing	else	will	do.	 It	 is	so	radiantly	real,	 it	 is	so	eternally	real	 that	one
has	to	say	that	time	has	ceased.
Reality	is	neither	past,	nor	present,	nor	future;	it	simply	is.	It	is	herenow.	Now	is
not	part	of	 time.	 In	 fact,	 you	 should	not	use	 the	word	 'now'.	Only	enlightened
people	should	be	allowed	to	use	it,	because	your	now	is	just	not	there.
What	do	you	call	 'now'?	The	moment	you	call	 it	 'now'	 it	 is	already	past.	Or,	 if
you	call	it
'now'	before	it	is	past,	then	it	is	in	the	future.	You	are	so	asleep	that	by	the	time
you	come	to	recapture	it,	it	is	already	gone.	It	is	very	slippery.	Now	is	possible
only	when	you	are	so	alert	 that	 there	is	not	a	single	dream	in	your	mind,	not	a
single	 thought,	 no	 ripples	 arising.	Then	you	 are	 totally	 present.	When	you	 are
present	 then	 reality	 is	 present.	 It	 is	 your	 presence	 that	 reveals	 the	 presence	 of
reality.	Then	you	are	in	the	now,	and	the	now	is	eternal.	Then	it	never	comes	and
goes,	it	is	simply	there.	Then	nothing	comes	and	nothing	goes.
One	of	Buddha's	great	disciples,	Bodhidharma,	used	 to	say	 that,	Buddha	never
existed;	he	was	never	born,	he	never	walked	on	the	earth,	he	never	talked.	One
of	 his	 disciples	 told	 him	 that	 what	 he	 was	 saying	 seemed	 simply	 absurd.
"Buddha	 was	 born	 in	 Kapilvastu	 to	 a	 certain	 king,	 to	 a	 certain	 woman.	 He
renounced	 the	world.	These	 are	historical	 facts,	 and	you	go	on	denying	 them?
And	you	yourself	are	a	follower	of	Buddha.	If	he	never	existed,	if	he	was	never
born	and	he	never	walked	on	the	earth,	then	whom	do	you	follow?"
Bodhidharma	said,	"I	follow	that	one	who	was	never	born,	never	walked	on	the
earth,	 never	 uttered	 a	 single	 word,	 never	 died.	 I	 follow	 that.	 He	 is	 the	 real
Buddha.	 And	 all	 else	 which	 you	 call	 history	 is	 nothing	 but	 dreams	 seen	 by
sleepy	people."
Now	this	has	to	be	understood.	I	am	talking	to	you;	it	is	a	fact.	I	am	talking	to
you,	you	are	listening	to	me,	but	still	Bodhidharma	is	perfectly	true:	it	is	still	a
dream	because	you	are	not	awake.	If	you	are	awake	you	will	see	that	I	have	not
uttered	a	single	word.	Then	you	will	see	a	totally	different	reality	where	words
are	not	uttered,	where	 silence	 reigns,	where	wordless	 reality	 is	 encountered.	 If
you	are	awake	you	will	see	me	directly,	and	you	will	see	total	stillness,	but	that
will	depend	on	your	silence,	 that	will	depend	on	your	non-dreaming	state,	 that
will	depend	on	your	awakening.	Then	you	will	see	that	this	man	who	is	sitting	in
front	 of	 you	 is	 not	 the	 real	 man.	 Then	 something	 else,	 something	 totally
different,	diametrically	different,	will	be	revealed	to	you.
That's	 the	 meaning	 when	 we	 call	 Buddha	 'Bhagwan'.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 reality	 for
everybody,	but	only	for	those	who	became	alert;	they	recognize.	That's	what	we
mean	 when	 we	 call	 Jesus	 'Son	 of	 God'.	 It	 was	 not	 revealed	 to	 all,	 because
everybody	 knew	 that	 this	 man	 was	 nobody	 else	 but	 the	 son	 of	 Joseph	 the
carpenter.	And	 he	was	 just	 claiming	 nonsense,	 that	 he	 is	 the	Son	 of	God.	But
those	who	 loved	him	and	 those	who	were	 tremendously	 alert	 about	 his	 reality
became	aware	 that	 the	 son	of	 Joseph	 the	carpenter	was	 just	 a	 reflection	 in	 the
world	of	unreality,	in	the	world	of	dreams.'Son	of	God'	is	the	reality.	But	you	can
see	that	reality	only	to	that	extent	to	which	you	have	become	real.	More	than	that
you	cannot	do.
Facts	 are	 not	 truths.	 Something	 may	 be	 a	 fact	 and	 may	 not	 be	 true,	 and
something	may	be	true	and	may	not	be	a	fact.	This	word	'fact'	is	derived	from	a
Latin	root	which	means	'to	do',	FACERE.	This	is	beautiful.	A	fact	is	that	about
which	you	can	do	something.	But	our	doing	is	nothing	but	dreaming.	You	can	do
many	 things	 in	your	dream	also;	 they	are	 facts.	You	become	 so	obsessed	with
your	dream	that	sometimes	it	has	happened	that	you	had	a	nightmare,	and	then
you	awake,	but	you	still	go	on	trembling,	you	still	go	on	perspiring.	The	fear	is
still	 there,	 the	heart	beats	 faster.	Now	you	know	 that	 it	was	a	dream,	now	you
know	that	it	was	just	a	nightmare,	nothing	to	be	worried	about,	but	still	you	are
trembling.	 The	 dream	 has	 affected	 you	 so	 much	 that	 it	 even	 penetrates	 your
reality	--	your	body,	your	mind.
But	we	go	on	living	in	two	sorts	of	sleep:	one	is	in	the	night	which	we	call	sleep,
and	the	other	 is	 in	 the	day	which	we	call	waking.	It	 is	a	waking	sleep,	 just	for
name's	sake.	Our	eyes	are	open,	but	unless	thinking	stops	completely,	your	real
eye	remains	closed.
"How	to	recognize	past	life	experiences	from	illusion?"
There	is	no	way	and	there	is	no	need,	and	one	should	not	waste	time	in	foolish
things.
The	gone	is	gone;	the	gone	is	already	illusion.	Only	one	thing	remains	and	that	is
your	witnessing.	 Catch	 hold	 of	 it,	 don't	 lose	 track	 of	 it.	 It	 will	 be	 difficult	 to
catch	hold	of	it;	again	and	again	you	will	lose	track,	but	again	and	again	remind
yourself	to	catch	hold	of	it.	Many	times	you	will	miss	the	goal,	many	times	you
will	have	glimpses.	But	by	and	by,	more	and	more	possibility	will	open.	And	if
you	can	remain	alert	even	for	a	 few	minutes	 together,	a	new	man	will	be	born
unto	you.	You	will	be	totally	different.	The	old	will	be	gone,	and	then	you	will
not	be	worried	with	past,	or	future,	or	present.	You	will	simply	live	in	a	different
dimension,	 the	dimension	of	eternity	 --	where	nothing	passes,	nothing	 is	born,
nothing	dies,	everything	remains.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
I	AM	FULL	OF	ENERGY,	FEELING	PLAYFUL	AND	MORE	AND	MORE
FRIENDLY,	BUT	I	TALK	TOO	MUCH.	WHAT	TO	DO?
BE	playful	about	 that	 too.	Don't	make	 it	 a	 serious	 thing.	Talk	playfully,	 and	 if
nobody	 is	 listening,	 take	 it	 playfully	 --	 because	 there	 is	 no	 necessity	 that
somebody	should	listen.
Don't	feel	offended.	If	it	comes	easy	for	you	to	talk,	talk.	If	the	other	is	not	in	the
mood	to	listen,	that	is	his	problem.	But	don't	feel	offended.	Just	remain	alert	to
what	is	happening	in	you,	that	you	want	to	talk.	It	will	happen	to	many	people.
When	 meditation	 releases	 energy	 in	 you,	 it	 will	 find	 all	 sorts	 of	 ways	 to	 be
expressed.	It	depends	on	what	type	of	talent	you	have.	If	you	are	a	painter	and
meditation	releases	energy,	you	will	paint	more,	you	will	paint	madly.	You	will
forget	 everything,	 the	 whole	 world.	 Your	 whole	 energy	 will	 be	 poured	 into
painting.	If	you	are	a	dancer	your	meditation	will	make	you	a	very	deep	dancer.
It	 depends	 on	 the	 capacity,	 talent,	 individuality,	 personality.	 So	 nobody	knows
what	will	 happen.	 Sometimes	 sudden	 changes	will	 happen:	 a	 person	who	was
very	 silent	 and	was	 never	 talkative	 suddenly	 becomes	 talkative.	He	may	 have
been	 repressed.	He	may	not	 have	been	 allowed	 ever	 to	 talk.	When	 the	 energy
arises	and	flows,	he	may	start	talking.
But	there	is	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Don't	repress	it.	If	you	feel	it	is	getting
too	heavy	for	others,	then	just	sit	in	your	room	and	talk	alone.	There	is	no	need
for	somebody	else	to	listen	to	you.	In	fact,	who	listens?	You	can	talk	to	the	wall
and	 it	will	be	more	human,	because	you	will	not	be	creating	any	 suffering	 for
anybody.	You	will	not	torture,	you	will	not	bore	anybody.
Somebody	has	sent	me	a	beautiful	anecdote.
Pat	 Reilly	 was	 confessing	 his	 sins.	 "Sure,	 Father,	 I	 had	 sex	 seven	 times	 last
night."
The	priest	asked,	"How	many	women?"
"Ah,	Father,	there	was	only	one	woman,"	answered	Pat.
To	which	the	priest	said,	"Well,	it	is	not	as	bad	as	I	thought.	Who	is	the	woman?"
"My	wife,	Father."
"Well,"	said	the	priest,	"there	is	nothing	wrong	with	that,	son."
"I	know,	Father,	but	I	just	had	to	tell	someone,"	replied	Pat.
There	 are	 moments	 when	 you	 just	 have	 to	 tell	 someone.	 If	 you	 don't	 tell,	 it
becomes	heavy	on	you.	If	you	tell,	you	are	released	and	relaxed.	If	you	can	find
a	sympathetic	listener,	good;	otherwise	just	talk	to	yourself.	But	don't	repress	it.
Repressed,	it	will	become	a	burden	on	you.	Just	sit	in	front	of	the	wall	and	have
a	good	talk.	In	the	beginning	you	will	feel	it	a	little	crazy,	but	the	more	you	do	it,
the	 more	 you	 will	 see	 the	 beauty	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 less	 violent.	 It	 does	 not	 waste
somebody	 else's	 time,	 and	 it	 works	 the	 same	 way,	 it	 does	 the	 same:	 you	 are
relieved.	And	after	a	good	talk	with	the	wall	you	will	feel	very,	very	relaxed.	In
fact,	 everybody	 needs	 to	 do	 it.	 The	world	 would	 be	 better	 and	more	 silent	 if
people	started	talking	to	the	walls.
Try	it.	It	will	be	deep	meditation	--	knowing	well	 that	 the	wall	 is	not	listening.
But	that	is	not	the	point.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 great	 psychoanalyst	 who	 became	 very	 old	 but	 still
continued	to	practice	six,	seven,	eight	hours	per	day,	listening	to	the	patients.	He
had	a	young	disciple,	an	apprentice,	who	became	tired	after	three	or	four	hours	--
listening	 to	 nonsense,	 neurotic	 obsessions,	 fixations,	 the	 same	 thing	 again	 and
again.	He	asked	his	old	master	one	day,	 "How	do	you	manage?	Because	 I	 see
you	as	fresh	in	the	evening	as	in	the	morning	when	you	come	to	the	clinic.	You
are	 as	 fresh	 as	when	 you	go	 --	 seven,	 eight	 hours	 of	 nonsense.	You	never	 get
tired.	I	get	tired	after	two,	three	hours	--	and	I	am	a	young	man!"
The	old	man	laughed	and	said,	"Who	listens?"
Freud	arranged	it	very	well.	He	did	not	even	face	the	patient.	He	would	tell	the
patient	to	lie	on	a	couch,	and	there	would	be	a	curtain,	and	behind	the	curtain	he
would	sit.	And	the	patient	lying	on	the	couch	looking	at	the	ceiling,	had	to	talk.
It	was	 really	 very	meaningful.	One:	when	 a	 person	 is	Lying	 down	he	 is	more
relaxed.	He	talks	of	deeper	 things	 than	when	he	 is	sitting.	He	goes	deeper	 into
his	 unconscious.	 Talk	 to	 a	 man	 standing,	 and	 he	 will	 be	 very	 superficial.	 Sit
down,	and	he	goes	a	 little	deeper.	Let	him	 lie	down	and	 then	 listen	 to	him;	he
goes	very	deep.
And	then:	he	was	not	facing	anybody.	When	you	are	facing	somebody	the	very
presence	 of	 the	 other	 functions	 as	 a	 repressive	 force.	 Then	 you	 start	 saying
things	which	he	would	like.	Then	you	start	saying	things	in	such	a	way	that	he	is
not	offended.	Then	you	manage	somehow	to	say	things	which	will	be	approved
by	him.	Then	there	is	much	repression;	then	the	truth	never	comes	out.	When	the
man	 is	not	 facing	you	and	you	are	 just	 facing	 the	ceiling,	you	have	nothing	 to
manage.	The	ceiling	will	never	be	offended,	you	can	say	anything	you	like.	By
and	by,	one	goes	deep	into	associations.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 the	 Freudian	 couch,	 simply	 your	 bedroom	will	 do.	 And
there	is	no	need	for	anybody	to	sit	there,	you	can	just	talk	and	listen	to	yourself.
Talking	 and	 listening	 to	 yourself	will	 give	 you	 a	 depth,	 a	 great	 understanding
about	your	own	mind.
So	talk	to	the	wall,	and	listen.	Be	both	the	talker	and	the	listener.	Don't	analyze,
don't	 judge,	don't	 say	 'this	 is	good	and	 that	 is	bad','that	 should	not	be	said	and
this	 should	 be	 said',	 no.	And	 don't	make	 any	 refinement,	 don't	 polish.	 Simply
blurt	out	whatsoever	comes	to	the	mind	--	ugly,	absurd,	irrelevant.	Let	the	mind
have	full	play	and	you	simply	watch.	It	will	be	a	very	great	meditation.
The	new	groom	was	pushing	 the	praises	of	married	 life	 to	his	bachelor	 friend.
"Yes,	it	is	wonderful.	Breakfast	before	I	go	to	work	is	large	and	delicious.	When
I	 go	 off	 after	 that	 the	 little	woman	gives	me	 a	 big	 hug	 and	kiss	 at	 the	 door.	 I
return	home	at	night,	 supper	 is	on	 the	 table.	After	 that	 I	 sit	 in	 the	 living	 room
reading	 the	 paper	while	 the	missus	 cleans	 away	 the	 dishes.	 Then	 she	 changes
into	something	more	comfortable	and	sits	down	beside	me,	and	talks	to	me.	And
she	talks,	and	talks,	and	talks,	until	I	wish	she	would	drop	dead."
Don't	give	such	an	opportunity	to	anybody	that	he	starts	thinking,	"When	are	you
going	to	drop	dead?"	It	is	your	problem.	Or,	you	can	make	a	good	arrangement	if
somebody	has	the	same	problem.	This	is	Amida's	problem.	In	this	ashram	there
are	 so	 many	 mad	 people;	 you	 can	 find	 somebody	 else	 who	 has	 the	 same
problem.	Then	you	can	make	a	good	arrangement:	one	hour	you	talk,	one	hour
you	 listen	 to	 him.	 No	 need	 to	 be	 connected	 with	 each	 other,	 no	 need	 to	 be
relevant,	 and	 no	 need	 to	 follow	 any	 rules	 of	 conversation.	 It	 is	 not	 a
conversation.	One	hour	you	blurt	whatsoever	comes	to	your	mind,	and	of	course,
then	you	have	to	pay	--	one	hour	you	have	to	listen.	And	it	will	be	valuable	for
both.
But	 one	 thing	 should	 be	 remembered:	 don't	 repress	 it.	 Anything	 repressed
becomes	poisonous.	And	talking	is	just	innocent;	the	wall	will	do.	Go	to	the	trees
and	 they	will	 feel	very	happy;	nobody	 talks	 to	 them.	They	are	always	waiting.
They	will	feel	grateful.	Or	go	to	the	river	or	to	the	rocks,	but	don't	repress.	By
and	by,	 things	will	clear	up	and	 talking	will	disappear.	 It	 is	 just	 the	beginning.
Then	deeper	layers	of	being	will	be	touched.	Talk	is	the	most	superficial	layer	of
your	 life,	 just	a	very	superficial	 layer.	When	energy	 is	 flowing	deep,	 that	 layer
starts	trembling,	ripples	arise.	Allow	them.	Soon,	when	the	talk	is	exhausted	and
you	have	thrown	out	all	the	rubbish	that	you	have	been	carrying	for	your	whole
life,	silence	will	come.	And	that	silence	will	be	completely	uncorrupted,	virgin.
You	can	force	your	talking,	you	can	repress	it	and	you	can	look	silent,	but	your
silence	will	not	be	real	silence.	Deep	down	the	tremor	will	continue;	deep	down
the	volcano	is	getting	ready	to	erupt	any	moment.	You	are	sitting	on	top	of	it.
People	 look	 silent	 but	 they	 are	 not	 silent.	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 become	 really
silent,	and	the	way	is	a	deep	catharsis.
I	know	Amida	is	feeling	great	energy.	Her	energy	sources	are	tapped,	and	she	is
getting	connected	with	her	very	ground	of	being.	So	in	all	ways	she	will	feel	too
powerful.	 Talk	 also	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 basic	 ingredients	 of	 a	 human	 being.	A
human	 being	 is	 a	 human	 being	 because	 he	 can	 talk.	No	 other	 animal	 has	 that
capacity.	And	then	Amida	is	a	woman,	not	even	a	man.
I	have	heard....
A	woman	was	saying	to	her	husband	that	the	new	priest	was	a	great	talker.	And
she	said,
"I	have	never	known	a	man	to	talk	so	fast.	It	is	almost	impossible	to	understand
what	he	is	saying.	His	words	overlap."
The	husband	said,	"I	know	the	reason	for	it.	His	father	was	a	politician	and	his
mother	was	a	woman."
Now,	the	perfect	combination.	So	Amida	is	a	woman;	talking	is	easy.	There	are
many	reasons	for	it.
Have	you	watched?	--	small	girls	start	talking	before	boys.	Boys	lag	behind.	In
colleges,	 schools,	 universities	 also,	 as	 far	 as	 language	 is	 concerned,	 girls	 are
always	better	than	boys.	They	always	get	higher	marks,	they	are	more	articulate.
Something	seems	to	be	different	between	the	feminine	mind	and	the	male	mind:
the	male	mind	is	a	better	doer,	the	female	mind	is	a	better	talker.	Maybe	because
much	energy	is	taken	by	doing	as	far	as	man	is	concerned;	no	energy	is	taken	by
doing	 as	 far	 as	 woman	 is	 concerned,	 so	 the	 whole	 energy	 pours	 into	 one
direction.
But	 there	 is	nothing	wrong	about	 it.	A	good	 talker	has	 something	valuable:	he
can	communicate	better.	To	be	articulate	is	beautiful	because	communication	is
more	possible.	And	a	good	 talk	 is	an	aesthetic	value	 in	 itself.	But	 first,	 let	 the
flood	be	thrown	out.	Then	things	will	sort	themselves	out,	then	things	will	settle.
After	 this	flood	is	gone,	Amida	will	 find	very	small	sentences	coming	into	her
consciousness,	 but	 diamond-like,	 each	 sentence	 a	 value	 in	 itself.	 But	 first	 this
flood	 has	 to	 go.	 If	 the	 flood	 is	 repressed,	 then	 those	 diamonds	 will	 be	 lost
forever.	 That's	 why	 all	 the	 great	 scriptures	 of	 the	 world	 are	 written	 in	 sutras,
aphorisms:	 because	 the	 people	 who	 wrote	 them	 went	 through	 this	 flood	 of
catharsis.	When	the	catharsis	was	complete,	then	diamond-like,	small	sentences	-
-	simple,	aesthetic,	beautiful,	complete	--	started	bubbling	in	the	consciousness.
It	is	from	that	consciousness	that	the	Vedas	were	born,	and	the	Koran.	And	it	is
from	 that	 consciousness	 that	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 language	 of	 the	 Bible	 arises.
Never	again	has	it	been	surpassed.
Jesus	was	 illiterate,	but	nobody	has	ever	surpassed	 that	clarity,	 that	penetrating
reality	 of	 his	 assertions.	 Behind	 it	 is	 great	 meditation.	 The	 Yoga	 Sutras	 of
Patanjali	or	the	Brahma	Sutras	of	Badraina	or	the	Bhakti	Sutras	of	Narad	--	small
sentences,	 the	 smallest	you	can	conceive,	 almost	 telegraphic	 --	but	 so	much	 is
pressed	 into	 them	 that	 each	 sentence	 has	 atomic	 energy.	 If	 it	 explodes,	 if	 you
lovingly	take	it	into	yourself,	to	your	heart.	It	will	explode	and	you	will	become
luminous	through	it.
But	first	the	flood	has	to	go.	It	is	a	good	symbol	that	the	flood	has	come.	Allow
it.	If	you	can	find	some	sympathetic	ears,	good.	Otherwise,	trees,	rocks,	but	don't
repress	it.
The	fifth	question:
Question	5
I	AM	CONFRONTED	BY	DEATH.	I	ACCEPT,	OR	SO	I	THINK,	AND	THEN
MANY
PEOPLE	 GET	 SICK	 AND	 DEATH	 HAPPENS	 AND	 HOSPITALIZATION
AND	I	GET
THIS	ENORMOUS	KNOT	OF	FEAR	IN	MY	STOMACH.	I	AM	SO	SCARED
OF
DEATH	AND	DYING.	I	GET	SO	FREAKED	OUT.
DEATH	 is	 a	 problem.	 You	 can	 avoid	 it,	 you	 can	 postpone	 it,	 but	 you	 cannot
completely	 dissolve	 it.	You	 have	 to	 face	 it.	 It	 can	 be	 dissolved	 only	 by	 going
through	it	to	the	very	end,	all	the	way.	It	is	very	risky	and	it	will	give	you	great
fear.	Your	whole	being	will	start	shaking	and	trembling;	the	very	idea	of	dying	is
unacceptable.	It	looks	so	unjust	and	it	looks	so	meaningless.	If	a	person	is	to	die
then	what	is	the	meaning	of	life?	Then	why	am	I	living,	for	what?	If	only	death
is	finally	to	happen,	then	why	not	commit	suicide	now?	Why	get	up	every	day,
work	hard,	go	to	bed,	get	up	again,	work	hard,	go	to	bed	--
for	what?	Just	to	die	in	the	end?
Death	 is	 the	only	metaphysical	problem.	 It	 is	 because	of	death	 that	man	 starts
thinking.	It	is	because	of	death	that	man	became	a	contemplative,	a	meditator.	In
fact,	it	is	because	of	death	that	religion	was	born.	The	whole	credit	goes	to	death.
Death	 stirred	 everybody's	 consciousness.	 The	 problem	 is	 such;	 it	 has	 to	 be
solved.	So	nothing	is	wrong	with	it.
The	question	is	from	Vidya.
"I	am	confronted	by	death"...everybody	is	confronted	by	death.	Martin	Heidigger
has	 said,	 "Man	 is	 a	 being	 towards	 death."	 And	 that	 is	 the	 priority	 of	 man.
Animals	die	but	they	don't	know	that	they	die	or	that	they	are	going	to	die.	Trees
die,	but	 there	 is	no	confrontation	with	death.	It	 is	 the	priority	of	man	that	only
man	knows	that	he	is	going	to	die.	Hence,	man	can	grow	beyond	death.	Hence,
there	is	a	possibility	to	penetrate	into	death	and	overcome	it.
"I	accept	or	so	I	think"...no,	acceptance	is	not	possible.	You	can	deceive:	you	can
think	 that	 you	 accept	 because	 it	 is	 so	 troublesome	 even	 to	 look	 at	 it.	 Even	 to
think	about	it	is	so	troublesome	that	one	thinks,	"yes,	okay,	I'm	going	to	die	--	so
what?	 I'm	 going	 to	 die,	 but	 don't	 raise	 the	 question.	Don't	 talk	 about	 it."	One
keeps	 it	 away,	 goes	 on	 putting	 it	 by	 the	 side	 so	 it	 does	 not	 come	 in	 the	way,
keeps	it	in	the	unconscious.
Acceptance	 is	 not	 possible.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 face	 death,	 and	 when	 you	 have
faced	it	you	need	not	accept,	because	then	you	know	there	is	no	death.
"And	then	many	people	get	sick	and	death	happens	and	hospitalization	and	I	get
this	enormous	knot	of	fear	in	my	stomach"...that	is	where	the	problem	has	to	be
solved.	 That	 enormous	 knot	 in	 the	 stomach	 is	 exactly	 the	 place	 where	 death
happens.	The	Japanese	call	it	HARA.	Just	below	the	navel,	two	inches	below	the
navel	 is	 a	 point	 where	 body	 and	 soul	 are	 connected.	 It	 is	 there	 where
disconnection	 happens	when	 you	 die.	 Nothing	 dies,	 because	 body	 cannot	 die,
body	 is	 already	 dead.	And	 you	 cannot	 die	 because	 you	 are	 life	 itself.	 Just	 the
connection	between	you	and	the	body	disappears.
That	 knot	 is	 exactly	 the	 place	where	 the	work	 has	 to	 be	 done,	 so	 don't	 try	 to
avoid	that	knot.	I	would	like	to	say	to	Vidya	that	whenever	you	feel	that	knot,	it
is	such	a	valuable	moment.	Close	your	eyes,	go	deep	into	the	knot.	That	is	hara.
Feel	it,	allow	it;	it	has	some	message	for	you,	it	wants	to	say	something	to	you.	If
you	allow	it,	it	will	give	you	the	message.	If	you	relax	into	it,	if	you	go	into	it,	by
and	by,	you	will	see	the	knot	has	disappeared	and	there	is,	 instead	of	a	knot,	a
lotus	flower,	something	flowering	there.	It	is	a	very	beautiful	experience.	And	if
you	go	still	deeper	you	will	see	that	it	is	a	bridge,	that	flower	is	a	bridge.	On	this
side	is	the	body,	on	the	other	side	is	your	reality,	your	soul.
And	that	flower	is	connecting	both;	the	flower	is	the	bridge.
The	flower's	roots	are	in	the	body,	and	the	flower's	fragrance	and	the	petals	are	in
the	soul.	It	is	a	link.	But	if	you	are	afraid	and	you	don't	go	there,	it	feels	like	a
knot,	a	tension,	a	stress.
"I	am	so	scared	of	death	and	dying.	 I	get	so	freaked	out"...There	 is	no	need	 to
freak	out;	freak	in.	It's	perfectly	natural	that	when	somebody	dies,	somebody	is
hospitalized	 again	 and	 again,	 again	 and	 again,	 you	 remember	 your	 death.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	it.
I	have	heard....
A	beatnik	visited	a	psychiatrist	and	pleaded,	"You	have	got	to	help	me."
"What	is	your	problem?"	asked	the	head-shrinker.
"Lately,"	 said	 the	 beat,	 "I	 have	 had	 the	most	 compelling	 desire	 to	 shower	 and
shave."
Now	if	you	don't	shower	and	you	don't	shave,	one	day	or	other	there	is	going	to
be	a	very	compelling	desire	to	shower	and	shave.	It	is	not	a	problem;	just	go	and
take	a	shower.
You	are	avoiding	death.	It	has	to	be	faced,	it	is	part	of	life's	work.	It	is	one	of	the
greatest	lessons	one	has	to	learn.	There	is	no	need	to	be	freaking	out;	that	is	not
going	to	help.	Go	in,	 face	 it.	Remember	 that	yes,	one	day	or	other	you	will	be
hospitalized,	one	day	or	other	you	will	be	ill,	and	one	day	or	other,	you	are	going
to	die.	So	there	is	no	point	in	postponing	it.	It	is	better	to	understand	it	before	it
is	too	late.
Mulla	 Nasrudin	 got	 sick	 and	 worriedly	 sent	 a	 hurried	 call	 for	 the	 priest,	 and
insisted	 that	 he	 call	 on	 him	 every	 day	 to	 groom	 his	 neglected	 soul	 for	 the
hereafter.	One	day	when	the	priest	made	his	daily	call,	he	found	Mulla	Nasrudin
in	high	spirits.
"I	am	getting	along	fine,	sir,"	chortled	Nasrudin.	"My	doctor	says	I	will	live	for
ten	 years	 yet,	 so	 you	 don't	 need	 to	 come	 back	 for	 a	 while.	 But	 how	 about
dropping	in	again	in	about	nine	years,	eleven	months	and	twenty-nine	days?"
One	day	 it	has	 to	be	 faced.	Don't	be	 foolish;	don't	postpone	 it.	Because	 if	you
postpone	it	to	the	very	end,	it	will	be	too	late.	It	is	not	certain	when	the	last	day
will	 happen.	 It	 can	 happen	 today,	 it	 can	 happen	 tomorrow,	 it	 can	 happen	 any
moment.	Death	is	very	unpredictable.
We	 live	 in	death,	 so	any	moment	 it	 can	happen.	Face	 it,	 encounter	 it,	 and	 that
knot	in	the	stomach	is	the	right	place	to	encounter	it.	That	is	the	very	door	from
where	you	enter	into	life	and	from	where	you	go	out	of	life.
The	last	question:
Question	6
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 BEING	 IN	 LOVE	 WITH	 YOU	 IS	 SCARY,	 AND	 I
SURRENDER.
IT	 is	 from	Prem	Purnima.	My	 answer	 is:	 being	 in	 love	with	 you,	 Purnima,	 is
even	more	scary,	and	I	accept.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	They	Kill	Lust	With	Lust
7	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607070
ShortTitle:
BELOV207
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
94
mins
THOSE	WHO	ARE	DEAD
AND	YET	FULLY	ALIVE
AND	KNOW	THE	FLAVORS
AND	FEELINGS
IN	LOVING;
THEY	WILL	CROSS	THE	RIVER.
GAZING	AT
THE	STREAM	OF	LIFE	AND	DEATH,
THEY	SEEK	INTEGRITY.
THEY	HAVE	NO	WISH
FOR	HAPPINESS	AT	ALL,
WALKING	AGAINST	THE	WIND.
THEY	KILL	LUST
WITH	LUST
AND	ENTER	THE	CITY	OF	LOVE
UNATTACHED...
MAN	 IS	 ENERGY,	 A	 DYNAMISM,	 A	 PROCESS,	 A	 VERY	 CREATIVE
PROCESS
with	a	thousand	and	one	potentialities,	with	infinite	alternatives	open.	Man	is	an
opening,	an	evolution,	and	with	all	the	possibilities	that	the	existence	has.	Man	is
a	miniature	existence;	a	drop,	of	course,	but	a	drop	has	all	that	the	ocean	has;	a
drop,	 of	 course,	 but	 a	 conscious	 drop.	 And	 the	 consciousness	 is	 oceanic;	 it
knows	no	boundaries.	But	the	man	I	am	talking	about	is	the	essential	man	of	the
Bauls,	ADHAR	MANUSH.	You	can	be	 that,	but	you	are	not	 that.	You	are	 the
seed.	You	can	open	and	blossom	and	release	your	fragrance	to	the	winds,	but	you
are	not	yet	that.	It	has	to	be	remembered.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	man	is	not	born	with	a	soul;	he	has	to	create	it	through
effort.	A	man	is	born	only	with	an	opportunity.	It	can	be	used,	it	can	be	wasted,
so	all	depends	on	you.	One	has	to	become	a	creator	of	oneself.	The	parents	have
given	you	a	body	and	a	possibility,	but	the	real	birth	has	yet	to	happen.	And	for
that	real	birth	you	will	have	to	become	your	own	mother,	your	own	father.	That
real	birth	is	an	inner	creativity.	You	have	to	move	withinwards	to	find	your	own
source	 of	 energy,	 and	not	 only	 that,	 but	 to	 change	 the	mechanical	 channels	 of
that	energy,,	to	make	conscious	channels	for	it.
Ordinarily,	energy	flows	downwards.	That's	what	Bauls	call	lust.	When	they	call
it	 lust	 they	are	not	denouncing	 it,	condemning	 it.	 It	 is	 just	a	 fact,	 just	as	water
flows	downwards.
It	 is	 natural	 for	 water	 to	 flow	 downwards,	 down	 the	 hill.	 But	 water	 can	 rise
upwards;	just	a	little	heat	is	needed.	The	water	has	to	be	heated;	it	can	evaporate.
At	 a	 certain	 degree	 of	 heat,	 a	 hundred	 degrees,	 it	 starts	 rising	 towards	 the
heavens.	The	same	water	that	was	always	going	downhill	starts	going	uphill.	A
conversion	has	happened;	just	heat	was	needed.	In	the	East	this	heat	is	known	as
TAP.	The	word	TAP	means	heat;	the	word	TAP
means	'heating	yourself'.
The	Bauls	sing,
While	desire	burns	in	the	limbs
still	there	is	time.
Boil	the	juice
on	the	fire	of	longing
to	condense	the	fruit.
The	sweetness	of	syrup
will	ferment	and	sour
unless	it	is	stirred
on	controlled	heat.
Feelings	evolve	from	desire,
and	love	shoots	forth	from	lust.
Lust	is	the	same	energy	as	love;	the	difference	is	only	of	direction.	Lust	moves
downwards,	 love	has	started	the	uphill	 task.	Lust	 is	 like	roots	of	a	 tree,	 love	is
like	wings	of	a	bird	--	but	the	energy	is	the	same.	All	energy	is	the	same.
Energy	as	such	is	neutral.	Unless	you	become	conscious	about	it	you	cannot	be
creative.
And	 the	 downhill	 movement	 is	 very	 destructive:	 you	 are	 simply	 dissipating
yourself.	You	are	not	getting	any	integration	through	it	--	what	Gurdjieff	used	to
call	crystallization.
Every	moment	you	 are	poured	with	 energy.	Existence	goes	on	pouring	 energy
into	you,	through	air,	through	water,	through	food,	through	the	sunlight,	through
the	 moonlight,	 and	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 other	 subtle	 influences.	 The	 universe
goes	on	pouring	its	energy	into	you.	What	are	you	doing	with	that	energy?	Are
you	doing	anything	or	simply	wasting	it?	Are	you	creating	something	out	of	it?
Are	you	getting	a	certain	integrity,	crystallization	out	of	it?	Or	does	it	just	come
through	one	end	and	is	lost	through	the	other	end?
There	are	many	people	who	are	just	like	a	pipe:	you	pour	one	thing	through	one
end,	 through	 the	other	end	 it	goes	out.	Don't	be	a	pipe.	When	 the	energy	 is	 in
you,	do	something	with	it	so	that	something	of	it	becomes	a	permanent	part	of
you.	Otherwise	 the	whole	 life	will	 be	 just	 a	 pipe:	 eating,	 defecating,	 drinking,
urinating	--	just	a	pipe.	Subtle	juices	are	created	by	your	energy.	That's	what	sex
is;	a	very	subtle	juice.	Now	what	are	you	doing	with	it?	Are	you	doing	anything
with	it,	or	just	wasting	it?
Lust	 is	 the	 lowest	 form	of	sex	energy;	 love,	 the	highest	 form.	Unless	your	 lust
becomes	love	you	will	be	missing	your	goal.
GURDJIEFF	used	to	say	that	there	is	a	certain	mechanism	in	man;	he	called	it
'KUNDABUFFER',	 just	 parallel	 to	KUNDALINI:	Kundalini	 is	 a	 center,	 but	 it
functions	only	when	the	energy	rises	upwards.	Kundabuffer	is	that	center	which
functions	 in	 you	 when	 the	 energy	 goes	 downwards.	 Kundabuffer	 has	 to	 be
destroyed,	melted,	destructured.	It	is	a	mechanism	out	of	the	continuous	practice
of	 many	 lives.	 A	 certain	 mechanism	 has	 arisen	 in	 everybody,	 a	 channel.	 The
moment	energy	 is	 ready	it	simply	moves	 through	that	channel.	That	channel	 is
already	there	to	take	it	out	of	your	being.	If	this	is	the	truth	and	nothing	else	is
possible,	then	Jean-Paul	Sartre	is	right:	that	man	is	a	useless	passion.	Then	for	a
few	 days	 you	 are	 alive	 on	 the	 earth,	 doing	 nothing	 --	 eating	 things,	 throwing
things,	absorbing	things,	throwing	things.	Then	what	is	the	point	of	it	all?
But	this	is	not	all.	The	kundabuffer	can	be	melted;	that	channel	can	be	broken.
And	once	that	channel	is	broken	another	channel	starts	functioning.	It	is	already
there	waiting	for	you.	Not	that	it	does	not	exist;	it	exists.	It	has	come	with	you
but	you	have	not	used	it	yet.
You	have	not	allowed	energy	to	flow	into	it.	Of	course,	it	is	an	uphill	task,	it	is
arduous.
Going	downward	is	very	easy;	going	uphill,	strength,	awareness,	a	certain	will,
courage,	trust...many	things	will	be	needed.
The	Bauls	sing,
The	act	of	loving
is	not	an	ideal	dream.
Loving	grows
from	the	grilling	of	lust	--
like	feeling	death,
being	wholly	alive.
The	clay-beetle	buried
in	the	earth	lives	on	clay,
nestling	in	it.
Lovers	who	know
how	love	can	overcome	lust
though	an	uphill	walk,
even	for	a	man	of	strength...
THE	very	courageous,	the	really	strong	people,	the	really	adventurous,	become
attracted	 towards	 paths	 of	 self-realization	 or	 paths	 of	 self-transformation.
Religion	is	the	greatest	adventure	there	is.	Going	to	Everest	is	nothing,	going	to
the	moon	also	is	nothing;	going	to	the	highest	peak	of	your	being	is	the	real	task.
Because	in	the	first	place,	we	are	not	even	aware	that	the	peak	exists.	In	the	first
place,	we	are	so	unconscious	 that	we	don't	know	what	we	are	doing.	We	don't
know	what	we	are	doing	with	our	lives.
I	have	heard....
The	 manager	 of	 a	 small	 power	 plant	 was	 electrocuted	 while	 on	 the	 fob.	 The
assistant	manager	informed	the	police	chief,	the	coroner,	and	the	workmen	in	the
plant.	 They	 gathered,	 horror-stricken,	 about	 the	 body	 of	 the	 dead	 manager
stretched	out	on	the	floor,	and	began	to	speculate	how	an	experienced	man	could
commit	so	fatal	an	error.
"The	only	thing	I	can	think	of,"	said	the	assistant	manager,	"is	that	poor	Joe	must
have	picked	up	this	terminal	in	one	hand....	"
The	assistant	manager	picked	up	the	terminal	and	then	without	thinking	reached
out	with	his	other	hand	and	came	into	contact	with...	Bang!
The	 assistant	manager	was	 stretched	out	 next	 to	 the	manager,	 but	 the	mystery
was	resolved	to	everyone's	satisfaction.
Man	is	unconscious.	You	go	on	doing	things,	not	knowing	why.	You	go	on	doing
things	you	could	not	do	if	you	were	even	a	little	conscious.
What	we	are	doing	with	our	life	is	just	sleeping	through	it.	Consciousness	has	to
be	evolved.	The	more	consciousness	you	have,	 the	more	energy	 starts	 flowing
upwards	on	its	own	accord.	Consciousness	 is	 the	clue,	 the	key,	 the	master	key.
Lust	 becomes	 love	 through	 consciousness,	 so	 love	 cannot	 be	 an	 unconscious
thing.
When	Bauls	say	that	love	is	the	door,	they	don't	mean	the	love	that	you	call	love.
Your	 love	 is	 as	unconscious	 as	 anything	else.	 It	 is	 unconscious,	 that's	why	we
use	 the	 expression	 'falling	 in	 love'.	Yes,	 it	 is	 a	 'falling	 in'.	 The	 love	Bauls	 are
talking	about	is	a	rising	in	love,	not	falling	in	love.	It	is	not	a	fall,	it	is	a	rise.	So
don't	misunderstand	that	your	love	is	what	Bauls	are	talking	about.	Your	love	is
just	a	name	for	lust	--	a	good	name,	a	beautiful,	nice	name.	And	beware	of	nice
words	because	they	can	be	very	deceptive.	If	you	label	lust	as	love,	you	will	be
deceived	by	your	own	labelling.
LUST	is	when	you	are	unconscious.	You	see	a	woman	or	a	man	and	you	fall	in
love,	 and	 you	 don't	 know	 why;	 sometimes	 even	 against	 yourself,	 in	 spite	 of
yourself.
People	 come	 and	 say	 to	 me,	 "What	 can	 we	 do?	 We	 are	 helpless;	 love	 has
happened."	This	love	is	not	the	love	of	the	Baul;	this	is	lust.	What	a	Baul	calls
lust	 is	 this:	unconscious	 love	 is	 lust.	Then	 it	 flows	downwards.	Then	 it	moves
through	the	sex	center	into	the	world	again.	Upwards	lust	is	love,	but	then	it	is
conscious.	 Consciousness	 is	 the	 staircase:	 step	 by	 step	 you	 become	more	 and
more	conscious.	Whatsoever	you	do,	you	do	 it	with	 full	consciousness	 --	even
walking,	eating,	going	to	bed,	talking,	listening	--	small	things	of	life,	but	you	do
them	with	consciousness.	And	when	you	are	 in	 love,	you	are	 in	 love	with	 full
consciousness.	It	is	not	against	yourself.	It	is	not	that	you	are	possessed,	it	is	not
that	 you	 are	 a	 victim,	 it	 is	 not	 that	 you	 are	 being	 pulled	 by	 somebody	 like	 a
magnet.	No,	you	are	moving	on	your	own.
The	Bauls'	love	is	very	cool.	It	has	the	coolness	of	awareness.	Your	love	is	very
hot;	it	has	the	fever	of	unconsciousness.
We	are	functioning	through	kundabuffer.	This	mechanism	exists	just	at	the	center
of	sex.
People	who	are	 living	 through	kundabuffer	can	 live	 two	sorts	of	 lives:	one,	of
indulgence,	and	the	other,	of	repression	--	but	both	are	the	same.	Ordinarily	the
people	 who	 live	 a	 life	 of	 repression	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 saints.	 That's	 simply
foolish.	They	are	the	same	people	in	a	different	garb.	People	who	live	a	life	of
indulgence	are	as	unconscious	as	the	people	who	live	a	life	of	repression.	In	fact,
the	more	strong	the	kundabuffer	is,	the	more	people	become	repressive,	because
they	want	to	control	it.	They	are	afraid.	They	are	afraid	because	they	are	losing
the	ego	control	over	 their	sex	desire.	They	try	 to	control	 it,	but	 their	control	 is
like	forcing	the	sex	desire	deep	into	the	unconscious.	They	sit	on	top	of	it;	they
have	to	continuously	fight	with	it.
And	remember:	if	you	have	to	fight	with	something	you	can	never	leave	it	and
you	 can	 never	 go	 beyond	 it.	 To	 fight	with	 it	 you	 have	 to	 remain	 on	 the	 same
level.	 To	 fight	with	 it	 you	 have	 to	 remain	 sitting	 on	 top	 of	 it	 for	 twenty-four
hours.	There	is	no	holiday.	You	leave	it	even	for	a	single	moment	and	it	is	again
there,	forcing	you	towards	indulgence.
Indulgence	and-repression	are	the	two	faces	of	the	same	type	of	person.	In	your
monasteries	 you	 will	 find	 the	 repressive	 type,	 in	 the	 world	 you	 will	 find	 the
indulgent	 type.	The	playboy	and	 the	so-called	saint	may	 look	opposite	 to	each
other,	but	they	are	complementary.	Their	obsession	is	the	same,	their	fixation	is
the	same,	their	neurosis	is	the	same.	Kundabuffer	has	to	be	melted	down.	What
to	do?
ONE	small	technique	will	be	of	tremendous	help.	Whenever	you	feel	sex	desire
arising,	 there	are	 three	possibilities:	one,	 indulge	in	 it	 --	ordinary,	everybody	is
doing	 that;	 second:	 repress	 it,	 force	 it	 down	 so	 it	 goes	 beyond	 your
consciousness	into	the	darkness	of	the	unconscious,	throw	it	into	the	basement	of
your	 life.	 That's	 what	 your	 so-called	 extraordinary	 people	 are	 doing	 --
MAHATMAS,	saints,	monks.	But	both	are	against	nature.	Both	are	against	 the
inner	science	of	transformation.
The	 third	 --	 a	 very	 rare	minority	 ever	 tries	 it	 --	 is	when	 the	 sex	 desire	 arises,
close	your	eyes.	It	is	a	very	valuable	moment:	desire	arising	is	energy	arising.	It
is	like	the	sun	rising	in	the	morning.	Close	your	eyes;	this	is	the	moment	to	be
meditative.	Move	downwards	 to	 the	sex	center	where	you	are	 feeling	 the	 thrill
the	vibration,	the	kick.	Move	there	and	just	be	a	silent	onlooker.	Witness	it,	don't
condemn	 it.	 The	moment	 you	 condemn	you	 have	 gone	 far	 away	 from	 it.	And
don't	enjoy	it,	because	the	moment	you	enjoy	you	are	unconscious.	Just	be	alert,
watchful,	like	a	lamp	burning	in	a	dark	night.	You	just	take	your	consciousness
there,	 unflickering,	 unwavering.	 You	 see	 what	 is	 happening	 at	 the	 sex	 center.
What	is	this	energy?
Don't	 call	 it	names	because	all	words	have	become	contaminated.	Even	 if	you
say	 it	 is	 sex,	 immediately	you	have	 started	 condemning	 it.	The	very	word	has
become	condemnatory.	Or,	 if	 you	belong	 to	 the	new	generation,	 then	 the	very
word	 has	 become	 something	 sacred.	 But	 the	 word	 is	 always	 loaded	 with
emotion.	Any	word	which	is	loaded	with	emotion	becomes	a	barrier	on	the	path
of	awareness.	You	just	don't	call	it	anything.	Just	watch	the	fact	that	an	energy	is
arising	near	the	sex	center.	There	is	a	thrill
--	 watch	 it.	 And	 watching	 it,	 you	 will	 feel	 a	 totally	 new	 quality	 of	 energy.
Watching	it,	you	will	see	it	is	rising	upwards.	It	is	finding	a	path	inside	you.	And
the	moment	 it	 starts	 rising	 upwards	 you	will	 feel	 a	 coolness	 falling	 on	 you,	 a
silence	surrounding	you,	a	grace,	a	beatitude,	a	benediction,	a	blessing	all	around
you.	It	is	no	longer	like	a	thorn,	painful.
It	 no	 longer	 hurts;	 it	 is	 very	 soothing,	 like	 a	 balm.	And	 the	more	 you	 remain
aware,	 the	 higher	 it	will	 go.	 If	 it	 can	 come	up	 to	 the	 heart,	which	 is	 not	 very
difficult	 --	difficult,	but	not	very	difficult....	 If	you	 remain	alert	you	will	 see	 it
has	 come	 to	 the	heart.	When	 it	 comes	 to	 the	heart	 you	will	 know	 for	 the	 first
time	what	love	is.
UP	to	now	you	have	been	carrying	a	counterfeit	in	the	name	of	love.	When	the
energy	 comes	 to	 the	 heart	 chakra,	 then	 it	 is	 transformed	 into	 love.	 Once	 it	 is
transformed	 into	 love,	 once	 you	 have	 felt	 it,	 once	 it	 has	 penetrated	 you,	 your
whole	being	will	feel	purified.	You	will	feel	virgin,	you	will	feel	so	pure,	so	holy,
that	you	cannot	 think	 that	heaven	 is	anywhere	else.	You	will	know	it	 is	within
you,	within	your	heart.	And	heaven	will	become	a	truth;	it	will	not	be	theology
then,	it	will	become	almost	a	geography.	You	will	know	exactly	where	it	is,	and
God	 will	 no	 longer	 be	 a	 hypothesis.	 In	 that	 purity,	 in	 that	 silence,	 in	 that
fulfillment	of	 love	you	will	see,	God	is	--	not	as	a	 theory,	but	as	a	self-evident
truth;	not	as	an	argument,	not	as	a	proof,	not	as	a	conclusion,	not	as	a	syllogism,
but	simply	it	is	there.	There	is	no	way	to	deny	it.	It	is	there	so	much	that	you	can
deny	yourself,	but	you	cannot	deny	God.	You	yourself	 look	so	faint	before	 the
reality	of	God	that	you	can	say,	"I	may	not	be,	but	He	is."
That	will	be	the	first	glimpse.	Energy	can	rise	still	higher.	When	it	comes	to	the
center	of	the	throat,	it	becomes	prayer.	People	have	been	doing	prayer,	but	they
don't	know	what	prayer	is	--	because	prayer	is	the	most	subtle	and	refined	form
of	love.	If	you	have	not	moved	through	the	heart	center	you	cannot	go	to	prayer;
there	 is	 no	 way.	 One	 has	 to	 go	 via	 the	 heart.	 Because	 of	 the	 throat	 center,
because	it	exists	at	the	throat	center	and	happens	at	the	throat	center,	people	have
started	doing	rituals.	People	have	made	prayers:	they	assert,	they	say	something.
But	 just	 by	 using	 the	 throat	 center	 and	 saying	 something	 to	God	 you	 are	 not
praying.	Prayer	is	concerned	with	the	throat	center,	but	not	as	verbalization.	It	is
an	 experience	 at	 that	 center,	 and	 the	 experience	 is	 exactly	 like	 when	 a	 child
sucks	at	his	mother's	breast	for	the	first	time.	It	is	not	that	you	say	something,	but
you	receive	something.
Prayer	is	not	saying	something	to	God,	but	receiving	something	from	God.	God
becomes	the	mother,	the	mother's	breast.	Prayer	is	a	nourishment.	Yes,	it	exists
and	happens	at	the	throat	center	because	the	throat	center	is	the	center	to	receive.
The	throat	center	is	the	first	center	which	starts	functioning	because	the	child	has
to	suck	air;	that	happens	through	the	throat	center.	And	then	he	has	to	suck	milk;
that	happens	through	the	throat	center.	Prayer	is	just	like	sucking	air,	vitality,	or
sucking	milk	at	the	breast	of	your	mother.
Hence,	Jesus	says,	"Unless	you	become	like	small	babes,	you	will	not	enter	into
my	kingdom	of	God."	He	is	talking	about	the	throat	center.	But	Christians	have
completely	 lost	 track	of	 it.	He	 is	 saying	 in	a	 symbolic	way	 to	again	become	a
babe,	again	start	sucking	from	the	throat	center	 the	energy	that	 life	 is.	Now,	of
course,	the	breast	is	invisible	and	the	milk	is	invisible.
Have	you	watched	a	man	 in	prayer?	 --	how	diffused	with	grace	he	 looks,	how
peaceful,	 how	at	 home,	 how	 relaxed.	Watch	 a	 small	 babe	 sucking	milk,	 fallen
asleep	with	 the	 nipple	 of	 the	 breast	 still	 in	 his	mouth,	 resting	 on	 his	mother's
breast,	fallen	asleep.	Watch	the	face	of	the	child;	that	is	the	face	of	the	saint	also
when	he	arrives	at	the	throat	center	and	prayer	arises.
PRAYER	is	not	something	that	you	do	with	God;	prayer	is	something	that	you
allow	God	to	do	with	you.	Prayer	is	receptive.	It	is	not	an	action	on	your	part,	it
is	a	passive	welcome..	Prayer	is	not	saying	something	to	God.	On	the	contrary,	it
is	listening	to	God.
It	is	being	ready	to	receive	His	gift.	It	is	very	difficult	to	receive	His	gift	because
you	 have	 your	 own	 ideas,	 you	 have	 your	 own	 plans.	 You	 go	 on	 telling	 Him,
showing	Him	the	right	path:	"Do	this,	then	I	will	be	happy."
We	have	the	adage	that	man	proposes	and	God	disposes.	This	is	simply	stupid,
sheer	stupidity.	Just	the	other	way	round	is	the	case:	God	proposes	and	man	goes
on	disposing	-
-	because	you	have	your	own	plans.	You	never	listen	to	Him,	you	think	you	are
wiser	than	Him.	You	go	on	advising	Him:	"Do	this,	don't	do	that"	--	that's	what
you	do	in	your	prayer.
A	 real	 prayer	 has	 nothing	 to	 suggest	 to	 God	 except	 a	 deep	 gratitude,
thankfulness.	 It	 simply	accepts	whatsoever	God	 is	pouring.	Prayer	 is	 receiving
the	gift.
But	it	happens	at	the	throat	center.	It	is	the	highest	form	of	love.	And	when	you
go	still	higher,	then	at	the	seventh	center,	SAHASRAR,	happens	SAMADHI,	the
ultimate	ecstasy,	where	the	seeker	is	lost	in	the	sought,	where	you	are	no	more
yourself,	where	God	and	you	lose	boundaries	and	become	one.
Overlapping	starts	at	 the	throat	center;	boundaries	become	dim,	not	very	clear-
cut.	 But	 still,	 you	 exist	 separately.	You	 have	 a	 separate	 center	 and	God	 has	 a
separate	 center.	 In	 prayer	 you	 two	 are	 meeting,	 overlapping.	 In	 some	 way
peripheries	are	merging	into	each	other,	but	still	centers	are	different.	The	higher
you	 go,	 the	 more	 centers	 come	 closer	 and	 closer.	 At	 the	 SAHASRAR,	 the
seventh	chakra,	your	centers	become	one.	Then	there	is	only	one	center.	That's
what	 is	meant	when	 Jesus	 says,	 "Not	 I,	 but	my	Father	 lives	 in	me."	Now	 the
seeker	 and	 the	 sought	 are	 not	 two.	 The	 ultimate	 meeting	 has	 happened,	 the
ultimate	love	has	flowered,	has	come	to	fruition	and	fulfillment.
If	you	become	aware	and	a	witness	when	the	sex	center	is	throbbing	with	energy,
vibrating,	streaming	--	without	choosing	 indulgence	or	 repression	--	 if	you	can
remain	just	in	the	middle,	a	watcher,	an	observer,	this	tremendous	transformation
happens	on	its	own.
So	next	time	you	feel	full	of	passion,	don't	move	into	these	two	easily	available
alternatives:	indulgence	or	repression.	Just	remain	in	the	middle,	and	you	are	at	a
point	where	the	door	can	open.	It	always	opens	in	the	middle.
Buddha	used	to	call	his	path	'the	middle	path',	MAJJHIM	NIKAYA,	because	he
said,
"Everywhere,	 excess	 is	 prohibited.	 Always	 choose	 the	 middle."	 The	 exact
middle	is	the	point	beyond.	If	you	can	find	the	exact	middle	ground	between	two
opposites,	 two	 rivals,	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	 them,	 you	 have	 reached	 a
transcendence.	 The	 transcendence	 opens	 just	 in	 the	 middle;	 the	 middle	 is	 the
beyond.
When	you	are	watching,	standing	like	a	witness	at	the	sex	center,	energy	moves
upwards.
Kundabuffer	 starts	 melting,	 and	 kundalini	 starts	 functioning.	 Kundalini	 is	 the
right	path,	kundabuffer	the	wrong	path.	And	kundabuffer	is	functioning	because
we	have	 lived	 so	unconsciously	 for	many	 lives	 that	kundalini	 cannot	 function.
Kundalini	 needs	 the	 fuel	 of	 consciousness.	 If	 that	 gas	 is	 missing,	 kundalini
cannot	function.	Kundabuffer	functions	with	unconsciousness.
So	it	depends	on	you:	if	you	go	on	supplying	unconsciousness,	kundabuffer	will
go	 on	 functioning;	 if	 you	 supply	 consciousness,	 suddenly	 your	 life	 turns.	You
start	moving	towards	the	interior	of	your	being;	a	deep	interiority.
A	 man	 who	 was	 extremely	 successful	 with	 muleteams	 was	 asked	 how	 he
managed	the	stubborn	creatures.
"Well,"	explained	the	man,	"when	they	won't	move,	I	pick	up	a	handful	of	soil
and	put	it	in	their	mouths.	Of	course,	they	spit	it	out,	but	as	a	rule	they	start	on."
"Why	do	you	think	it	has	that	effect?"	asked	the	person.
"I'm	not	sure,	but	I	think	it	changes	the	current	of	their	thoughts."
If	you	start	witnessing,	nobody	knows	exactly	HOW	your	energy	starts	moving,
but	somehow	it	happens.	Maybe	it	changes	your	current	of	thought.	It	is	a	great
shock.
You	 try	 --	 you	 are	 angry,	 you	 are	 getting	 into	 anger;	 suddenly	 become	 alert.
Shake	 and	 jerk	 your	 body	 and	 become	 alert,	 and	 see	what	 happens.	 Suddenly
you	will	 see	 that	 something	 has	 slipped	 out	 of	 your	 hands;	 you	 are	 no	 longer
angry.	 Somehow	 anger	 looks	 foolish	 now.	 Or,	 slap	 your	 face	 when	 you	 are
getting	 angry	 rather	 than	 slapping	 somebody	 else's	 face	 --	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to
help.	 Slap	 your	 own	 face	 when	 you	 are	 getting	 angry	 and	 see	 what	 happens.
Suddenly,	 the	mechanism	 that	 was	 going	 to	 function	 in	 a	 routine	way	 cannot
function;	you	have	shocked	it.
A	consciousness	arises	if	you	slap	your	own	face,	a	consciousness	which	breaks
the	 unconscious	 pattern.	 So	 wherever	 you	 want	 to	 change,	 remember
consciousness	is	the	key.	Otherwise,	we	are	almost	living	in	a	sort	of	insanity.	A
few	mad	people	are	in	the	madhouses,	the	remainder	are	outside.	But	it	is	very
difficult	 to	 find	 a	 sane	 man.	 The	 differences	 are	 only	 of	 degrees.	 Have	 you
watched	the	fact,	have	you	ever	become	afraid	of	it?	--	that	the	person	who	has
become	mad	was	also	just	like	you	a	few	days	before?
Nobody	had	ever	thought	that	he	would	become	mad;	he	is	mad.	Can't	the	same
happen	to	you?
IT	is	told	about	William	James,	the	greatest	American	psychologist,	that	when	he
went	to	visit	a	madhouse	for	the	first	time,	he	went	back	home	very	sad.	He	had
fever.	The	wife	was	worried.	She	said,	"What	has	happened?	You	went,	and	you
were	perfectly	okay."
He	 said,	 "Don't	 talk	 to	 me.	 I'm	 in	 no	 mood	 to	 talk."	 He	 slipped	 under	 the
blankets	 and	 remained	 ill	 for	 two	 or	 three	 days.	 Everybody	was	worried.	 The
doctor	said,	"Nothing	is	wrong."	Then	he	said	what	had	happened.
Seeing	many	mad	people	in	the	madhouse,	suddenly	a	thought	occurred	to	him:
"The	 same	 can	 happen	 to	me."	 That	 gave	 him	 a	 trembling;	 he	was	 never	 the
same	man	again.
But	that	made	him	very	alert.
Inside	your	mind,	continuous	madness	exists	--	and	you	know	it.	How	can	you
manage	not	to	know	it?	But	it	goes	on	like	an	undercurrent.	On	the	surface	you
manage	well.
I	have	heard....
A	clergyman	had	occasion	to	preach	to	the	inmates	of	an	insane	hospital.	During
his	sermon	he	noticed	that	one	of	the	patients	paid	the	closest	attention,	his	eyes
riveted	upon	the	preacher's	face,	his	body	bent	eagerly	forward.	This	interest	was
most	flattering.	After	the	service,	the	speaker	noticed	that	the	man	spoke	to	the
superintendent.	So	as	soon	as	possible,	 the	preacher	 inquired,	"Didn't	 that	man
speak	to	you	about	my	sermon?"
"Yes."
"Would	you	mind	telling	me	what	he	said?"
The	superintendent	tried	to	sidestep,	but	the	preacher	insisted.	"Well,"	he	said	at
last,
"what	the	man	said	was,'Just	think...he	is	out	and	I	am	in.'"
You	may	be	out	and	somebody	may	be	in,	but	the	difference	is	only	of	degree.
Unless	you	become	conscious,	you	are	always	on	the	verge	of	madness,	always
boiling,	 always	 ready.	Any	 small	 thing	 can	 prove	 the	 last	 straw	on	 the	 camel.
Any	small	thing,	any	small	incident,	and	you	may	cross	the	boundary.
TO	 live	 unconsciously	 is	 not	 to	 really	 live.	 To	 become	 conscious,	 to	 move
consciously,	 to	 be	 conscious	 of	 all	 that	 happens	 in	 your	mind,	 to	 be	 separate
from	 your	 mind	 --	 because	 consciousness	 becomes	 separate;	 whenever	 you
watch	something	you	become	separate	from	that	thing	--	this	is	the	secret.	If	you
watch	your	thoughts	you	become	separate	from	your	thoughts;	you	are	no	more
identified.	And	when	you	 are	 not	 identified,	 you	 are	 not	 cooperating,	 and	you
don't	go	on	giving	energy	to	your	 thoughts	--	by	and	by,	 they	disappear.	When
the	host	is	not	interested,	the	guests	disappear.	They	don't	come	so	often;	or	even
if	 they	 come	 they	 don't	 stay	 so	 long.	 Gaps	 arise	 --	 one	 thought	 comes,	 then
minutes	 pass	 and	 another	 thought	 does	 not	 come.	 In	 that	 gap	you	 face	 reality.
Then	there	is	no	screen	between	you	and	reality.	Unscreened	reality	is	what	God
is.
The	song	for	today:
THOSE	WHO	ARE	DEAD
AND	YET	FULLY	ALIVE
AND	KNOW	THE	FLAVORS
AND	FEELINGS
IN	LOVING;
THEY	WILL	CROSS	THE	RIVER.
GAZING	AT
THE	STREAM	OF	LIFE	AND	DEATH,
THEY	SEEK	INTEGRITY.
THEY	HAVE	NO	WISH
FOR	HAPPINESS	AT	ALL,
WALKING	AGAINST	THE	WIND.
THEY	KILL	LUST
WITH	LUST
AND	ENTER	THE	CITY	OF	LOVE
UNATTACHED....
Tremendous	sutras,	tremendously	significant	sutras....	"Those	who	are	dead	and
yet	 fully	 alive"....	How	can	 you	be	 dead	 and	 yet	 fully	 alive?	 If	 you	 become	 a
witness	to	your	body,	then	you	know	you	are	not	the	body.	The	body	is	born	and
the	body	is	going	to	die;	the	moment	you	know	you	are	not	the	body,	you	know
that	 you	 were	 never	 born	 and	 you	 will	 never	 die.	 So	 in	 a	 sense	 you	 become
wholly	alive,	eternally	alive	--	what	Jesus	calls
'abundance	of	life',	overflowingly	alive.	You	cannot	be	exhausted	then.	Then	you
are	not	caused:	you	don't	have	any	beginning	and	you	cannot	have	any	end;	you
are	perpetual	energy,	eternal	energy.	Then	you	are	wholly	alive	on	the	one	hand,
and	because	you	know	you	are	not	the	body,	then	the	life	that	you	used	to	think
consisted	in	body	is	no	longer	there.
The	 body	 is	 already	 dead.	 You	 use	 it,	 you	 live	 in	 it,	 but	 you	 are	 no	 longer
identified	with	it.
THOSE	WHO	ARE	DEAD
AND	YET	FULLY	ALIVE
AND	KNOW	THE	FLAVORS
AND	FEELINGS	IN	LOVING;
THEY	WILL	CROSS	THE	RIVER.
And	 when	 you	 are	 fully	 alert	 and	 no	 longer	 attached	 to	 the	 body,	 no	 longer
identified	with	 the	body,	 no	 longer	does	 the	 idea	 exist	 in	 you	 that	 you	 are	 the
body,	then	love	arises.
The	moment	you	are	no	 longer	 the	body,	 the	kundabuffer	 is	broken	--	because
the	 kundabuffer	 can	 exist	 only	 when	 you	 are	 identified	 with	 the	 body.	 The
kundabuffer	is	a	part	of	the	body.
NOW	be	careful	about	what	I	am	saying;	be	attentive.
The	 kundabuffer	 is	 part	 of	 the	 body	 and	 kundalini	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the	 body.
Kundalini	is	part	of	YOU,	it	is	part	of	your	consciousness.	So	people,	there	are
many...even	a	few	doctors	have	tried	to	find	out	where	the	kundalini	exists	in	the
body.	A	few	have	even	been	foolish	enough	to	prove	that	it	exists	here	or	there,
at	this	center	or	that.
Kundalini	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the	 physical	 body	 at	 all.	 And	 Gurdjieff	 was	 right:	 if
people	 are	 trying	 to	 prove	 that	 kundalini	 is	 part	 of	 the	 body,	 then	whatsoever
they	prove	is	kundabuffer,	not	kundalini.	Nobody	was	there	to	say	to	Gurdjieff
that	kundalini	 is	part	of	 the	 soul,	not	of	 the	body.	And	all	 the	 so-called	Hindu
yogis,	 particularly	 the	modern	 ones,	 try	 in	 every	way	 to	 imitate	 science	when
they	write.	They	 try	 to	show	and	prove	 that	Yoga	 is	scientific.	Of	course,	 then
they	start	falling	victim	to	the	same	attitude,	the	same	standpoint	as	the	scientists
have	become	victims	of:	 the	standpoint	that	starts	with	the	body	and	thinks	the
body	is	all.	So	they	try	to	prove	that	kundalini	exists	somewhere	in	the	physical
body,	that	it	is	physiological.
Gurdjieff	used	 to	 say	 that	 these	people	were	 talking	about	kundabuffer:	 "Their
kundalini	 is	 not	 kundalini,	 but	 kundabuffer;	 a	 false	 entity."	When	 you	 are	 too
attached	 to	 the	 body,	 this	 false	 entity	 arises.	 It	 arises	 in	 the	 body,	 not	 in	 you.
When	you	are	no	longer	identified	with	the	body	kundabuffer	disappears.	It	is,	in
fact,	 the	kundabuffer	 from	where	you	are	 identified	with	 the	body.	That's	why
sex	 becomes	 almost	 synonymous	with	 love.	When	 a	woman	 has	 come	 to	 her
menopause	 she	 starts	 thinking-that	 her	 life	 is	 finished.	When	 a	man	 comes	 to
know	that	he	is	no	longer	sexually	potent,	he	starts	feeling	that	now	he	is	useless.
These	wrong	attitudes	exist	because	we	are	too	identified	with	the	sex	center.
If	witnessing	arises	and	you	are	separate,	and	you	KNOW	that	you	are	separate	-
-	not	 that	you	repeat	 it,	not	 that	 the	Vedas	say	 that	you	are	separate	 from	your
body	so	you	repeat	it,	you	chant	it,	and	constant	repetition	gives	you	an	illusory
idea	 that,	yes,	you	are	 separate	 from	 the	body.	That	 is	not	going	 to	help.	Your
own	knowing,	experiential,	existential,	can	be	of	help,	nothing	else.	If	you	know
you	 are	 not	 the	 body,	 suddenly	 love	 arises;	 energy	 starts	 moving	 towards	 the
heart	center.
The	heart	does	not	exist	in	the	lungs.	The	heart	is	not	part	of	the	body,	lungs	are
a	part	of	the	body.	And	whatsoever	you	have	been	thinking	of	as	your	heartbeat
is	not	a	heartbeat,	it	is	just	lungs	beating.
Hidden	behind	this	beat	is	another	beat.	You	can	think	of	it	in	this	way:	the	lungs
and	heart	are	parallel.	Lungs	belong	to	the	body,	and	heart	belongs	to	the	soul.
Kundabuffer	 and	 kundalini	 are	 parallel:	 kundabuffer	 belongs	 to	 the	 body,
kundalini	belongs	to	the	soul.	Sex	and	love	are	parallel:	sex	belongs	to	the	body,
love	belongs	to	the	soul.	The	world	and	God	are	parallel:	 the	world	belongs	to
the	body,	God	belongs	to	the	soul.	Body	and	soul	exist	parallel,	like	two	parallel
lines	 always	 together	 and	 yet	 meeting	 nowhere;	 always	 together,	 running
together	for	thousands	of	lives	and	meeting	nowhere.	They	affect	each	other,	but
meeting	never	happens.	They	color	each	other.	When	you	become	too	obsessed
with	 the	 body,	 your	 body	 almost	 possesses	 the	 soul.	 When	 you	 become	 too
detached	from	the	body,	your	soul	starts	possessing	your	body.
Ordinarily	the	soul	remains	a	slave	and	the	body	becomes	the	master.	But	when
the	conversion	happens,	understanding	arises.	The	soul	 regains	 its	mastery	and
body	comes	to	its	right	place	--	becomes	a	slave,	an	obedient	slave.
THOSE	WHO	ARE	DEAD
AND	YET	FULLY	ALIVE
AND	KNOW	THE	FLAVORS
AND	FEELINGS	IN	LOVING;
THEY	WILL	CROSS	THE	RIVER.
GAZING	AT
THE	STREAM	OF	LIFE	AND	DEATH
THEY	SEEK	INTEGRITY.
Integrity,	Yoga	--	integration,	crystallization,	centering,	or	whatsoever	you	like	to
call	it	-
-	is	the	goal.
GAZING	AT...that	is	the	key;	what	I	was	calling	witnessing.
GAZING	AT
THE	STREAM	OF	LIFE	AND	DEATH,
THEY	SEEK	INTEGRITY.
INSIDE	 you	 there	 is	 one	 stream	 of	 life	 and	 one	 stream	 of	 death.	Body	 is	 the
stream	of	death,	soul	is	the	stream	of	life.	Soul	never	dies,	body	is	never	alive.
With	 the	 soul-body	 together,	 the	body	 reflects	 the	 life	of	 the	 soul.	 It	 is	 simply
luminous	with	the	life	of	the	soul.	The	life	is	borrowed;	it	is	like	the	moon.	The
moon	has	no	rays	of	its	own,	it	reflects	the	sun.	The	rays	come	from	the	sun,	are
reflected	from	the	moon,	but	you	see	them	as	if	they	are	coming	from	the	moon.
It	is	as	if	you	burn	a	small	lamp	in	a	room	and	somebody	passing	outside	looks
inside	through	the	glass	window.	The	glass	window	spreads	the	light	of	the	lamp
outside	 also,	 but	 the	 light	 is	 not	 coming	 from	 the	 glass	window,	 it	 is	 coming
from	an	interior	place.
Your	body	reflects	life	--	your	body	is	luminous	with	the	life	of	the	soul.	That's
why	when	the	soul	disappears	the	body	is	dead.	The	body	was	always	dead.	Go
and	put	off	the	light	inside	the	room	and	the	window	will	be	dark.	It	was	always
dark	because	it	has	no	light	of	its	own.
Body	is	the	stream	of	death,	and	if	you	continue	to	be	attached	to	the	body,	you
will	again	and	again	be	falling	into	the	stream	of	death.	You	will	be	born	and	you
will	 be	 dying,	 and	 you	will	 be	 born	 and	 you	will	 be	 dying	 --	 this	 is	what	 the
Hindus	call	'the	wheel	of	life	and	death'.	Go	in,	withinwards,	and	find	the	source
of	life.	It	is	totally	different	from	the	body.	It	has	made	its	abode	in	the	body,	but
it	is	not	the	body.	That	is	the	stream	of	life.
Watching,	 gazing,	 witnessing	 these	 two...THE	 STREAM	 OF	 LIFE	 AND
DEATH,	THEY
SEEK	 INTEGRITY.	 And	 once	 your	 understanding	 has	 become	 perfect	 about
what	 death	 is	 and	 what	 life	 is,	 you	 become	 integrated,	 you	 become	 centered.
Because	 then	no	more	 is	your	 center	 in	 the	body.	Then	 there	 is	no	 longer	 any
illusion	that	you	are	in	the	body.
Then	you	are	suddenly	aware	of	the	real	center	of	your	being,	of	your	innermost
shrine.
THEY	HAVE	NO	WISH
FOR	HAPPINESS	AT	ALL,
WALKING	AGAINST	THE	WIND.
The	Bauls	say	the	real	seekers	have	no	wish	for	happiness	at	all,	walking	against
the	wind.	They	 simply	 float	with	 life.	They	 don't	 ask	 anything	 from	 life,	 they
simply	receive.
Whatsoever	life	gives,	they	enjoy,	they	delight	in	it,	but	their	demand	has	ceased.
They	don't	swim,	and	they	never	swim	against	the	stream;	they	simply	float	with
the	stream.
That's	what	surrender	is.
There	is	a	beautiful	song....
Oh	cruelly	eager,
are	you	going	to	fry	on	fire
your	heart's	flower-bud?
Are	you	going	to	force	it	to	blossom
and	let	the	scent	escape
without	biding	your	time?
Look	at	my	Master,	God,
eternally	opening	the	buds
to	bloom
but	never	in	a	hurry.
You	are	dependent
on	the	hours	of	the	day
because	of	your	terrifying	greed.
What	else	can	you	do?
Listen	to
the	Beloved's	appeal
and	do	not	hurt
the	Master	at	heart.
The	stream	spontaneously	flows,
lost	in	itself,
listening	to	His	words,
O	my	eager	one.
The	Bauls	say,	"Don't	try	to	force	anything."	Let	life	be	a	deep	let-go.	See	God
opening	millions	of	flowers	every	day	without	forcing	the	buds,	waiting,	never
in	a	hurry,	giving	their	time	to	them.	The	Bauls	say,	"Everything	happens	at	its
right	time,	everything	happens	in	its	own	season.	Wait,	don't	be	impatient,	don't
be	in	a	hurry.	All	hurry	is	greed,	and	all	hurry	is	a	subtle	fight."	That	which	is
going	to	happen	will	happen.
Whenever	it	is	going	to	happen	it	will	happen;	you	need	not	fight	existence.	You
can	surrender,	you	can	trust.
THIS	has	to	be	understood.
If	this	becomes	part	of	your	inner	climate,	it	will	give	you	tremendous	joy.	Then
you	are	no	 longer	proposing	anything,	and	 then	nobody	can	frustrate	you.	You
don't	have	any	plan	and	you	don't	have	any	goal.	You	are	not	going	somewhere,
you	have	simply	left	yourself	in	His	hands,	and	He	takes	you	wherever	he	wants.
"Thy	 Kingdom	 come.	 Thy	 will	 be	 done...."	 Let	 His	 will	 be	 done:	 that	 is	 the
Bauls'	 method.	 It	 is	 of	 surrender	 and	 love	 and	 trust.	 The	 Baul	 is	 not	 a	 yogi,
certainly	not	a	Hatha	yogi;	the	Baul	is	a	lover,	a	devotee.	He	trusts	that	God	is
taking	 him	 into	 some	 unknown	world,	 but	 it	must	 be	 beautiful	 because	He	 is
taking	him.	The	river	 is	going	to	the	ocean;	 it	must	be	going,	because	it	 is	His
river.	This	childlike	trust	is	his	only	method.
THEY	HAVE	NO	WISH
FOR	HAPPINESS	AT	ALL,
WALKING	AGAINST	THE	WIND.
THEY	KILL	LUST
WITH	LUST
AND	ENTER	THE	CITY	OF	LOVE
UNATTACHED....
That's	why	Bauls	say,	"Even	if	lust	has	to	be	transcended,	it	is	through	lust."	If
anger	has	to	be	transcended,	it	is	through	anger.	They	know	the	alchemy	of	how
to	change	poison	into	nectar.	They	don't	say	to	throw	it,	it	is	poison.	They	say	to
transform	it,	nectar	is	hiding	behind	it.	The	poison	is	only	just	the	shell.	Find	the
inner	 content	 of	 it;	 love	 is	 hiding	 behind	 lust.	 Soul	 is	 hiding	behind	 the	 body,
God	 is	hiding	behind	 the	world.	Don't	 throw	 it.	 It	will	 be	 throwing	 something
tremendously	valuable.	Maybe	you	are	not	yet	aware	of	what	value	is	there.	You
think	 it	 is	 just	 a	 stone.	 Become	 a	 jeweller.	 It	 is	 what	 Bauls	 call	 to	 become	 a
RUSIK,	 a	 connoisseur.	 Know	 the	 taste	 of	 it,	 find	 out	 the	 ways,	 what	 it	 is.
Become	 alert	 to	 the	 hidden	 reality,	 open	 the	 doors	 and	go	 into	 it.	 It	may	be	 a
Kohinoor;	don't	throw	it.	If	God	has	given	you	the	stone,	it	must	be	a	Kohinoor	-
-
otherwise	why	should	He	give	 it	 to	you?	Don't	 think	yourself	wiser	 than	Him.
Let	His	wisdom	be	the	supreme.	You	trust.	If	He	has	given	you	a	stone	it	must	be
a	Kohinoor,	it	must	be	a	great	diamond.	It	is	His	gift;	it	cannot	be	otherwise.
So	even	in	lust	they	are	not	like	ordinary	ascetics.	They	don't	fight,	they	search
deep	in	 it,	 they	try	 to	find	the	chemistry	of	 it.	Something	is	bound	to	be	 there,
otherwise	why	should	God	give	so	much	sex	energy	to	everyone?	And	to	man	he
has	given	more	than	to	any	animal.	In	animals,	sex	is	seasonal.	Once	a	year	or
twice	 a	 year	 they	 become	 sexual,	 otherwise	 sex	 disappears.	Man	 is	 sexual	 for
twenty-four	 hours,	 twelve	 months	 a	 year,	 year	 in	 and	 year	 out.	 Something	 is
bound	to	be	there.	Why	has	so	much	sex	energy	been	given	to	man?	It	cannot	be
only	for	generative	reasons	--	because	animals	are	doing	perfectly	well.	If	man
were	only	 seasonally	 sexual,	 things.	 in	 a	way,	would	have	been	better:	 once	 a
year	for	a	month,	and	for	eleven	months	you	are	free.	You	can	do	a	thousand	and
one	things	and	not	be	worried	about	it.	One	month	in	a	year	would	be	enough.
But	why	has	man	been	given	so	much	sex	energy?	It	cannot	be	only	to	generate
children.
This	 great	 treasure	 has	 been	 given	 for	 some	 other	 reason:	 it	 carries	 a	 hidden
possibility	 for	 becoming	 tremendously	 alert	 and	 aware.	 This	 energy	 has	 to
become	love,	and	this	love	has	to	become	prayer,	and	this	prayer	has	to	become
ecstasy.
The	 generative	 part	 is	 very	 minor	 as	 far	 as	 man	 is	 concerned.	 Something	 of
greater	value	is	hiding	in	it.	God	cannot	give	you	something	without	a	particular
reason	in	it.
THEY	KILL	LUST
WITH	LUST
AND	ENTER	THE	CITY	OF	LOVE
UNATTACHED....
When	 lust	 is	 transformed	 and	 you	 enter	 into	 the	 city	 of	 love,	 you	 enter
unattached.
Remember,	that	is	their	definition	of	love.	If	love	has	attachment	in	it,	it	is	lust,
If	love	has	no	attachment	in	it,	only	then	is	it	not	lust.	When	you	are	in	lust	you
are	not	 really	 thinking	of	 the	other,	 thinking	of	your	beloved	or	 lover.	You	are
simply	using	the	other	for	your	own	ends.	And	of	course,	attachment	is	bound	to
be	there,	because	you	would	like	to	possess	him,	and	you	would	like	to	possess
him	 or	 her	 forever.	 Because	 tomorrow	 also	 you	 may	 need,	 the	 day	 after
tomorrow	also	you	may	need.	You	need	a	lover	and	you	want	to	possess	him.
LOVE	is	a	gift.	You	give;	you	need	not	be	worried	about	whether	tomorrow	he
will	be	there	to	receive	or	not.	Because	a	lover	can	give	to	the	trees,	to	the	rocks.
A	lover	can	give	to	the	emptiness	of	the	sky.	A	lover	can	simply	flower	and	send
his	 fragrance	 to	 the	winds,	 even	 if	 nobody	 is	 there.	 Just	 think:	Buddha	 sitting
under	 his	Bodhi	 tree,	 alone,	 full	 of	 love,	 overflowing....	Not	 that	 somebody	 is
there	 to	 receive,	 but	 God	 is	 always	 there	 to	 receive,	 in	 so	many	 forms,	 in	 so
many	ways.
Lust	 is	 greed,	 lust	 is	 attachment,	 lust	 is	 possessiveness.	 Love	 needs	 no
possession,	love	knows	no	attachment,	because	love	is	not	greed.	Love	is	a	gift.
It	is	a	sharing.	You	have	found	something;	your	heart	is	full,	your	fruits	are	ripe.
You	 hanker	 that	 somebody	 should	 come	 and	 share.	 It	 is	 unconditional;	 who
shares	 does	 not	 matter.	 But	 you	 are	 so	 full	 of	 it	 that	 you	 would	 like	 to	 be
unburdened	 --	 as	when	clouds	are	 full	of	 rainwater,	 they	 rain.	Sometimes	 they
rain	 in	a	forest,	sometimes	 they	rain	on	a	hill,	sometimes	 they	rain	 in	a	desert,
but	they	rain.	The	fact	of	where	they	rain	is	irrelevant.	They	are	so	full	they	have
to	rain.
A	 lover	 is	 so	 full	 he	 becomes	 a	 cloud,	 full	 of	 lovewater;	 he	 has	 to	 rain.	 That
raining	is	spontaneous.
The	so	called	lovers
rarely	know
the	flavors	of	loving.
A	lover	lives
for	love	alone
as	the	fish	in	the	water.
Great	is	the	lover
who	can	love	day	and	night
and	is	wholly	devoted
to	love's	intercourse.
Worship	with	prayers.
The	man	or	the	woman
is	still	alone,
but	a	lover	is	formed
when	the	souls	conjoin.
Ordinarily	a	man	is	alone,	a	woman	is	alone.	Loneliness	is	there.	Even	if	you	are
attached	to	a	man	or	woman	or	a	friend,	and	it	is	only	the	attachment	of	lust,	you
will	remain	lonely.	Have	you	not	watched	it?	Attached	to	a	woman,	attached	to	a
man,	 but	 still	 you	 remain	 lonely.	 Somewhere	 deep	 down	 there	 is	 no
communication	with	the	other;	you	are	cut	off,	like	islands.	Even	dialogue	seems
to	be	 impossible.	Lovers	ordinarily	never	 talk	 to	each	other,	because	each	 talk
creates	 argument,	 and	 each	 talk	 brings	 conflict.	 By	 and	 by,	 they	 learn	 to	 be
silent;	by	and	by,	they	learn	somehow	to	avoid	the	other,	or	at	the	most,	tolerate.
But	they	remain	lonely.	Even	if	the	other	is	there,	there	is	space;	the	inner	space
remains	unfulfilled.
The	Bauls	say,
The	 man	 or	 the	 woman	 is	 still	 alone,	 but	 a	 lover	 is	 formed	 when	 the	 souls
conjoin.
It	is	not	a	question	of	two	bodies;	it	is	not	a	question	of	two	bodies	meeting	and
embracing	and	penetrating	each	other.	The	question	is	of	 two	souls	penetrating
each	 other.	 When	 two	 souls	 penetrate	 each	 other,	 then	 loneliness	 disappears
forever.	Then	a	totally	new	world	arises	where	you	are	never,	never	lonely.	You
have	become	a	whole.
Man	is	half,	woman	is	half.	When	love	happens,	wholeness	happens.
Poison	and	nectar
are	mingled	in	one
like	music	played	and	heard
in	one	single	act.
The	human	heart
free	from	flaw,
forever	enlightened,
sees	good	and	evil	--
same	time,	same	space.
A	child	sucking	his	mother
draws	milk;
a	leech	at	the	breast	of	a	woman
draws	blood.
"Poison	and	nectar	are	mingled	in	one...."	Love	and	lust	are	mingled	in	one,	life
and	death	are	mingled	in	one.	It	depends	on	you	what	you	are	going	to	choose	of
it.	 A	 child	 sucking	 his	 mother	 draws	 milk;	 a	 leech	 at	 the	 same	 breast	 draws
blood.	It	depends	on	you.	Lust	is	not	bad,	but	love	and	lust	are	mingled	together.
CHOOSE	 love;	 bring	 love	 out	 of	 lust.	 Let	 your	 life	 be	 a	 life	 of	 alertness,	 so
whatsoever	you	do	is	done	in	such	awareness	that	only	that	which	is	valuable	is
chosen,	and	the	valueless	is	left.
The	whole	life	is	nothing	but	a	great	effort	to	choose	life	against	death,	to	choose
love	instead	of	lust,	to	choose	God	instead	of	the	world,	to	choose	beauty,	good,
truth,	instead	of	falsities.
My	heart!
You	are	in	a	muddle.
As	the	days	go,
your	inherited	riches,
plundered,	fly.
You	only	doze	around	the	clock
drinking	dreams
and	living	in	five	homes
with	no	control.
The	robber	rests	with	you,
my	heart,
in	your	own	room.
But	how	can	you	know?
Your	eyes	are	shut	in	sleep.
This	is	unawareness:	"Your	robber	rests	with	you,	my	heart,	in	your	own	room.
But	how	can	you	know?	Your	eyes	are	 shut	 in	 sleep."	Open	your	eyes.	Watch
what	is	happening	inside,	outside.	Be	alert	 to	the	death	and	life	stream,	and	by
and	by,	fall	into	the	life	stream	and	be	integrated.
Love	springs
as	feelings	merge.
Divided	forms
assume	a	single	way.
A	pair	of	hearts
running	in	parallel	streams
long	to	reach
the	God	of	loving.
Bauls	 say,	 "Love	 a	 man,	 love	 a	 woman,	 but	 let	 this	 love	 be	 nothing	 but	 an
offering	to	the	ultimate	love,	the	love	of	God."
Love	springs
as	feelings	merge.
Divided	forms
assume	a	single	way.
A	pair	of	hearts
running	in	parallel	streams
long	to	reach
the	God	of	loving.
If	your	love	is	love	and	not	lust,	then,	by	and	by,	you	will	find	that	you	and	your
beloved	are	both	moving	together,	singing,	dancing	towards	the	Ultimate	Lover,
the	Ultimate	Beloved	where,	 and	only	where,	 one	 can	 find	 rest.	Then	you	 are
moving	 towards	 the	 ultimate	 home.	 If	 lust	 is	 there,	 then	 you	 are	 moving
nowhere.
Lust	is	like	dead,	stagnant	water	--	a	pond;	love	is	like	a	river.	And	if	you	love
somebody,	your	rivers	move	parallel	towards	the	ocean.	It	is	good	to	go	dancing
with	your	beloved,	good	to	go	hand	in	hand,	good	to	go	singing,	with	laughter	in
the	 heart.	But	 remember,	 if	 your	 life	 becomes	 a	 pool,	 stagnant,	 then	 it	 is	 lust.
Love	is	always	flowing.	Love	is	dynamic,	lust	is	stale	and	stagnant.
The	essence	of	beauty
in	the	mirror	of	love
stares	at	his	face;
the	formless
within	the	visual	form.
The	fire	cools
in	his	hands
and	quicksilver	roasts	on	flames.
Love	is	a	miracle.	Once	love	has	happened,	miracles	happen	continuously:	fire
cools	in	his	hands	and	quicksilver	roasts	on	flames.
Love	has	a	different	world.	Lust	 lives	under	a	different	 law.	The	mystics	have
called	the	law	of	lust	the	law	of	gravitation:	one	is	pulled	downwards.	And	the
law	of	love	is	the	law	of	grace:	one	is	pulled	upwards.
I	have	heard....
A	 Sufi	 mystic	 was	 staying	 in	 somebody's	 house	 and	 he	 was	 thought	 to	 be	 a
madman,	so	the	family	was	a	little	afraid.	The	man	was	not	reliable;	he	might	do
anything.	But	he	was	also	known	as	a	great	mystic	so	they	could	not	throw	him
out;	they	were	also	afraid	of	that.	In	the	night	--	"Where	to	put	him?	Where	is	he
going	to	sleep?"	So	they	put	him	in	the	basement.
In	the	middle	of	the	night	they	suddenly	heard	laughter	coming	from	the	terrace.
They	could	recognize	the	laughter;	it	was	that	madman's.	But	how	did	he	reach
the	terrace?	He	had	been	put	in	the	basement.	They	ran	upstairs;	he	was	laughing
madly,	he	was	rolling	on	the	terrace.
They	said,	"What	has	happened?	How	have	you	come	here?"
He	 said,	 "That's	 why	 I	 am	 laughing.	 I	 was	 sleeping	 in	 the	 basement,	 and	 a
miracle	of	miracles	happened:	suddenly	I	fell	upwards.	Hence,	I	am	laughing!"
The	 story	 is	beautiful.	Mystics	 fall	 upwards,	 love	 falls	upwards.	 It	 is	 a	part	of
another	world,	of	another	law:	the	law	of	grace.
Light	has	burst
on	the	walls	of	the	sky.
The	kind	one
has	blossomed	at	last.
Waking	in	the	morning,
I	saw	him	present,
appearing	close	to	my	face.
Flowers	wither
and	birds	flutter
and	the	dew	forms	on	the	leaves.
The	glow	of	the	night
is	melting	away
with	the	rising	heat
of	the	sun.
Love	is	rising	sun,	lust	is	the	dark	night	of	the	soul.
Explore	the	nature
of	your	own	body,
my	unfeeling	heart.
Unless	you	know
your	very	substance,
worshipping	God	is	of	no	avail.
The	body	is	the	home
of	seven	heavens
for	you	to	voyage.
You	will	blunder
as	you	never	learned	to	know
the	friends	and	the	foes
alive	in	your	body.
So	 the	basic	work	 is	 to	know	the	foe	and	 the	friend	 in	 the	body.	To	know	that
which	 you	 are	 and	 that	 which	 you	 are	 not	 is	 the	 basic	 work,	 to	 discriminate
between	death	and	life,	lust	and	love,	kundabuffer	and	kundalini.
There	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	All	that	is	going	to	happen	is	going	to	happen
within	you.	All	is	given	there,	all	is	already	given.	Just	a	little	discrimination,	a
little	 awareness	 is	 needed.	 Bring	 light	 unto	 your	 own	 being.	 Close	 your	 eyes
from	the	outside	and	open	your	eyes	withinwards.	The	whole	world	is	 there	 in
miniature.
The	mystics	say:	As	above,	so	below.
The	Hindus	 say:	Whatsoever	 is	 in	Brahman,	whatsoever	 is	 in	 the	 universe,	 is
also	in	man.
MAN	is	a	small	map	of	the	whole	cosmos.	The	limited	and	unlimited	both	exist
in	you;	matter	and	consciousness	both	exist	 in	you;	 the	 lowest	and	 the	highest
both	exist	in	you.
Nietzsche	 used	 to	 say	 that	man	 is	 a	 rope	 stretched	 between	 two	 abysses,	 two
eternities.
Yes,	man	is	a	rope,	a	bridge.	You	are	a	ladder:	one	part	is	resting	on	the	earth,	the
other	 part	 --	 you	 cannot	 even	 see	 it	 --	 is	 resting	 at	 the	 feet	 of	God.	Watch	 it,
recognize	it,	feel	the	direction.	And	move.	Start	moving.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	I'm	Just	Being	To	You
8	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607080
ShortTitle:
BELOV208
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
91
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
WHAT	DO	YOU	DO	WHEN	SOMEBODY	HATES	YOU?
WHETHER	 SOMEBODY	 HATES	 YOU	 OR	 SOMEBODY	 LOVES	 YOU
SHOULD
NOT	MAKE	ANY	DIFFERENCE	IN	YOU.	If	you	are,	you	remain	the	same.	If
you	are	not,	then	you	are	immediately	changed.	If	you	are	not,	then	anybody	can
pull	you,	push	you;	then	anybody	can	push	your	buttons	and	change	you.	Then
you	are	a	slave,	then	you	are	not	a	master.	Your	mastery	begins	when	whatsoever
happens	outside	does	not	change	you;	your	inner	climate	remains	the	same.
A	 psychoanalyst	 was	 attending	 a	 convention.	 At	 one	 of	 the	 lectures	 one	 ugly
woman	sitting	next	to	him	began	to	pinch	him.	Annoyed,	he	was	about	to	give
her	 an	 angry	 retort,	when	he	 changed	his	mind:	 "Why	 should	 I	 get	 angry,"	 he
decided.	"After	all,	it	is	her	problem."
Whether	somebody	loves	you	or	hates	you,	it	is	his	or	her	problem.	If	you	are,	if
you	have	understood	your	being,	you	remain	in	tune	with	yourself.	Nobody	can
disturb	your	inner	harmony.	If	somebody	loves,	good;	if	somebody	hates,	good.
Both	remain	somewhere	outside	you.	This	is	what	we	call	mastery.	This	is	what
we	call	crystallization
--	becoming	free	of	impressions,	influences.
You	ask	me,	"What	do	you	do	when	somebody	hates	you?"
What	can	I	do?	It	is	that	person's	problem;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	me.	If	I	was
not	here	he	would	have	hated	somebody	else.	He	would	have	hated.	If	there	were
nobody	and	he	were	alone,	he	would	have	hated	himself.	Hatred	is	his	problem.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	me,	not	in	the	least.	Basically	it	does	not	even	refer	to
me;	I	am	just	an	excuse.	Somebody	else	would	have	done	as	well,	would	have
functioned	as	an	excuse	for	him.
Have	you	not	watched	 it?	 that	when	you	are	angry,	you	are	simply	angry.	 It	 is
not	that	your	anger	is	addressed	to	somebody.	That	'somebody'	is	nothing	but	an
excuse.	Angry,	you	come	home	from	the	office;	you	jump	on	your	wife.	Angry,
you	 go	 from	 your	 home;	 you	 are	 angry	 in	 the	 office	 with	 the	 peon,	 with	 the
clerk,	with	this	and	that.	If	you	analyze	your	states	of	mind,	you	will	come	to	see
that	they	belong	to	you.	You	live	in	your	own	world,	but	you	go	on	projecting	it
on	others.
When	you	are	angry,	YOU	are	angry	--	not	at	me.	When	you	are	full	of	hate,	you
are	full	of	hate	--	not	at	me.	When	you	are	full	of	love,	you	are	full	of	love	--	not
at	me.	Once	you	understand	 it,	 you	 remain	 like	 a	 lotus	 leaf	 in	 the	world.	You
remain	in	the	water	but	the	water	does	not	touch;	it	touches	you	not.	You	remain
in	the	world	and	yet	aloof,	not	of	it.
Then	 nobody	 can	 disturb	 your	 silence,	 and	 nobody	 can	 distract	 you.	 Your
compassion	goes	on	flowing.	If	you	love	me,	you	receive	my	compassion.	If	you
hate	me,	you	will	not	 receive	my	compassion	 --	not	because	 I	will	not	give	 to
you.	I	will	be	continuously	giving	to	you,	as	much	as	I	give	to	those	who	love
me,	but	you	will	be	closed	and	you	will	not	receive	it.
Once	being	is	attained,	one	is	compassion,	unconditional	compassion.	Not	that	in
some	 moments	 he	 becomes	 compassionate	 and	 some	 moments	 he	 is	 not
compassionate.
Compassion	 then	 is	 his	 natural	 climate,	 compassion	 is	 his	 permanent	 mood,
compassion	 is	 his	 integrated	 being.	 Then	 whatsoever	 you	 do,	 his	 compassion
goes	 on	 showering	 on	 you.	 But	 there	 are	 moments	 when	 you	 will	 receive	 it,
when	 you	 will	 be	 open,	 and	 there	 are	 moments	 when	 you	 will	 not	 receive	 it
because	you	will	be	closed.
So	in	hate	you	will	not	receive	that,	in	love	you	will	receive	that.	And	you	may
even	feel	the	difference	--	because	one	who	loves	me	will	start	growing,	one	who
hates	me	will	start	shrinking.	Both	will	become	so	totally	different	that	you	may
start	thinking	that	I	must	be	giving	more	to	the	one	I	Love,	or	one	who	loves	me,
and	I'm	not	giving	to	one	who	hates	me	or	is	angry	at	me	or	is	closed	towards
me.	But	I	am	not	doing	that.	The	clouds	are	there	and	they	are	showering:	if	your
pot	is	not	broken	it	will	be	filled.	Or	even	if	your	pot	is	not	broken,	but	is	upside-
down,	then	you	will	miss.	Hate	is	a	state	of	upside-downness.	Then	rains	can	go
on	showering	but	you	will	remain	empty,	because	your	opening	is	not	there.
Once	 you	 are	 put	 rightside-up,	 that's	 what	 love	 is.	 Love	 is	 nothing	 but	 an
opening,	a	receptivity,	a	welcome,	an	invitation,	that	"I	am	ready;	come,	please."
The	 Bauls	 go	 on	 singing,	 "Come	 Beloved,	 come."	 They	 go	 on	 sending	 their
invitations.
Love	is	inviting,	hate	is	repelling.	If	you	love	me	you	will	receive	much	--	not
because	I	am	giving	you	more	especially;	but	if	you	hate	me	you	will	not	receive
at	 all	 --	 not	 because	 I	 am	 not	 giving	 you,	 but	 because	 you	 are	 closed.	 But	 I
remain	myself.
I	am	not	identified	with	my	body,	I	am	not	identified	with	my	mind.	I	have	come
home.
If	you	are	identified	with	your	body	and	somebody	hurts	your	body,	you	will	be
angry;	he	 is	hurting	YOU.	If	you	are	 identified	with	your	mind	and	somebody
insults	you,	you	will	be	angry,	because	he	 is	hurting	your	mind.	Once	you	are
identified	with	 your	 being	 nobody	 can	 hurt,	 because	 nobody	 has	 yet	 invented
any	way	to	hurt	being.
The	body	can	be	hurt,	can	be	killed.	The	mind	can	be	hurt...but	the	being	cannot
be	touched.	There	is	no	way	to	hurt	it,	there	is	no	way	to	create	pain.	It's	VERY
nature	is	blissfulness.	You	can	hurt	my	body;	simple.	If	I	am	identified	with	the
body	I	will	be	angry	because	I	will	think	you	have	hurt	me.	If	you	insult	me	then
the	hurt	goes	into	the	mind.	If	I	am	identified	with	the	mind,	again	you	are	my
enemy.	But	 I	 am	neither	 identified	with	 the	body	nor	with	 the	mind.	 I	 am	 the
witness.	So	whatsoever	you	do	never	reaches	to	my	witnessing	center.	It	goes	on
witnessing	it;	it	remains	utterly	unaffected.
Once	false	identifications	fall,	you	are	unperturbed.	Then	you	become	the	center
of	the	cyclone,	and	storms	can	go	on	raging	all	around	you,	but	deep	inside	you
remain	 at	 the	 still,	 small	 center	 of	 your	 being,	 completely	 transcendental	 to
whatsoever	is	happening.
I	have	heard....
A	philosopher,	a	barber	and	a	bald-headed	fool	were	travelling	together.	Losing
their	way	they	were	forced	to	sleep	in	the	open	air,	and	to	avoid	danger	 it	was
agreed	 to	watch	 by	 turns.	 The	 first	 lot	 fell	 on	 the	 barber,	who	 for	 amusement
shaved	 the	philosopher's	head	while	he	was	sleeping.	He	 then	awoke	him,	and
the	philosopher,	raising	his	hand	to	scratch	his	head,	exclaimed,	"Here	is	a	pretty
mistake!	You	have	awakened	the	old	bald-headed	fool	instead	of	me."
Your	 identification	 is	 the	BASIC	problem.	 If	you	are	 identified	with	 the	body,
then	you	are	going	to	remain	in	constant	trouble.	Because	body	is	continuously
changing,	your	identity	will	never	be	at	a	point	where	you	can	settle	and	relax.
One	day	the	body	is	young,	another	day	it	is	old.	One	day	it	is	healthy,	another
day	it	is	ill.	One	day	you	are	so	radiant	with	youth,	another	day	just	a	dilapidated
structure,	a	ruin.	Continuously,	body	is	in	a	flux.
That's	 why	 people	 who	 are	 identified	 with	 the	 body	 will	 remain	 constantly
puzzled,	 confused,	 not	 knowing	 who	 they	 are.	 You	 are	 identifying	 with
something	which	 is	 not	 reliable.	 One	 day	 it	 is	 born,	 another	 day	 it	 dies.	 It	 is
continuously	dying	and	continuously	changing.	How	can	you	rest	with	it?
If	you	are	identified	with	the	mind	then	there	will	be	even	more	trouble.	Because
the	body	at	least	has	a	certain	structure:	it	changes,	but	changes	very	slowly.	You
never	feel	the	change.	It	changes	very	silently,	and	it	takes	years	really,	to	feel	a
certain	change	happening.	A	child	does	not	become	a	young	man	overnight,	and
a	 young	man	does	 not	 become	 an	 old	man	overnight.	 It	 takes	 years,	 and	 very
slow	 is	 the	 change;	 and	 such	minute,	minor	 changes	 happen	 that	 one	 is	 never
aware.	But	with	 the	mind	 you	 are	 constantly	 in	 turmoil;	 every	 single	moment
there	is	change.	One	moment	you	are	happy,	another	moment	you	are	sad.	One
moment	you	were	at	the	top	of	the	world,	feeling	so	fortunate,	another	moment
you	are	in	hell,	thinking	to	commit	suicide.	How	can	you	identify	with	the	mind?
Being	is	that	which	remains	always	the	same,	eternally	the	same.	It	has	no	form
so	 it	 cannot	 change,	 and	 it	 has	 no	 content	 so	 it	 cannot	 change.	 The	 being	 is
contentless,	 formless.	 It	 has	 no	 name,	 no	 form	 --	 what	 in	 the	 East	 we	 call
NAMARUPA.	These	two	things	change:	the	name	and	the	form.	It	is	neither.	It
is	 simple,	 sheer	 existence,	 empty	 of	 all	 content	 and	 all	 form	 Once	 you	 have
entered	 this	 emptiness	 nothing	 can	disturb	you,	 because	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be
disturbed.	Nothing	can	hit	you,	because	there	is	nobody	inside	to	be	hit.
Then	if	you	hate	me,	your	arrow	will	pass	through	me.	It	cannot	strike	because
there	is	nobody.	You	cannot	make	a	target	of	me.	Whether	you	love	me	or	hate
me,	you	cannot	make	a	target	of	me.	So	it	makes	no	difference.	And	I	don't	do
anything,	I	just	remain	myself.
One	day	Mulla	Nasrudin	was	saying	to	me,	"Yes,	I	used	to	be	in	politics	myself.
I	was	a	dog-catcher	in	my	town	for	two	years,	but	finally	lost	the	job."
"What	was	the	matter?"	I	asked	him.	"Change	of	mayors,	or	something	else?"
He	said,	"No,	I	finally	caught	the	dog."
And	that's	what	I	would	like	to	say	to	you:	I	finally	caught	the	dog.	Now	there	is
no	work	left	for	me.	I	am	jobless.	I'm	not	doing	anything:	all	desires	have	gone,
all	doing	has	left.
I'm	just	here.	I'm	just	being	to	you.	If	you	love,	you	will	receive	me	with	great
welcome,	 and	you	will	 be	 tremendously	benefitted.	 If	 you	hate	 you	will	miss,
and	the	responsibility	will	be	yourS.	Now	it	is	for	you	to	choose.	But	I	don't	do
anything.
The	second	question:
Question	2
YOU	 ARE	 RECOMMENDING	 MEDITATION	 OR	 DEVOTION.	 I	 FIND
THEM	BOTH
HELPFUL;	 BOTH	 LEAD	 TO	 THE	 SAME	 GOAL:	 BLISS,	 ANANDA.
SOMETIMES	 I	 FEEL	 I	 AM	 THAT,	 OR	 RATHER	 THIS,	 THE	 ESSENTIAL
MAN,	AND	SOMETIMES
I	 FEEL	 ECSTATIC	 IN	 BEING	 A	 DEVOTEE	 --	 SINGING,	 PRAYING,
DANCING,	 TALKING	 OF	 HIM,	 PLAYING	 LEELA	 WITH	 THE	 DIVINE.
CAN	I	BE	BOTH?
WHAT	IS	MY	REAL	NATURE?	WHICH	WOULD	YOU	SUGGEST	FOR	MY
GROWTH?	IN	FIFTEEN	MONTHS	OF	SANNYAS	WITH	YOU,	THE	FEAR
OF
DEATH	 IS	 GONE,	 BODY	 HAS	 BECOME	 THE	 TEMPLE	 DIVINE,	 MIND
HAS
BECOME	 AN	 INSTRUMENT	 FOR	 HIS	 USE.	 ALL	 YOUR	 WORDS	 ARE
SWEET,	 BUT	 SWEETER	 IS	 YOUR	 SILENCE	 FROM	 WHICH	 I	 HAVE
RECEIVED	MY	LIFE'S
DIRECTION:	DO	NOTHING,	ACCEPT,	ACT,	WHICH	IS	WORKING	VERY
WELL
FOR	MY	GROWTH.	KINDLY	ENLIGHTEN.
THE	question	is	from	Krishnananda	Bharti.
If	 things	are	going	so	beautifully,	why	make	a	problem?	Can't	you	accept	your
own	 insight?	Do	 you	 always	 need	 a	witness?	Do	 you	 always	 need	 somebody
else's	approval?
If	I	am	gone,	you	will	be	in	a	mess.	When	you	are	feeling	so	happy,	is	not	that
happiness	enough	proof	that	you	are	on	the	right	track?
But	in	life	you	have	been	wrong	so	many	times	that	you	have	lost	trust	in	your
own	self.
This	 is	 one	 very	 basic	 thing	 to	 be	 understood	 and	 relearned:	 trust	 in	 yourself.
When	 everything	 is	 going	 beautifully	 and	 you	 are	 feeling	 happy	 and	 blissful,
forget	what	I	am	saying.	Don't	be	worried	about	it.	You	know	well	that	things	are
going	well.	Why	create	suspicion	about	your	own	experiences?
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	was	going	on	a	sight-seeing	tour	of	Detroit.	Going	up	Jefferson
Avenue,	the	driver	of	the	bus	called	out	all	the	places	of	interest.
"On	the	right,"	he	announced,	"we	see	the	Dodge	House."
"John	Dodge?"	the	Mulla	asked.
"No,	sir,	Horace	Dodge."	Continuing	on	 further,	he	called	out,	 "On	 the	 far	 left
corner	we	have	the	Ford	House."
"Henry?"	the	Mulla	suggested.
"No	sir,	Edsel."	Still	further	out	on	Jefferson:	"On	the	near	left	crossing	you	will
see	Christ's	Church."
"Jesus?	or	am	I	wrong	again?"	Mulla	Nasrudin	asked	sheepishly.
I	understand	that	life	is	such	that	you	have	been	found	wrong	so	many	times	that
you	 have	 lost	 your	 inner	 feel.	 You	 have	 lost	 trust	 in	 yourself.	 You	 have	 lost
confidence,	so	you	have	 to	ask	somebody.	Even	 if	you	are	 feeling	blissful	you
have	to	ask	somebody,
"Am	I	going	right?"	Bliss	is	the	indication.
So	 now,	 two	 are	 the	 possibilities:	 either	 you	 are-really	 feeling	 blissful	 as	 you
write	 in	 your	 question	 --	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 ask	 me;	 or	 you	 are	 just
imagining	and	you	know	it	--	hence	you	have	asked.	That	too	has	to	be	decided
deep	inside	you.	Because	an	imagined	bliss	is	no	bliss	at	all.	You	can	imagine.
Man	has	imagination	in	abundance.
You	can	imagine	things	--	because	I	am	talking	about	bliss	continuously:	about
love,	about	meditation,	ecstasy.	You	can	catch	 those	words	and	your	greed	can
start	playing	LEELA	with	you,	rather	than	you	playing	LEELA	with	the	divine.
Your	greed	can	start	playing	LEELA	with	you,	and	it	can	give	you	ideas.	But	if
they	are	 imaginary	you	will	always	be	suspicious	because	deep	down	you	will
know	 that	 this	 is	 just	 fantasy.	 If	 that	 is	 the	 case,	 then	 asking	 is	 perfectly
meaningful.
You	have	to	decide.	If	it	is	really	happening,	you	are	really	happy,	it	is	a	fact	and
you	are	not	 imagining	 it,	 then	you	are	on	 the	right	 track	--	because	 there	 is	no
indication	other	than	blissfulness.
When	 you	 feel	 blissful	 you	 are	 right,	 moving	 in	 exactly	 the	 way	 you	 should
move.
Because	bliss	increases	only	when	you	are	approaching	closer	to	God,	and	in	no
other	way.	If	you	are	going	away	from	God,	anguish	arises.	You	feel	more	and
more	frustrated,	more	and	more	bored,	more	and	more	miserable.	Misery	 is	an
indication	that	you	are	going	astray,	a	natural	indication	that	you	have	lost	track
of	truth.	Bliss	simply	says	that	you	are	falling	in	line	with	the	whole.	Things	are
becoming	harmonious,	the	garden	of	the	Beloved	is	coming	closer:	the	air	feels
cooler,	winds	bring	 the	 fragrance	of	 the	 flowers,	 freshness,	a	new	 thrill,	a	new
enthusiasm.	 Then	 you	 are	moving	 towards	 the	 garden	 of	 the	Beloved.	Maybe
you	cannot	see	yet,	but	the	direction	is	right.
So	trust	yourself.	But	if	you	are	imagining,	then	drop	all	your	imagination.
The	third	question:
Question	3
AT	DARSHAN,	FROM	THE	WAY	YOU	TALKED	TO	ME	IT	SEEMS	CLEAR
MY
MEDITATION	 IS	 TO	 LIVE	 TOTALLY	 IN	 THE	 HERE	 AND	 NOW.	 YOU
MADE	IT
CLEAR	I	WAS	NOT	TO	LIVE	IN	HOPE.	T.S.	ELIOT	SAID,	"I	SAID	TO	MY
SOUL,	BE	STILL,	AND	WAIT	WITHOUT	HOPE,	FOR	HOPE	WOULD	BE
HOPE	FOR	THE
WRONG	THING.	WAIT	WITHOUT	LOVE,	FOR	LOVE	WOULD	BE	LOVE
OF	THE
WRONG	 THING.	 THERE	 IS	 YET	 FAITH,	 BUT	 FAITH	 AND	 THE	 LOVE
AND	THE
HOPE	ARE	ALL	IN	THE	WAITING."	ANYTHING	MORE	TO	SAY	OSHO?
THE	question	is	from	Pradeepa.
She	understood	perfectly	what	I	was	trying	to	show	her.	Maturity	happens	when
you	start	 living	without	hope.	Hope	 is	childish.	You	become	mature	when	you
don't	project	hope	into	 the	future.	In	fact,	you	are	mature	when	you	don't	have
any	future;	you	just	live	in	the	moment	--	because	that	is	the	only	reality	there	is.
In	 the	 past,	 religion	 used	 to	 talk	 about	 the	 hereafter.	 Those	were	 the	 childish,
immature	days	of	religion.	Now	religion	talks	about	herenow;	religion	has	come
of	age.
In	the	Vedas,	in	the	Koran,	in	the	Bible,	hereafter	is	the	basic	goal.	But	now	man
is	no	 longer	 that	childish.	That	sort	of	God	and	 that	sort	of	 religion	 is	dead.	 It
was	a	religion	of	hope,	it	was	a	religion	of	future.
Now	 another	 sort	 of	 religion	 is	 asserting	 itself	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 and	 this
religion	is	about	herenow,	the	present.	There	is	nowhere	else	to	go	and	there	is
no	other	space	and	no	other	time	to	live,	only	this	space	and	this	time,	here	and
now.	Life	has	to	become	very	intense	in	this	moment.	A	man	who	lives	in	hope
dissipates	 life.	He	 spreads	 life;	 it	 becomes	 too	 thin.	And	when	 it	 becomes	 too
thin,	 it	 is	 never	 happy.	 Happiness	 means	 intensity,	 tremendous	 depth.	 If	 you
spread	your	hope	into	the	future,	life	will	become	very	thin.	It	will	lose	depth.
When	I	say	drop	all	hope,	I	mean	be	so	intense	in	 the	moment	 that	 there	 is	no
need	for	the	future.	Then	there	is	a	turning,	a	transformation.	The	very	quality	of
time	changes	 for	you	 it	becomes	eternal.	What	can	you	do	with	hope?	 In	 fact,
what	can	you	hope?	You	cannot	hope	for	the	new.	You	can	only	hope	for	the	old,
that	which	has	happened	before	--
maybe	with	a	little	modification	here	and	there,	a	little	more	decorated.	But	hope
is	nothing	but	past:	you	have	lived	something,	you	have	experienced	something,
and	you	again	and	again	hope	for	it.	It	is	a	repetition;	it	is	circular.
Hope	means	simply	projecting	 the	past	 into	 the	 future	again:	you	 loved	a	man
yesterday,	 you	 want	 to	 love	 the	 man	 tomorrow	 also.	 And	 you	 know	 that
yesterday	 was	 not	 a	 fulfillment,	 hence	 the	 hope.	 Yesterday	 was	 not	 enough,
hence	 the	 hope.	 You	 missed	 something	 yesterday.	 Now	 that	 missed	 gap	 is
torturing	you;	it	is	creating	agony.	You	hope	that	again	tomorrow	that	man	will
be	available	to	love	you,	and	tomorrow	you	will	really	love.
But	between	yesterday	and	 tomorrow	is	 today.	 If	you	really	want	 to	 love,	 then
why	not	be	herenow,	today?	Otherwise,	when	today	will	have	become	yesterday
you	 will	 again	 start	 projecting	 it.	 Incomplete	 experiences	 are	 projected.
Uncompleted	desires	are	projected.	 If	you	 really	 love	 totally	 this	moment,	you
will	 never	 think	 about	 this	 moment	 again.	 It	 is	 finished,	 it	 is	 complete,	 it	 is
perfect.	It	disappears,	it	leaves	no	trace	on	you.
This	 is	 what	 Krishnamurti	 calls	 'total	 act'.	 Total	 act	 creates	 no	 KARMA:	 it
creates	 no	 chain,	 it	 creates	 no	 bondage.	 If	 it	 is	 total,	 you	 never	 remember	 it
again;	there	is	no	point.
We	 remember	 only	 something	which	 has	 remained	 incomplete.	Mind	 tends	 to
complete	 things.	 And	 you	 have	 so	 many	 incomplete	 experiences;	 they	 go	 on
being	 projected	 into	 the	 future.	 The	 past	 is	 gone	 --	 now	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to
complete	 them	 in	 the	 past;	 and	 the	 present	 is	 going	 out	 of	 your	 hands	 fast,
slipping,	 so	 you	 don't	 see	 any	 point,	 any	 possibility	 to	 complete	 them	 in	 the
present.	The	future	is	long:	you	can	project	--	 this	life,	another	life,	 this	world,
another	world	--	you	can	project	eternity.	Then	you	are	at	ease.
You	say,	"I	am	not	at	a	loss;	tomorrow	is	there.	There	will	be	another	life."	But
by	and	by,	you	are	getting	trapped	in	a	wrong	pattern.
No,	hope	is	not	the	right	thing.	Live	in	the	present	so	deeply,	so	completely,	that
nothing	is	 left.	Then	there	will	be	no	projection.	You	will	move	very	smoothly
into	the	tomorrow	without	carrying	any	load	from	today.	And	when	there	is	no
yesterday	haunting	you,	then	there	is	no	tomorrow.	When	the	past	is	not	hanging
around	you,	there	is	no	future.
Pradeepa	has	understood	rightly.	That's	what	I	was	trying	to	show	her:	hope	is	an
illness,	a	disease	of	the	mind.	It	is	hope	that	is	not	allowing	you	to	live.	Hope	is
not	 the	 friend,	 remember;	 it	 is	 the	 foe.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 hope	 that	 you	 go	 on
postponing.	 But	 you	will	 remain	 the	 same	 tomorrow	 also,	 and	 tomorrow	 also
you	will	hope	for	some	future.	And	this	way	it	can	go	on	for	eternity,	and	you
can	go	on	missing.	Stop	postponing.	And	who	knows	what	the	future	is	going	to
reveal	to	you?	There	is	no	way	to	know	about	it.	It	is	an	opening;	all	alternatives
are	open.	What	is	really	going	to	happen,	nobody	can	predict.
People	have	tried.
That's	why	people	go	to	astrologers,	to	I	CHING,	and	to	other	sorts	of	things.	I
CHING
goes	on	fascinating	people,	astrologers	go	on	influencing	people.	Astrology	still
seems	 to	 be	 a	 great	 force.	Why?	 --	 because	 people	 are	 missing	 and	 they	 are
hoping	for	the	future.
They	want	some	clue	to	know	what	is	going	to	happen	so	they	can	arrange	it	that
way.
These	things	will	persist,	even	if	scientifically	it	is	proved	that	it	is	all	nonsense.
They	will	persist	because	it	is	not	a	question	of	science,	it	is	a	question	of	human
hope.	 Unless	 hope	 is	 dropped,	 I	 CHING	 cannot	 be	 dropped.	 Unless	 hope	 is
dropped,	astrology	cannot	be	dropped.	It	will	have	great	power	over	man's	mind
because	 hope	 is	 gripping	 you.	 You	 would	 like	 to	 know	 little	 clues	 about	 the
future	so	you	can	move	more	confidently,	you	can	project	more	confidently,	and
you	can	postpone	many	more	things.
If	you	know	something	about	tomorrow,	I	think	you	will	not	live	today.	You	will
say,
"What	 is	 the	 need?	 Tomorrow	we	will	 live."	 Even	without	 knowing	 anything
about	 tomorrow	you	are	doing	 that.	And	 tomorrow	never	comes...	and	when	 it
comes,	it	is	always	today.	And	you	don't	know	how	to	live	today.
So	you	 are	 in	 a	 great	 trap.	Drop	 that	whole	 structure.	Hope	 is	 the	 bondage	of
man,	hope	is	SAMSAR,	hope	is	the	world.	Once	you	drop	hope	you	become	a
SANNYASIN;	then	there	is	nowhere	to	go.
I	have	heard....
One	day	Mulla	Nasrudin	was	in	a	very	deep	meditative	mood.	Sitting	by	the	side
of	his	dog	he	delivered	a	monologue:
"You	are	only	a	dog,	but	 I	wish	I	was	you.	When	you	go	 to	your	bed	you	 just
turn	around	 three	 times	and	 lie	down.	When	 I	go	 to	bed	 I	have	 to	 lock	up	 the
place,	and	wind	up	 the	clock,	and	put	out	 the	cat,	and	undress	myself,	and	my
wife	wakes	up	and	scolds	and	then	the	baby	wakes	and	cries	and	I	have	to	walk
him	around	the	house	and	then	maybe	I	get	myself	to	bed	in	time	to	get	up	again.
When	you	get	up,	you	just	stretch	yourself,	stretch	your	neck	a	little,	and	you	are
up.	I	have	to	light	the	fire,	put	on	the	kettle,	scrap	some	with	my	wife,	and	get
myself	breakfast.	You	be	laying	around	all	day	and	have	plenty	of	fun;	I	have	to
work	all	day	and	have	plenty	of	trouble.	When	you	die,	you	are	dead;	when	I	die
I	have	to	go	somewhere	again."
This	 'somewhere	again'...call	 it	hell,	call	 it	heaven,	but	somewhere;	and	God	is
here	and	you	are	always	going	somewhere.
God	is	your	surround,	and	you	are	always	missing	Him	because	you	are	missing
the	present.	God	has	only	one	tense	--	that	is	present.	The	past	and	future	don't
exist.	Man	 exists	 in	 the	 past	 and	 future,	 not	 in	 the	 present;	 God	 exists	 in	 the
present,	not	in	the	past	and	future.	So	how	is	the	meeting	going	to	happen?	We
live	in	different	dimensions.
Either	God	starts	living	in	the	past	and	future	--	then	there	can	be	a	meeting,	but
then	He	will	not	be	a	God,	He	will	be	just	as	ordinary	a	man	as	you	are;	or	you
start	living	in	the	present	--	then	the	meeting	happens.	But	then	too	you	will	not
be	human,	 you	will	 become	divine.	Only	 the	divine	 can	meet	with	 the	divine;
only	the	same	can	meet	the	same.
Drop	hope.
Hope	is	the	cause	of	why	you	are	missing	God.	And	the	problem	is,	the	vicious
circle	 is:	 the	more	you	miss	God,	 the	more	you	hope;	 the	more	you	hope,	 the
more	you	miss.	Once	you	look	deep	down	into	hope,	its	structure,	its	grip	on	you
--	the	very	vision,	and	the	hope	drops	on	its	own	accord.	Suddenly	you	are	here
and	now,	and	you	will	see	as	if	a	curtain	had	dropped	from	your	eyes,	a	curtain
has	dropped	from	your	senses.	You	will	become	TREMENDOUSLY	fresh	and
young,	and	you	will	see	a	totally	luminous	world	all	around	you.	The	trees	will
be	 green	 but	 in	 a	 different	 way:	 tremendously	 green	 --	 and	 the	 green	will	 be
luminous.	The	world	will	immediately	turn	into	a	psychedelic	world.	It	is	--	your
eyes	 are	 just	 so	 covered	with	 dust	 that	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 psychedelic	 that	 is
surrounding	you	from	everywhere.
Drop	hope.
But	whenever	I	say	to	somebody	to	drop	hope,	he	thinks	that	I	am	telling	him	to
become	 hopeless.	 No,	 I'm	 not	 doing	 that.	 When	 you	 drop	 hope	 there	 is	 no
possibility	 of	 becoming	 hopeless,	 because	 hopelessness	 exists	 only	 because	 of
hope.	You	hope	 and	 it	 is	 not	 fulfilled;	 hopelessness	 arises.	You	hope,	 and	you
hope	 again	 and	 again	 in	 vain;	 hopelessness	 arises.	 Hopelessness	 is	 frustrated
hope.	The	moment	you	drop	hope,	hopelessness	is	also	dropped.	You	are	simply
without	hope	and	without	hopelessness.
And	that	is	the	most	beautiful	moment	that	can	happen	to	a	man,	because	in	that
very	moment	one	enters	into	the	shrine	of	God.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
DESPITE	ALL	YOU	HAVE	SAID,	L	AM	STILL	UNWILLING	TO	MAKE	A
CHOICE
BETWEEN	THE	 PATH	OF	MEDITATION	AND	THE	 PATH	 IS	 LOVE.	MY
HEART
LOVES	THE	WORLD	TOO	MUCH	TO	SAY'ENOUGH',	AND	MY	MIND	IS
TOO
CYNICAL	 TO	 SURRENDER.	 GURDJIEFF	 SPEAKS	 OF	 A	 FOURTH	WAY
WHICH
INVOLVES	 SIMULTANEOUS	WORK	ON	BODY,	HEART	AND	MIND.	 IS
THERE
NO	POSSIBILITY	OF	FOLLOWING	THIS	PATH?
BE	alert	of	your	own	cunningness.	You	cannot	surrender	here,	and	you	think	you
will	be	able	to	surrender	to	Gurdjieff?	The	problem	is	not	with	me	or	Gurdjieff,
the	 problem	 is	 that	 with	 me	 you	 cannot	 surrender.	 And	 Gurdjieff	 was	 a	 hard
taskmaster,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 dangerous	Masters	 ever.	 after	 Bodhidharma.	 The
problem	is	with	you.	See	the	point	of	it.
The	point	is,	if	I	talk	about	love,	people	come	to	me	and	they	say,	"It	is	difficult
for	 us;	 can't	 we	 meditate?"	 And	 if	 I	 tell	 them	 to	 meditate	 they	 say,	 "It	 is	 so
difficult.	Is	there	not	some	other	way?"	They	want	to	postpone.
Now	you	are	asking,	"Can't	we	follow	Gurdjieff?"	Ask	one	thing:	are	you	ready
to	 follow?	 Following	 is	 difficult.	 Following	MEANS	 surrendering.	 Following
means	that	now	you	put	your	mind	aside.	Gurdjieff	is	now	an	excuse	so	you	can
think	inside	yourself,	"If	I	am	not	surrendered	to	this	man,	at	least	I	am	ready	to
surrender	to	Gurdjieff."	But	where	are	you	going	to	find	Gurdjieff?	And	if	you
ever	come	across	him,	you	will	start	thinking	of	other	Masters,	because	there	are
many	 possibilities.	 You	 will	 ask	 the	 same	 question	 of	 Gurdjieff...that	 it	 is
difficult	for	me	to	surrender	to	you,	and	it	is	very	difficult	to	work	on	body,	mind
and	soul	together	--	because	even	to	work	on	one	thing	separately	is	difficult.	To
work	 on	 three	 things	 together	 is,	 of	 course,	 going	 to	 be	more	 complex,	more
arduous.	So	then	you	can	say,	"Can't	I	follow	the	path	of	the	Bauls?"
This	is	how	you	have	been	travelling	in	your	many	lives.	Remember,	you	are	not
new	 on	 this	 earth.	 And	 remember,	 you	 have	 been	 with	 many	 Masters	 --
otherwise	you	would	not	be	here.	You	have	forgotten	completely,	but	you	have
missed	many	 times.	 It	 is	 not	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that	 you	 are	missing.	You	may
have	walked	with	Buddha,	you	may	have	walked	with	Jesus.	There	are	people
who	 I	 know	 for	 certain	 have	 walked	 with	 Jesus,	 but	 they	 missed.	 There	 are
people	who	walked	with	Buddha	and	they	missed.
But	the	search	goes	on....
The	first	 thing	that	I	 try	to	find	out	whenever	a	person	wants	to	be	initiated	by
me	is	whether	he	is	new,	or	an	old	sinner.	Up	to	now,	I	have	not	come	across	a
fresh	man	who	 is	 getting	 interested	 in	 religion	 for	 the	 first	 time.	No,	 one	 has
been	with	many	Masters,	has	travelled	on	many	paths,	but	never	has	been	totally
anywhere.
Now	you	can	miss	this	opportunity	also.
I	have	heard....
A	 couple	 in	 their	 sixties	 had	 somehow	managed	 to	 survive	 forty-five	 years	 of
married	life	filled	with	as	much	fighting	as	love.	When	hubby	came	home	from
his	office	on	his	 sixty-fifth	birthday,	his	wife	 lovingly	presented	him	with	 two
beautiful	 ties.	 He	 was	 so	 touched	 that	 he	 would	 not	 let	 her	 cook	 dinner.	 He
would	take	her	out	as	soon	as	he	had	time	to	clean	up	and	change	his	shirt.	It	was
a	 rare	 moment	 of	 tenderness.	 A	 few	 minutes	 later	 hubby	 came	 downstairs
dressed	 for	 an	 evening	 on	 the	 town	 and	wearing	 one	 of	 his	 gift	 ties.	His	wife
stared	 at	 him	 for	 a	 moment	 before	 the	 force	 of	 argumentative	 habit	 took
command.
"What	is	the	matter?"	she	snarled.	"The	other	one	is	no	good?"
But	now,	a	man	can	wear	only	one	tie:	"What	is	the	matter?	The	other	one	is	no
good?"
If	you	just	want	to	be	argumentative,	then	you	can	follow	Gurdjieff.	But	that	will
be	just	avoiding	the	opportunity	that	is	here,	available	to	you.	DO	something.	If
you	want	to	follow	Gurdjieff,	follow.	Follow	Gurdjieff,	but	please	follow.	Don't
go	 on	 playing	 games	with	 yourself.	 One	 can	 be	 very	 clever,	 one	 can	 deceive
oneself.	 It	 is	 not	 very	 dangerous	when	 you	 deceive	 others,	 because	 sooner	 or
later	they	will	find	out	that	you	are	deceiving.	It	cannot	go	on	for	long.	But	when
you	are	deceiving	yourself,	it	is	very	difficult.	Who	is	going	to	find	out?	You	are
alone	there,	and	if	YOU	are	deceiving....
I	 have	 heard	 about	 one	man	 travelling	 on	 a	 train.	He	was	 playing	 solitaire.	A
man	 in	 the	 compartment	was	watching	 it,	 but	 he	 became	 aware	 that	 the	 other
man	was	 deceiving	 himself.	He	was	 the	 only	 player.	 The	 other	man	watching
became	aware	that	he	was	deceiving	himself.
He	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	What	are	you	doing?	Can't	you	see	that	you	go	on
deceiving	yourself?"
The	man	said,	"I	have	been	doing	it	for	my	whole	life."
The	other	man	asked,	"Can't	you	catch	yourself	deceiving?"
He	said,	"I	am	too	clever."
Cleverness	 can	become	a	great	obstacle	because	 cleverness	 is	 not	 intelligence.
Cleverness	is	a	good	name	for	cunningness.	Be	aware	of	it.
Follow	 if	 you	want	 to	 follow	 on	Gurdjieff's	 path.	 Perfectly	 good;	 that	 path	 is
perfectly	good.	But	then	what	are	you	doing	here	wasting	your	time?	Follow	that
path.	 For	 what	 are	 you	 waiting?	 If	 you	 are	 here,	 then	 forget	 Gurdjieff	 and
everything	 else.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 be	 here	 with	 me,	 then	 be	 here	 with	 me	 so
something	actually	happens.
But	this	is	very	common,	it	is	not	unusual:	people	go	on	changing	their	Masters,
from	one	place	to	another.	Whenever	they	feel	that	now	it	 is	getting	too	much,
and	they	may	get	committed	and	involved,	they	change.	Again	they	start	playing
the	same	game	somewhere	else.	When	they	feel	that	now	the	moment	is	coming
--	they	will	have	to	do	something	--	they	again	change.
It	is	a	marriage...	to	be	with	me	is	to	be	married	with	me.	People	stay	with	me	up
to	 the	point	where	 the	courtship	continues.	Once	 the	problem	arises	of	getting
committed,	 involved,	 then	 they	 are	 scared.	 Then	 they	 start	 thinking	 of	 some
other	path.	Any	path	will	do	--	because	really	it	is	not	a	question	of	paths,	it	is	a
question	of	surrendering.
Surrender	on	any	path,	 and	 truth	will	 happen	 to	you	 --	because	 it	 happens	not
because	of	any	path,	it	happens	because	of	surrender.
Some	years	ago	a	politician	was	being	driven	by	a	farmer	in	a	buggy.	A	winged
insect	kept	circling	about	 the	horse's	head	and	 then	about	 the	politician's	head.
"Uncle,	what	kind	of	insect	is	that?"	asked	the	politician.
"Just	a	horsefly,"	said	the	old	man.
"Horsefly?	What	is	that?"
"Just	a	fly	that	flies	around	the	heads	of	horses	and	mules	and	jackasses."
As	the	insect	was	still	buzzing	about	the	politician's	head	he	saw	a	chance	for	a
little	banter,	and	said,	"Uncle,	you	don't	mean	to	say	I	am	a	horse?"
"No,	you	certainly	ain't	no	horse."
"Well,	you	don't	mean	to	call	me	a	mule	do	you?"
The	farmer,	irritated,	said,	"You	ain't	no	mule,	either."
Then	the	politician	spoke	emphatically,	"Now	look	here,	Uncle,	do	I	look	like	a
jackass	to	you?	Surely	you	don't	mean	to	call	me	a	jackass?"
"No,	sir,	 I	ain't	calling	you	no	jackass	and	you	don't	 look	like	a	 jackass	 to	me.
But	you	see,	you	can't	fool	the	horsefly."
Don't	be	very	cunning,	don't	be	clever,	because	you	can't	fool	existence.	You	can
fool	only	yourself.	In	the	final	analysis	you	cannot	fool	anybody	else	except	you.
So	 watch	 each	 step	 that	 your	 mind	 takes.	 I'm	 not	 saying,	 "Follow	 me";	 I'm
saying,	"Follow."
Anywhere,	wherever	your	heart	leads	you,	wherever	you	feel	a	certain	harmony
between	you	and	the	Master,	go	there	and	follow.	But	follow.	Just	thinking	is	not
going	to	help.
You	cannot	befool	existence.
The	fifth	question:
Question	5
BEING	OUTSIDE	THE	ASHRAM	IS	SOMETIMES	HARD	FOR	ME,	FOR	I
SEE
HOW	HARD	PEOPLE	ARE	AND	STEP	ON	EACH	OTHER.	 THIS	HURTS
ME
MUCH,	SOMETIMES	EVEN	BODILY,	AND	IF	EEL	VULNERABLE	LIKE	A
SMALL	CHILD.	PLEASE	TELL	ME	HOW	TO	DEAL	WITH	IT.
THERE	are	always	problems	in	the	world,	and	the	world	has	always	been	there,
and	 the	 world	 will	 remain	 there.	 If	 you	 start	 working	 out:	 changing
circumstances,	 changing	 people,	 thinking	 of	 a	 utopian	 world,	 changing	 the
government,	the	structure,	the	economy,	the	politics,	the	education,	you	will	be
lost.	That	is	the	trap	known	as	politics.
That's	how	many	people	waste	their	own	lives.	Be	very	clear	about	it:	the	only
person	 you	 can	 help	 right	 now	 is	 you	 yourself.	 Right	 now	 you	 cannot	 help
anybody.	This	may	be	just	a	distraction,	just	a	trick	of	the	mind.	See	your	own
problems,	see	your	own	anxieties,	see	your	own	mind,	and	first	try	to	change	it.
It	happens	to	many	people:	the	moment	they	become	interested	in	some	sort	of
religion,	 meditation,	 prayer,	 immediately	 the	 mind	 tells	 them,	 "What	 are	 you
doing	sitting	here	silently?	The	world	needs	you;	there	are	so	many	poor	people.
There	is	much	conflict,	violence,	aggression.	What	are	you	doing	praying	in	the
temple?	Go	and	help	people."
How	can	you	help	 those	people?	You	are	 just	 like	 them.	You	may	create	even
more	 problems	 for	 them,	 but	 you	 cannot	 help.	 That's	 how	 all	 the	 revolutions
have	always	failed.	No	revolution	has	yet	succeeded	because	the	revolutionaries
are	in	the	same	boat.
The	 religious	 person	 is	 one	 who	 understands	 that	 "I	 am	 very	 tiny,	 I	 am	 very
limited.	 If	with	 this	 limited	energy,	even	 if	 I	can	change	myself,	 that	will	be	a
miracle".	And	if	you	can	change	yourself,	if	you	are	a	totally	different	being	with
new	life	shining	in	your	eyes	and	a	new	song	in	your	heart,	then	maybe	you	can
be	helpful	to	others	also,	because	then	you	will	have	something	to	share.
Just	 the	other	day	Shiva	sent	me	a	very	beautiful	 incident	 in	 the	 life	of	Basho.
Basho	is	the	greatest	haiku	poet	of	Japan,	the	Master	haiku	poet.	But	he	was	not
just	a	poet.	Before	becoming	a	poet	he	was	a	mystic;	before	he	starting	pouring
out	 with	 beautiful	 poetry,	 he	 poured	 deep	 into	 his	 own	 center.	 He	 was	 a
meditator.
It	is	said	that	Basho	was	entering	upon	a	journey	when	he	was	a	young	man.	The
journey	was	an	endeavor	to	find	himself.	Not	long	after	he	had	begun	he	heard	a
small	 child	 crying	 alone	 in	 the	 forest	 --	 maybe	 he	 was	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree,
meditating,	 or	 trying	 to	 meditate;	 he	 heard	 a	 small	 child	 crying	 alone	 in	 the
forest.	He	meditated	for	a	long	time	on	what	to	do.	He	then	picked	up	his	pack
and	continued	on	his	way,	leaving	the	child	to	its	own	fate.
In	his	journal	he	recorded:	"First	one	has	to	do	what	one	needs	for	oneself	before
one	can	do	anything	for	another."
Looks	 hard...a	 child	 alone	 in	 the	 forest,	 crying,	 and	 this	 man	 meditates	 on
whether	to	do	anything	or	not,	whether	he	can	help	the	child,	whether	it	will	be
right	to	help	him	or	not.
A	 child,	 a	 helpless	 child	 crying	 in	 the	 wilderness,	 alone,	 lost	 --	 and	 Basho
meditates	over	it	and	finally	decides	that	how	can	he	help	somebody	else	when
he	has	not	even	helped	himself	yet.	He	himself	is	lost	in	a	wilderness,	he	himself
is	lonely,	he	himself	is	childish.
How	can	he	help	anybody?
The	incident	looks	very	hard,	but	is	very	meaningful.	I'm	not	saying	don't	help	a
child	 in	 the	 forest	 if	 you	 find	 him	 crying	 and	weeping.	But	 try	 to	 understand:
your	own	light	is	not	burning	and	you	start	helping	others.	Your	own	inner	being
is	in	total	darkness	and	you	start	helping	others.	You	yourself	are	suffering	and
you	become	a	servant	of	the	people.
You	have	not	passed	through	the	inner	rebellion	and	you	become	a	revolutionary.
This	 is	 simply	 absurd,	 but	 this	 idea	 arises	 in	 everybody's	 mind.	 It	 seems	 so
simple	to	help	others.
In	fact,	people	who	really	need	to	change	themselves	always	become	interested
in	changing	others.	That	becomes	an	occupation,	and	they	can	forget	themselves.
This	 is	 what	 I	 have	 watched.	 I	 have	 seen	 so	 many	 social	 workers,
SARVODAYIS,	and	I	have	never	seen	a	single	person	who	has	any	inner	light	to
help	anybody.	But	they	are	trying	hard	to	help	everybody.	They	are	madly	after
transforming	 the	 society	 and	 the	 people	 and	 people's	 minds,	 and	 they	 have
completely	forgotten	 that	 they	have	not	done	 the	same	to	 themselves.	But	 they
become	occupied.
Once	an	old	revolutionary	and	social	worker	was	staying	with	me.	I	asked	him,
"You	are	completely	absorbed	in	your	work.	Have	you	ever	thought	if	what	you
really	want	happens,	if	by	a	miracle,	overnight,	all	that	you	want	happens,	what
you	will	do	the	next	morning?	Have	you	ever	thought	about	it?"
He	laughed	--	a	very	empty	laughter	--	but	then	he	became	a	little	sad.	He	said,
"If	it	is	possible,	I	will	be	at	a	loss	as	to	what	to	do	then.	If	the	world	is	exactly
as	I	want	it,	then	I	will	be	at	a	loss	for	what	to	do.	I	may	even	commit	suicide."
These	people	are	occupied;	this	is	their	obsession.	And	they	have	chosen	such	an
obsession	which	can	never	be	fulfilled.	So	you	can	go	on	changing	others,	 life
after	life.
Who	are	you?
This	 is	 also	 a	 sort	 of	 ego:	 that	 others	 are	 hard	 upon	 each	 other,	 that	 they	 are
stepping	on	each	other.	Just	the	idea	that	others	are	hard	gives	you	a	feeling	that
you	are	very	soft.
No,	you	are	not.	This	may	be	your	way	of	ambition:	to	help	people,	to	help	them
to	become	soft,	to	help	them	to	become	more	kind,	compassionate.
Kahlil	Gibran	has	written	a	small	story:
There	was	a	dog,	a	great	revolutionary	one	might	say,	who	was	always	teaching
other	dogs	of	 the	 town	that	"Just	because	of	your	nonsense	barking	we	are	not
growing.	You	waste	your	energy	by	barking	unnecessarily."	A	postman	passes,
and	 suddenly...a	 policeman	 passes,	 a	 sannyasin	 passes....	 Dogs	 are	 against
uniforms,	 any	 sort	 of	uniform,	 and	 they	 are	 revolutionaries.	They	 immediately
start	barking.
The	leader	used	to	tell	 them,	"Stop	this!	Don't	waste	energy,	because:this	same
energy	 can	 be	 put	 into	 something	 useful,	 creative.	 Dogs	 can	 rule	 the	 whole
world,	but	you	are	wasting	your	energy	for	no	purpose	at	all.	This	habit	has	to	be
dropped.	This	is	the	only	sin,	the	original	sin."
The	dogs	were	always	feeling	that	he	was	perfectly	right;	logically,	he	was	right:
why	do	you	go	on	barking?	And	much	energy	is	wasted;	one	feels	tired.	Again
the	next	morning	one	starts	barking,	and	again	by	the	night	one	is	tired.	What	is
the	point	of	it	all?	They	could	see	the	leader's	meaning,	but	they	also	knew	that
they	were	just	dogs,	poor	dogs.
The	 ideal	 was	 very	 great	 and	 the	 leader	 was	 really	 a	 revealer	 --	 because
whatsoever	he	was	preaching	he	was	doing.	He	never	used	 to	bark.	You	could
see	his	character:	that	whatsoever	he	preached	he	practiced	also.
But	by	and	by,	they	got	tired	of	his	constant	preaching.	One	day	they	decided	--
it	was	the	birthday	of	the	leader	--	and	they	decided,	as	a	gift,	that	at	least	on	that
night	they	would	resist	the	temptation	to	bark.	At	least	for	one	night	they	would
respect	the	leader	and	give	him	a	gift.	He	could	not	be	more	happy	than	this.	All
the	dogs	stopped	that	night.	It	was	very	difficult,	arduous.	It	was	just	like	when
you	are	meditating,	how	difficult	it	is	to	stop	thinking.	It	was	the	same	problem.
They	stopped	barking,	and	they	had	always	barked.
And	 they	were	 not	 great	 saints,	 but	 ordinary	 dogs.	But	 they	 tried	 hard.	 It	was
very,	 very	 arduous.	 They	 were	 hiding	 in	 their	 places	 with	 closed	 eyes,	 with
clenched	 teeth,	 so	 they	 would	 not	 see	 anything,	 they	 would	 not	 listen	 to
anything.	It	was	a	great	discipline.	The	leader	walked	around	the	town.	He	was
very	puzzled:	"To	whom	to	preach?	Whom	to	teach	now?	What	has	happened?"
--	 complete	 silence.	 Then	 suddenly	when	midnight	 had	 passed,	 he	 became	 so
annoyed,	because	he	had	never	really	thought	that	the	dogs	would	listen	to	him.
He	had	known	well	that	they	would	never	listen,	that	it	was	just	natural	for	dogs
to	 bark.	 His	 demand	 was	 unnatural,	 but	 the	 dogs	 had	 stopped.	 His	 whole
leadership	was	at	stake.	What	was	he	going	to	do	from	tomorrow?	because	all	he
knew	was	just	to	teach.	His	whole	ministry	was	at	stake.	And	then	for	the	first
time	he	realized	that	because	he	was	constant}y	teaching	from	the	morning	till
the	 night	 that's	 why	 he	 had	 never	 felt	 the	 need	 to	 bark.	 The	 energy	 was	 so
involved,	and	that	was	a	sort	of	barking.
But	that	night,	nowhere,	nobody	was	found	guilty.	And	the	preacher-dog	started
feeling	a	tremendous	urge	to	bark.	A	dog	is,	after	all,	a	dog.	Then	he	went	into	a
dark	 lane	 and	 started	 barking.	When	 the	 other	 dogs	 heard	 that	 somebody	 had
broken	the	agreement,	then	they	said,	"Why	should	we	suffer?"	The	whole	town
started	barking.	Back	came	the	leader	and	said,	"You	fools!	When	are	you	going
to	 stop	 barking?	 Because	 of	 your	 barking	 we	 have	 remained	 just	 dogs.
Otherwise,	we	would	have	dominated	the	whole	world."
Remember	 well	 that	 a	 social	 servant,	 a	 revolutionary,	 is	 asking	 for	 the
impossible	--	but	it	keeps	him	occupied.	And	when	you	are	occupied	with	others'
problems,	 you	 tend	 to	 forget	 your	 own	 problems.	 First,	 settle	 those	 problems,
because	that	is	your	first,	basic	responsibility.
A	famous	psychologist	had	bought	a	farm	just	for	fun.	Every	time	he	threw	grain
into	his	plowed	furrows	an	army	of	black	crows	would	swoop	down	and	gobble
up	his	grain.
Finally,	 swallowing	 his	 pride,	 the	 psychologist	 appealed	 to	 his	 old	 neighbor,
Mulla	Nasrudin.
The	Mulla	 stepped	 into	 the	 field	 and	went	 through	 all	 the	motions	of	 planting
without	 using	 any	 seed.	The	 crows	 swooped	 down,	 protested	 briefly	 and	 flew
away.	The	Mulla	repeated	the	process	the	next	day	and	then	the	next,	each	time
sending	the	birds	off	befuddled	and	hungry.	Finally,	on	the	fourth	day,	he	planted
the	field	with	grain;	not	a	crow	bothered	to	come.
When	 the	 psychologist	 tried	 to	 thank	 Mulla,	 the	 Mulla	 grunted.	 "Just	 plain
ordinary	psychology,"	said	he.	"Ever	heard	of	it?"
Remember,	 this	 is	very	plain,	ordinary	psychology:	not	 to	poke	your	nose	 into
others'
affairs.	 If	 they	are	doing	something	wrong,	 that	 is	 for	 them	to	 realize.	Nobody
else	can	make	them	realize.	Unless	they	decide	to	realize	it	there	is	no	way,	and
you	will	be	wasting	your	valuable	time	and	energy.	Your	first	responsibility	is	to
transform	 your	 own	 being.	 And	 when	 your	 being	 is	 transformed	 things	 start
happening	of	their	own	accord.
You	become	a	light	and	people	start	finding	their	paths	through	your	light.	Not
that	you	go,	not	that	you	force	them	to	see.	Your	light,	burning	bright,	is	enough
invitation;	people	start	coming.	Whosoever	is	in	need	of	light	will	come	to	you.
There	is	no	need	to	go	after	anybody	because	that	very	going	is	foolish.	Nobody
has	changed	anybody	against	his	will.	That	is	not	the	way	things	happen.	This	is
plain,	ordinary	psychology;	ever	heard	of	it?...	just	keep	to	yourself.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
L	AM	DESPERATE.	 IF	FEEL	MORE	AND	MORE	ENERGY	AND	A	DEEP
LET-GO
WANTING	 TO	 HAPPEN.	 IN	 THE	 LAST	 WHILE	 I	 OFTEN	 HAVE	 A
FEELING	OF
LETTING	MYSELF	FALL	 INTO	SOMETHING,	LIKE	 INTO	THE	SEA,	OR
INTO
THE	INCREDIBLE	BEAUTIFUL	VAST	CLOUDS	OF	THE	SKY.	BUT	THE
STRONGER	 THIS	 BECOMES,	 THE	 STRONGER	 ANOTHER	 PART,	 MY
EGO,	IS
TRYING	TO	KEEP	ME	DOWN,	TO	PUT	ME	TO	SLEEP	AGAIN,	TO	TELL
ME
THAT	EVERYTHING	IS	JUST	BULLSHIT	AND	FANTASY.	THIS	IS	SO
INCREDIBLY	 STRONG,	 AND	 THERE	 DOES	 NOT	 SEEM	 TO	 BE
ANYTHING	LIKE
WILLPOWER.	I	FEEL	TOTALLY	POWERLESS;	THAT	MAKES	ME	FEEL
DESPERATE,	 HELPLESS,	 AND	 SOMETIMES	 FRUSTRATED.	 PLEASE
HELP	ME.
THE	 question	 is	 from	 Anand	 Maria.	 Maria,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 some
misunderstanding	 in	 your	 mind.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 ego	 that	 is	 trying	 to	 give	 you	 a
message	 that	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 fantasies;	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 fantasies.	 But
fantasies	are	beautiful.	You	are	dreaming	sweet	dreams.	It	is	not	the	ego	that	is
pulling	you	down,	it	is	the	ego	that	is	dreaming	and	that	is	going	into	fantasies.
The	 part	 that	 wants	 to	 pull	 you	 down	 is	 your	 awareness.	 You	 are	 in	 a	 total
confusion	about	it.
Awareness	always	brings	you	back	to	reality.	Ego	is,	in	fact,	a	dream;	it	is	a	false
entity.
Ego	 never	 stops	 anybody	 from	 going	 into	 fantasies,	 because	 ego	 feeds	 on
fantasy.	 Ego	 is	 the	 greatest	 fantasy.	 How	 can	 it	 prevent	 you	 from	 going	 into
fantasies?	It	wants	you	to	dream,	it	wants	you	to	dream	great	dreams	of	the	other
world.
It	is	not	the	ego	that	is	pulling	you	down	to	the	earth.	The	part	that	is	pulling	you
down	to	reality	is	awareness,	but	you	are	condemning	awareness,	and	you	would
like	 to	 go	 into	 the	 fantasies	more	 and	more.	No,	 you	 are	 in	 a	 complete	mess,
Maria.
"I	 feel	more	and	more	energy	and	a	deep	 let-go	wanting	 to	happen.	 In	 the	 last
while	I	often	have	a	feeling	of	letting	myself	fall	into	something,	like	the	sea,	or
into	 the	incredible	beautiful	vast	clouds	of	 the	sky....	"	They	are	nowhere,	 they
are	just	in	your	imagination.
"But	 the	 stronger	 this	 becomes,	 the	 stronger	 another	 part,	my	ego,	 is	 trying	 to
keep	me	down,	to	put	me	to	sleep	again,	to	tell	me	that	everything	is	just	bullshit
and	fantasy....	"
It	is;	it	is	bullshit.	It	will	be	hard	for	you.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
A	schoolteacher	in	London	had	a	mixed	class	containing	children	of	all	religions,
of	all	nationalities.	One	day	she	asked	her	class	who	was	the	greatest	man	who
ever	lived,	and	said	that	the	child	who	gave	the	correct	answer	would	receive	a
shilling.
The	 first	 child	 was	 American	 and	 answered,	 "George	 Washington."	 Patrick
O'Kelly	was	 next	 and	 he	 said	 that	 St.	 Patrick	was	 the	 greatest	man	who	 ever
lived.	Then	there	was	an	Indian	child	who	said	Gautam	Buddha,	and	a	Chinese
who	 said	Lao	Tzu.	Then	 little	Abe	was	 next	 in	 line	 and	without	 hesitation	 he
answered,	"Jesus."
The	teacher	promptly	gave	him	the	shilling	and	said,	"Now	tell	me	how	it	is	that
you,	being	a	little	Jew,	and	not	believing	in	Jesus	as	the	Christ,	mention	his	name
as	the	greatest	man	who	ever	lived?"
"Well,"	 replied	Abe,	 "deep	 in	my	 heart	 I	 know	 it	 was	Moses,	 but	 business	 is
business."
Deep	in	your	heart	you	also	know	it	is	bullshit.	That's	why	you	are	pulled	back
to	the	earth	again	and	again.	Come	back	to	the	earth;	imagination	won't	help.
There	is	a	poetry,	a	different	type	of	poetry-which	arises	out	of	reality.	Yes,	there
are	 beautiful	 clouds	 and	 there	 are	 vast	 oceans	 of	 beatitude,	 but	 that	 arises	 by
being	 rooted	 in	 the	earth.	There	 is	no	conflict	between	 that	beauty	and	 reality.
That	beauty	is	nothing	but	reality	itself	manifested	in	its	total	grandeur.	But	right
now,	whatsoever	you	are	doing	is	just	a	fantasy.	So	change	your	emphasis.	It	is
the	ego	which	is	fantasizing,	and	it	is	awareness	which	is	pulling	you	down.
Allow	awareness	to	work	more	and	more,	and	don't	waste	time	in	dreams.
I	have	heard....
Two	fishermen	were	exchanging	their	experiences	of	the	previous	day.	One	man
said	he	had	caught	a	three-hundred-pound	salmon.
"But	 salmon	never	weighed	 as	much	 as	 three	 hundred	 pounds,"	 said	 the	 other
man.
"Nevertheless,	 I	 caught	 one	 weighing	 three	 hundred	 pounds.	 What	 did	 you
catch?"
"Not	 much,"	 answered	 the	 second	 man.	 "Only	 a	 rusty	 old	 lamp.	 But	 on	 the
bottom	 of	 it	 was	 inscribed:	 Property	 of	 Christopher	 Columbus,	 1492.	When	 I
opened	the	lamp	I	was	surprised	to	find	it	still	held	a	candle	in	it,	and	you	know
that	the	candle	was	still	lit?"
"Now	let	us	get	together	on	these	stories,"	urged	the	first	fisherman.	"If	you	will
put	 out	 that	 damned	 candle,	 I	 will	 take	 a	 couple	 of	 hundred	 pounds	 off	 that
salmon."
One	wants	to	have	sweet	experiences,	one	desires	to	have	beautiful	experiences.
But	just	by	desiring	you	cannot	have	them,	you	can	only	dream	about	them.	You
can	have	them	not	by	desiring,	but	by	working	hard	on	your	being.	Tremendous
effort	 is	 needed.	 Then	 one	 day	 reality	 comes,	 is	 revealed.	 And	 then	 it	 has	 a
splendor	 which	 no	 dream	 can	 ever	 have.	 Because	 dream	 is	 just	 a	 dream,	 a
thought	 in	 the	mind	 --	 a	 colorful	 thought,	 but	 still	 a	 thought.	When	 reality	 is
revealed,	 it	 is	 totally	 different;	 it	 is	millions	 of	 times	more	 beautiful	 than	 any
dream.	Don't	waste	time	in	dreaming.	Walk	on	earth,	be	in	the	body,	come	back
to	your	senses.
The	last	question:
It	is	from	Divya.
Question	7
BELOVED	 MASTER,	 I	 DON'T	 WANT	 TO	 HEAR	 ANY	 MORE	 ABOUT
LOVE	OR
MEDITATION;	THEY	ARE	ONE	TO	ME.	 I	SEEK	TRUTH	AND	YOU	ARE
THE
MEANS.	MY	DEVOTION	AND	MY	PRAYERS	ARE	AN	EXPRESSION	OF
GRATITUDE.	 LOVE	 IS	 NOT	 THE	 ASKING,	 AND	 LOVE	 IS	 NOT	 THE
OTHER.
LOVE	 IS,	 I	 AM.	 SOMETIMES	 I	 WONDER	 WHETHER	 YOU	 EXIST	 OR
WHETHER	 I	 AM	 PERPETUALLY	 CREATING	 YOU,	 OR	 WHETHER	 I
EXIST	SEPARATE	FROM
YOU.	 I	 TRULY	 MUST	 BE	 A	 GOD	 IF	 YOU	 ARE	 SO	 BEAUTIFUL.	 MY
LOVE,	MY
GRATITUDE	FOR	YOU	IS	THE	ONLY	CERTAINTY	THAT	REMAINS,	THE
ONLY
REALITY.	 I	 AM	 THE	KNOWING,	 AND	YET	 EACH	 TIME	 I	 HEAR	YOU
SAY'LOVE
OR	 MEDITATION'	 YOU	 CATCH	 ME	 AGAIN	 OFF	 CENTER,	 FIDDLING
WITH
CATEGORIES:	"AM	I	THIS	OR	THAT?	LET	US	SEE.'
WHAT	A	BEAUTIFUL	TRIP	YOU	ARE.
Thank	you,	Divya.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Be	The	Formless	In	You
9	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607090
ShortTitle:
BELOV209
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
98
mins
MY	HEART
DRESS	YOURSELF	IN	THE	SPIRIT
OF	ALL	WOMEN
AND	REVERSE	YOUR	NATURE	AND	HABITS.
MILLIONS	OF	SUNS
WILL	BURST	OPEN	WITH	BRILLIANCE
AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
YOU	WILL	SEE
WHAT	CANNOT	BE	SEEN
ONLY	IF	YOU	CAN	BE
THE	FORMLESS	IN	YOU.
The	song	for	today:
MY	HEART
DRESS	YOURSELF	IN	THE	SPIRIT
OF	ALL	WOMEN
AND	REVERSE	YOUR	NATURE	AND	HABITS.
MILLIONS	OF	SUNS
WILL	BURST	OPEN	WITH	BRILLIANCE
AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
YOU	WILL	SEE
WHAT	CANNOT	BE	SEEN
ONLY	IF	YOU	CAN	BE
THE	FORMLESS	IN	YOU.
THE	SONG	IS	TREMENDOUSLY	IMPORTANT,	 IS	VERY	BASIC	TO	THE
BAUL
ATTITUDE.	There	are	two	approaches	towards	God:	one	is	of	the	male	mind	--
aggressive,	active;	the	other	is	of	the	feminine	mind	--	passive,	receptive.	Bauls
belong	to	the	second	approach.	Just	as	Lao	Tzu	and	Chuang	Tzu	belong	to	the
second	approach,	Mahavir	and	Patanjali	belong	to	the	first	approach.
The	male	mind	seeks	and	searches	God	as	if	God	is	somewhere	else	and	has	to
be	discovered.	The	 feminine	mind	simply	prays	and	waits.	The	 feminine	mind
trusts	that
"When	I	am	ready,	God	will	come	to	me."	It	is	God	who	comes,	not	the	seeker
who	goes	to	God.	And	in	fact,	how	can	you	seek	God?	You	don't	know	Him,	you
don't	 know	 His	 address,	 you	 don't	 know	 the	 direction,	 you	 don't	 know	 the
definition.	And	even	 if	you	come	across	Him,	how	are	you	going	 to	 recognize
Him?	because	recognition	is	possible	only	if	you	have	known	Him	before.
All	search	in	a	way	is	futile.	And	because	of	the	male	mind,	atheism	has	become
very	predominant	in	the	world.	It	is	the	failure	of	the	male	mind	that	atheism	has
become	so	prevalent.	In	the	West	atheism	has	become	really	the	greatest	religion
--	because	the	West	is	male-oriented.	The	very	orientation	is	of	conquering	--	as
if	there	is	a	fight	between	man	and	God,	as	if	there	is	a	tussle,	a	wrestling.	In	the
West	the	result	of	this	effort	has	been	only	that	God	has	completely	disappeared.
Nietzsche	declared,	"God	is	dead."
Nietzsche	is	the	very	essence	of	the	male	mind:	will	to	power,	will	to	dominate,
will	to	possess.
If	you	search	for	Him	too	much,	your	very	search	will	become	a	barrier.
There	have	been	a	few	people	who	have	attained	through	that	approach	also	--	a
Mahavir,	a	Patanjali	--	but	those	cases	are	rare,	and	the	struggle	is	very	long	and
unnecessary.	God	comes	to	you.	God	is	always	coming	to	you.	The	Bauls	say,	"It
is	not	you	who	seek	Him,	it	is	He	who	is	seeking	you.	It	is	not	that	you	pray	to
Him,	He	is	praying	to	you.	Listen!
Be	passive,	accept.	He	is	knocking	on	the	door,	and	inside	the	room	you	are	so
occupied	 in	 searching	 and	 seeking	 that	 you	 cannot	 listen	 to	 the	 knock."	Man
cannot	 seek	 God;	 only	 God	 can	 seek	 man.	 This	 is	 a	 profound	 truth	 to	 be
understood,	 because	how	can	you	 seek	God?	How	can	you	 relate?	You	 are	 so
dark,	 so	 dull,	 so	 asleep,	 so	 unconscious,	 so	 ignorant	 --	 how	 are	 you	 going	 to
seek?	And	whatsoever	you	seek	will	never	be	bigger	than	you,	cannot	be.	Your
God	will	be	your	God.
If	horses	seek	God,	they	will	make	an	image	of	God,	but	the	image	will	be	of	a
horse,	not	of	a	man	--	because	man	has	never	done	anything	good	to	horses.	In
fact,	 if	 they	 had	 some	mythology	 about	 the	 devil,	 man's	 image	 would	 be	 the
image	of	the	devil.	If	trees	are	seeking	God,	they	will	seek	in	the	form	of	trees	--
because	we	cannot	go	beyond	our	 form.	Our	 form	will	be	 the	 limitation.	So	 if
you	seek,	the	God	is	going	to	be	yours,	and	your	God	is	almost	no	God.
Let	 Him	 seek	 you.	 Allow	 Him.	 His	 hand	 has	 been	 reaching	 for	 you
continuously;	just	be	in	a	let-go.	Don't	escape	from	Him,	that's	all.	There	is	no
need	to	seek	Him	positively,	just	don't	escape	from	Him.	Let	Him	be,	listen,	be
receptive,	welcome.	In	 that	 listening,	 in	 that	 receptivity,	He	will	penetrate	you.
Become	feminine,	become	a	woman.
A	Buddha	is	a	woman.
He	was	 seeking	 for	 six	 years;	 he	 tried	 the	male-oriented	 approach.	 He	was	 a
warrior,	the	son	of	a	great	king,	trained	in	the	ways	of	war	and	fight	and	struggle.
It	was	natural	 for	him	 to	 seek	God.	He	 tried,	he	 tried	hard.	He	went	 from	one
Master	to	another,	and	he	was	so	sincere	that	no	Master	could	say	to	him,	"You
are	not	doing	right,	 that's	why	you	are	not	 reaching."	He	was	so	sincere	 in	his
effort	that	all	the	teachers	told	him,	"This	is	all	we	can	say	to	you.	And	if	it	is	not
happening,	then	find	some	other	Master.	We	are	incapable.
We	cannot	do	more	than	this."
One	day	he	had	renounced	the	whole	world,	then	came	the	ultimate	renunciation
--	one	day	he	renounced	the	searching	and	seeking	also...seeing	the	futility	of	it,
just	groping	in	the	dark.	That	night	when	he	dropped	search	also,	he	became	a
woman.	That	night	he	relaxed	under	the	Bodhi	tree;	there	was	nothing	to	do	now.
Man	 is	 a	 doer.	Woman	 is	 a	 lover,	 not	 a	 doer.	Man	 is	 the	mind,	woman	 is	 the
heart.	Man	can	create	things,	but	cannot	give	birth	to	life.	For	that,	receptivity	is
needed,	 receptivity	of	 the	earth.	The	seed	falls	 into	 it,	disappears	underground,
and	one	day	a	new	life	arises.
That's	how	a	child	is	born.
A	womb	is	needed	to	give	birth	to	God,	OR,	to	give	birth	to	yourself.	You	have
to	become	a	womb.
BUDDHA	became	a	womb	that	night,	renounced	all.	Now	there	was	nothing	to
do.	 Just	 meditate	 over	 it:	 nothing	 to	 do.	 The	 world	 was	 finished,	 there	 was
nothing	 to	 find.	 Now	 even	 the	 spiritual	 search	 was	 gone.	 Everything	 became
absolutely	calm	and	quiet.	When	there	is	nothing	to	seek	there	is	no	desire;	when
there	is	no	desire	there	is	no	thought;	and	when	there	is	no	desire,	no	thought,	no
search,	the	ego	cannot	exist.	It	exists	as	the	doer.
In	 that	moment,	 future	disappeared.	When	you	are	not	going	 to	do	 something,
what	is	the	point	of	having	a	future?	The	future	is	needed	as	a	space	to	project
your	desires.	To	project,	future	is	needed.
That	 night,	 future	 disappeared;	 in	 fact,	 time	 disappeared.	When	 you	 are	 not	 a
doer	what	is	the	use	of	time?	Buddha	relaxed.	This	relaxation	was	absolute,	total,
whole.	He	relaxed	into	himself	--	nowhere	to	go,	one	has	to	relax	into	oneself;
no	desire,	no	 thought,	 everything	has	proved	 futile.	 In	 fact,	what	proved	 futile
was	the	male-oriented	mind,	the	mind	of	the	doer.	In	the	morning	when	the	last
star	was	disappearing,	he	opened	his	eyes.
The	whole	night	 had	been	 a	night	 of	 dreamless	 sleep,	 because	dreams	 are	by-
products	of	desires.	Have	you	watched?	When	you	want	 to	do	something,	 it	 is
very	difficult	to	sleep	in	the	night;	the	morning	is	too	exciting.	The	tomorrow	is
too	exciting,	you	have	to	do	something.	Even	if	you	are	going	for	a	holiday	to
the	Himalayas,	you	cannot	sleep	in	the	night;	planning	continues.	You	have	to	do
this	and	that,	and	rehearsal	continues.	Sleep	becomes	difficult...	dreams.
Buddha	 slept	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 That	 sleep	 was	 SAMADHI:	 no	 thought,	 no
dream,	no	desire.	He	relaxed	into	his	center,	and	when	he	opened	his	eyes	he	was
like	a	small	babe	-
-	 fresh,	 young.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 last	 disappearing	 star,	 and	 as	 the	 star
disappeared,	 he	 also	 disappeared.	 He	 became	 enlightened.	 But	 enlightenment
happened	in	a	deeply	feminine	state	of	mind.
Hence,	Jains	and	Buddhists	are	always	in	conflict	--	because	Mahavir	is	a	male-
oriented	mind,	a	warrior,	a	conqueror.	That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	'mahavir'.
That	is	not	his	real	name;	his	real	name	was	Vardhman.	But	he	conquered	truth.
And	he	was	so	brave	and	the	adventure	was	so	great	 that	he	 is	remembered	as
Mahavir:	the	great	courageous	one.	There	is	a	very	subtle	conflict	between	Jains
and	Buddhists.	Down	through	the	centuries	they	have	been	arguing	against	each
other.	That	can	be	understood.	The	 reason	 is	male-mind,	 female-mind,	yin	and
yang,	active	and	passive,	day	and	night.	The	day	is	the	symbol	of	the	man;	the
night	is	the	symbol	of	the	woman.	The	day	is	full	of	activity,	the	night	is	simply
rest.	The	day	is	bright,	light	--	the	sun	is	there.	You	can	see	things	clear-cut.	You
can	 define	 things:	 you	 can	 know	what	 is	 what	 and	 who	 is	 who.	 In	 the	 night
darkness	surrounds.	The	whole	existence	 is	enveloped	 in	darkness.	You	cannot
distinguish	what	 is	what;	 you	 cannot	 see	where	 you	 are,	who	 you	 are.	 It	 is	 a
tremendous	 relaxation	 of	 all	 definitions,	 of	 all	 limitations,	 Woman	 is	 always
known	as	the	dark	one,	the	night,	the	earth.
Buddha	became	a	woman	that	night;	he	became	enlightened.
Bauls	say,
MY	HEART,
DRESS	YOURSELF	IN	THE	SPIRIT
OF	ALL	WOMEN...
Become	 a	 woman.	 They	 mean	 of	 course,	 psychologically,	 spiritually.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	your	body,	but	your	attitude.	Woman	is	patient.	Just	think	of	a
man	having	a	child	in	his	belly	for	nine	months.	You	cannot	conceive	that	a	man
will	be	able	to	tolerate	it	--
impossible.	A	woman	is	very	patient,	accepting.	The	woman's	resistance	is	much
stronger	than	man's.	Man	in	fact	is	the	weaker	sex.	He	may	be	stronger	as	far	as
muscles	 are	 concerned,	 but	muscles	 are	 no	 criterion	 of	 strength.	One	 hundred
fifteen	 boys	 are	 born	 to	 a	 hundred	 girls.	 By	 the	 time	 they	 reach	 the	 age	 of
marriage,	fifteen	boys	have	died.
Nature	has	to	give	birth	to	more	males	because	a	few	of	them	are	going	to	die.
Women	 live	 longer	 than	 men,	 almost	 five	 years	 more;	 that's	 why	 you	 see	 so
many	widows	 in	 the	world.	And	women	 are	more	 resistant	 to	 illness,	 disease.
Women	are	more	tolerant,	more	accepting.	From	where	comes	this	strength?	--	it
comes	from	their	receptivity.
When	you	are	a	doer	you	exhaust	yourself.
A	woman	and	a	man	making	 love...man	exhausts	himself;	woman	 is	 enriched,
nourished,	because	 she	 is	 a	 receptive	end.	Making	 love,	 a	man	 loses	energy,	 a
woman	gains	it.	That's	why	women	have	been	suppressed	all	over	the	world.	If
they	were	not	suppressed	the	man	would	be	killed:	it	would	become	impossible
for	any	man	to	satisfy	any	woman.
Now,	modern	researchers	say	that	woman	have	multiple	orgasms.	A	woman	can
make	love	to	one	dozen	people	in	one	night	and	still	feel	fresh,	full	of	energy.	A
man	can	make	love	only	once,	and	then	he	is	exhausted.	Man	throws	energy	out,
woman	takes	energy	in.
The	same	has	 to	happen	with	God.	The	Bauls	say,	"Become	feminine,	become
passive."
But	remember,	when	they	say	become	passive	they	don't	mean	to	become	lazy.
To	be	lazy	is	also	the	same	as-to	be	active.	Lazy	is	not	passive.	He	may	not	be
doing	anything,	but	in	his	mind	he	goes	on	doing.	He	may	not	be	actually	doing
anything,	but	he	goes	on	doing	many	things	in	the	mind	--	even	more	so,	because
the	whole	energy	 is	available	and	he	has	nothing	do.	He	goes	on	 thinking	and
doing	 things	 in	 the	 mind;	 that	 activity	 remains.	 Passivity	 does	 not	 mean
inactivity,	 it	 means	 a	 very	 expectant	 patience,	 a	 very	 active	 patience,	 alive
patience.	The	lazy	man	is	dull;	the	lazy	man	is	simply	dead.
Passivity	is	not	deadness.	It	is	fully	alive:	the	reservoir	is	full	of	energy,	but	not
going	anywhere,	not	going.	in	any	search,	just	waiting	for	the	Beloved	to	come.
That's	why	women	never	take	any	initiative	in	love	affairs	--	they	cannot.	And	if
a	woman	 takes	 initiative	 in	 the	 love	 affair,	 then	 she	must	 be	 a	 part	 of	 the	 'lib
movement'.
Then	 she	 is	 losing	 her	womanhood	 somehow.	 They	wait:	 the	 initiative	 has	 to
come	 from	 the	man.	 The	woman	waits	 --	 not	 that	 she	 doesn't	 love,	 she	 loves
tremendously;	no	man	can	love	that	deeply	--	but	she	waits.	She	trusts	that	things
will	happen	in	their	right	time,	and	hurrying	is	not	good.	A	woman	is	non-tense
but	 full	 of	 energy,	 hence	 the	 feminine	 beauty.	 The	 roundness	 of	 the	 feminine
body	is	not	only	a	physical	 thing	--	 the	same	is	so	in	her	psychology	also.	She
has	 a	 round	 shape,	 smooth,	 warm,	 ready	 to	 dissolve,	 but	 not	 aggressive.
Passivity	means	non-aggressiveness,	non-violence.	It	is	not	laziness.
I	have	heard....
The	Swiss	people,	 especially	 those	 from	 their	 capital,	Berne,	 are	 said	 to	be	 as
slow	 as	 snails.	 So	 one	 day	 two	Berner	 friends	went	 out	 for	 a	walk.	After	 one
hour	one	said,
"Christmas	is	beautiful."
Another	hour	passed	when	his	friend	answered,	"Yes,	and	love	is	beautiful	too."
After	 a	 long	 while	 the	 first	 answered,	 "You	 are	 right	 but	 Christmas	 is	 more
often."
One	can	be	so	lazy	that	Christmas	is	more	often	than	love-making.
Laziness	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 stagnancy.	 Laziness	 is	 lustlessness;	 laziness	 is	 suicide	 --
slow,	very	slow.	So	remember,	passivity	is	not	negation	of	energy.	Passivity	is	a
reservoir	of	energy
--	vibrant,	throbbing	streaming,	ready	to	receive,	but	non-aggressive.
It	happened:	A	sufi	mystic	was	sitting	under	a	tree.	A	passer-by	told	him,	"What
are	you	doing	here?	Your	house	is	on	fire."	Just	in	front	of	him	the	house	was	on
fire.
"I	know	it,	stranger,"	said	the	so-called	mystic.
"Then	why	are	you	not	doing	something	about	it?"	cried	the	excited	stranger.
"I	 am,"	 said	 that	 mystic.	 "ever	 since	 the	 fire	 started,	 I	 have	 been	 praying	 for
rain."
THE	Baul	is	not	lazy.	He	is	full	of	action,	but	he	is	not	active.	This	distinction
has	to	be	understood.
You	can	sit,	for	all	practical	purposes,	not	doing	anything,	and	your	mind	can	go
on	being	 active,	 occupied,	 engaged.	You	can	be	 engaged	 in	much	activity	 and
your	mind	 can	 remain	 inactive,	 passive,	 aloof,	 detached.	 They	 are	 not	 against
being	active,	they	are	against	being	continuously	occupied	inside,	because	then
you	 don't	 give	 space	 for	God	 to	 enter	 into	 you.	You	 don't	 allow	Him	 enough
door.	Your	inner	world	is	so	full	of	rotten	furniture	that	He	cannot	find	a	place	to
stay	there.	A	deep	inner	emptiness	is	needed;	that	inner	emptiness	becomes	the
womb.
So	I'm	not	saying	stop	doing,	stop	action;	I'm	not	saying	that.	I	am	saying	that
whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing,	 let	 it	 be	 just	 an	 outside	 activity.	 Inside	 become
feminine,	silent,	doors	opened,	empty,	waiting.
In	the	mother's	womb	the	feminine	egg	simply	waits.	It	does	not	go	anywhere.
The	male	sperm	travels,	and	it	travels	with	fast	speed.	It	is	really	a	tremendous
distance	 for	 the	 male	 sperm	 to	 travel	 to	 the	 woman's	 egg;	 great	 competition
starts.	Men	are	competitive	from	the	very	beginning,	even	before	they	are	born.
While	making	 love	 to	a	woman	a	man	releases	millions	of	sperm,	and	 they	all
rush	 towards	 the	 egg.	Great	 speed	 is	 needed	 because	 only	 one	will	 be	 able	 to
reach	the	egg,	not	all.	Only	one	is	going	to	be	the	Nobel	Prize	winner.	The	real
Olympics	start	there!	And	it	is	a	life	and	death	question,	it	is	not	ordinary.	And
great	is	the	competition	--	millions	of	sperms	fighting,	rushing	--	one	will	reach.
Sometimes	it	happens	that	two	reach	at	the	same	time,	hence	twins	are	born.
Because	 once	 one	 sperm	has	 entered,	 then	 the	 door	 is	 closed.	 Sometimes	 two
sperms	reach	exactly	at	the	same	time,	or	three	sperms	reach	exactly	at	the	same
time;	the	door	was	open,	so	all	the	three	enter	in.	Then	there	are	three	children
born,	or	 two	children,	or	 four,	or	 even	 six.	But	 that	 rarely	happens.	Ordinarily
one	 reaches	 just	 a	 split	 second	 before	 the	 others.	 The	 door	 is	 open;	 once	 one
guest	 has	 entered,	 the	 door	 closes.	 But	 the	 feminine	 egg	 simply	 waits
there...great	trust.
That's	 why	 women	 cannot	 be	 competitive:	 they	 cannot	 fight,	 they	 cannot
struggle.	And	if	you	find	a	woman	somewhere	who	struggles	and	fights,	who	is
competitive,	 then	 something	 of	 womanhood	 is	 missing	 in	 her.	 Physically	 she
may	be	a	woman,	psychologically	she	is	a	man.
So	remember,	passivity	is	not	laziness.	Passivity	has	its	own	kind	of	activity.	It	is
non-tense,	relaxed.
Two	 turtles	were	 dragging	 through	 the	 desert,	 very	 thirsty.	After	 a	while	 they
discovered	a	big	bottle	of	Coca-Cola	(must	have	been	Americans).	They	jumped
with	joy,	but	soon	realized	they	had	no	opener.	They	tried	hard	but	there	was	no
chance	to	open	the	bottle,	so	they	decided	one	would	go	back	to	the	village	and
the	other	would	watch	the	bottle.	A	long	time	passed	--	five	hours,	ten	hours,	one
day,	two	days,	five	days,	seven	days.	Then	the	one	turtle	again	tried	to	open	the
bottle.	Immediately,	the	other	one	came	running	from	the	nearby	sand	dune	and
shouted,	"If	you	start	like	this,	I	will	never	go."
BAULS	 are	 very	 active	 people,	 whirlwinds	 --	 dancing,	 singing,	 and	 yet	 very
inactive	people	as	far	as	God	is	concerned.	They	say,	"Whenever	YOU	think	is
the	right	time,	come;	you	will	find	me	waiting.	I	am	helpless,	I	don't	know	where
you	are.	I	am	helpless,	I	don't	know	how	to	find	you.	My	only	prayer	is	that	you
help	me	 to	allow	you	 to	 find	me."	They	simply	dance	and	wait,	 they	sing	and
wait.	This	waiting	for	God	is	their	prayer.
If	you	can	wait	you	will	pass	through	a	great	transformation.	Nothing	is	needed
to	be	done;	 simple	waiting	 --	but	 it	 needs	great	 trust.	Otherwise	 the	mind	will
say,	"What	are	you	doing?	If	you	are	not	going	to	seek	Him,	you	will	never	find
Him."
Bauls	say,	just	like	Lao	Tzu,	"Seek	and	you	will	miss.	Seek	not	and	find."	He	is
here;	your	seeking	takes	you	somewhere	else.	He	has	already	come.	The	guest	is
at	the	door;	He	is	knocking.	But	you	are	so	occupied	inside	the	mind	--	maybe
occupied	for	Him,	thinking	about	Him,	but	so	occupied	--	that	you	cannot	listen
to	the	moment,	and	you	cannot	be	open	to	the	herenow.
MY	HEART,
DRESS	YOURSELF	IN	THE	SPIRIT
OF	ALL	WOMEN
AND	REVERSE	YOUR	NATURE	AND	HABITS.
Patanjali	calls	his	reversal	PRATYAHAR	--	go	back	to	the	source.	Mahavir	calls
this	 reversion	 PRATYA	 KRAMAN	 --	 come	 in,	 don't	 go	 without;	 fall
withinwards.	 Ordinarily	 your	 mind	 is	 future-oriented,	 always	 moving
somewhere	 else,	 looking	 for	 God	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future.	 Bauls	 say	He	 has
been	here	from	the	very	beginning.	He	is	not	in	the	future.	He	is	the	very	cause,
the	source	of	all,	so	no	need	to	seek	Him	in	the	future.
Just	fall	deep	down	into	your	own	being	and	you	will	find	Him	waiting	for	you
to	come	home.	He	is	already	there,	He	is	already	the	case.
...	AND	REVERSE	YOUR	NATURE	AND	HABITS.
What	do	they	mean	by	reversing	your	habits	and	your	nature?	Ordinarily	man	is
upside-down.	Non-essential	things	have	become	very	important	to	you,	and	you
go	on	losing	the	essential.	You	go	on	gathering	seashells	and	colored	stones,	not
for	 a	 single	moment	becoming	aware	 that	you	are	 losing	your	 life.	That	 is	 the
only	precious	thing.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	was	stabbed	by	burglars,	but	before	dying	he	wrote	a	note	to	his
wife	from	the	hospital.	The	last	paragraph	of	it	read,	"I	have	been	very	fortunate
because	only	the	day	before	I	had	put	all	my	money	and	negotiable	bonds	in	my
safety	 deposit	 box	 at	 the	 bank,	 so	 that	 I	 am	 losing	 practically	 nothing	 but	my
life."
But	life	is	all.	What	else	is	there?	If	you	lose	life	and	gain	the	whole	world,	what
are	you	gaining?	And	if	you	gain	your	life	and	lose	the	whole	world,	nothing	is
lost.
The	Bauls	 say,	 "You	will	 have	 to	 change	your	habits,	 you	will	 almost	have	 to
reverse	 your	 nature."	 Right	 now	 you	 are	 going	 outward;	 you	 will	 have	 to	 go
inward.	Right	 now	 you	 are	 seeking	God;	 you	will	 have	 to	 allow	Him	 to	 seek
you.	 Right	 now	 you	 are	 attached	 to	 material	 things	 which	 have	 no	 intrinsic
value;	 you	 will	 have	 to	 attach	 yourself	 to	 spiritual	 values	 which	 are	 really
eternally	 valuable.	Right	 now	you	go	on	 fighting	with	 life,	 struggling.	Almost
everyone	 believes	 in	 the	 survival	 of	 the	 fittest,	 so	 one	 goes	 on	 fighting	 and
fighting	 and	 fighting.	 The	 Bauls	 say;	 "Love,	 don't	 fight.	 God	 is	 never	 known
through	 fighting.	 Nothing	 is	 achieved	 through	 fighting;	 only	 love	 opens	 the
door."
Right	 now	we	 go	 on	 thinking	 that	 someday	 in	 the	 future	 we	 are	 going	 to	 be
happy,	 joyful,	 celebrating,	Bauls	 say,	 "You	are	 fools!	 If	you	want	 to	be	happy,
joyful,	 celebrating,	 nothing	 is	 lacking.	 Right	 now,	 this	 moment,	 dance;	 this
moment,	 laugh.	This	moment	 is	 all	 there	 is;	 celebrate	 it.	 "	People	come	 to	me
and	if	I	say	to	them,	"Celebrate	your	life,"
they	say,	"Yes,	that's	why	we	have	come	here:	to	learn	how	to	create	situations	in
which	we	can	celebrate."	The	situation	is	already	there:	trees	go	on	celebrating,
birds	 go	 on	 singing.	What	 do	 they	 have?	 --	 no	 bank	 balance,	 no	 prestige,	 no
power.	They	are	not	presidents	or	prime	ministers.	But	have	you	ever	seen	trees
or	birds	brooding,	worried,	 thinking	of	 the	 future?	No,	 they	 simply	 live.	What
has	happened	to	man?
BAULS	say,	"Celebrate	this	moment."
This	 is	what	Christ	called	conversion:	a	one	hundred	and	eighty	degree	 turn	--
less	will	not	do.	That's	what	I	call	SANNYAS:	a	hundred	eighty-degree	turn	--
less	will	 not	do.	 It	 is	not	 a	question	of	 renouncing	 life,	 it	 is	 just	 a	question	of
renouncing	old	 habits.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 question	of	 becoming	more	 alert	 and	 seeing
what	is	essential	and	what	is	not.	If	you	go	on	choosing	the	essential,	sooner	or
later	you	will	 reach	 to	 the	essential	man,	what	Bauls	call	ADHAR	MANUSH.
And	 the	 way	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 essential	 man	 is	 to	 be	 SAHAJA	 MANUSH,
spontaneous	man.	Spontaneity	should	be	the	prayer,	but	we	are	so	cunning	and
so	clever.
I	stayed	once	with	an	efficiency	expert.	When	we	were	going	to	sleep,	he	sat	in
his	bed	and	he	said,	"Now	I	will	pray."	So	I	watched	him	to	see	what	prayer	he
was	doing.	He	looked	at	the	sky	and	said,	"Ditto."
I	was	surprised:	"What	 type	of	prayer	 is	 this?"	So	I	asked	him,	"If	you	are	not
offended,	if	you	don't	mind,	please	tell	me.	I	have	heard	many	types	of	prayers,
but	'ditto'?	This	is	something	absolutely	new."
He	said,	"I	say	a	prayer	only	once	in	a	year,	the	first	day	of	the	year.	And	then
what	is	the	point	of	repeating	the	same	prayer	every	day?	I	say	'ditto',	and	God
must	understand."
Even	prayer	 is	 calculation.	Even	 in	 prayer	 people	 are	 so	miserly.	They	 cannot
say	 something	 to	 God	 today.	 In	 fact,	 their	 cleverness	 is	 the	 basis	 of	 their
stupidity;	their	cunningness	is	the	cause	of	their	idiocy.	They	are	not	intelligent.
An	intelligent	person	lives	in	the	moment	--	very	responsive.	He	allows	his	heart
to	move	into	prayer.	He	does	not	force	anything	upon	the	heart,	he	simply	allows
it	to	flow	towards	God.	In	fact,	you	should	always	remember	that	prayer	is	not	to
change	the	heart	of	God,	prayer	changes	YOU.	But	people	pray	in	such	a	way,	as
if	they	are	giving	advice	to	God:	"Don't	do	this,	do	this!"	All	prayers,	if	reduced
to	 the	 bare	minimum,	will	mean	 that	 people	 are	 saying	 to	God,	 "Please	God,
don't	let	two	plus	two	be	four.	Have	compassion	on	me.	This	time	at	least	make
two	plus	two	be	five."	Prayers	are	complaints,	grumblings.	Then	the	prayer	does
not	exist.
Prayer	is	not	to	change	God;	He	needs	no	change.	Prayer	is	to	change	yourself.
But	how	can	saying	'ditto'	change	you?	If	you	say	'ditto',	you	remain	ditto;	there
is	no	possibility.
Let	it	be	remembered	always	that	prayer	never	changes	God.	There	is	no	need	to
change	 Him.	 He	 is	 as	 He	 should	 be,	 and	 His	 existence	 is	 as	 it	 should	 be	 --
perfect.	The	only	change	needed	is	within	your	own	heart.	Your	prayer	changes
you.	When	you	cry,	tears	come,	or	you	sing	and	you	dance,	it	changes	YOU.
Of	course,	when	you	are	in	a	different	mood,	a	feminine	mood,	God	can	come
closer	to	you;	you	attract	Him,	you	allow	Him,	you	become	an	opening	towards
Him.	Prayer	is	an	opening	towards	God.	It	 is	putting	your	heart	before	Him	so
His	presence	can	transform	you.	And	this	should	be	the	way	of	the	whole	of	your
life.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 praying	 once	 a	 day	 or	 once	 a	 year	 or	 once	 in	 a
lifetime.	Prayer	should	become	like	breathing;	it	should	be	there	each	moment.
The	 Baul	 never	 goes	 to	 the	 temple	 or	 to	 the	 mosque	 or	 to	 the	 gurudwara.
Wherever	he	is,	he	is	in	prayer.
People	 who	 live	 unspontaneous	 lives	 become	 too	 crowded	 by	 thoughts	 --	 of
course,	borrowed.	All	 thoughts	are	borrowed.	Knowledge	as	such	 is	borrowed.
KNOWING	 is	 pure	 and	 yours,	 but	 knowledge	 is	 not.	 People	 who	 are	 not
spontaneous	 become	mechanical.	 They	 don't	 see	what	 is	 the	 case,	 they	 go	 on
seeing	what	their	expertise	allows	them	to	see;	they	see	through	blinkers.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin's	wife	was	 carried	 to	 the	 hospital	 in	 an	 unconscious	 condition
after	a	 terrible	 fall.	The	surgeon	made	a	brief	examination,	but	 shook	his	head
significantly	 and	 turned	 sympathetically	 to	 the	 anxious	 husband.	 "Mulla,"	 he
said,	"I'm	sorry	to	tell	you	that	your	wife	is	dead."
"No,	I	ain't,"	said	the	supposed	corpse,	opening	one	eye.
"Hush	up	you!"	said	Nasrudin.	"Doesn't	the	doctor	know	better	than	you?"
EXPERTS	are	everywhere.	It	is	good	as	far	as	worldly	thing	are	concerned,	but
in	the	spiritual	dimension	there	are	no	experts	--	because	the	spiritual	dimension
does	not	allow	itself	to	be	defined,	to	be	reduced	to	theorems.	It	is	not	geometry
and	it	 is	not	mathematics,	 it	 is	sheer	poetry.	 It	knows	no	 limitations,	hence	 the
spontaneous	songs	of	the	Bauls.	They	are	not	philosophers,	not	metaphysicians;
they	are	simple	singers,	poets.
And	their	poetry	is	not	according	to	the	rules,	and	their	poetry	is	not	what	people
know	 of	 as	 poetry.	 They	 don't	 know	 any	 metro,	 they	 are	 not	 worried	 about
language;	they	are	simple	people.	Their	poetry	is	their	overflowing	heart.
...	AND	REVERSE	YOUR	NATURE	AND	HABITS.
The	 key	 to	 this	 sutra	 is:	 become	 conscious,	 because	 all	 your	 habits	 are
unconsciously	dominated.	You	do	things	 like	a	sleepwalker.	Become	conscious
and	your	habits	will	change,	and	the	conversion	will	happen.	Do	whatsoever	you
are	doing	but	become	more	conscious	while	doing	it.	Don't	become	a	robot,	be	a
man.
Bauls	say	that	once	consciousness	enters	into	your	being,	a	new	climate	arises.
In	that	new	climate,	new	flowers	open;	in	that	new	climate,	new	birds	come	and
nestle	around	you;	 in	 that	new	climate,	God	 is	 the	closest	 reality.	He	 is	within
and	He	is	without.	But	God	is	not	a	theory	to	be	discussed;	it	is	something	to	be
lived.	It	is	an	experience.
They	sing,
He	talks	to	me
but	He	would	not	let	me	see	Him.
Listen	to	each	single	word	very	attentively...
He	talks	to	me
but	He	would	not	let	me	see	Him.
He	moves	close	to	my	hands,
but	away	from	my	reach.
I	explore	the	sky	and	the	earth
searching	Him,
circling	round	my	error
of	not	knowing	me:
who	am	I,	and	who	is	He?
"He	 talks	 to	me	but	he	would	not	 let	me	see	him...."	These	are	 symbols.	 I	 am
talking	to	you;	then	you	are	passive	because	you	have	only	to	listen.	When	I	am
talking	to	you	you	become	feminine,	you	become	the	receiving	end.	But	if	you
want	to	see	me	you	become	male,	because	then	you	have	to	do	something.
THE	Bauls	say:	God	talks	to	me	but	He	would	not	let	me	see	Him.	He	allows	me
to	be	passive	but	he	won't	allow	me	to	be	active.	He	moves	close	to	my	hands,	I
can	almost	touch	Him,	but	the	moment	I	try	to	touch	He	is	far	away.	He	moves
close	to	my	hands	but	away	from	my	reach,	because	reaching	for	Him	is	again
active.	He	comes	close	 to	you	when	you	are	 simply	waiting.	Don't	 try	 to	grab
Him,	He	is	very	elusive.	The	moment	you	become	male,	He	is	gone;	the	moment
you	become	female,	He	is	there.
Attested	by	your	own	heart,
oh	my	Master,
lead	me	the	right	way.
As	you	play	the	melody
on	the	lute,
the	lute	could	never	sing	on	its	own
without	you	to	play	it.
"...	Attested	by	your	own	heart,	oh	my	Master,	lead	me	the	right	way"	The	Baul
says,	"I	don't	know	which	is	the	right	way;	you	lead	me.	And	I	have	nothing	to
say	 about	 the	 goal.	 Let	 your	 heart	 decide	 it.	 Whatsoever	 you	 decide	 is	 my
destiny.	 Lead	me	 the	 right	 way	 as	 you	 play	 the	melody	 on	 the	 lute.	 The	 lute
could	never	sing	on	its	own	without	you	to	play	it."	The	Baul	becomes	a	hollow
bamboo,	 a	 flute.	This	 is	what	passivity	 is.	 If	God	 is	 ready	 to	 sing,	 the	Baul	 is
ready	to	take	His	song	as	far	as	he	can	--	but	he	himself	cannot	sing.	All	song	is
His,	all	energy	is	His.	At	the	most	we	can	be	hollow	bamboos,	not	obstructing
the	way.	If	this	is	achieved,	everything	is	achieved.	If	you	are	not	obstructing	the
way	of	His	song,	enough.	Humanity	cannot	do	more	than	that.
How	could	he	stand
in	a	normal	upright	way?
The	man	without	a	heart	in	him,
the	roots	of	his	tree
are	planted	in	the	sky
and	the	branches	lie	on	the	earth.
Flowers	are	in	blossom
on	the	tree,
but	it	never	bears	fruit.
For	him
the	river	is	dying	of	thirst
and	the	fire	perishes,	freezing,
and	birds	nestle	in	the	water.
He	is	meeting	his	Master
in	the	cremation	ground.
ORDINARY	life	is	a	chaos.	Things	are	not	where	they	should	be.	Everything	is
misplaced.	Roots	are	in	the	sky	and	branches	are	coming	to	the	earth.	The	tree
has	flowered,	but	it	never	comes	to	fruit.	The	river	is	there	and	one	is	dying	of
thirst.	God	is	there	but	you	are	standing	on	your	head,	so	you	cannot	see	Him.
Or,	even	if	you	see	Him,	you	see	Him	very	distorted.
Mind	is	a	mechanism	to	distort.	Hence,	whether	you	are	on	the,	path	of	love	or
on	 the	 path	 of	 meditation,	 one	 thing	 is	 needed	 on	 both	 the	 paths	 as	 a	 basic
requirement:	that	the	mind	should	be	put	aside.	Mind	goes	on	distorting.
MILLIONS	OF	SUNS
WILL	BURST	OPEN	WITH	BRILLIANCE
AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
God	 is	 a	 tremendous	 experience	 of	 light,	 of	 beauty,	 of	 splendor.	God	 is	 not	 a
word,	 it	 is	a	dimension.	 It	 is	a	vast	ocean	 in	which	you	disappear	 like	a	 small
drop.
MILLIONS	OF	SUNS
WILL	BURST	OPEN	WITH	BRILLIANCE
AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
And	once	you	have	 tasted	Him,	 then	 every	 form	becomes	His	 form.	Then	 the
formless	is	bursting	all	around.	But	first,	one	has	to	have	the	taste.	If	I	tell	you
that	in	these	green	trees	it	is	He	who	is	green,	words	will	reach	you	but	meaning
will	not.	You	will	understand	what	I	am	saying,	and	yet	you	will	not	understand.
Words	you	will	understand:	the	container	you	will	carry,	but	the	content	will	be
lost	unless	you	have	tasted	Him.	Then,	everything	is	His	form.	In	a	rock,	He	is	a
rock;	 in	 a	 tree,	 He	 is	 the	 tree;	 in	 a	 flower,	 He	 is	 a	 flower;	 understand:	 the
container	you	will	not	understand.	Words	you	will	in	the	star,	He	is	a	star.	Then
all	 forms	are	His.	 In	 tremendous	 forms,	 in	millions	of	 forms,	He	 is	expressing
Himself.	 God	 is	 expression,	manifestation,	 revelation.	 If	 you	watch	 your	 own
being	you	will	be	able	to	understand	it.
If	 you	 have	 some	 talent	 --	 if	 you	 can	 paint,	 or	 if	 you	 can	 sing,	 or	 if	 you	 can
compose	poetry	--	then	unless	you	have	done	it	you	will	not	feel	happy,	you	will
not	feel	fulfilled.
Unless	your	destiny	is	fulfilled,	unless	your	innermost	core	has	become	creative,
you	will	feel	something	is	missing	somewhere.	You	may	know	it,	you	may	not
know	it,	but	you	will	feel	a	gap,	a	big	gap	in	your	life.	You	may	have	all	that	life
can	give	to	you,	but	if	you	have	not	found	the	right	thing	that	allows	your	being
to	express	itself,	 then	you	will	be	like	a	rosebush	on	which	flowers	have	never
happened.	Then	the	rosebush	will	be	sad,	because	the	rosebush	will	be	just	futile.
What	is	the	point	of	being	there?	Once	flowers	bloom,	the	rosebush	has	attained
to	meaning,	significance;	the	rosebush	has	become	creative.	Her	soul	is	released,
she	is	no	more	in	bondage.
If	you	ask	me	what	is	MOKSHA,	liberation,	this	is	MOKSHA	for	me:	to	release
your	soul	from	bondage.	I'm	not	 telling	you	to	go	to	 the	monasteries,	or	 to	 the
Himalayas	and	sit	in	a	cave	and	just	waste	your	life.	I	am	saying	that	you	move
into	 the	 creative	 dimension	because	 that	 is	 the	 dimension	of	God.	Sing	 if	 you
have	 a	 song	 to	 sing,	 and	 that	 will	 be	 your	 MOKSHA.	 Paint	 if	 painting	 is
somewhere	hidden	in	you	and	wants	to	assert
--	that	will	be	your	MOKSHA.	Dance!	If	dance	is	throbbing	within	your	heart,
then	let	it	be	manifested.	Once	manifested,	your	soul	will	be	free.
As	 I	 see	 it,	 the	 so-called	 religious	 people	 are	 less	 religious	 than	 the	 creative
people.	A	poet	is	more	religious	to	me,	a	painter	more	religious,	a	dancer	more
religious	 than	your	 so-called	MAHATMAS	 --	 because	 they	 are	 not	 creative	 at
all.	 They	 are	 almost	 stupid	 people;	 they	 are	 simply	withering	 away.	 They	 are
rosebushes	 that	 have	 stopped	 growing	 rose	 flowers:	 now	 even	 to	 call	 them
rosebushes	is	not	right.	They	are	simply	vegetating.
IN	India	a	great	calamity	has	happened:	these	people	are	respected.	Uncreative
people	 are	 respected,	 and	 the	 reasons	 to	 give	 them	 respect	 are	 simply	 foolish.
Somebody	can	fast	--
now	this	is	uncreative	activity;	or	somebody	can	stand	for	hours	in	the	hot	sun	--
now	this	is	good	in	a	circus,	but	life	is	not	enriched	by	it;	or	somebody	can	lie	on
a	bed	of	thorns.
What	is	the	point	in	it?	What	are	you	creating?	One	can	become	very	insensitive
and	lie	down	on	thorns.	And	the	body	has	dead	spots	on	it,	so	if	you	try	to	find
out	you	will	 be	 able	 to	 find	out.	 Just	 tell	 your	wife	or	your	husband	 to	 take	 a
thorn	or	 a	 needle	 and	push	many	 spots	 on	your	 back.	You	will	 see	 that	 a	 few
spots	you	will	 feel,	and	a	 few	you	will	not	 feel;	 those	are	 the	spots.	There	are
dead	 spots	 on	 the	 back.	One	 has	 just	 to	 find	where	 they	 are,	 then	 you	 can	 lie
down	on	a	bed	of	thorns.	And	by	and	by,	the	body	becomes	immune,	resistant,
hard.	But	these	people	lose	all	sensitivity:	they	have	never	produced	a	song,	they
have	never	danced.	But	in	India	they	are	thought	to	be	great	souls.	It	is	ugly,	it	is
stupid,	it	is	very	dangerous	--	because	the	whole	country	has	been	worshipping
uncreativity.
Worship	 dancers,	 singers;	 worship	 poets,	 painters;	 worship	 creative	 people	 --
because	God's	 only	 definition	 is	 creativity.	He's	 the	 creator,	 so	 be	 a	 creator	 in
your	own	right.
Then	your	stream	runs	parallel	to	His	stream.	And	if	you	become	really	creative,
totally	creative,	you	fall	into	His	stream.	He	starts	functioning	through	you.	All
creativity	is	His,	so	whenever	you	are	creative,	you	are	prayerful.	Whether	you
go	to	the	mosque	or	the	temple	is	irrelevant.
Bauls	 are	 very	 creative	 people,	 simple,	 but	 very	 creative.	This	 I	 call	 the	 great
calamity	 that	 happened	 in	 India.	Because	of	 this	many	 things	disappeared:	 the
genius	 of	 this	 country	 disappeared.	You	 don't	 need	 a	 genius	 to	 fast,	 you	 need
only	a	stubborn,	muletype	mind,	that's	all;	just	a	cruel,	masochistic	mind,	that's
all.	So	your	MAHATMAS	are	nothing	but	super-masochists,	destructive	people.
If	 you	 starve	 somebody	 else	 you	 will	 be	 caught	 by	 the	 police;	 if	 you	 starve
yourself	 you	 will	 be	 respected	 as	 a	 MAHATMA.	 But	 in	 both	 cases	 you	 are
creating	pain,	misery.
I	have	been	in	contact	with	thousands	of	monks	--	Jain	monks,	Buddhist	monks,
Hindu	monks.	Rarely	has	 it	 happened	 --	 I	was	 simply	 surprised	 --	 rarely	did	 I
come	 across	 somebody	who	was	 intelligent.	But	 they	 are	 doing	 certain	 things
which	have	become	respectable,	and	nobody	re-evaluates	that	if	you	honor	and
respect	uncreative	things,	the	country	will	become,	by	and	by,	more	uncreative.
Bow	your	head	down	wherever	you	find	creativity,	because	God	is	nothing	but
creativity.
So	 wherever	 there	 is	 a	 sign	 of	 creativity,	 God	 has	 a	 signature	 there.	 He	 has
already	been	there.	Maybe	even	the	poet	does	not	know,	but	he	has	been	touched
by	something	from	the	beyond.
Rabindranath	used	to	close	his	doors	whenever	he	would	be	in	a	poetic	mood	--
sometimes	for	one	day,	two	days,	three	days	he	would	not	come	out.	He	would
forget	 about	 food,	 he	 would	 not	 go	 to	 the	 bathroom,	 he	 would	 forget	 about
everything.	The	whole	family	and	his	disciples	would	be	worried	too:	"How	long
is	this	going	to	be?..."
And	he	had	told	them	never	to	disturb	him,	because	whenever	he	was	in	a	poetic
mood,	God	is	there.	So	disturbing	him	would	be	disturbing	God.	He	would	cry
and	tears	would	fall	from	his	eyes,	and	he	would	be	almost	transfigured.
Once	it	happened	that	a	group	of	people	had	come	to	meet	him,	and	they	were
drinking	tea.	Suddenly	the	cup	slipped	from	Rabindranath's	hand,	and	he	closed
his	 eyes.	 People	 knew...	 they	watched	 this	 beautiful	 phenomenon	 for	 a	 single
moment.	His	face	changed	--
a	new	radiance,	a	new	grace,	something	of	the	invisible	entered.	They,	without
disturbing	 him,	 slowly,	 slowly	 disappeared.	 Only	 one	 man	 remained,	 hiding
behind	a	 tree	 to	see	what	was	happening.	He	had	come	for	 the	first	 time.	That
man	himself	has	told	me,	"I	have	never	seen	such	a	transfiguration.	By	and	by,
Rabindranath	was	no	more	human	--
something	superhuman,	a	great	ecstasy.	And	I	could	see	the	luminousness,	and
he	 started	 swaying,	 and	 he	 started	 singing.	And	 those	words	were	 not	 coming
from	him;	he	was	just	instrumental.	For	three	days	he	remained	in	that	state."
Poetry	is	always	born	when	the	poet	is	just	instrumental.	Painting	is	born	when
the	 painter	 is	 not	 painting	 his	 ideas,	 but	 is	 possessed	 by	God.	Remember	 it:	 I
would	like	my	sannyasins	to	be	creative,	because	I	don't	know	of	any	other	way
to	come	close	to	God.
THESE	uncreative	religions	and	uncreative	religious	people	have	done	nothing
but	harm
--	quarrelling,	argumentative,	killing	each	other.	And	with	the	problem	about	the
transcendental,	 one	 thing	 is	 very	 complex:	 you	 cannot	 prove	 anything.	 The
experience	 is	 transcendental.	 Christians	 cannot	 prove	 they	 are	 right.	 Hindus
cannot	 prove	 they	 are	 right.	 No,	 no	 decision	 can	 be	 decisive,	 so	 they	 go	 on
fighting	and	quarrelling.	The	whole	energy	that	should	become	creative	becomes
destructive.
This	also	has	to	be	noted	down:	if	you	don't	use	your	energy	in	a	creative	way,	if
it	doesn't	become	a	dance	and	a	laughter	and	a	delight,	then	the	same	energy	will
become	harmful	and	poisonous.	It	will	be	destructive.
It	 is	 said	 that	 Adolf	 Hitler	 wanted	 to	 become	 a	 painter,	 but	 he	 was	 refused
admission.	 Just	 think:	 the	whole	world	would	have	been	 totally	 different	 if	 he
had	 been	 accepted	 in	 the	 academy.	 There	would	 have	 been	 no	 Second	World
War.	The	whole	humanity	would	have	been	totally	different.	But	this	man	could
not	be	 creative.	He	wanted	 to	be	 creative,	 he	had	 the	 energy;	 certainly	he	had
tremendous	energy:	he	dragged	the	whole	world	towards	destruction	as	no	other
man	has	ever	been	able	to	do.	But	it	was	the	same	energy;	it	could	have	become
creative,	but	became	uncreative.
I	have	heard....
The	father	lectured	his	son	on	the	evils	of	fisticuffs	as	a	way	of	settling	disputes.
"Don't	 you	 know	 that	when	 you	 grow	 up	 you	 can't	 use	 your	 fists	 to	 settle	 an
argument?"	 the	 father	 began.	 "You	 must	 begin	 to	 use	 peaceful	 and	 amicable
means	of	arriving	at	a	decision.	Try	to	reason	things	out,	try	to	discover	by	logic
and	evidence	which	is	right	and	abide	by	the	right.	Remember	 that	might	does
not	make	 right.	 Though	 the	 strong	may	win	 over	 the	weak,	 that	 still	 does	 not
prove	that	the	weak	is	wrong."
"I	know,	Dad,	"said	the	boy,	kicking	at	the	grass.	"But	this	was	different."
"Different?	What	different?	How	different?	What	were	you	and	Johnny	arguing
about	that	you	had	to	fight	over	it?"
"Well,	he	said	he	could	whip	me	and	I	couldn't	whip	him,	and	there	was	only	one
way	to	find	out	which	of	us	was	right."
It	cannot	be	decided	by	amicable	means.	 If	 this	 is	 the	question:	who	can	whip
whom?
then	 only	 whipping	 can	 decide.	 Destructive	 people	 are	 always	 very	 egoistic
because	 they	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 drop	 their	 egos.	 The	 creative	 person	 knows
glimpses	of	no-ego	of	 egolessness.	He	knows	 states	of	no-ego.	 In	moments	of
creativity,	 he	 becomes	 so	 possessed	 that	 he	 has	 a	 taste	 of	 something	 of	 the
beyond.	 But	 a	 destructive	 person	 knows	 no	 non-ego	 states;	 he	 becomes	 a
crystallized	 ego.	And	 then	 the	whole	world	 goes	 on	 fighting:	Hindus	 fighting
Mohammedans,	Mohammedans	fighting	Hindus,	Christians	fighting	Jews,	Jews
fighting	Christians	--	and	the	whole	world	is	just	a	conflict.	It	could	have	been	a
great	orchestra,	but	it	is	simply	a	war.
Religion	 has	 to	 become	 creative.	 To	 be	 uncreative	 should	 be	 thought	 as	 the
original	sin,	and	to	be	creative	should	be	thought	as	the	only	and	the	super-most
virtue.
MILLIONS	OF	SUNS
WILL	BURST	OPEN	WITH	BRILLIANCE
AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
If	you	are	moving	in	the	right	direction	--	receptive,	creative,	happy,	celebrating,
loving	--
millions	of	suns	will	burst	open.	One	day	you	come	to	your	innermost	shrine...
...	AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
YOU	WILL	SEE
WHAT	CANNOT	BE	SEEN
ONLY	IF	YOU	CAN	BE
THE	FORMLESS	IN	YOU.
Remember	it:	you	can	see	only	if	you	can	be	the	formless	in	you.	If	you	want	to
see	 the	formless	you	will	have	 to	become	formless	within.	Because	only	when
the	wavelengths	are	the	same,	is	there	communion.	When	you	are	also	formless
within	 you,	 suddenly	 something	 clicks	 and	 you	 are	 one	 with	 God.	 He	 is
formless,	 you	 are	 formless;	 there	 cannot	 be	 two	 formlessnesses.	 There	 can	 be
millions	of	forms,	but	formlessness	can	only	be	one.
HOW	to	attain	to	this	inner	formlessness?	--	drop	the	ego.	That	is	giving	you	a
limitation.
Drop	 the	 very	 word'1'.	 Use	 it,	 it	 is	 utilitarian	 in	 the	 outside	 world,	 but	 never
bring	it	home.	Never	say'I'	inside	because	that	makes	a	limitation,	and	because	of
that	barrier	you	will	never	be	able	to	move	into	the	Beloved,	and	you	will	never
be	able	to	allow	the	Beloved	to	move	into	you.	If	you	want	to	see	God,	become
something	like	God.	Be	creative	--	one	thing;	be	formless	--	another	thing.
Have	you	tallied,
my	heart,
the	number	of	ways	of	finding	Him
in	the	city	of	love?
The	treasure	of	life,
sans	bogus	reckonings,
the	world	is	a	carnival
where	lovers	meet
like	children	of	games.
Figure	out	the	nature	of	your	feelings
for	the	jewel	of	your	life.
He	is	reached	in	the	way
each	seek	to	reach	Him.
He	is	reached	in	the	way	each	seek	to	reach	Him....
Through	tender	passion	or	servitude,
through	loyalty	or	parental	care,
or	through	the	love
of	tranquility,	peace,
find	the	feelings
which	are	born	with	you
and	then	worship	Him
with	your	own	strength.
Bauls	 say	 that	 there	 are	 no	 fixed	 laws	 and	 rules	 to	 reach	 Him.	 There	 is	 no
methodology.
There	are	no	 super	highways	 to	 reach	 to	Him,	only	 small	 footpaths.	And	each
has	to	seek	Him	in	his	own	way.	Of	course,	a	poet	has	to	seek	in	his	own	way,	a
dancer	 has	 to	 seek	 in	 his	 own	 way,	 a	 lover	 has	 to	 seek	 in	 his	 own	 way,	 a
meditator	has	to	seek	in	his	own	way.
So	 you	 should	 never	 listen	 to	 what	 others	 are	 saying;	 listen	 to	 your	 feelings.
Remain	true	to	yourself	and	you	will	remain	true	to	God.	He	has	already	given
you	the	key	--	the	key	is	in	your	feelings.	Never	imitate,	because	there	is	no	one
way	for	all.	If	you	understand	me	rightly,	then	the	really	religious	world	will	be	a
world	 of	 no	 religions	 --	 no	Hindu,	 no	Mohammedan,	 no	Christian,	 no	 Jain.	A
real	world	which	is	religious	will	be	of	religious	people:	everybody	seeking	and
searching	in	his	own	way.	And	God	is	not	limited.
JESUS	 says,	 "In	 my	 God's	 house	 there	 are	 many	 mansions."	 Yes,	 there	 are
millions	of	doors.	 In	 fact,	 for	 each	 individual	 there	 is	 a	 separate	door,	 special;
nobody	 else	 can	 enter	 through	 that	 door	 but	 you.	 So	 don't	 imitate:	 imitation
creates	 falsity,	 pseudo-ness,	 inauthenticity.	 Just	 feel	 your	 own	 way	 and	 don't
bother	 about	what	 others	 say.	 It	 is	 nobody	 else's	 business.	Don't	 bother	 about
what	churches	say,	organizations	say	--	listen	to	your	own	heart.
Bauls	are	very	 individualistic.	Religion	has	 to	be	 individualistic	because	 it	 is	a
process	 of	 individuation.	 But	 what	 other	 religions	 have	 done	 up	 to	 now	 is	 to
destroy	individuality	and	try	to	make	everybody	a	part	of	the	crowd.	They	have
created	mobs,	and	they	have	destroyed	individuals.	Bauls	are	rebellious	about	it.
He	who	has	seen	the	beauty
of	the	Beloved	friend
can	never	forget	it.
The	form	is	for	seeing
but	not	for	discourse,
as	beauty	has	no	comparison.
He	who	has	seen	that	form
flashing	on	the	mirror,
the	darkness	of	his	heart
is	gone.
He	lives	with	his	eyes
focused	on	the	form,
careless	of	the	river
between	life	and	death.
His	heart
forever	devoted	to	the	beauty
dares	the	gods.
Each	one	has	to	come	to	his	own	vision,	each	one	has	to	look	through	his	own
eyes.	You	cannot	see	 through	my	eyes,	and	you	cannot	 touch	Him	through	my
hands.	Even	if	I	hold	your	hand	and	put	it	on	Him,	it	will	never	reach	to	Him	--
because	 you	 are	 not	 ready.	 If	 you	 are	 ready,	He	 is	 always	 reaching	 you.	And
what	is	readiness	in	the	eyes	of	the	Bauls?
--	become	individual.
Remember,	 God	 is	 very	 original;	 He	 never	 makes	 the	 same	 model	 again.	 A
Buddha	 is	a	Buddha,	a	Krishna	 is	a	Krishna	--	never	again	does	He	repeat.	So
don't	 go	 on	 carrying	Gitas	 and	Dhammapadas.	Read	 them	 as	 beautiful	 pieces:
read	them	as	poetry,	but	not	as	religion.	Read	them	as	great	art,	literature,	but	not
as	religion.	Listen	to	the	Koran	recited
--	 it	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful	 whether	 you	 understand	 it	 or	 not,	 whether	 you
know	 the	 language	 or	 not.	 The	 very	 word	 'koran'	 means	 recite.	 There	 is	 no
comparison;	no	other	scripture	can	be	recited	so	beautifully.	It	is	aesthetic,	it	has
a	tremendous	beauty	of	sound;	listen	to	it.	Read	the	Bible	--	never	has	literature
ever	 been	 able	 to	 transcend	 the	 simple	 assertions	 of	 Jesus	 --	 but	 never	 as
religion.	Religion	you	will	have	to	find	yourself.	Poetry	you	can	find,	beautiful
assertions	you	 can	 find.	And	 I'm	not	 saying	don't	 read	 them,	because	 they	 are
your	heritage.	They	make	you	rich.	A	man	who	has	not	read	about	Buddha	and
who	 has	 not	 read	 his	 assertions	 cannot	 be	 contemporary.	 Something	 will	 be
missing.	If	you	have	not	read	the	Koran	and	the	Bible	and	Mahavir's	statements,
then	you	will	 lack	something	very	essential.	You	will	be	poorer	for	 that.	Read,
but	read	as	great	literature.	Enjoy	it,	delight	in	it,	but	don't	believe.	A	poem	is	not
to	be	believed,	it	is	to	be	delighted	in.
BELIEF	is	borrowed.	You	will	have	to	find	your	own	trust,	you	will	have	to	find
your	own	faith.	Hard	is	the	path,	arduous	are	the	ways.	In	the	beginning	it	looks
almost	impossible	to	reach,	but	I	say	to	you,	it	is	only	in	appearance.	If	you	start
moving:	 if	 you	 start	 praying,	 if	 you	 start	 dancing,	 if	 you	 start	 singing	 in	 His
name,	He	arrives.
Do	you	wish	to	visit
my	inner	home
and	drink	nectar,
my	heart?
Will	you	not	fail	to	enter
where	lovers	march
in	a	joyous	carnival
singing	of	love?
Then	walk	the	way
with	a	lamp	of	beauty,
leaving	behind	this	greed,
that	lust,
the	ways	of	the	world,
and	all	qualities.
Blames	and	violence,
old	age	and	death,
dawn	and	dusk
do	not	live	there.
Only	rays	of	color
brilliantly	shine.
What	cannot	be	seen	you	will	see.	The	impossible	will	happen.	Religion	is	 the
impossible	 revolution.	 It	 happens	 --	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to	 believe	 that	 it
happens.	It	is	so	beyond	the	ordinary	mind:	it	is	so	beyond	logic,	it	is	so	beyond
intellect,	that	it	is	difficult	to	believe	that	it	happens	--	but	it	happens.	Look	into
my	eyes,	look	into	ME,	watch	and	feel;	it	has	happened.	It	can	happen	to	you.
YOU	WILL	SEE
WHAT	CANNOT	BE	SEEN
ONLY	IF	YOU	CAN	BE
THE	FORMLESS	IN	YOU.
BUT	the	only	art	that	you	have	to	learn	is	how	to	be	formless	within	you.	How
to	drop	the	ego	is	the	very	core	of	all	religions;	how	to	efface	yourself	utterly,	so
utterly	that	your	room	is	just	an	emptiness,	that	you	are	just	a	room	and	nothing
else,	 just	 space,	 pure	 space.	 In	 that	 pure	 space	 one	 starts	 seeing	 that	 which
cannot	be	seen,	and	one	starts	hearing	that	which	cannot	be	heard,	and	one	starts
touching	what	cannot	be	touched,	and	one	arrives	to	the	point	where	all	seeking,
searching,	desiring	disappears.	One	is	fulfilled.
That	 benediction	 is	 your	 birthright.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 missing,	 nobody	 else	 is
responsible.
Only	you,	and	ONLY	you	are	responsible	if	you	miss.	There	is	no	need	to	miss
even	for	a	single	moment	anymore.	Once	understood,	what	is	the	problem?	Why
cannot	you	put	yourself	aside?	Why	cannot	you	be	in	a	state	where	no'I'	exists?
Sometimes	 it	 happens	 accidentally.	 Listening	 to	 great	 music,	 sometimes	 it
happens	that	you	forget	that	you	are.	You	ARE,	more	so	than	ever	before	--	more
grounded,	more	centered	--	but	still	you	forget	that	you	are.	It	disappears	in	great
music.	Watching	a	Himalayan	peak,	it	disappears	sometimes.	It	is	so	wonderful,
so	surprising,	so	pure...	the	untouched	Himalayan	snow...	that	for	a	moment	you
touch	an	altitude	of	your	own	being,	and	the	ego	is	left,	deep	down.
Sometimes,	if	in	the	night	you	are	suddenly	awakened,	for	a	single	moment	you
are	 puzzled	 about	who	 you	 are	 and	where	 you	 are.	Have	 you	 not	watched	 it?
Otherwise,	ask	your	wife	or	husband	one	day	to	wake	you	suddenly	in	the	night,
to	shake	you,	and	see:	for	a	few	seconds	you	are,	but	there	is	no	feeling	of	who
you	are.	The	name,	the	form,	the	identity	is	not	there.	You	are	coming	from	such
deep	sleep	that	it	will	take	a	little	time	to	take	back	the	garb	of	the	ego.
IT	happens	 in	 love.	Two	 lovers	 sitting	are	not	 two	 --	 something	between	 them
has	 fallen,	 disappeared.	 Barriers	 gone,	 they	 are	 overlapping.	 It	 happens
accidentally	also,	but	if	you	understand	it	you	can,	by	and	by,	allow	it	to	grow	in
you.	That's	all	that	religion	is	about.
MY	HEART,
DRESS	YOURSELF	IN	THE	SPIRIT
OF	ALL	WOMEN
AND	REVERSE	YOUR	NATURE	AND	HABITS.
MILLIONS	OF	SUNS
WILL	BURST	OPEN	WITH	BRILLIANCE
AND	THE	FORMLESS	IN	VISUAL	FORMS.
YOU	WILL	SEE
WHAT	CANNOT	BE	SEEN
ONLY	IF	YOU	CAN	BE
THE	FORMLESS	IN	YOU.
The	Beloved,	Vol	2
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Love	Is	Death
10	July	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7607100
ShortTitle:
BELOV210
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
81
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 MORE	 SEARCHING	 AND	 SEEKING.
THAT	HAS
ALL	STOPPED.	I	HAVE	FOUND	NOTHING	IN	PARTICULAR,	BUT	I	FEEL
FREE,	FREED.	 I	GO	ABOUT	MY	BUSINESS	WITHOUT	ANXIETY.	THIS
FOR	ME	IS
BLISS,	 AND	 I	 FEEL	 SUCH	 A	 FLOOD	 OF	 GRATITUDE	 FOR	 YOUR
PRESENCE
HERE.	GIRISHA.
THERE	IS	NOTHING	TO	BE	FOUND	IN	PARTICULAR.	The	search	for	 the
particular	 is	 illusory,	 utterly	 illusory.	 The	mind	 seeks	 something	 in	 particular;
that	 is	 the	problem	with	 the	mind.	God	 is	not	a	particular	 thing	or	a	particular
being;	God	is	sheer	existence.
All	 that	 is	 is	 God.	 God	 is	 the	 greatest	 generality.	 You	 cannot	 find	 Him
somewhere	 because	 He	 is	 everywhere.	 You	 cannot	 find	 Him	 in	 any	 place
because	 He	 is	 the	 whole,	 the	 total.	 You	 cannot	 indicate	 Him;	 whatsoever	 the
indication,	it	will	be	wrong:	He	is	in	all	directions,	within	and	without.
Mind	is	narrow;	it	goes	on	seeking	in	a	very	concentrated	way.	Concentration	is
not	 the	 approach	 towards	 God.	 Concentration	 is	 a	 mind	 approach.	 God	 is
everywhere,	 so	 you	 have	 to	 relax,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 meditative.	 That's	 the
difference	between	concentration	and	meditation.	Concentration	is	a	focusing	of
the	mind	exclusively	on	something.	That's	what	desire	is:	a	concentrated	mind,	a
mind	intent	to	reach	somewhere,	to	reach	something,	a	great	seeking	--	but	it	has
to	be	narrow.	And	God	is	the	infinite.
You	have	 to	 relax,	 and	you	have	 to	 drop	 all	 searching	 --	 only	 then	you'll	 find
Him.	Seek,	and	you	will	never	find	Him.	Just	be,	and	He	has	always	been	there
surrounding	you.	He	has	never	left	you	for	a	single	moment,	because	you	cannot
exist	without	Him.	It	is	impossible	to	be	without	Him	for	a	single	split	moment.
He	is	your	life.	He	is	your	being.
You	can	 exist	without	 food	 for	months,	 you	 can	 exist	without	water	 for	 a	 few
days,	you	can	exist	without	air	for	a	few	seconds,	but	you	cannot	exist	without
God	even	for	a	split	second.	It	is	impossible.
This	 is	my	whole	effort	here:	 to	help	you	 to	 relax.	 I	am	not	here	 to	make	you
tense,	ambitious,	desiring	to	find	God.	One	who	is	searching	is	still	in	the	world.
The	 searcher	 is	 part	 of	 the	 world.	 One	 day	 he	 was	 seeking	 money,	 power,
prestige;	now	he	is	seeking	God,	bliss,	heaven,	but	the	search	continues.	He	has
only	changed	 the	objects	of	 the	 search,	but	he	 remains	 the	 same.	 I	 am	here	 to
help	you	 to	 see	 the	point	 that	God	 is	 already	 the	case.	You	are	 just	 like	a	 fish
already	in	the	ocean.	Maybe	the	ocean	is	so	obvious	that	you	can't	see:	you	are
born	 in	 it,	 you	 are	 made	 of	 it,	 you	 will	 dissolve	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 question	 of
recognition,	not	of	search.
A	searching	mind	becomes	concentrated.	Relax	and	just	recognize.
So	I	don't	say	to	you	to	seek	God,	I	say	to	you	to	live	Him	right	now.	There	is	no
need	 to	 seek	 --	 enjoy	 Him	 right	 now,	 celebrate!	 Let	 it	 be	 a	 festival.	 He	 has
already	happened.	He	is	just	waiting	for	you	to	dance	with	Him,	to	delight	with
Him.
Good.	 Girisha	 is	 perfectly	 right:	 "I	 have	 found	 nothing	 in	 particular"...right,
precisely.
That	 is	 the	 point;	 nothing	 is	 to	 be	 found	 in	 particular..."but	 I	 feel	 free,
freed"...exactly,	that	is	the	point	to	be	understood.	A	great	freedom	is	needed	--
freedom	from	desire,	freedom	from	search,	freedom	from	seeking,	freedom	from
the	narrow	mind.	One	simply	relaxes	in	all	directions.	When	you	relax,	you	are
all-dimensional;	when	you	seek,	you	are	one-dimensional.	When	you	relax	you
become	part	of	the	whole;	when	you	seek	you	remain	an	ego.
This	'nothing'	is	what	God	is;	and	this	freedom,	this	tremendous	freedom	--	that
there	 is	 no	 longer	 any	 desire	 to	 bind	 you,	 no	 bondage	 exists	 --	 this	 is	 what
MOKSHA,	liberation	is.	MOKSHA	or	liberation	is	not	a	geographical	thing.	It	is
not	somewhere:	it	 is	not	after	you	die,	 it	 is	a	recognition,	a	recognition	of	here
and	now.	Be	free	of	all	seeking.
There	 are	 only	 two	 types	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world:	 one,	 who	 are	 continuously
seeking.	They	seek	and	they	never	find,	because	seeking	is	not	the	way	to	find.
They	seek	one	 thing,	 then	another	 thing,	 then	another	 thing;	 they	continuously
change	 their	 objects,	 but	 they	 continue	 seeking.	 They	 are	 one-dimensional
people.	They	miss	God	because	God	is	all-dimensional.	They	are	linear	people;
they	move	in	a	line	--	and	God	is	all.	You	cannot	find	Him	through	linear	logic.
Then	there	is	another	type	of	person	--	very	rare	--	who	doesn't	seek,	who	enjoys,
who	delights	 in	whatsoever	 is	available,	who	dances,	who	sings.	These	are	 the
Bauls,	these	are	the	really	authentically	religious	people.
God	is	not	somewhere	in	the	future.	If	you	delight,	He	is	here.	If	you	celebrate,
you	will	find	Him	just	by	your	side,	beating	in	your	heart.	But	if	you	seek	Him
you	will	never	 find	Him	anywhere.	The	seeking	mind	never	 reaches	 to	 reality.
And	 one	 becomes	 too	 much	 of	 a	 seeker,	 by	 and	 by:	 too	 much	 practice,
conditions,	 so	 you	 go	 on	 seeking.	 Today	 you	 will	 seek,	 yesterday	 you	 were
seeking,	tomorrow	also	you	will	seek;	past	lives	you	were	seeking,	this	life	you
are	seeking,	in	the	future	lives	also	you	will	seek.	Seeking	has	become	habitual.
It	has	become	a	structure.	Drop	that	structure!
This	is	my	message:	He	is	here,	right	THIS	very	moment.	Don't	miss	Him.
There	 is	 no	 point	 in	 seeking;	 you	 just	 also	 be	 here,	 as	 He	 is	 here,	 and	 the
meeting,	and	the	communion,	and	the	orgasm...	you	become	one.
"I	go	about	my	business	without	anxiety"	--	beautiful!	Because	then	everything
is	His,	business	also.	Ordinary	day	to	day	activity	becomes	religious,	because	all
is	His.	When	you	are	 taking	a	bath,	you	are	giving	Him	a	bath.	When	you	are
standing	under	 a	 shower,	He	 is	 showering	on	you.	When	you	are	 eating	He	 is
eating,	and	when	you	feel	satisfied	He	feels	satisfied.	When	you	are	singing	He
is	singing	within	you,	and	He	is	the	audience	also;	He	is	listening	to	you.	Every
moment	 and	 every	 act	 becomes	 luminous	with	His	 presence.	When	 the	whole
life	becomes	luminous	--	waking,	He	wakes	 in	you;	sleeping,	He	goes	 to	sleep
and	takes	a	rest	--	then	there	is	no	distraction.	Then	you	are	continuously	in	tune
with	Him.	Then	 the	harmony	has	happened.	This	 is	what	 a	 religious	 life	 is	 all
about.
Religious	life	is	not	something	separate	from	life.	It	is	not	the	life	of	the	temple
or	 of	 the	 monastery;	 it	 is	 the	 life	 offered	 to	 God	 --	 totally,	 unconditionally,
utterly.	And	now	one	lives	because	He	wants	you	to	live.	And	one	lives	happily,
because	He	has	chosen	you,	because	He	has	chosen	you	to	be	an	instrument	to
Him.	 Then	 you	 become	 a	 flute	 on	 His	 lips...then	 everything	 is	 tremendously
beautiful.	This	is	what	the	Bauls	want	to	say....
'...and	I	feel	such	a	flood	of	gratitude	for	your	presence	here."
Gratitude	 arises	 whenever	 you	 start	 feeling	 God's	 presence	 around	 you;	 then
only	 gratitude	 is	 left.	 Then	 your	 whole	 energy	 becomes	 gratitude,	 then	 your
whole	being	becomes	a	thanksgiving,	it	becomes	a	prayer	--	because	nothing	is
missing,	and	the	world	is	so	perfect,	and	everything	is	as	it	should	be.	Gratitude
is	natural.	Gratitude	is	not	something	that	can	be	practiced.	You	have	been	taught
to	be	grateful;	you	cannot	be.
Gratefulness	is	a	consequence:	when	you	feel	God	close	by,	gratitude	arises.	It	is
a	by-product.	Respect	arises.	This	respect	is	not	something	that	you	manage,	it	is
something	 beyond	 you.	 You	 have	 been	 taught	 to	 be	 grateful	 to	 your	 parents,
taught	 to	be	grateful	 to	your	 teachers,	 taught	 to	be	grateful	 to	your	 elders,	but
those	are	all	just	conditionings.
When	real	gratitude	arises,	then	you	see	what	a	tremendous	difference	there	is.
The	 gratitude	 that	 was	 taught	 was	 just	 a	 concept,	 a	 dead	 ritual.	 You	 were
following	it	 like	a	mechanism.	When	the	real	gratitude	upsurges	in	your	being,
you	feel	for	the	first	time	what	prayer	is,	what	love	is.
Good,	Girisha.	Continue	to	remember,	continue	to	relax,	continue	not	to	lose	this
experience	 that	 is	 happening	 to	 you,	 because	 this	 experience	 is	 the	 only
experience	 that	makes	 life	meaningful,	which	gives	 life	 a	 glow,	 a	 benediction.
You	are	blessed,	Girisha,	but	don't	lose	track	of	it.	It	is	very	difficult	to	get,	and	it
is	very	easy	to	lose	--	because	mind	has	a	long	history,	and	it	is	very	strong,	and
this	new	experience	 is	 just	a	small	 sprout,	very	soft,	 fragile.	The	mind's	heavy
rock	can	crush	it	at	any	moment,	so	be	very	alert.
People	 who	 have	 not	 known	 anything	 like	 a	 spiritual	 experience	 of	 ecstasy,
elation,	who	have	never	felt	any	presence	of	God,	need	not	be	very	alert,	because
they	have	nothing	to	lose.	But	a	person	who	has	had	an	experience,	a	glimpse,	a
mini-SATORI,	 has	 much	 to	 lose.	 He'll	 have	 to	 be	 more	 cautious.	 Be	 more
cautious.	Allow	what	has	happened	to	you	to	happen	more	and	more.	Go	deeper
into	it	so	that	 that	which	is	fragile	becomes	strong,	 that	which	is	new	becomes
deeply	rooted	in	your	being.
It	fact,	people	who	are	searching	and	seeking	and	making	much	fuss	about	it	are
completely	unaware	that	finally,	when	they	reach,	they	will	find	there	is	nothing.
I	have	heard....
A	lawyer	was	cross-examining	Mulla	Nasrudin,	a	witness.	He	asked,	"And	you
say	you	called	on	Mrs.	Sultana	on	May	2nd?	Now	will	you	tell	the	jury	just	what
she	said?"
"I	 object	 to	 the	 question,"	 interrupted	 the	 lawyer	 on	 the	 other	 side.	There	was
nearly	 an	 hour's	 argument	 between	 counsel,	 and	 finally	 the	 judge	 allowed	 the
question.	"And	as	I	was	saying,"	the	first	lawyer	began	again,	"on	May	2nd	you
called	on	Mrs.	Sultana.	Now	what	did	she	say?"
"Nothing,"	replied	Nasrudin.	"She	was	not	at	home."
One	day,	when	you	 arrive,	 you	 simply	 are	 amazed	 that	 for	 so	many	 lives	 you
were	 seeking	 something	which	had	never	been	 there,	 and	 that	which	has	been
there	was	so	close	to	you,	and	there	was	no	need	to	seek	it.
Delight,	enjoy.	God	is	not	a	thing,	it	is	an	attitude,	an	attitude	of	celebration	and
festivity.
Drop	 sadness.	 He	 is	 so	 close	 by;	 dance!	 Drop	 long	 faces,	 it	 is	 sacrilege	 --
because	He	 is	 so	close	by.	Forget	your	childish	miseries	and	worries;	He	 is	 so
close	by.	Don't	go	on	brooding	about	immaterial	things;	He	is	so	close	by.	Allow
Him	to	hold	your	hand.	He	has	been	waiting	for	you	for	long.
The	second	question:
Question	2
IF	 YOU	 HAPPENED	 TO	 MEET	 A	 BAUL,	 A	 TANTRICA,	 AND	 A	 YOGI,
WITH
WHOM	WOULD	YOU	LIKE	TO	TAKE	A	CUP	OF	TEA?
IT	is	a	very	complex	question.	The	answer	is	not	easy,	but	still	I	will	try.
I	will	tell	the	Yogi	to	prepare	the	cup	of	tea,	because	those	are	the	most	hygienic
people!
And	I	will	tell	the	Tantrica	to	bring	it,	because	they	know	how	to	present	a	thing;
they	know	what	ritual	is.	But	I	am	going	to	take	tea	with	the	Baul.
The	third	question:
Question	3
WHEN	ONE	BECOMES	EMPTY	OF	ALL	THOUGHTS,	EMPTY	OF	ALL
PLANNINGS,	 EMPTY	 OF	 ALL	 DESIRES,	 WHAT	 TRANSFORMATION
WILL
HAPPEN	 IN	ONE'S	OUTER	LIFE	AND	ONE'S	 INNER	LIFE?	HOW	WILL
HE
BEHAVE?	 HOW	WILL	 HE	 SEE	 THINGS?	 HOW	WILL	 HE	 LIVE	 IN	 THE
WORLD?
PLEASE	SAY.
IT	 depends,	 it	 depends	 on	 the	 individual.	 There	 cannot	 be	 any	 dogmatic
statement	about	 it	because	each	 individual	 is	 so	unique.	When	Basho	becomes
enlightened	he	starts	singing	poetry,	poems;	Buddha	has	never	done	that.	When
Krishna	becomes	enlightened	he	starts	dancing,	singing;	Mahavir	has	never	done
that.	 When	 Mahavir	 becomes	 enlightened	 he	 keeps	 silence	 for	 many	 years,
remains	absolutely	silent,	not	a	ripple	is	allowed;	Meera	has	not	done	that.	When
she	becomes	enlightened,	she	dances	from	village	to	village,	she	sings	the	glory
of	God.	It	is	very	difficult	to	make	a	dogmatic	statement.
There	have	been	people	who	renounced	life	when	they	became	enlightened	and
went	 to	 the	Himalayas,	moved	as	 far	away	from	the	society	as	possible.	There
have	been	people	who	became	enlightened	and	came	back	to	the	world,	even	if
they	had	been	in	the	Himalayas,	and	started	living	with	people	again.	There	have
been	people	who	remained	emperors	even	when	they	became	enlightened.	Zen
Masters	go	on	living	very	ordinary	lives;	it	is	very	difficult	even	to	recognize.	If
you	don't	have	eyes	to	penetrate	them,	you	will	not	recognize	them.
It	is	said	about	a	great	Zen	Master,	Rinzai....	The	emperor	came	to	see	him.	He
was	cutting	wood	just	in	front	of	the	ashram.	The	emperor	asked,	"Where	is	your
Master?"
Rinzai	 said,	 "He	 is	 inside."	 Now	 of	 course,	 the	 emperor	 thought	 he	 must	 be
inside	the	ashram,	so	he	went	inside	the	ashram.	Rinzai	ran	in	another	door	and
sat	 on	 the	 Master's	 chair	 with	 closed	 eyes.	 When	 the	 emperor	 reached,	 he
recognized:	"This	man	seems	 to	be	exactly	 like...	 just	 like	 the	woodcutter."	He
said,	"What	is	the	matter?	Who	are	you?	Are	you	trying	to	befool	me,	or	are	you
a	 madman?"	 Rinzai	 said,	 "But	 I	 have	 told	 you,	 he	 is	 inside,	 and	 you	 didn't
understand	me.	Because	you	did	not	understand	me,	I	had	to	run	and	I	had	to	sit
on	this	chair.	Maybe	you	can	understand	only	superficials.	I	was	ready	then	and
there	 to	reveal	myself,	but	you	didn't	wait.	Yes,	 I	am	the	Master,	now	what	do
you	want?	And	don't	waste	much	time,	because	much	wood	is	still	left	to	be	cut
and	chopped."
Zen	Masters	live	very	ordinary	lives:	they	chop	wood,	they	carry	water	from	the
well,	they	prepare	food	in	the	kitchen.	It	is	very	difficult	to	see	them	unless	you
have	eyes.
They	don't	live	any	sort	of	extraordinary	life,	because	they	say,	"The	very	search
to	 be	 extraordinary	 is	 egoistic."	 Just	 to	 be	 ordinary	 is	 the	 real	 attitude	 of	 a
religious	 man.	 And	 remember,	 the	 urge	 to	 be	 extraordinary	 is	 very	 ordinary.
There	 is	 nothing	 extraordinary	 about	 it	 because	 everybody	 wants	 to	 be
extraordinary.	To	be	ordinary	is	very	extraordinary	--	because	who	wants	 to	be
ordinary?
So	 it	 is	 very	 difficult,	 and	 I	will	 not	 give	 you	 a	 criterion	 to	 judge	 by	 because
those	 criteria	 have	 been	 very	 destructive	 and	 harmful.	 Once	 you	 have	 a	 dead
criterion	with	you,	you	will	miss	many	real	people,	and	you	will	be	deceived	by
many	pseudo	people.
Whosoever	can	fulfill	that	criterion	will	look	like	he	is	enlightened.
For	 example:	Mahavir	 became	 enlightened;	 he	 became	 naked.	 Now,	 anybody
can	stand	naked;	there	is	nothing	special	about	it.	Any	madman	can	do	that.	And
you	can	go	to	visit	a	nudist	club	--	they	are	not	all	Mahaviras.	Buddha	became
enlightened;	he	was	sitting	in	a	particular	posture,	the	lotus	posture.	You	can	sit
in	a	lotus	posture.	If	you	are	Eastern,	then	it	is	very	simple;	if	you	are	Western,
then	six	months'	practice,	but	 that's	all.	You	can	sit	 in	a	 lotus	posture,	but	 that
will	not	make	you	a	Buddha.	You	can	 imitate	very	easily;	 that's	how	 imitators
are	there	all	over	the	world.	Go	and	see	a	Jain	monk:	he	imitates	perfectly,	but
nothing	else	is	there.
Enlightenment	 is	always	new,	 fresh	 --	 it	 is	not	an	 imitation,	 it	 is	not	a	carbon-
copy;	it	 is	ALWAYS	original.	So	I	cannot	tell	you	exactly	how	he	will	behave,
but	I	can	tell	you	how	to	imbibe.	If	there	is	somebody	who	has	something	of	the
unknown	 around	 him	 --	 a	 mystique	 --	 then,	 how	 to	 imbibe?	 Drop	 all
considerations,	all	mental	considerations.
Don't	 ask	 that	 he	 should	 be	 'like	 this';	 just	 be	 with	 him.	 Just	 sit	 with	 him	 in
silence.	be	open	to	him.	If	he	has	become	enlightened,	suddenly	you	will	see	a
throb	within	you	that	you	have	never	known	before:	your	energy	will	start	rising.
You	 will	 see	 a	 great	 silence	 arising	 in	 you,	 and	 a	 great	 bliss,	 drop	 by	 drop,
reaching	your	innermost	core	of	being.
An	enlightened	person,	 if	 allowed	 to	enter	 into	you,	will	give	you	self-evident
proofs.	But	those	are	not	intellectual	proofs;	they	are	not	arguments	of	mind.	He
argues	with	his	whole	being.	His	argument	is	that	of	his	presence	--	so	allow	his
presence	and	don't	carry	any	criterion.	If	you	are	a	Jain	you	will	miss	Buddha;	if
you	are	a	Jain	you	will	miss	Krishna;	 if	you	are	a	Jain	you	will	miss	Christ.	If
you	 are	 a	 Christian	 you	 will	 miss	 Mahavir.	 You	 will	 carry	 an	 idea,	 a	 fixed
pattern.	Don't	carry	any	fixed	pattern.	If	you	feel	that	somebody	is	there	who	is
livelier	 than	 you,	 more	 radiant	 than	 you,	 more	 understanding	 than	 you,	 more
compassion	overflowing	from	his	being,	then	just	be	in	his	presence.	That's	what
we	 call	 SATSANG:	 just	 be	 in	 his	 presence.	 If	 he	 has	 arrived,	 you	will	 feel	 a
sudden	pull	in	your	being	--	you	are	being	pulled	towards	some	unknown	center.
And	you	will	 feel	 tremendous	 beauty,	 bliss.	 blessings	 showering	 on	 you.	That
will	be	the	only	criterion;	but	for	that	you	have	to	be	ready.
Ordinarily,	 people	 ask,	 "Give	us	 some	objective	 criterion."	There	 is	 none.	The
criterion	can	only	be	if	you	are	open.	What	is	the	criterion	to	know	whether	this
flower	 is	 a	 rose	 or	 not?	 The	 only	 criterion	 is	 to	 open	 your	 eyes,	 open	 your
nostrils,	 smell	 it,	 let	 it	 reach	your	being;	only	 that	will	 reveal.	But	 if	you	don't
have	 eyes	 and	 you	 have	 lost	 your	 sense	 of	 smell,	 then	 it	 will	 be	 very,	 very
difficult	for	you	to	know	whether	it	is	a	rose	or	something	else.	It	may	be	just	a
plastic	rose	or	a	paper	rose;	it	can	deceive	you.
So	I	will	not	give	you	any	description	of	the	objective	reality,	of	what	happens	--
it	is	individual,	unique,	always	different,	never	the	same	--	but	I	can	give	you	a
subjective	way	to	feel.
I	have	heard....
A	 maddened	 Roman	 swordsman	 came	 into	 the	 village	 cutting	 down	 men,
women,	 and	 children,	 and	 terrifying	 everyone.	Arriving	 at	 the	 doors	 of	 a	 Zen
monastery,	he	smashed	down	the	door	with	the	hilt	of	his	sword.	Striding	up	to
the	Master	who	was	sitting	in	ZAZEN,	he	raised	his	sword	and	was	just	about	to
kill	him,	when	something	of	the	Master's	stillness	reached	him.	And	angrily	he
shouted,	"Don't	you	realize	 that	standing	 in	 front	of	you	 is	a	man	who	can	cut
you	in	two	without	the	blink	of	an	eye!"
The	Master	quietly	said,	"Don't	YOU	realize	that	sitting	in	front	of	you	is	a	man
who	 can	 be	 cut	 in	 two	 without	 the	 blink	 of	 an	 eye?	 So	 go	 ahead.	 Don't	 be
restricted	by	my	silence;	do	whatsoever	you	have	decided	to	do."	But	the	silence
had	reached	the	madman.	The	silence	of	the	Master	had	touched	his	heart;	now	it
was	impossible.
So	just	be	open.
Even	 if	 you	 are	 a	 madman,	 and	 open,	 you	 will	 recognize	 enlightenment
wherever	 it	 is,	 in	 whatsoever	 form	 it	 has	 taken.	 And	 even	 if	 you	 are	 a	 great
philosopher,	intellectual,	very	rational	to	the	core,	if	you	don't	allow	yourself	to
imbibe	 the	spirit	of	silence	and	bliss,	you	will	miss.	You	have	 to	be	very,	very
open.	You	have	to	be	in	a	let-go	--	and	then	the	evidence	comes	so	strongly.	It	is
so	 certain	 that	 you	 can	 deny	 everything,	 but	 you	 cannot	 deny	 a	 man	 of
enlightenment	--	it	is	impossible.	You	may	not	be	able	to	prove	it	to	others
--	because	there	is	no	way	to	prove	--	but	for	you,	the	thing	is	settled.	And	once
it	 is	settled	for	you,	once	you	have	been	in	contact	with	an	enlightened	man,	a
bridge	 has	 been	 created.	 Now	 you	 can	 never	 be	 the	 same	 again.	 The	 VERY
phenomenon	that	you	could	recognize	a	man	of	enlightenment	is	enough	to	start
the	 foundation	 of	 you	 own	 enlightenment.	 It	 is	 enough	 to	 give	 you	 a	 new
direction,	a	new	being,	a	new	birth.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
ANYTHING	I	SEE	HAPPENING	IN	MYSELF	IS	FALSE,	ILLUSORY,	AND	A
MIND
TRIP,	RIGHT?	AND	MY	RECOGNITION	OF	THE	MIND	TRIP	IS	A	MIND
TRIP
TOO?
RIGHT.
As	far	as	thoughts	go,	everything	is	a	mind	trip.	When	thoughts	cease	and	you
see	without	any	thoughts	crowding	in	your	mind,	when	you	see	clearly	with	no
smoke	 of	 the	 thoughts	 surrounding	 you,	 when	 your	 look	 is	 simple,	 innocent,
uncorrupted	by	thoughts,	then	it	is	not	a	mind	trip.	Only	meditation	is	not	a	mind
trip;	everything	else	is	a	mind	trip.	Or,	love	is	not	a	mind	trip;	everything	else	is
a	mind	trip.	If	love	or	meditation	has	happened	to	you,	you	will	know	what	I	am
indicating	towards.	In	a	deep	moment	of	love,	thinking	stops.	The	moment	is	so
intriguing,	the	moment	is	so	tremendously	powerful,	the	moment	is	so	intensely
alive,	that	thinking	stops.	You	are	simply	in	awe,	a	great	wonder	surrounds	you.
Or	 in	 deep	 meditation,	 when	 the	 moment	 of	 silence	 has	 come	 and	 you	 are
absolutely	silent,	 still	 --	no	flickering,	no	wavering,	no	 trembling,	 the	flame	of
your	 consciousness	 is	 straight	 --	 then	 thinking	 stops.	Then	you	are	outside	 the
grip	of	the	mind.	Otherwise,	everything	is	a	mind	trip.
Remember	it:	one	has	to	go	beyond	the	mind	because	the	mind	is	SAMSAR,	the
mind	is	the	world.	It	is	because	of	your	thinking	that	you	are	missing	the	truth.
Once	thinking	is	stopped	you	are	face	to	face	with	the	reality.	It	is	the	continuous
screen	of	thinking	that	is	distorting	reality.	It	is	as	if	you	are	looking	in	a	lake	full
of	ripples.	It	is	a	full	moon	night,	and	the	lake	is	reflecting	the	beautiful	moon	--
but	it	is	full	of	ripples.	You	cannot	gather	it	together;	the	moon	goes	on	splitting
into	a	thousand	fragments.	The	whole	lake	seems	to	be	spread	over	by	the	moon,
silvery,	many	fragments	of	the	moon	all	around.	Then	the	wind	stops,	the	ripples
disappear:	 those	 fragments	 start	 falling	 into	 one	 moon.	 The	 silver	 that	 was
spread	all	over	the	lake	becomes	more	concentrated	in	one	place.	When	the	lake
is	completely	without	ripples,	the	moon	is	reflected	perfectly.
When	 the	 mind	 is	 with	 thoughts,	 the	 lake	 is	 with	 ripples;	 when	 the	 mind	 is
without	 thoughts,	 the	 lake	 is	 without	 ripples.	 God	 is	 reflected	 perfectly	 when
there	is	no	ripple	in	you.	Forget	all	about	God	--	the	only	thing	to	be	done	is	how
to	 become	 ripple-less,	 how	 to	 become	 thoughtless,	 how	 to	 drop	 this	 constant
obsession	with	 thinking.	 It	can	be	dropped	--	 it	 is	because	of	your	cooperation
that	it	continues.	It	is	your	energy	that	you	go	on	giving	to	it	that	keeps	it	alive.	It
is	just	like	a	man	on	a	bicycle:	he	goes	on	pedaling	--
it	is	his	energy	that	keeps	the	cycle	going	on.	Once	he	stops	pedaling,	the	cycle
may	go	a	little	further	because	of	the	past	momentum,	but	then	it	has	to	stop.
Don't	 give	 energy	 to	 your	 thoughts.	 Become	 a	 witness	 --	 indifferent,	 aloof,
distant.	Just	see	the	thoughts,	and	don't	be	in	any	way	involved	in	them.	Note	the
fact:	 the	 thoughts	 are	 there;	 but	 don't	 choose	 this	way	 or	 that,	 don't	 be	 for	 or
against,	don't	be	pro	or	con.
Just	be	a	watcher.	Let	the	mind-traffic	move,	just	stand	by	the	side	and	look	at	it,
unaffected	by	it,	as	if	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
Sometimes	 try	 it:	 go	 on	 the	 busiest	 street	 where	 the	 traffic	 rush	 is	 too	much.
Stand	by	the	side	of	the	road	and	see	the	traffic	--	so	many	people	going	hither
and	 thither,	 and	 cars	 and	bicycles	 and	 trucks	 and	buses.	You	 just	 stand	by	 the
side	and	look,	and	do	the	same	inside:	close	your	eyes	and	see	--	the	mind	is	a
traffic	 of	 thoughts,	 thoughts	 rushing	 here	 and	 there.	You	watch,	 you	 just	 be	 a
watcher.	By	and	by,	you	will	 see	 that	 the	 traffic	 is	becoming	 less	and	 less.	By
and	by,	you	will	see	that	the	road	is	empty,	nobody	is	passing.
In	those	rare	moments,	first	glimpses	of	SAMADHI	will	enter	in	you.
There	are	three	stages	of	SAMADHI.	First,	when	you	achieve	glimpses	through
gaps	--
one	thought	comes,	then	it	has	gone	and	another	has	not	come	for	the	time	being.
There	may	even	be	 a	gap	 for	 a	 few	 seconds;	 in	 that	 interval	 reality	penetrates
you	--	the	moon	becomes	one.	The	reflection	is	there	only	for	a	single	moment,
but	you	will	see	the	first	glimpse.
This	is	what	in	Zen	they	call	SATORI.	By	and	by,	the	gaps	will	become	bigger,
and	 when	 the	 gaps	 become	 bigger	 and	 you	 can	 see	 reality	 more	 clearly,	 that
vision	of	reality	changes	you.	Then	you	cannot	be	the	same	because	your	vision
becomes	your	reality	also.	Whatsoever	you	are	seeing	affects	your	being.	Your
vision,	by	and	by,	is	absorbed,	digested.	That	is	the	second	stage	of	samadhi.
And	then	comes	the	last	stage:	when	suddenly	the	whole	traffic	disappears,	as	if
you	were	fast	asleep	and	dreaming	and	somebody	has	shaken	you	and	awakened
you,	 and	 the	 whole	 traffic	 of	 dreaming	 has	 stopped.	 In	 that	 third	 stage	 you
become	one	with	reality,	because	there	is	nothing	to	divide.	The	fence	that	was
dividing	you	has	disappeared.	The	wall	is	no	more	there.	The	wall	is	made	of	the
bricks	of	thoughts,	desires,	feelings,	emotions;	once	it	disappears	--	it	is	a	China
wall,	very	ancient,	and	every	strong	--	but	once	it	disappears,	 there	is	no	fence
between	you	and	God.	When	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 third	 stage	happens,	 that	 is
where	the	Upanishads	announced,	"AHAM	BRAHAMASMI"
--	 I	 am	God,	 I	 am	 the	Brahma.	 It	 is	where	 the	 Sufi	mystic,	Mansur,	 declares,
"ANA'L
HAQ"	--	I	am	the	truth.	It	is	there	when	Jesus	declares,	"I	and	my	God	are	one,	I
and	my	Father	are	one."
The	fifth	question:
Question	5
ON	THE	ONE	HAND	YOU	ARE	GIVING	ULTIMATE	FREEDOM	TO	DO
WHATSOEVER	WE	WANT	 TO	 DO,	 AND	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 HAND	 YOU
ARE
GIVING	RESPONSIBILITY.	WITH	RESPONSIBILITY,	I	CANNOT	USE	THE
WORD	 'FREEDOM'	 AS	 I	 WANT,	 HENCE	 I	 HAVE	 TO	 WAIT	 FOR	 THE
RIGHT
MEANING	OF	FREEDOM.	THE	MOMENT	I	GET	IT,	I	GET	IT	WITH
RESPONSIBILITY.	OSHO,	WHEN	I	UNDERSTAND	I	FEEL'THANK	YOU'.
OTHERWISE,	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	USE,	AND	I	HAVE	ALREADY	USED	IT
AS	A	LICENCE.
IT	 is	one	of	 the	perennial	questions	of	humanity:	 the	question	of	 freedom	and
responsibility.	If	you	are	free,	you	interpret	it	as	if	now	there	is	no	responsibility.
Just	a	hundred	years	ago	Friedrich	Nietzsche	declared,	"God	is	dead,	and	man	is
free."	And	the	next	sentence	he	wrote	is,	"Now	you	can	do	whatsoever	you	want
to	 do.	 There	 is	 no	 responsibility.	 God	 is	 dead,	 man	 is	 free,	 and	 there	 is	 no
responsibility."	There	he	was	absolutely	wrong;	when	 there	 is	no	God,	 there	 is
TREMENDOUS	responsibility	on	your	shoulders.	If	there	is	a	God,	he	can	share
your	responsibility.	You	can	throw	your	responsibility	on	Him:	you	can	say,	"It	is
YOU	who	have	made	the	world;	it	is	YOU	who	have	made	me	in	this	way;	it	is
YOU	who	 is	 finally,	 ultimately,	 responsible,	 not	me.	How	 can	 I	 be	 ultimately
responsible?	 I	 am	 just	 a	 creature,	 and	 you	 are	 the	 creator.	Why	 have	 you	 put
seeds	of	corruption	 in	me	and	seeds	of	sin	 in	me	from	the	beginning?	You	are
responsible.	I	am	free."	In	fact,	if	there	is	no	God,	then	man	is	ABSOLUTELY
responsible	 for	 his	 acts,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 throw	 responsibility	 on
anybody	else.
When	I	say	to	you	that	you	are	free,	I	mean	that	you	are	responsible.	You	cannot
throw	responsibility	on	anybody	else,	you	are	alone.	And	whatsoever	you	do,	it
is	your	doing.
You	cannot	say	that	somebody	else	forced	you	to	do	it	--	because	you	are	free;
nobody	can	force	you!	Because	you	are	free,	it	is	your	decision	to	do	something
or	 not	 to	 do	 something.	 With	 freedom	 comes	 responsibility.	 Freedom	 IS
responsibility.	But	the	mind	is	very	cunning,	the	mind	interprets	in	its	own	way:
it	 always	 goes	 on	 listening	 to	 that	 which	 it	 wants	 to	 listen	 to.	 It	 goes	 on
interpreting	 things	 in	 its	 own	 way.	 The	 mind	 never	 tries	 to	 understand	 what
really	is	the	truth.	It	has	taken	that	decision	already.
I	have	heard....
"I	am	a	respectable	man,	doctor,	but	lately	life	has	become	intolerable	because	of
my	feelings	of	guilt	and	self-recrimination."	The	patient	gulped	miserably	before
continuing.
"You	 see,	 I	 have	 recently	 fallen	 victim	 to	 an	 uncontrollable	 urge	 to	 pinch	 and
fondle	girls	in	the	underground."
"Dearie	me,"	tutted	the	psychiatrist	consolingly,	"we	must	certainly	help	you	to
rid	yourself	of	this	unfortunate	urge.	I	can	quite	see	how	distressing....	"
The	patient	broke	in	anxiously,	"It	is	not	so	much	the	urge	I	wanted	you	get	rid
of	for	me,	doctor,	it	is	the	guilt."
People	go	on	 talking	about	freedom,	but	 they	don't	want	freedom	exactly,	 they
want	irresponsibility.	They	ask	for	freedom,	but	deep	down,	unconsciously,	they
ask	for	irresponsibility,	licence.
Freedom	 is	maturity;	 licence	 is	 very	 childish.	 Freedom	 is	 possible	 only	when
you	 are	 so	 integrated	 that	 you	 can	 take	 the	 responsibility	 of	 being	 free.	 The
world	 is	 not	 free	 because	 people	 are	 not	 mature.	 Revolutionaries	 have	 been
doing	many	 things	 down	 through	 the	 centuries,	 but	 everything	 fails.	 Utopians
have	been	continuously	thinking	of	how	to	make	man	free,	but	nobody	bothers	--
because	man	cannot	be	free	unless	he	is	integrated.	Only	a	Buddha	can	be	free,	a
Mahavira	can	be	free,	a	Christ,	a	Mohammed	can	be	free,	a	Zarathustra	can	be
free,	because	freedom	means	 the	man	now	is	aware.	 If	you	are	not	aware	 then
the	state	is	needed,	the	government	is	needed,	the	police	is	needed,	the	court	is
needed.	Then	freedom	has	to	be	cut	from	everywhere.	Then	freedom	exists	only
in	name;	in	fact	it	doesn't	exist.	How	can	freedom	exist	when	governments	exist?
--	it	is	impossible.	But	what	to	do?
If	governments	disappear,	there	will	simply	be	anarchy.	Freedom	will	not	come
in	if	governments	disappear,	there	will	simply	be	anarchy.	It	will	be	a	worse	state
than	it	is	now.	It	will	be	sheer	madness.	The	police	are	needed	because	you	are
not	alert.
Otherwise,	what	is	the	point	of	having	a	policeman	standing	on	the	crossroad?	If
people	 are	 alert,	 the	 policeman	 can	 be	 removed,	 will	 have	 to	 be	 removed,
because	it	is	unnecessary.	But	people	are	not	conscious.
So	 when	 I	 say	 'freedom',	 I	 mean	 be	 responsible.	 The	 more	 responsible	 you
become,	 the	more	 free	 you	 become;	 or,	 the	more	 free	 you	 become,	 the	more
responsibility	 comes	 on	 you.	 Then	 you	 have	 to	 be	 very	 alert	 to	what	 you	 are
doing,	what	 you	 are	 saying.	 Even	 about	 your	 small	 unconscious	 gestures	 you
have	 to	be	very	 alert	 --	 because	 there	 is	nobody	else	 to	 control	you,	 it	 is	 only
you.	When	I	say	 to	you	 that	you	are	 free,	 I	mean	 that	you	are	a	God.	 It	 is	not
licence,	it	is	tremendous	discipline.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
AFTER	HEARING	YOU	FOR	THE	LAST	NINE	DAYS	AND	UNDERGOING
MORNING	AND	EVENING	MEDITATIONS	IN	YOUR	ASHRAM,	I	CAME
TO	THE
CONCLUSION	THAT	I	ENVY	VIVEK,	BUT	I	AM	NOT	JEALOUS	OF	HER.
I	FEEL
SHE	IS	HOLDING	THE'PARAMPADA'	OF	BELOVED	DISCIPLE	IN	THE
ASHRAM.	HOW	TO	REACH	THAT	STAGE?
MIND	functions	 in	 such	 strange	ways.	You	have	been	here	 to	meditate;	 it	 has
nothing	to	do	with	anybody	else.	In	fact,	a	real	meditator	will	not	look	at	what	is
happening	to	others.	A	real	meditator	will	be	going	inwards.
It	 is	 said	about	Bayazid	 that	he	 lived	with	his	Master	 for	 twelve	years,	and	he
passed	the	same	hall	every	day	to	come	to	the	Master.	One	day	the	Master	said
to	Bayazid,	"You	go	back	to	the	hall.	There,	in	the	cupboard,	one	book	is	Lying	-
-	you	bring	that	book."
Bayazid	said,	"I	will	go,	because	I	have	never	seen	that	there	is	a	cupboard."	The
Master	 said,	 "You	 have	 been	 coming	 to	 see	 me	 continuously,	 every	 day,	 for
twelve	 years,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 pass	 that	 hall	 every	 day;	 you	 have	 not	 looked
around?"	He	said,	"I	was	coming	to	you,	Master.	I	am	not	here	to	look	at	what	is
in	the	hall,	whether	there	is	a	cupboard	or	not,	and	whether	there	is	a	book	in	it
or	not.	I	am	not	here	for	that.	My	whole	intent,	my	whole	being	is	just	for	you.	I
am	open	towards	you.	I	will	go	and	see."	The	Master	said,	"There	is	no	need;	the
book	is	not	needed.	In	fact,	there	is	no	book	and	there	is	no	cupboard.	It	was	just
a	test	to	see	whether	you	are	distracted.	I	am	happy	that	you	are	not	distracted."
Now,	this	question	is	a	question	of	distraction.	How	are	you	related	to	anybody?
You	should	be	meditating,	or,	at	the	most,	you	should	be	open	towards	me.	But
mind	goes	on	creating	new	complexities	and	troubles.
The	 question	 is	 from	 a	 woman,	 so	 that	 shows	 something	 about	 the	 feminine
mind	also.
She	 is	 more	 interested	 in	 Vivek	 than	 in	 me.	 If	 you	 are	 to	 feel	 envious,	 feel
envious	of	me!
But	a	woman	is	a	woman;	even	if	she	has	come	to	meditate,	it	makes	not	much
difference.	 And	 then	 she	 says,	 "I	 am	 not	 jealous	 of	 her,	 but	 I	 envy."	 This	 is
always	happening	in	the	mind:	if	somebody	is	envious	we	call	him	jealous;	if	we
are	jealous	we	say	this	is	just	envy.	There	is	a	double-bind.
What	is	envy?	It	is	nothing	but	passive	jealousy.	Maybe	jealousy	is	too	strong	a
phenomenon;	envy	is	a	little	passive.	The	difference	may	be	of	degrees,	but	it	is
not	of	quality,	it	is	only	of	quantity.	Envy	can	become	jealousy	at	any	moment;
envy	is	just	jealousy	in	progress.	Mind	has	to	drop	all	envies	and	jealousies.
She	has	 asked,	 "How	 to	 reach	 that	 stage?"	The	 first	 thing	 is	 to	drop	envy	and
jealousy,	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 --	 because	 love	 cannot	 exist	 where
envy	and	jealousies	exist.	Then	your	search	is	only	for	a	certain	type	of	power:
that	in	the	name	of	love	you	are	just	trying	to	fulfill	the	ego.	And	it	is	arduous	to
drop,	because	 love	exists	only	when	all	 the	negative	 elements	of	 the	mind	are
dropped.	It	is	very	arduous.	You	can	ask	Vivek	how	arduous	it	is.
Just	a	few	days	ago	she	was	saying	to	me,	"You	are	worse	than	Gurdjieff!"	Now
that	 is	a	great	compliment.	Gurdjieff	was	really	very	hard	on	his	disciples,	and
she	 says,	 "You	 are	worse	 than	Gurdjieff!"	 But	 I	 can	 understand:	 I	 am	 hard,	 I
HAVE	 to	 be	 hard.	 The	 closer	 you	 come	 to	 me,	 the	 harder	 you	 will	 find	 me.
When	you	come	just	as	a	visitor,	then	it	is	okay;	I	am	not	hard.	I	have	to	be	very,
very	polite	when	you	come	as	a	visitor	--	that	is	the	trap.	Once	you	are	trapped,
then	I	become	hard.
The	woman	has	not	taken	sannyas	yet;	she	should	take	sannyas	and	see.
Come	 closer	 to	 me...	 you	 will	 be	 coming	 closer	 to	 your	 own	 death.	 Love	 is
death.	You	will	have	to	die;	only	then	can	you	comeclose	to	me.	You	will	have	to
efface	yourself	utterly;	only	then	can	you	come	close	to	me.
But	people	think	that	 love	is	 the	promise	of	a	rose	garden.	Yes,	ultimately	yes,
but	on	the	way	it	is	a	lot	of	hell.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote:
A	 great	 philosopher,	 feeling	 the	 absolute	 meaninglessness	 of	 life,	 decided	 to
commit	suicide	by	hanging	himself.	A	friend	came	into	the	room	and	discovered
him	standing	with	a	rope	around	his	waist,	and	he	enquired	what	he	was	trying	to
do.	The	philosopher	told	him	he	was	taking	his	own	life.	"But,"	said	the	friend,
"why	have	you	the	rope	round	your	waist?"
"Well,"	said	the	philosopher,	"when	I	tied	it	round	my	neck,	it	was	choking	me."
Love	 is	a	 rope	round	 the	neck	--	 it	will	choke	you,	 it	will	kill	you.	Only	 those
who	are	courageous	enough	 to	commit	suicide	--	a	spiritual	suicide	--	who	are
ready	to	die,	only	they	can	be	reborn,	and	only	they	can	be	close	to	me.	It	has
nothing	to	do	with	me.	I	am	there,	available	to	everybody.	My	invitation	is	there
for	you	to	come.	It	depends	on	you.
But	if	you	come	just	to	become	close	to	me,	envious	of	others	who	are	close,	you
are	 coming	 close	 for	wrong	 reasons.	Then	 your	 rope	will	 be	 just	 around	 your
waist,	and	you	will	say,	"I	cannot	put	it	on	my	neck,	it	is	choking."
People	 can	 come	close	 also	 for	wrong	 reasons,	 for	 political	 reasons.	Now	 this
woman	 has	 a	 political	 mind:	 she	 thinks	 Vivek	 is	 in	 a	 PARAMPADA,	 in	 the
highest	power	position.
This	is	a	search	for	power.
Those	who	are	close	to	me	are	close	because	they	have	effaced	themselves.	At
least	they	are	sincerely	trying.	It	is	hard,	it	is	difficult,	but	they	are	trying.
I	was	reading	a	small	anecdote:
There	was	a	small	camp	of	little	boy	scouts.	The	camp	counsellor	was	explaining
the	rules	of	a	new	game:	"If	your	enemy	calls	your	number	from	his	side	of	the
battlefield,"
he	 said,	 "you	must	be	 a	dead	man,	 immediately.	Drop	 just	where	you	are.	Lie
still	as	if	you	are	dead,	become	completely	dead."
Ten	minutes	later	came	an	agonized	whisper	from	the	youngest	camper,	"Please
may	I	move	now?	I	am	a	dead	man,	but	I	am	on	an	ant	hill."
You	 can	 pretend	 that	 you	 are	 effacing	 yourself,	 you	 can	 pretend	 that	 you	 are
humble,	 you	 can	 pretend	 that	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 drop	 your	 ego,	 but	 pretensions
won't	 help.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 truth	 comes	 out.	 And	 one	 should	 not	 become
interested	for	wrong	reasons.
The	girl	was	rich	and	the	young	man,	Mulla	Nasrudin,	was	very	poor.	She	liked
him	but	that	was	all,	and	Nasrudin	knew	it.	One	night	he	had	been	a	little	more
tender	than	usual:
"You	are	very	rich,"	he	ventured.
"Yes,"	she	replied	frankly.	"I	am	worth	one	million	rupees."
"And	I	am	poor."
"Yes."
"Will	you	marry	me?"
"No."
"I	thought	you	would	not."
"Then	why	did	you	ask	me,	Nasrudin?"
"Aw,"	 said	Nasrudin,	 "just	 to	 see	 how	 a	man	 feels	when	 he	 loses	 one	million
rupees."
Don't	ask	such	questions,	because	 they	come	out	of	wrong	desires.	First	watch
from	where	they	are	coming	and	be	very,	very	alert.	See	as	clearly	as	possible.
Don't	 hide	 behind	 words.	 Don't	 call	 your	 jealousy	 envy.	 Be	 very	 hard	 with
yourself.	Only	then	will	your	diagnosis	be	helpful,	and	right	questions	will	arise.
If	you	ask	a	wrong	question,	you	waste	time.
The	last	question:
Question	7
WHO	IS	A	BAUL?	PLEASE	TELL	US	THE	DEFINITION.
IT	should	have	been	asked	in	the	beginning;	now	this	is	going	to	be	last.	But	in	a
way,	it	is	good.	If	in	the	beginning	you	had	asked	about	the	definition	of	a	Baul,
it	would	have	been	almost	impossible	to	say	anything.	Not	that	now	I	can	define,
but	at	least	now	I	can	say	it	is	indefinable.
The	 Baul	 is	 not	 a	 metaphysics,	 the	 Baul	 is	 a	 mystique.	 I	 can	 invite	 you	 to
participate	 in	 that	mystery,	but	definition	 is	not	possible.	So	 I	am	not	going	 to
define.	Instead,	I	will	tell	you	a	story.	Maybe	that	will	give	you	a	definition;	but
you	will	have	to	find	it	yourself.
I	have	heard....
Once	upon	a	time,	an	angel	came	to	earth	to	see	man	and	his	world,	because	he
had	heard	so	many	stories	of	man's	splendor	that	he	could	not	resist	his	curiosity.
The	beauty	of	the	world	overwhelmed	him:	the	sunlit	mountain	peaks	and	dark
forests,	the	whining	winds	and	tossing,	rainbow-colored	valleys,	the	dew-kissed
soil,	the	soil's	lusty	smell,	the	animals,	fierce	and	gentle.	Everywhere	there	was
such	beauty.	But	when	the	angel	saw	man	he	was	awed,	for	he	heard	the	music
of	 the	human	heart	 and	 the	 song	of	 the	human	soul.	He	 fell	 in	deep	 love	with
human	mystery.	 Dusk	 came,	 but	 he	 lingered	 on.	Man	 and	man's	 earth	 had	 so
moved	the	angel	that	he	hesitated	to	leave.	But	finally,	his	time	finished,	he	had
to	 go	 with	 tears	 in	 his	 eyes.	 And	 tremendously	 encircled,	 enriched	 by	 this
adventure	on	the	earth,	by	this	experience,	before	going	out,	before	going	back
to	his	own	world,	just	out	of	sheer	joy	he	wanted	to	help	some	of	us	on	our	way.
He	 looked	about,	 saw	four	persons	walking	 together.	He	approached	 them	and
said,	"I	have	come	to	grant	you	each	one	wish."	As	luck	would	have	it,	they	all
were	spiritual	aspirants.
The	 first	 one	 spoke	 up,	 "I	 have	 striven	 incessantly	 after	 distant	 divine	 truth	 --
nothing	but	struggle,	struggle,	struggle.	Give	me	spiritual	peace!"
"But	struggling	is	one	of	the	joys	of	life,"	said	the	angel,	not	understanding	the
first	seeker's	wish.
"I	would	like	peace!"	insisted	the	man.
This	 being	 his	wish,	 the	 angel	 changed	 the	 youth	 into	 a	 cow	 that	 chewed	 the
grass	of	a	distant	pasture	quite	contentedly.
A	bit	disturbed,	the	angel	turned	to	the	other	aspirant.
"God	 is	pure	but	 I	 am	not,"	 said	 the	other.	 "Please	 rid	me	of	all	 impurities,	of
passions,	emotions,	desires."
"Are	not	they	the	very	fount	of	life?"	asked	the	angel.
"But	I	don't	want	life,	I	want	purity!"	insisted	the	second	man.	He	then	closed	his
eyes	and	waited	for	his	transformation.	In	a	split	second	he	disappeared,	and	in	a
faraway	temple,	a	marble	statue	appeared	in	his	likeness.
Then	the	third	one	said,	"Make	me	perfect;	anything	less	will	simply	not	do."	He
vanished	but	did	not	reappear	anywhere,	for	nothing	on	earth	is	perfect	or	can	be
perfect.
The	angel	turned	to	the	fourth,	"And	what	is	your	wish?"
"I	have	no	wish,"	replied	this	happy	man.
"No	wish	at	all?"
"None	--	except	to	be	human,	fully	human	and	alive."
A	near-smothered	joy	began	again	to	stir	within	the	angel.	He	looked	longingly
upon	this	blessed	man,	and	then	leaned	over	and	embraced	him	with	a	deep	love.
The	fourth	man	continued	on	his	way	singing	the	glory	of	life,	dancing	the	joy	of
life.
This	fourth	man	is	the	Baul.
There	 is	 no	other	way	 to	 define	 a	Baul.	The	Baul	 is	 tremendous	 love	 for	 life,
tremendous	love	for	this	earth,	tremendous	love	for	all	that	is.	The	Baul	is	not	an
idealist,	he	is	a	realist	--	down	to	earth.	The	Baul	does	not	ask	for	any	paradise
somewhere	else,	he	is	already	in	paradise,	herenow.	The	Baul	is	not	a	seeker,	the
Baul	is	one	who	has	found.	the	Baul	is	a	SIDDHA:	one	who	has	looked	into	life
and	 realized	 that	 all	 is	 available	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 seek.	One	 has	 just	 to
participate	 in	 this	 mystery	 called	 life.	 He	 dances,	 he	 sings,	 he	 enjoys,	 he	 is
blissful	for	no	reason	at	all.	This	is	half	the	story;	the	other	half	is	still	there.
The	 angel	 reached	 heaven.	 God	 called	 him	 and	 asked	 him,	 "What	 were	 you
doing	on	the	earth?	Tinkering	with	my	creation?"
The	angel	said,	"I	am	sorry,	but	those	people	desired;	those	were	their	wishes.	I
simply	helped	them	to	fulfill."
God	said,	"That's	right.	I	am	not	angry,	I	was	just	enquiring.	Have	you	any	wish
to	be	fulfilled?"
The	angel	said,	"Make	me	the	fourth	man	back	on	the	earth.	Send	me	back	and
make	me	the	fourth	man."
Let	that	be	your	wish	also.	And	there	is	no	need	to	ask?	because	that	is	already
fulfilled.
You	are	 a	man	on	 the	 earth,	 a	woman	on	 the	 earth;	 enjoy	 this	 gift	 of	God!	 In
deep	gratefulness,	sing	the	song,	dance	the	dance	that	is	waiting	deep	inside	your
being	to	be	expressed.	Be	creative.	Flower.
A	Baul	is	a	flowering.	A	Baul	is	a	flowing	energy.	A	Baul	is	not	the	ordinarily
so-called	 religious,	 a	 Baul	 is	 really	 religious.	 He	 is	 not	 against	 the	 world,
because	 he	 is	 not	 against	 God.	 It	 is	 His	 creation;	 he	 is	 not	 against	 anything
because	all	is	God's.	He	finds	the	temple	of	God	everywhere.	Every	presence	is
full	of	His	presence.	A	Baul	is	a	madman;	that	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	'baul'.
It	comes	from	a	Sanskrit	word,	vatul,	which	means	mad.
Become	mad	in	the	name	of	God!	Become	mad	in	sheer	joy!	and	then	you	will
know	what	a	Baul	is.	There	is	no	way	to	define;	I	can	only	indicate.	There	is	no
way	to	even	describe,	but	I	am	here,	present	--	I	am	a	Baul.	You	look	into	me,
taste	me	a	little,	eat	me,	drink	me;	that	may	give	you	some	definition.	And	if	you
really	want,	if	you	really	desire	the	definition,	then	become	a	Baul.	There	is	no
other	way	 to	know	 it.	To	know	God	one	has	become	a	God,	 because	you	 can
know	only	that	which	you	have	become.	Only	existence,	and	the	experience	of
existence,	can	enlighten	you,	nothing	else.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Die	Living
Chapter	title:	Love	Is	Death
