
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Talks	given	from	06/09/87	am	to	03/10/87	pm
English	Discourse	series
28	Chapters
Year	published:	1988
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	The	great	pilgrimage:	from	here	to	here
6	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709060
ShortTitle:
PILGR01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
134
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO
WHY	 AM	 I	 SUCH	 A	 BEGGAR	 FOR	 ATTENTION?	 WHAT	 CAN	 I	 DO
ABOUT	IT?
Prem	Kabir,	it	is	one	of	the	human	weaknesses,	one	of	the	deep-rooted	frailties,
to	seek	attention.
The	reason	one	seeks	attention	is	because	one	does	not	know	oneself.	It	is	only
in	 other	 people's	 eyes	 one	 can	 see	 his	 face,	 in	 their	 opinions	 he	 can	 find	 his
personality.	What	they	say	matters	immensely.	If	 they	neglect	him,	ignore	him,
he	feels	lost.	If	you	pass	by	and	nobody	takes	any	attention,	you	will	start	losing
what	you	have	put	together	--	your	personality.	It	is	something	that	you	have	put
together.	You	have	not	discovered	it,	it	is	not	natural.	It	is	very	artificial	and	very
arbitrary.
It	 is	not	only	you	who	 is	a	beggar	 for	attention;	almost	everybody	 is.	And	 the
situation	cannot	change	until	you	discover	your	authentic	self	--	which	does	not
depend	on	anybody's	opinion,	attention,	criticism,	 indifference,	which	does	not
have	anything	to	do	with	anybody	else.	Because	very	few	people	have	been	able
to	discover	their	reality,	the	whole	world	is	full	of	beggars.
Deep	 down	 you	 are	 all	 trying	 to	 find	 attention;	 it	 is	 nourishment	 for	 your
personality.
Even	if	people	condemn	you,	criticize	you,	are	against	you,	that	is	acceptable,	at
least	 they	are	paying	attention	to	you;	if	 they	are	friendly,	respectful,	of	course
that	 is	 far	better,	but	you	cannot	survive	as	a	personality	without	some	kind	of
attention.	It	can	be	negative,	it	can	be	positive,	it	doesn't	matter.	People	must	say
something	about	you;	respectful	or	disrespectful,	both	fulfill	the	same	purpose.
I	would	like	you	to	think	about	the	word	`respect'.	It	does	not	mean	honor,	as	it	is
said	 in	 all	 the	 dictionaries	 without	 exception.	 Respect	 simply	 means	 looking
again,	re-spect.
When	 you	 are	 passing	 by	 on	 the	 road,	 somebody	 looks	 back	 again,	 you	 have
caught	his	eye	--	you	are	somebody.	Because	respect	gives	you	the	idea	of	being
somebody	special,	you	can	do	anything	stupid	just	to	get	attention.
In	 all	 the	 ages	 people	 have	 tried	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	ways	 to	 get	 attention.
Those	ways	are	not	necessarily	 rational	 --	 for	example,	 the	punks	 in	 the	West.
What	are	they	really	wanting	by	cutting	their	hair	in	strange	and	weird	ways,	and
then	painting	it	with	different	psychedelic	colors?	What	are	they	wanting?	They
are	beggars.	You	should	not	be	angry	with	them	because	that	is	what	they	want.
You	 should	 not	 condemn	 them	 because	 that	 is	 what	 they	 want.	 Their	 parents
should	not	 criticize	 them	because	 that	 is	what	 they	want.	They	cannot	 survive
without	people	paying	attention	to	them.
People	 have	 done	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 you	may	 not	 believe	 in	 the	 past.	 People
have	 remained	 naked....	 What	 was	 the	 need	 for	 Mahavira	 or	 Diogenes	 to	 be
naked?	It	is	no	longer	natural	for	man	to	be	naked	in	all	the	seasons;	he	lost	that
capacity	 long	 ago.	 All	 animals	 are	 naked,	 but	 they	 have	 a	 natural	 immunity.
When	it	is	winter	their	hair	grows,	when	it	is	hot	summer	their	hair	falls.	Nature
has	given	them	a	protection.
The	 same	 protection	was	 available	 to	man	 too,	 but	man	 is	 intelligent	 and	 can
improve	on	nature.	He	found	ways	to	cover	his	body	according	to	 the	seasons.
Naturally	his	body	lost	the	natural	growth	of	hairs.	Now,	to	be	naked...	suddenly
your	body	cannot	create	the	mechanism	to	protect	you.
I	 know	Mahavira	 or	Diogenes	 are	 unique	 individuals,	 but	 I	 think	 they	were	 a
little	 uncertain	 of	 their	 uniqueness.	 They	 fulfilled	 that	 suspicion,	 that	 missing
gap,	 by	 being	 naked,	 because	 you	 cannot	 avoid	 giving	 attention	 to	 a	 naked
person	in	a	world	where	everybody	is	wearing	clothes.	The	naked	person	stands
aloof.	You	cannot	avoid...	it	is	almost	irresistible	to	look	at	him,	to	ask,	"What	is
the	matter?"
But	their	nakedness	became	something	spiritual;	people	started	being	respectful
just	 because	 they	 were	 naked.	 Now,	 nakedness	 is	 not	 a	 quality	 or	 any
qualification	 or	 any	 creativity;	 all	 the	 animals,	 all	 the	 birds,	 all	 the	 trees	 are
naked.
There	are	still	 Jaina	monks	 in	 India,	not	more	 than	 twenty.	They	used	 to	be	 in
thousands,	but	now	to	find	that	many	stupid	people	is	a	little	difficult.	One	Jaina
monk	 dies	 and	 is	 not	 replaced,	 so	 their	 number	 goes	 on	 falling.	 Only	 twenty
people	all	over	India	are	still	naked	--	and	I	have	seen	many	of	them;	they	don't
show	any	sign	of	intelligence,	they	don't	show	any	quality	of	silence,	they	don't
show	 any	 joy.	 Their	 faces	 are	 sad,	 dull,	 sleepy.	 They	 are	 suffering,	 they	 are
torturing	themselves,	just	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	brings	the	attention	of	the
people.
Anything,	howsoever	stupid,	is	possible	for	man	if	it	can	bring	attention	to	him.
In	Russia	before	the	revolution	there	was	a	Christian	sect	which	used	to	cut	their
genitals	 publicly	 on	 a	 particular	 day	 each	 year	 --	 and	 they	 had	 thousands	 of
followers.	Their	only	qualification	for	being	spiritual	was	that	they	had	cut	their
genitals.	When	the	day	arrived,	they	would	gather	in	a	church	courtyard	and	they
would	cut	their	genitals	and	pile	them	up.	And	thousands	of	people	would	come
to	see	this	stupidity.
The	women	were	not	 left	behind...	 of	 course	 they	were	 in	a	difficulty	because
they	don't	have	hanging	genitals	to	cut;	their	genitals	are	inwards.	They	started
cutting	their	breasts
--	they	were	not	ready	to	be	left	behind.	It	was	such	a	messy	and	bloody	affair,
but	people	were	touching	their	feet,	worshiping	them,	and	all	that	they	have	done
is	just	an	ugly	act	against	nature	and	against	themselves.
What	is	significant	if	a	man	goes	on	a	fast?	Mahatma	Gandhi	used	the	strategy
his	whole	life:	It	was	nothing	but	catching	the	attention	of	the	whole	nation.	And
if	he	was	going	to	fast	unto	death,	the	whole	world's	attention	was	immediately
caught.	 Otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 spirituality	 in	 fasting:	 millions	 die	 starving.
Millions	 are	 going	 to	 die	 in	 the	 coming	 ten,	 twelve	 years	 from	 starvation.
Nobody	will	give	any	honor	or	respect	to	them.	Why?
Because	their	starvation	is	inevitable.	They	are	not	starving	wilfully	but	because
they	don't	have	food;	they	are	simply	poor	and	starving	people.
But	Mahatma	Gandhi	had	everything	available	to	him,	although	he	lived	like	a
poor	man.
One	of	his	intimate	followers,	a	very	intelligent	woman,	Sarojini	Naidu	--	has	a
statement	 on	 record	 that	 to	 keep	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 poor	 they	 had	 to	 spend
treasures	on	him.	It	was	not	a	simple	poverty,	it	was	a	managed	show.
He	would	not	drink	the	milk	from	a	buffalo	because	it	is	rich,	rich	with	vitamin
A	and	other	vitamins.	He	would	not	drink	the	milk	of	a	cow	because	that	too	is
rich,	and	poor	people	cannot	afford	it.	He	would	drink	only	the	milk	of	a	goat,
because	that	is	the	cheapest	animal	and	poor	people	can	afford	it.	But	you	will	be
surprised:	his	goat	was	being	washed	twice	a	day	with	Lux	toilet	soap!	His	goat's
food	consisted	of	the	richest	nourishment	that	any	rich	man	may	feel	jealous	of.
It	 is	 such	 an	 insane	 world!	 The	 goat	 was	 given	 the	 milk	 of	 a	 cow	 to	 drink.
Cashew	nuts,	apples	and	other	nourishing	fruits	were	her	only	food;	she	was	not
living	on	grass.	Her	daily	food	in	those	old	days	cost	ten	rupees	per	day;	that	ten
rupees	per	day	in	those	days	was	enough	for	a	man	to	live	for	a	whole	month.
And	Gandhi	was	traveling	third	class.	Naturally,	he	was	attracting	attention	--	a
great	 man	 is	 traveling	 third	 class!	 But	 nobody	 saw	 that	 the	 third	 class
compartment,	which	could	have	carried	sixty	people	at	least,	was	carrying	only	a
single	man;	 it	 is	 far	more	 costly	 than	 the	 air-conditioned	 compartment.	 But	 it
attracted	attention.
He	started	using	clothes	just	like	the	farmers	of	India	--	they	are	eighty	percent
of	the	people	in	the	country.	Because	he	was	using	farmer's	clothes	--	the	upper
body	is	naked,	only	the	lower	body	has	a	small	piece	of	cloth	to	wrap	around	--
the	poor	people	of	this	country	became	immensely	respectful	and	started	calling
him	Mahatma,	the	great	soul.
But	I	have	been	looking	into	his	life	as	deeply	as	possible.	I	don't	find	any	great
soul;	 I	 have	 not	 found	 even	 a	 little	 soul	 --	 just	 pure	 politics	 in	 the	 name	 of
religion.	Knowing	perfectly	well	that	India	can	be	impressed	only	by	religion,	he
was	doing	devotional	songs	every	day	in	the	morning	and	in	the	evening,	but	it
was	all	to	attract	attention.
Attention	 gives	 you	 tremendous	 nourishment	 for	 the	 ego.	 And	 there	 are
instances...	 his	 secretary	 --	 private	 secretary,	 Mahadeo	 Desai	 --	 has	 written	 a
whole	 diary	 of	 the	 many	 years	 that	 he	 spent	 with	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 as	 his
secretary.	 Many	 times	 there	 are	 mentions	 about	 J.	 Krishnamurti,	 with	 such
sarcastic	remarks	that	one	cannot	believe	that	Mahatma	Gandhi	had	any	insight
into	meditation	or	awareness:	otherwise	he	cannot	be	sarcastic.
You	can	criticize,	but	criticism	needs	understanding.	You	can	say	Krishnamurti
is	not	right,	but	then	you	have	to	give	evidence	--	on	what	grounds?	But	just	to
laugh	and	giggle	when	Krishnamurti's	name	was	mentioned...	Krishnamurti	was
saying,	"I	am	the	awakened	one;	you	also	have	the	capacity	to	be	an	awakened
one,"	and	that	was	making	Mahatma	Gandhi	laugh	sarcastically.
Meher	 Baba,	 another	 man	 of	 the	 same	 caliber	 as	 J.	 Krishnamurti,	 gave	 a
telegram	to	Mahatma	Gandhi	saying,	"You	have	been	in	search	of	God,	you	have
written	 your	 autobiography	 and	 titled	 it	 EXPERIMENTS	WITH	TRUTH,	 but
you	don't	know	anything	of	meditation,	of	silence.	If	you	are	really	interested	I
can	come	to	you	and	I	can	make	you	aware	of	the	dimension	of	meditation."	And
the	whole	gang	that	was	around	Mahatma	Gandhi	laughed	--	"This	fellow	thinks
that	 he	 is	 God	 himself."	 And	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 replied,	 "I	 will	 do	 my	 own
search;	you	need	not	trouble	to	come	here."
A	 third	 time	 it	 happened.	 One	 man	 of	 the	 name	 Kedarnath	 was	 of	 the	 same
caliber	as	J.
Krishnamurti,	but	was	not	world	known.	He	was	not	a	man	of	words	but	a	man
of	 silence,	 peace.	 He	 stayed	 in	 Mahatma	 Gandhi's	 ashram,	 and	 soon	 the
pendulum	started	moving	towards	him.	The	disciples	of	Mahatma	Gandhi	by	and
by	started	deserting	him.	In	his	morning	devotional	songs,	the	number	of	people
was	declining:	they	were	going	to	sit	in	silence	with	Kedernath.
Finally	 it	 became	 such	 a	 situation:	 the	 ashram	 was	 Mahatma	 Gandhi's,
Kedarnath	was	just	a	guest,	but	he	captured	almost	all	Gandhi's	disciples.	Gandhi
was	 left	 alone,	 but	 his	 ego	 would	 not	 allow	 him	 to	 go	 and	 sit	 where	 all	 his
disciples	were	 sitting	 --	 in	 silence	with	Kedarnath.	 It	was	with	great	humanity
and	compassion	that	Kedarnath	left	the	ashram	in	the	middle	of	the	night	just	to
avoid	a	clash,	because	now	it	was	becoming	clear	that	Mahatma	Gandhi	had	lost
control	of	his	own	disciples.	Kedarnath	did	not	want	to	create	any	conflict.
Sri	 Aurobindo	 had	 a	 certain	 clarity.	 He	 was	 not	 an	 enlightened	 man	 of	 the
category	of	J.
Krishnamurti	or	Meher	Baba,	but	he	was	very	close.	Perhaps	one	life	more	and
he	will	be	enlightened;	he	was	just	on	the	border	line.	He	declared,	"India	will
become	 free,	will	 attain	 freedom	on	my	birthday"	 --	 and	 it	 actually	 happened.
The	fifteenth	of	August	is	Sri	Aurobindo's	birthday,	and	he	had	declared	it	thirty
years	 before.	 People	 had	 completely	 forgotten	 about	 his	 declaration,	 but	 India
became	free	on	the	fifteenth	of	August.
Sri	 Aurobindo	 sent	 a	 message	 to	Mahatma	 Gandhi,	 "Now	 that	 the	 country	 is
free,	 you	 need	 a	 complete	 program	 for	 its	 progress,	 because	 it	 is	 one	 thing	 to
fight	 for	 freedom	and	 it	 is	another	 thing	after	attaining	 the	freedom	to	create	a
nation;	tremendous	responsibility	falls	on	your	shoulders."
And	the	reply	that	Mahatma	Gandhi	gave	was	again	simply	sarcastic:	"You	have
left	 the	 world;	 you	 live	 in	 your	 ashram.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 worry	 about	 what
happens	to	freedom	and	what	we	are	going	to	do;	that	is	our	business.	You	have
left	it,	you	don't	have	to	interfere."
Now	a	man	like	Sri	Aurobindo	could	have	given	insight,	but	that	insight	was	not
accepted
--	and	 it	 shows.	 In	 those	 forty	years	 that	have	passed	since	 freedom,	 India	has
become	worse	 every	day.	 It	 has	no	program;	 its	 population	has	doubled,	more
than	 doubled.	 Its	 poverty	 has	 doubled	 --	 the	 poverty	 grows	 according	 to	 the
population.	 By	 the	 end	 of	 this	 century,	 India	 will	 be	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the
whole	 history	 of	 mankind,	 of	 millions	 of	 years,	 the	 most	 densely	 populated
country.	Up	to	now,	China	has	been	the	first.	So	only	one	achievement	seems	to
have	come	out	of	forty	years	of	freedom:	people	have	produced	more	and	more
children.
By	the	end	of	 this	century,	 just	 thirteen	years	away,	India	will	have	one	billion
people	 in	 the	 country.	When	 it	 became	 free	 it	 had	 only	 four	 hundred	million
people.	It	seems	that	each	year	there	is	an	increase	of	one	million	people	--	but
no	 technology	 is	 growing,	 no	 science	 is	 growing,	 no	 new	methods	 are	 being
used.	And	this	population	growth	goes	on	making	the	country	poorer	and	poorer.
India	is	living	on	loans	from	the	rich	countries	like	America,	and	that	is	a	new
kind	of	slavery,	economic	slavery.
The	 days	 of	 political	 slavery	 are	 past,	 because	 it	 was	 unnecessary....	 It	 is	 a
similar	case:	the	days	of	slaves	are	past,	and	the	days	of	servants	have	come	in
because	 the	 slave	was	 a	great	 responsibility	 to	 the	 slaveowner.	He	had	 to	 take
care	 of	 the	 slave's	 health,	 he	 had	 to	 take	 care	 of	 his	 body,	 food,	 clothes,	 his
medicine,	because	he	was	an	 investment.	He	has	purchased	 the	man,	and	 if	he
dies	his	whole	investment	is	gone.
Slavery	disappeared	not	because	slaves	revolted	against	it;	there	is	no	instance	of
slaves	 revolting.	 Slavery	 died	 because	 the	 people	 who	 were	 enslaving	 other
people	found	better	ways	--	servants.	You	are	not	purchased;	hence	it	 is	not	an
investment.	If	you	die,	you	die;	it	is	not	a	loss	to	the	owner.	He	pays	you,	but	he
has	 no	 concern	 for	 your	 body,	 for	 your	 health,	 for	 your	 family.	 This	 was	 far
better.
The	 same	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 world	 of	 freedom.	 The	 British	 Empire
disappeared,	 all	 other	 empires	 have	 disappeared,	 because	 political	 slavery
became	costly,	very	costly.	It	was	the	responsibility	of	the	rulers	to	feed	people,
at	least.
The	moment	Britain	saw	that	India	is	growing	so	fast	in	population	that	it	will	be
impossible	to	feed	the	people,	and	the	whole	responsibility	will	be	on	the	head	of
Britain,	 Atlee	 sent	 to	Mountbatten	 an	 urgent	 message:	 "You	 finish	 the	 whole
thing	before	1948,	and	if	you	can	do	it	earlier	I	will	praise	you.	Whatever	way
has	 to	 be	 found,	 be	 quick,	 and	 let	 them	 be	 free.	 Because	 then	 the	 whole
responsibility	 will	 be	 on	 their	 own	 heads.	 They	 cannot	 complain,	 `Britain	 is
exploiting	us;	that's	why	we	are	poor.'"
Now	nobody	is	exploiting	you,	and	your	poverty	has	grown	much	greater	than	it
has	ever	been	under	slavery.
Politicians	can	pretend	to	be	religious	if	religion	is	attractive.	Because	they	need
attention	 their	whole	 personality	 is	 false.	 It	 depends	 on	 how	many	 people	 are
following	them;	it	depends	on	the	number	of	people	who	are	attentive	to	them.	It
is	a	politics	of	numbers.
The	Catholic	 pope	 is	 against	 birth	 control,	 against	 abortion,	 not	 because	 he	 is
compassionate,	saying,	"This	is	absolute	cruelty	and	violence,"	not	because	he	is
life-affirmative	 --	 the	whole	Catholic	 attitude	 is	 life-negative,	 it	 is	 against	 life.
Then	why	this	insistence	that	there	should	be	no	birth	control	and	no	abortion?
Because	this	is	the	only	way	to	increase	the	number	of	Catholics,	and	this	is	the
only	way	to	make	other	people	so	poor	that	they	have	to	come	under	the	fold	of
the	Catholic	empire.
Now	that	there	are	so	many	orphans	in	India,	Catholics	have	a	good	opportunity.
And	one	wonders...	 a	woman	 like	Mother	Teresa	 is	 awarded	 a	Nobel	 prize,	 is
awarded	many	doctorates	 in	 India	by	 Indian	universities,	 is	 awarded	prizes	by
the	 Indian	 government,	 all	 because	 she	 is	 taking	 care	 of	 orphans.	But	 nobody
thinks	 that	 that	 care	 simply	 means	 converting	 those	 orphans	 into	 Catholics.
Naturally	Mother	Teresa	cannot	be	 in	favor	of	birth	control	 --	 from	where	will
she	get	the	orphans?
Christianity	 cannot	 be	 in	 favor	 of	 a	 world	 which	 is	 rich.	 The	 scientists	 are
declaring	 continually	 that	 we	 have	 come	 to	 such	 a	 point	 of	 technological
progress	 that	now	there	 is	no	need	for	anybody	to	be	hungry,	 to	be	starving	or
dying	because	of	 shortage	of	 food.	 It	has	never	before	been	possible,	but	now
scientists	are	saying	that	we	can	feed	five	billion	people	very	easily,	we	can	feed
even	 more	 --	 but	 those	 voices	 are	 silenced.	 No	 politician	 pays	 any	 attention,
because	politicians	are	also	interested	in	having	a	big	following.
In	 India	Mohammedans	will	not	be	 ready	 to	accept	 that	you	 should	not	marry
four	women...	which	 is	 simply	a	human	matter.	But	 they	have	made	 it	 a	point
that	it	is	a	religious	matter.	I	cannot	understand	how	it	is	religious	to	marry	four
women.	And	 if	 it	 is	 religious	 to	marry	 four,	 then	 it	will	be	doubly	 religious	 to
marry	eight.	Perhaps	 that's	why	Mohammed	himself	married	nine	women.	The
reality	is	that	four	women	can	produce	four	children	in	the	year;	vice-versa	will
not	help.	One	woman	marrying	 four	men	will	 still	produce	one	child,	not	 four
children.	But	one	man	marrying	a	number	of	women	can	produce	more	children.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	India	has	already	been	divided	in	the	name	of
religion,	 and	Mohammedans	have	 taken	Pakistan	on	one	 side,	 and	Bangladesh
on	 another	 side;	 the	 country	 has	 been	 cut	 into	 three	 parts.	 Now	 again
Mohammedans	 are	 growing	 so	 much	 that	 India	 is	 the	 greatest	 Mohammedan
country	in	the	world.	No	Mohammedan	country	has	so	many	Mohammedans	as
India	has.	Any	day	they	can	start	demanding	a	separate	country,	because	they	are
second	 in	 number	 to	 Hindus,	 and	 Hindus	 are	 not	 a	 converting	 religion.
Mohammedans	are	a	converting	religion,	 forcibly	 too.	There	 is	no	need	of	any
argument;	the	sword	is	the	argument!
Your	 so-called	 religious	 leaders,	 your	 so-called	 political	 leaders,	 all	 need
attention,	 all	 need	 their	 names	 and	 their	 photos	 continually	 in	 the	newspapers,
because	 if	 newspapers	 forget	 anybody's	 name	 for	 a	 few	months,	 people	 forget
that	man	also.	Now	what	do	you	know	about	Richard	Nixon?	Where	is	that	poor
fellow?	One	day	he	was	the	greatest,	most	powerful	man	on	the	earth,	and	now
you	will	only	hear	about	him	the	day	he	dies,	and	that	too	will	be	on	the	third,
fourth	 page	 of	 the	 newspapers	 in	 a	 small	 column.	 What	 happens	 to	 these
powerful	 people?	 When	 they	 lose	 people's	 attention,	 their	 personality	 starts
disappearing.
I	 have	 known	many	 political	 leaders	 in	 this	 country.	 Perhaps	 this	 country	 has
more	ex-ministers,	chief	ministers,	governors	than	any	other	country.	Once	they
become	"ex"	they	are	finished.	Then	nobody	pays	any	attention	to	them,	nobody
asks	them	to	inaugurate	bridges,	railway	lines,	hospitals,	schools.	No	paper	even
bothers	where	 they	 are,	whether	 they	 are	 alive	 or	 dead.	And	 there	was	 a	 time
when	they	were	in	the	newspapers	every	day,	on	the	radios,	on	television.
One	 of	 my	 sannyasins	 works	 in	 the	 Indian	 television.	 She	 wanted	 to	 bring	 a
small	piece	from	my	talks	every	day	to	the	television.	The	director	said,	"We	can
accept	the	material,	but	we	cannot	mention	Osho's	name."
She	said,	"But	this	is	absolutely	illegal,	and	it	is	stealing."
But	the	director	said,	"You	should	not	mention	his	name	at	all	"	--	because	that's
what	 the	 Indian	 politicians	 want,	 and	 that's	 what	 the	 politicians	 of	 the	 whole
world	want.
The	 Attorney	 General	 of	 America	 has	 emphatically	 declared	 in	 a	 press
conference,	"Our	whole	effort	will	be	to	silence	Osho's	voice	completely."
One	reporter	asked,	"What	does	it	mean?	Do	you	want	to	assassinate	him?"
And	the	Attorney	General	laughed.	He	said,	"No,	we	will	find	some	roundabout
ways	so	he	is	not	heard	any	more."
The	 American	 government	 is	 pressurizing	 the	 Indian	 government	 so	 that	 no
foreign	news	media	will	be	allowed	to	reach	me.	And	I	am	receiving	letters	from
Germany,	from	America,	from	Greece,	from	England,	from	Australia,	"What	is
the	matter?	Why	 is	 the	 Indian	 government	 absolutely	 stubborn	 that	 they	 don't
want	 any	 news	 media,	 newspapers,	 radio,	 or	 television	 people	 to	 come	 to
Poona?"
This	 is	 the	way,	 in	 their	 eyes,	 to	 silence	me.	They	 are	wrong.	 I	 have	my	own
ways:	I	have	my	own	people	who	are	enough...	 just	person	to	person.	If	a	man
like	Gautam	Buddha,	without	 any	 television,	without	 any	newspapers,	without
any	 radio,	 could	 convert	 the	 whole	 of	 Asia,	 what	 is	 the	 problem?	 I	 am	 not
dependent	on	their	news	media.
But	the	fear	of	the	politicians	is...	 the	whole	media	attention	should	be	focused
on	them	--
and	why	are	people	asking	to	go	to	Poona?	Why	don't	they	ask	to	come	to	Delhi?
That	hurts	them	very	badly.
It	 is	 not	 only	your	 problem,	 that	 you	 are	 a	 beggar	 for	 attention;	 it	 is	 a	 human
reality.	And	the	reason	is	that	you	depend	on	your	personality	--	which	is	false,
which	has	been	created	by	the	society,	and	which	can	be	taken	away	by	society.
Don't	depend	on	it.	It	is	not	in	your	power.
That	 which	 is	 in	 your	 power	 is	 your	 own	 individuality.	 Discover	 it!	 And	 the
name	of	the	science	to	discover	it	is	meditation.
Once	you	know	yourself,	you	don't	care	about	others.	Even	if	 the	whole	world
forgets	you	it	does	not	matter,	 it	does	not	even	make	the	slightest	difference	to
you;	or	 the	whole	world	can	know	--	 that	 too	does	not	give	you	any	ego.	You
know	 ego	 is	 false,	 and	 to	 depend	 on	 the	 false	 is	 to	make	 houses	 on	 the	 sand,
without	foundation.	Your	personalities	are	almost	signatures	on	water.	You	have
not	even	signed,	and	they	disappear.
A	group	 of	 Jewish	mothers	were	 drinking	 coffee	 together,	 and	 bragging	 about
their	children.	One	had	a	 four-year-old	who	could	 read	already.	Another	had	a
five-year-old	 who	 had	 already	 appeared	 on	 television.	 Then	 Becky	 Goldberg
spoke	up	and	said,	"That's	nothing.	You	should	see	my	little	Hymie.	He	is	only
five	years	old,	but	the	other	day	he	went	to	the	psychiatrist	all	by	himself!"
A	middle-aged	woman	confessed	to	her	priest	that	she	was	becoming	vain.
"Why	do	you	think	so?"	asked	the	priest.
"Because,"	replied	the	woman,	"every	time	I	look	in	the	mirror	I	am	inspired	by
my	beauty."
"Don't	worry,"	said	the	priest,	"that's	not	a	sin,	that's	only	a	mistake!"
It	was	a	big	meeting	of	the	medical	society	in	honor	of	an	ear	specialist	who	was
retiring	after	more	than	fifty	years	of	service.	As	a	gift,	they	presented	him	with
a	 golden	 ear.	 He	 stood	 up	 to	make	 a	 speech,	 and	 after	 the	 applause	 had	 died
down,	he	looked	at	his	gift	and	said,	"Thank	god	I	was	not	a	gynecologist!"
Don't	depend	on	others!
Be	independent	in	your	being.
Just	listen	to	your	inner	voice.
You	can	listen	the	moment	you	start	stilling	and	silencing	your	mind	--	and	it	is
not	difficult.	And	when	I	say	it	is	not	difficult,	I	say	it	with	absolute	authority:	It
is	 not	 difficult!	 If	 it	 has	 happened	 to	me,	 it	 can	 happen	 to	 you	 --	 there	 is	 no
difference.	All	human	beings	are	potentially	capable	 to	know	 themselves.	And
the	moment	you	know	yourself,	 then	nobody	can	take	away	your	individuality.
Even	if	they	kill	you,	they	can	only	kill	your	body,	not	you.
When	Socrates	was	poisoned,	the	chief	judge	said	to	him,	"I	feel	sorry	that	I	had
to	 agree	 with	 the	 majority.	 They	 all	 wanted	 to	 kill	 you.	 And	 you	 are	 such	 a
strange	fellow...	I	gave	you	three	alternatives,	but	you	did	not	accept."
The	 chief	 judge	 had	 tremendous	 respect,	 but	 what	 to	 do?	 The	 majority	 was
shouting,	"He	should	be	killed	because	he	is	corrupting	our	youth.	He	is	giving
them	 ideas	which	 are	 against	 our	 tradition,	 against	 our	 religion.	He	 is	making
them	skeptical	of	the	old	and	the	ancient.	He	is	making	them	explore	the	reality
on	 their	 own,	 and	 not	 just	 believe	 in	 knowledge	 and	 ancient	 scriptures.	He	 is
destroying	our	tradition.	We	don't	want	this	man;	this	man	should	be	destroyed."
But	 the	 chief	 judge	 understood	 the	 whole	 situation.	 He	 said	 to	 Socrates...
because	 in	 those	days	 in	Greece	 there	were	city	states;	Athens	was	a	city	state
and	the	Athenian	law	was	not	applicable	outside	Athens.	So	he	said,	"The	first
simple	 choice	 is,	 you	 just	move	out	 of	Athens,	 just	 outside	 the	boundary	 line,
and	 there	you	 can	make	your	 school,	 your	 academy.	Those	who	want	 to	 learn
will	come	there."
Socrates	said,	"That	will	show	my	fear	of	death...	and	some	day	I	am	going	to
die,	I	am	old	enough.	These	people	are	too	impatient;	I	will	die	by	myself.	So	to
escape	 from	Athens	 just	 for	 a	 few	years...	my	being	does	not	 support	 such	 an
idea.	I	cannot	act	out	of	fear.	I	would	rather	accept	death,	because	you	can	only
kill	my	body	but	not	my	spirit.
And	the	body	is	going	to	die	anyway,	any	moment!"
The	chief	judge	said,	"The	second	alternative	is	if	you	promise	not	to	talk	about
truth,	to	stop	teaching,	you	can	live	in	Athens."
He	said,	"Then	what	will	be	the	point	of	living?	To	me,	truth	is	higher	than	life.
Life	comes	and	goes;	truth	remains.	No,	I	cannot	accept	that."
The	chief	judge	said,	"Then	the	last	thing	is	that	you	can	say,	Ì	am	sorry	that	I
have	hurt	people's	 feelings.'	 Just	a	simple	apology	will	make	me	stand	 in	your
favor,	and	you	can	be	saved	from	this	ugly	act	of	poisoning	you	to	death."
Socrates	said,	"That	is	not	possible,	because	I	have	not	done	anything	wrong.	I
cannot	say	I	am	sorry.	I	can	only	say	I	am	immensely	happy,	and	the	question	of
an	apology	does	not	arise.	For	centuries	you	all	will	be	condemned	because	you
poisoned	me.	And	one	thing	I	would	like	you	to	know	is	that	your	name	will	be
remembered	 only	 because	 you	 gave	 the	 judgment	 for	 my	 death;	 otherwise,
nobody	will	remember	you."
This	is	the	man	of	individuality,	who	does	not	care	for	his	life,	for	his	body,	who
has	no	fear.	He	accepted	death	with	joy.
An	 individual	 is	 the	 only	 person	 who	 can	 get	 rid	 of	 this	 state	 of	 begging;
otherwise	you	are	going	to	remain	a	beggar	your	whole	life.	And	in	subtle	ways
you	are	continuously	begging.	Every	young	man	falling	 in	 love	with	a	woman
will	 ask	 the	woman,	 "Am	 I	 the	 first	man	 you	 have	 fallen	 in	 love	with?"	 It	 is
almost	inevitable.	And	every	woman	will	ask,	"Am	I	the	first	woman	you	have
fallen	in	love	with?"	Why	such	questions?	The	woman	wants	you	never	to	have
paid	 attention	 to	 anybody:	 "I	 am	 the	 first,	 the	 most	 beautiful	 woman	 in	 your
eyes."
Man	all	through	history	has	insisted	that	he	will	marry	only	a	virgin	--	for	what?
It	is	such	a	stupid	idea,	because	a	virgin	is	absolutely	inexperienced.	You	should
insist,	 "I	 should	 marry	 someone	 who	 has	 some	 experience."	 This	 is	 simple,
logical,	rational	and	scientific.
But	all	the	societies	have	insisted	that	they	will	accept	in	marriage	only	a	virgin
girl.
In	the	middle	ages	there	were	doctors	in	Europe...	because	the	woman's	virginity
can	be	judged,	checked.	There	is	a	very	thin	layer	of	skin	--	if	she	has	not	been	in
a	 sexual	 relationship,	 that	 skin	 remains	 intact;	 if	 she	 has	 been	 in	 a	 sexual
relationship,	that	skin	is	broken.	That	broken	skin	proves	that	she	is	not	a	virgin.
Now	sometimes	it	can	be	broken	just	by	riding	on	a	bicycle,	it	can	be	broken	by
riding	on	a	horse,	it	can	be	broken	by	any	accident	--	falling	from	the	staircase.	It
is	not	something	that	can	be	broken	only	by	making	love.	But	every	young	man
was	alert	on	his	first	night	as	to	whether	the	woman	was	virgin	or	not,	so	there
were	 doctors	 in	Europe	who	 used	 to	 fix	 a	 false	 skin	 to	make	 anybody	 virgin!
Their	profession	was	flourishing	greatly.
I	 was	 in	 Greece,	 and	 I	 asked	 one	 of	 my	 sannyasins,	 "In	 Greece	 is	 virginity
immensely	valued	by	the	orthodox	church	of	Greece?"	And	the	sannyasin	I	was
asking	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 women,	 one	 time	 chosen	 as	Miss
Greece.
She	 laughed.	 She	 said,	 "The	 church	 goes	 on	 saying	 that	 virginity	 is	 our
fundamental	 principle,	 but	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 a	 virgin	 in	Greece!"	 But
before	 getting	married,	 they	 become	 virgin.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 very	 small	 thing	 for	 a
gynecologist	to	fix	a	thin	layer	of	skin.
I	have	heard	one	priest	was	asking	and	thundering	and	threatening	the	people	of
his	congregation,	 "If	you	are	not	virgin,	you	will	 suffer	hellfire.	So	all	women
who	 are	 virgin,	 or	 who	 have	 been	 virgin	 before	 their	 marriage,	 stand	 up!"
Nobody	stood	up.	He	said,	"I	say	again..."	One	woman	with	a	little	baby	stood
up.	He	said,	"I	am	happy	at	least	one	woman	has	followed	the	religious	principle
of	the	Greek	orthodox	church."
The	 woman	 said,	 "Forgive	 me	 Father,	 I	 am	 not	 standing	 for	 myself;	 I	 am
standing	 for	 the	 baby.	 You	 cannot	 expect	 a	 six-month-old	 baby	 to	 stand	 by
herself!	She	is	certainly	a	virgin,	I	can	guarantee	it!"
All	kinds	of	stupid	notions	have	prevailed	in	humanity.	And	you	have	to	follow
these	 notions	 if	 you	 want	 attention.	 In	 India,	 if	 you	 want	 to	 have	 attention...
There	was	a	man	in	Mahatma	Gandhi's	ashram,	and	he	was	an	intelligent	man.
He	had	been	a	professor,	a	 retired	professor,	Professor	Ranga.	He	 lived	for	six
months	only	on	cow	dung	and	cow	urine	--	just	these	two	things	for	six	months	-
-	and	he	became	more	of	an	attraction	than	Mahatma	Gandhi	himself.	Everybody
who	 was	 coming	 to	 the	 ashram	 was	 going	 to	 see	 Professor	 Ranga.	 Even
Mahatma	Gandhi	called	him	a	great	man,	a	great	spiritual	man!	I	don't	see	how
cow	dung	can	make	a	man	spiritual.	It	simply	can	prove	that	he	is	stupid.
But	in	Hindu	society	where	the	cow	is	accepted	as	the	mother,	the	holy	mother,
this	is	a	great	spiritual	attainment.
All	over	the	world	you	will	find	the	same	kind	of	superstitions	in	different	ways.
And	if	you	want	the	attention	of	people,	you	have	to	follow	their	ideas.	You	have
always	to	be	a	follower,	you	have	always	to	be	a	believer,	you	have	always	to	be
stupid	and	idiotic.
But	if	you	want	to	get	rid	of	this	begging,	you	will	have	to	get	rid	of	your	ego
and	your	personality.	You	will	have	to	learn	that	there	is	nothing	in	respect,	there
is	 nothing	 in	 reputation,	 there	 is	 nothing	 in	 respectability.	 They	 are	 all	 bogus
words,	 meaningless,	 contentless.	 The	 reality	 belongs	 to	 you,	 but	 unless	 you
discover	it,	you	will	have	to	depend	on	others.
You	are	emperors,	but	you	have	to	discover	yourself.
And	this	discovery	is	not	difficult:
Your	kingdom	is	within	you.
You	just	have	to	learn	to	close	your	eyes	and	look	inwards.	A	little	discipline,	a
little	 learning	 not	 to	 remain	 focused	 on	 the	 outside	 continuously,	 but	 to	 turn
inwards	 at	 least	 once	 or	 twice	 a	 day,	 whenever	 you	 can	 find	 time...	 slowly,
slowly	 you	 start	 becoming	 aware	 of	 your	 eternal	 being.	 Then	 the	 idea	 of
attention	simply	disappears.
And	 the	 miracle	 is:	 the	 day	 you	 don't	 need	 anybody's	 attention,	 people	 start
feeling	 your	 charisma,	 because	 charisma	 is	 the	 radiation	 of	 your	 individuality.
They	start	feeling	that	you	are	somebody	special,	unique	--	although	they	cannot
pinpoint	where	your	uniqueness	is,	what	it	is	that	attracts	like	a	magnet.
People	 who	 have	 discovered	 themselves	 have	 found	 thousands	 of	 people
attracted	towards	them,	but	they	are	not	asking	for	it.
Question	2
BELOVED	MASTER,
HOW	CAN	HYPNOSIS	AND	MEDITATION	COME	TOGETHER?
Amrit	 Nirjan,	 hypnosis	 has	 been	 condemned	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 ignorant	 people.
They	 don't	 understand	 anything	 about	 it,	 but	 you	will	 find	 people	 everywhere
condemning	 it.	 The	 word	 is	 used	 without	 knowing	 even	 the	 meaning	 of	 it.
People	will	 say	 to	you,	 "You	are	hypnotized,	 that's	why	you	go	 to	Osho!"	But
just	ask	them	what	hypnosis	is.	They	cannot	even	tell	you	the	literal	meaning	of
it,	nor	can	they	tell	you	what	is	the	technique	of	it.
Just	the	word	is	enough	to	condemn	anybody,	"You	are	hypnotized."
Hypnosis	 is	a	 tremendously	beautiful	art,	and	 there	 is	nothing	wrong	 in	 it.	But
everything	can	be	used	in	a	wrong	way	or	in	a	right	way.	You	can	have	a	sword
and	cut	somebody's	head.	That	is	not	the	fault	of	the	sword;	the	sword	is	neutral.
With	 your	 sword	 you	 can	 prevent	 somebody	 from	 raping	 a	 woman.	 But	 the
sword	is	absolutely	neutral,	neither	good	nor	bad;	every	energy	is	neutral.
Hypnosis	 is	 a	 tremendous	 source	 of	 energy.	 The	word	 itself	means	 deliberate
sleep.	 You	 know	 ordinary	 sleep,	 you	 sleep	 every	 day;	 because	 it	 is	 ordinary
sleep,	it	does	not	go	deep	enough.	Its	function	is	to	help	your	body	to	recover	its
energy	lost	in	the	day-to-day	work,	so	tomorrow	morning	you	can	get	up	fresh,
again	able	 to	work.	The	ordinary	sleep	only	goes	so	deep	 that	 it	can	help	your
body	to	recover,	rejuvenate.
Deliberate	sleep	is	 the	meaning	of	hypnosis.	It	 is	a	simple	thing,	but	 it	goes	as
deep	 as	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 go.	 It	 refreshes	 your	 body,	 it	 silences	 your	mind,	 it
cleanses	 your	 heart,	 it	 can	 reach	 to	 your	 very	 being.	 It	 all	 depends	 on	 your
willingness	--	nobody	can	hypnotize	you	against	your	will.	That	also	is	a	greatly
fallacious	idea	prevalent	in	the	world,	that	somebody	can	hypnotize	you	against
your	will.	That	is	impossible.	Nobody	can	hypnotize	you	against	your	will.
Simple	 methods	 are	 used	 by	 the	 hypnotist.	 He	 will	 tell	 you	 to	 relax	 and
concentrate	 on	 something	 shiny,	 without	 moving	 your	 eyelids;	 just	 keep	 your
eyes	 open	 as	 long	 as	 you	 can,	 and	only	when	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 for	 you,
when	the	eyelids	close	by	themselves
--	you	cannot	do	anything,	you	cannot	stop	--	only	then...	You	are	relaxed,	lying
down	in	a	silent	place,	looking	at	a	very	strong	light	which	tires	the	eyes,	staring
at	it.	The	hypnotist	is	repeating,	"Your	eyelids	are	becoming	very	heavy,	the	light
is	too	strong	and	you	are	going	to	fall	asleep	soon."	And	he	will	go	on	repeating
it.
It	 takes	 not	more	 than	 three	 to	 five	minutes	 before	 you	will	 start	 feeling	 your
eyelids	 have	 become	 heavier,	 and	 heavier,	 and	 heavier.	And	 a	moment	 comes
when	you	cannot	keep	 them	open,	 they	simply	close.	Then	 the	hypnotist	starts
telling	you,	"You	are	going	deeper,	deeper.	And	you	will	hear	only	my	voice	and
nothing	else."	Your	total	willingness	is	needed.	If	you	are	reluctant,	if	you	don't
want	 it,	 then	 the	 hypnotist	 is	 absolutely	 helpless.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 power	 of	 the
hypnotist	as	it	is	understood	in	the	world,	it	is	the	willingness	of	the	hypnotized
that	brings	that	deep	kind	of	deliberate	sleep.
If	 you	 follow,	 cooperate	 with	 the	 hypnotist,	 he	 can	 take	 you	 deeper,	 deeper,
deeper...	 the	 mind	 has	 become	 silent.	 And	 the	 moment	 he	 says	 anything,	 it
simply	sinks	into	your	being.	Your	heart	is	dancing	with	harmony	--	no	tension,
no	thought.	You	have	entered	into	the	innermost	shrine	of	your	being;	now	relax
there.
But	this	is	possible	only,	and	I	am	saying	categorically	only,	if	you	are	willing	to
go	 into	 it.	But	 it	 is	 tremendously	helpful,	because	you	 find	 it	very	difficult	on
your	own	to	go	into	that	deep	silence	where	the	world	is	left	far	behind.	And	if
the	 hypnosis	 is	 going	 to	 be	 used	 for	meditative	 purposes...	 It	 can	 be	 used	 for
many	kinds	of	purposes,	it	can	be	used	for	healing.
Seventy	percent	of	your	diseases	are	just	mind	diseases,	they	are	not	really	there.
You	simply	believe	they	are	there,	and	because	you	believe,	they	are	there.	It	is
because	of	this	there	are	so	many	`pathies':	allopathy,	homeopathy,	naturopathy,
ayurveda,	 unani.	 There	 are	 so	 many	 `pathies',	 Chinese,	 Japanese...	 and	 all
function	perfectly	well,	but	only	for	seventy	percent.
Only	allopathy	is	a	scientific	methodology;	it	functions	on	one	hundred	percent
of	your	diseases.	But	every	pathy...	homeopathy	is	nothing	but	sugar	pills,	but	it
works,	 and	 the	 work	 is	 not	 small	 --	 seventy	 percent.	 For	 seventy	 percent	 of
sicknesses	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good.	 Naturopathy	 works,	 and	 naturopathy	 is	 very
simple,	 for	 example,	 having	 a	 mud	 bath.	 Fill	 your	 bathtub	 with	 mud	 and	 lie
down	 in	 the	 mud,	 and	 it	 cures	 many	 things.	 It	 has	 been	 found	 that	 seventy
percent	of	diseases	are	in	your	own	hands.
I	had	a	doctor	who	was	a	fake	doctor.	He	was	my	friend.	He	had	no	degrees,	but
his	 board	was	 full	 of	 degrees	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 degrees,	 from	 inside	 India,	 from
outside	India.
And	he	made	a	lab.	As	you	entered	into	his	clinic,	first	you	would	pass	through	a
tremendous	lab,	which	was	all	just	bogus	--	great	machines	that	you	have	never
seen,	which	have	nothing	 to	do	with	medicine	--	and	he	would	 impress	you	 in
this	way.
When	you	reached	his	office	you	would	be	surprised.	He	never	used	an	ordinary
stethoscope;	 he	 had	 a	 very	 special	 arrangement.	He	was	 a	 genius	 although	 he
was	a	fake.
But	he	was	a	genius!	You	would	have	to	lie	down	on	the	table,	and	above	your
head	 there	were	many	big	bottles	with	colored	water,	 joined	with	a	 tube.	That
tube	he	would	attach	to	the	stethoscope,	and	the	water	would	jump.	You	would
see	the	water	jumping	--
whether	 red	water	 is	 jumping	or	green	water	 is	 jumping.	You	have	never	 seen
such	a	thing!
It	 created	great	 trust	 in	 the	man:	 "That	man	 is	 not	 ordinary."	And	he	was	 just
watching	 the	water...!	 That	 could	 have	 been	 done	 by	 anybody,	 by	 an	 ordinary
stethoscope;	 it	 was	 nothing...	 your	 heart	 is	 jumping,	 so	 the	 water	 is	 jumping.
Everything	was	special!	He	had	almost	cured	the	person	by	the	time	he	was	out
of	his	clinic,	and	he	was	simply	giving	water,	colored	water,	to	people.
He	 was	 caught	 by	 the	 police.	 As	 I	 heard	 that	 he	 had	 been	 caught,	 I	 went
immediately	to	the	police	station	and	I	told	those	people,	"He	is	fake,	but	he	has
helped	hundreds	of	people	--	you	should	also	consider	that.	It	is	absolutely	unjust
to	harass	 him.	 It	 is	 true	 that	 those	degrees	 are	 false,	 but	 those	degrees	 are	not
given	by	any	university,	any	medical	college;	so	what	is	wrong	if	he	has	used	the
alphabet	 and	 he	 has	 made	 his	 degrees	 himself?	 Your	 concern	 should	 be	 how
many	people	he	has	helped.	And	those	are	the	people	whom	nobody	could	help."
People	used	to	go	to	him	only	as	a	last	resort,	because	his	fees	were	very	high.
Naturally,	 he	 had	 such	 a	 great	 establishment,	 his	 fees	were	 almost	 eight	 times
more	than	any	qualified	doctor.	And	he	said	to	me,	"Even	taking	eight	times	the
fees	helps	the	patient.
When	he	pays	so	much,	he	gets	well	quickly.	When	he	pays	so	much,	he	believes
that	 the	 doctor	 is	 not	 ordinary.	 So	 it	 is	 not	 only	 a	 question	 of	 getting	 more
money,	it	is	a	question	of	helping	the	patient.	It	is	part	of	treatment."
But	 the	 police	 were	 not	 ready	 to	 listen	 to	 me;	 he	 was	 presented	 before	 the
magistrate.	I	went	 there	too,	and	I	said,	"You	should	look	at	 the	record	of	how
many	people	he	cures.
And	those	are	the	incurable	people.	They	have	been	to	allopathy,	they	have	been
to	 ayurveda,	 they	 have	 been	 to	 homeopathy.	 Nothing	 helps,	 but	 this	 man
manages	to	help	them.	Now	the	real	criterion	should	be	how	much	service,	how
much	help	he	has	given,	but	you	are	simply	bothering	about	certificates."
The	magistrate	said,	"I	can	understand	you,	but	I	have	to	follow	the	law."
So	the	poor	doctor	is	behind	the	bars.	But	I	was	continually	talking	to	him,	and
he	 was	 very	 open	 and	 clear.	 He	 said,	 "I	 have	 arranged	 this	 whole	 thing	 as	 a
hypnotic	strategy.
Once	 the	 patient	 is	 hypnotized,	 is	 ready	 to	 cooperate	with	me,	 once	 he	 trusts
me...	and	he	has	to	trust	because	he	has	paid	so	much	money,	and	he	has	to	trust
because	I	am	the	last	resort.	He	has	been	to	all	kinds	of	doctors.	If	I	fail,	then	he
has	 no	 hope,	 so	 naturally	 he	 has	 to	 trust	me.	And	 he	 can	 see	 that	 it	 is	 not	 an
ordinary	doctor's	clinic.	It	is	so	extraordinary	that	it	is	impossible	for	the	doctor
to	fail."
If	 somebody	 is	 not	 willing,	 the	 hypnotist	 has	 to	 create	 the	 willingness.
Hypnotism	is	not	some	power	in	the	hands	of	the	hypnotist.	That	idea	I	want	to
criticize	absolutely,	without	any	conditions	attached	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 thought	all	over
the	world	 that	 it	 is	 a	 power	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 hypnotist.	 It	 is	 not;	 it	 is	 your
power.
The	hypnotist	is	only	a	help	to	awaken	you	to	your	own	power,	and	then	it	can
be	used	for	many	things:	 for	healing,	 for	making	you	live	 longer,	 for	changing
your	harmful	habits,	smoking,	drinking.	It	can	do	tremendous	work.
It	 can	 be	 used	 as	 an	 educative	methodology.	You	 can	 learn	 in	 hypnosis	 better
than	you	can	 learn	ordinarily,	because	everything	 is	 silent	and	you	are	hearing
only	one	voice.
Even	if	somebody	else	comes	and	talks,	you	will	not	hear,	you	are	open	only	to	a
small	narrow	way	to	the	hypnotist.	He	can	teach	you	any	new	language.	He	can
teach	 you	 any	 new	 science.	 He	 can	 teach	 you	 arithmetic,	 anything	 within
minutes	for	which	people	take	hours	and	days	to	learn.
And	 it	 can	 be	 used	 for	meditation	 too.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned	 hypnosis	 is
simply	a	 relaxed,	deliberate	sleep	with	a	small	opening,	a	 little	window,	 to	 the
person	who	hypnotized	you.	He	can	tell	you	that	your	meditation	will	go	deeper
every	day,	and	if	this	thought	gets	in	your	unconscious,	your	meditation	will	start
going	 deeper.	 Just	 a	 few	 sessions	 and	 he	 can	 give	 you	 the	 last	 post-hypnotic
suggestion:	now	you	don't	need	any	hypnosis;	your	meditation	will	go	deeper	on
its	own	accord.
Hypnosis	has	not	been	used	in	the	whole	of	history	for	meditation,	but	it	can	be
used,	and	 it	can	be	used	with	 tremendous	power,	because	you	have	 to	 fight	 so
much	with	your	thoughts	unnecessarily.	That	whole	struggle	with	your	mind	can
be	dropped	by	hypnotic	sessions	without	much	effort.
Hypnosis	is	also	capable	of	giving	you	a	post-hypnotic	suggestion,	if	you	want
to	hypnotize	yourself,	by	a	simple	strategy:	count	from	one	to	one	hundred,	and
from	one	hundred	back	to	one.	By	the	time	you	have	reached	back	to	one,	you
will	fall	into	deep	hypnosis.	And	you	can	tell	yourself	before	going	into	hypnosis
--	because	you	will	be	alone	--	"The	state	of	hypnosis	will	 last	only	for	fifteen
minutes.	After	fifteen	minutes	I	will	come	out	of	it."	This	is	auto-hypnosis.
Hetero-hypnosis	means	somebody	is	helping	you.	In	the	beginning	it	is	good	to
take	help.
But	you	have	to	be	very	willing,	in	a	very	loveful	atmosphere.
An	old	man	was	torturing	his	family	continuously	with	this	disease,	that	disease.
And	 he	 was	 reading	 the	 encyclopedia	 and	 finding	 diseases.	 He	 was	 reading
medical	magazines	and	finding	new	diseases	that	have	just	been	discovered,	and
he	 would	 immediately	 start	 torturing	 his	 family,	 "I	 am	 suffering	 from	 this
disease."	 It	 was	 a	 way	 of	 remaining	 in	 power.	 He	was	 retired.	 Nobody	 cared
about	him;	in	fact,	he	was	a	burden.	But	even	if	you	are	a	burden,	you	don't	want
to	 be	 neglected.	His	method	not	 to	 be	 neglected	 and	not	 to	 be	 ignored	was	 to
create	new	diseases.
Doctors	were	 tired	because	 they	said,	"That	man	 is	strange,	he	has	no	disease.
He	 just	goes	on	 reading	and	finding	diseases	 from	encyclopedias,	and	 then	we
have	 to	 treat	 something	 which	 he	 has	 not	 got	 --	 and	 that	 may	 unnecessarily
create	 trouble."	Medicine	which	 is	 given	 to	 a	 person	who	has	 no	 disease	may
cause	some	trouble,	particularly	allopathic	medicines	which	are	almost	all	based
on	poison.	So	the	doctors	were	saying,
"We	are	tired,	just..."
Then	one	doctor	said,	"It	will	be	good	if	you	go	to	a	hypnotist.	I	have	a	friend
who	is	a	very	good	hypnotist,	perhaps	he	may	be	helpful."	Now	the	old	man	is
saying	that	he	is	suffering	from	sleeplessness,	so	the	hypnotist	will	be	perfectly
the	 right	 person.	 He	will	 give	 him	 sleep.	 He	will	 also	 give	 him	 the	 the	 post-
hypnotic	suggestion,	"You	will	go	to	sleep	--	just	drink	hot	milk	before	you	go	to
bed	and	immediately	you	will	fall	asleep."
He	will	associate	sleep	with	the	hot	milk,	and	once	it	gets	associated	in	the	mind,
it	works.
Every	child	knows	that	the	teddy	bear	works;	you	take	the	teddy	bear	away,	and
the	 child	 cannot	 sleep.	And	everybody	has	his	own	methods	of	 creating	 teddy
bears.	You	will	 find	somebody	clutching	his	blanket.	 If	you	don't	allow	him	to
clutch	his	blanket,	he	cannot	sleep.	Everybody	has	a	certain	posture	of	sleeping.
If	you	don't	allow	him	that	posture,	he	cannot	sleep.	These	are	natural	ways	of
auto-hypnotizing	yourself.
So	the	hypnotist	was	brought,	and	the	old	man	was	told,	"Now	you	forget...	all
your	diseases	will	be	 finished.	We	have	 found	 the	greatest	hypnotist."	The	old
man	 lay	 down,	 and	 the	 hypnotist	 said,	 "Just	 as	 I	 say	 you	 are	 falling	 asleep,
asleep...	 and	your	eyelids	are	becoming	heavy,	 so	heavy,	mountainously	heavy
so	that	you	cannot	keep	them	open...	"
And	soon	the	old	man	was	fast	asleep.
The	doctor	took	away	his	bag,	slipped	silently	out,	took	his	fees,	and	the	family
was	very	happy	that	this	is	the	right	man.	But	as	the	son	came	back,	the	old	man
opened	one	eye	and	said,	"Has	that	crank	gone	or	not?"	He	was	not	willing;	he
was	just	pretending.
Immediately	the	moment	he	said,	"Your	eyes	are	becoming	heavy,"	he	closed	his
eyes,	 listened	 to	 the	 whole	 thing,	 and	 knew	 that	 this	 is	 stupid.	 How	 can	 this
create	sleep?
Your	willingness	is	absolutely	needed.	It	is	you	who	creates	the	hypnosis,	not	the
person	who	hypnotizes	you.	But	it	is	good	in	the	beginning	if	you	can	help	each
other.	There	is	nothing	much	to	it;	anybody	you	trust	can	help	you	and	take	you
deep	into	hypnosis.	And	when	you	are	 in	deep	hypnosis	he	can	check	whether
you	are	in	deep	hypnosis	or	not.	He	can	push	a	needle	in	your	hand;	you	will	not
feel	it.	He	can	take	your	hand	up	and	leave	it,	and	it	will	fall	because	you	are	not
awake	and	you	cannot	keep	it	that	way.	So	there	are	just	a	few	small	things	he
can	try	to	find	out	if	you	are	really	in	hypnosis.
Then	he	can	tell	you	about	meditation:	whenever	you	sit	to	meditate,	take	a	bath,
make	a	special	room	for	your	meditation.	Don't	do	anything	in	that	room	so	that
it	 remains	 vibrating	 with	 your	 meditativeness.	 Burn	 incense,	 bring	 roses	 and
flowers,	sit	silently.
Close	 your	 eyes,	watch	 your	 thoughts	 and	 you	will	 immediately	 go	 into	 deep
silence;	thoughts	will	disappear.	This	can	happen	without	hypnosis	but	it	takes	a
longer	time.
Hypnosis	is	a	short	cut.
Your	question	 is	significant,	Amrit	Nirjan.	You	are	asking,	"How	can	hypnosis
and	meditation	come	together?"	They	can	come	together	very	easily.	Hypnosis
can	be	used	for	many	purposes	--	it	can	be	used	for	meditation.	And	the	people
who	 said	 you	 are	 being	 hypnotized	 by	me	 are,	 in	 a	way,	 right.	 Just	 because	 I
don't	use	methods	of	hypnotizing	you,	 that	does	not	mean	 that	hypnosis	 is	not
created	by	you.
I	am	not	hypnotizing	you,	but	you	love	me,	you	trust	me	--	that's	enough.	And
then	 when	 I	 stop	 for	 a	 moment,	 you	 also	 stop	 with	 me.	 When	 I	 am	 not
speaking...	just	a	gap,	and	you	are	also	in	a	gap.	Slowly,	slowly	your	heart	starts
the	same	rhythm	as	my	heart.	My	words	start	having	a	certain	music,	a	certain
solacing,	a	certain	relaxing	quality.	All	depends	on	love,	all	depends	on	trust,	but
you	are	creating	it.
I	am	not	hypnotizing	--	I	am	not	a	hypnotist.
I	don't	need	to	be,	I	am	myself.	My	presence	is	hypnotizing.	So	I	don't	need	to
tell	you,
"Lie	 down	 and	 I	 will	 move	 a	 crystal...	 ding-dong,	 ding-dong.	 You	 are	 falling
asleep,	ding-dong....	"	I	have	told	you	the	story...
A	 sex	 maniac	 was	 being	 hypnotized	 by	 a	 ding-dong	 hypnotist,	 and	 the	 sex
maniac	jumped;	he	said,	"Doctor,	it	works!	My	ding-dong	is	asleep!"
I	am	not	a	ding-dong	hypnotist!...
I	love	you.	I	want	to	share	my	truth	with	you	for	no	other	reason	except	that	I	am
so	full	of	it,	I	cannot	contain	it.	I	want	to	share;	I	want	to	unburden	myself.	And
if	 you	 are	 ready	 on	 the	 other	 end	 to	 receive	 it,	 hypnosis	 will	 happen
automatically.	 And	 with	 hypnosis,	 because	 my	 insistence	 is	 continuously	 on
meditation,	you	will	find	it	easier	to	meditate	here	with	me	than	anywhere	else	--
in	the	beginning	at	least.
Later	 on,	when	you	have	developed	on	your	 own	 and	you	 are	more	 confident
that	you	can	fly	in	the	silent	spaces	of	your	heart,	then	you	will	be	able	to	create
the	same	state	anywhere;	I	will	not	be	needed.
I	don't	want	you	to	be	addicted	to	me	--	because	I	am	not	a	drug,	and	I	don't	want
you	 to	 be	 addicted	 to	 anything.	 But	 you	 can	 use	 things	 which	 have	 been
condemned	by	ignorant	people,	not	knowing	what	they	are	saying.	You	can	use
them	for	tremendous	benefit,	for	your	spiritual	growth.
Just	an	innocent	heart	is	needed	for	meditation.	And	hypnosis	can	cleanse	your
heart	and	can	bring	you	into	the	state	of	a	small	child.
Little	Roger	was	frightened	of	 the	 large	bulldog	that	occupied	 the	yard	next	 to
his	home.
One	day,	feeling	adventurous,	Roger	climbed	the	fence.	The	huge	bulldog	rushed
up	 to	him	and	 licked	his	 face.	The	boy	began	 to	 scream	and	his	mother	 came
running	to	his	side.
"Did	he	bite	you,	darling?"
"Not	yet,"	whimpered	Roger,	"He	just	tasted	me."
That	is	the	simplicity	of	a	child.
Old	Sam	Rosenbaum	was	seventy-five,	really	very	old,	and	finally	got	his	nerve
together	to	take	a	flight	in	a	small	airplane.	As	he	climbed	out	after	the	ride,	he
turned	to	the	pilot	and	said,	"Sir,	I	wish	to	thank	you	for	both	those	rides."
"What	are	you	talking	about?"	said	the	pilot,	"You	had	only	one	ride."
"Oh	no	I	didn't,"	said	old	Sam.	"I	had	two:	my	first	and	my	last!"
In	 old	 age	 also,	 if	 people	 have	 lived	 rightly	 they	 come	 back	 to	 the	 same
innocence	of	a	child.	And	according	to	me,	unless	an	old	man	becomes	again	a
child,	 he	has	missed	 the	opportunity	of	growing	 in	 the	 spiritual	 dimension;	he
has	wasted	his	 life	 in	 trivia.	He	has	been	collecting	only	seashells	and	colored
stones	 on	 the	 sea	 beach,	 but	 he	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 discover	 the	 treasure	 of
consciousness,	awareness,	enlightenment.
Hypnosis	 can	 be	 certainly	 used.	 Here	 we	 are	 going	 to	 create	 a	 school	 for
hypnosis,	where	you	will	be	able	to	learn	how	to	auto-hypnotize	yourself	so	you
don't	 have	 the	 dependence	 on	 the	 hypnotist.	 And	 then	 you	 can	 use	 that	 auto-
hypnotizing	process	for	meditation.
This	 is	 a	 pioneer	 effort	 to	 bring	 hypnosis	 and	meditation	 together	 for	 the	 first
time.	But	together	they	can	be	tremendously	great.	They	can	bring	you	so	much
light,	 so	 much	 blissfulness	 --	 and	 so	 easily.	 I	 like	 to	 repeat	 Chuang	 Tzu's
statement,	"Easy	is	right;	right	is	easy."	I	don't	want	you	to	become	unnecessarily
self-torturing,	following	unnecessarily	long,	arduous	ways	to	come	to	yourself.
You	don't	have	to	go	anywhere.
I	want	to	teach	you	the	great	pilgrimage	from	here	to	here.	I	want	you	to	learn
the	art	of	reaching	to	God	singing,	dancing,	rejoicing.
Laugh	your	way	to	God.
In	essence	that	is	my	teaching.
And	 it	 is	 possible,	 with	 the	 help	 of	 hypnosis,	 to	 make	 meditation	 the	 easiest
process.	But	drop	any	idea	of	condemnation	of	hypnosis,	which	you	may	have
gathered	because	all	 the	world,	 the	whole	world,	 is	afraid	of	being	hypnotized.
There	have	been	people,	highly	 intelligent,	who	wanted	 to	come	to	see	me	but
they	 finally	 decided	 not	 to	 because	 they	were	 afraid	 they	may	 be	 hypnotized.
Nobody	can	hypnotize	you	against	your	will.
Millions	 of	 people	would	 like	 to	 come.	 They	 are	 reading	my	 books,	 they	 are
listening	 to	my	 tapes,	 they	 are	 seeing	 the	 videos,	 but	 they	 are	 afraid	 to	 come
close	to	me.	A	fear	has	been	created	by	the	so-called	religious	leaders	that	they
will	be	hypnotized.
It	happened	that	one	famous	but	ugly	and	pornographic	magazine,	STERN,	from
Germany,	 had	 sent	 a	 reporter.	 He	 became	 so	 interested	 because	 he	 wanted	 to
write	an	inside	story.	So	he	meditated,	he	listened	to	me,	he	did	everything	that
sannyasins	 are	doing	here.	He	became	 so	 joyful	 and	blissful	 that	 he	became	a
sannyasin!	He	wrote	 the	 story,	 he	went	back.	The	STERN	editorial	 board	was
very	 annoyed.	 The	 first	 thing	 they	 said	was,	 "You	 have	 been	 hypnotized.	We
cannot	publish	your	article.	You	have	written	it	under	hypnosis."
He	said,	"What	nonsense	you	are	talking!"
They	 did	 not	 publish	 his	 article.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 they	 fired	 him.	 And	 they
managed	to	distort	his	article	the	way	they	wanted:	they	left	out	everything	that
was	positive,	they	inserted	their	own	interpretations,	and	colored	the	whole	thing
in	such	an	ugly	and	negative	way	that	even	he	was	surprised,	because	when	they
fired	him...	and	he	was	one	of	their	most	important	chief	reporters.
He	had	come	to	live	here,	then	he	lived	in	the	commune	in	America,	and	I	think
soon	he	will	be	coming	back.	Wherever	he	will	be,	he	will	be	a	sannyasin.	He
has	 tasted	 the	 experience	himself.	 It	 is	 no	more	 a	 borrowed	knowledge;	 it	 has
entered	into	his	being,	but	it	is	not	hypnosis.
He	was	wrongly	understood,	and	he	was	wrongly	condemned.	Journalists	come,
but	they	always	are	spectators.	They	will	not	know	what	is	happening	to	people
in	 their	 inner	 being.	 Unless	 they	 become	 insiders,	 their	 reports	 are	 worthless.
Many	other	people	come,	just	as	spectators	to	see	what	is	happening.
This	place	is	not	for	spectators.
This	place	is	only	for	those	who	have	courage	to	participate	in	this	tremendous
experiment	of	consciousness	awakening.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Be	a	joke	unto	yourself
7	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709070
ShortTitle:
PILGR02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
92
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
IT	 SEEMS	 TO	 ME	 THAT	 YOU	 ARE	 TRULY	 THE	 FIRST	 MAN	 THIS
PLANET	HAS
EVER	KNOWN	WHO	REALLY	UNDERSTANDS	WOMEN	AND	ACCEPTS
THEM.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Prem	Bubula,	I	have	told	you	that	a	woman	is	to	be	loved,	not	understood.	That
is	the	first	understanding.
Life	is	so	mysterious	that	our	hands	cannot	reach	to	its	heights,	our	eyes	cannot
look	into	its	deepest	mystery.	Understanding	any	expression	of	existence	--	men
or	 women	 or	 trees	 or	 animals	 or	 birds	 --	 is	 the	 function	 of	 science,	 not	 of	 a
mystic.	I	am	not	a	scientist.	To	me	science	itself	is	a	mystery,	and	now	scientists
have	started	to	recognize	it	--	they	are	dropping	their	old	stubborn,	superstitious
attitude	that	one	day	they	will	know	all	that	is	to	be	known.
With	Albert	Einstein	the	whole	history	of	science	has	taken	a	very	different	route
because	the	more	he	went	 into	 the	deepest	core	of	matter,	 the	more	he	became
puzzled.	All	 logic	was	 left	 behind,	 all	 rationality	was	 left	 behind.	You	 cannot
dictate	to	existence,	because	it	does	not	follow	your	logic.	Logic	is	man-made.
There	 was	 a	 point	 in	 Albert	 Einstein's	 life	 when	 he	 remembers	 that	 he	 was
wavering	about	whether	to	insist	on	being	rational...	but	that	would	be	foolish.	It
would	be	human,	but	not	 intelligent.	Even	if	you	insist	on	logic,	on	rationality,
existence	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change	 according	 to	 your	 logic;	 your	 logic	 has	 to
change	according	to	existence.	And	the	deeper	you	go,	existence	becomes	more
and	more	mysterious.
A	 point	 comes	when	 you	 have	 to	 leave	 logic	 and	 rationality	 and	 just	 listen	 to
nature.	 I	 call	 it	 the	 ultimate	 understanding	 --	 but	 not	 in	 the	 ordinary	 sense	 of
understanding.	You	know	it,	you	feel	it,	but	there	is	no	way	to	say	it.
Man	is	a	mystery,	woman	is	a	mystery,	everything	that	exists	is	a	mystery	--	and
all	our	efforts	to	figure	it	out	are	going	to	fail.
I	am	reminded	of	a	man	who	was	purchasing	in	a	toy	shop	a	present	for	his	son
for	Christmas.	He	was	a	well-known	mathematician,	so	naturally	the	shopkeeper
brought	out	a	jigsaw	puzzle.	The	mathematician	tried...	it	was	a	beautiful	puzzle.
He	tried	and	tried	and	tried	and	started	perspiring.	It	was	becoming	awkward:	the
customers	and	the	salesmen	and	the	shopkeeper	were	all	watching	and	he	has	not
been	able	to	bring	the	puzzle	to	a	solution.
Finally	 he	 dropped	 the	 idea	 and	 he	 shouted	 at	 the	 shopkeeper:	 "I	 am	 a
mathematician	 and	 if	 I	 cannot	 solve	 this	 jigsaw	puzzle,	 how	do	 you	 think	my
small	boy	will	be	able	to?"
The	 shopkeeper	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand.	 It	 is	 made	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that
nobody	can	solve	it	--	mathematician	or	no	mathematician."
The	mathematician	asked,	"But	why	is	it	made	in	this	way?"
The	 shopkeeper	 said,	 "It	 is	 made	 in	 this	 way	 so	 that	 the	 boy	 from	 the	 very
beginning	starts	learning	that	life	cannot	be	solved,	cannot	be	understood."
You	can	live	it,	you	can	rejoice	in	it,	you	can	become	one	with	the	mystery,	but
the	idea	of	understanding	as	an	observer	is	not	at	all	possible.
I	don't	understand	myself.	The	greatest	mystery	to	me	is	myself.	But	a	few	clues
I	can	give	to	you:
A	psychiatrist	 is	 a	 fellow	who	asks	you	a	 lot	of	 expensive	questions	 that	your
wife	asks	you	for	nothing.
The	key	 to	happiness:	You	may	speak	of	 love	and	 tenderness	and	passion,	but
real	ecstasy	is	discovering	you	haven't	lost	your	keys	after	all.
Women	begin	by	resisting	a	man's	advances	and	end	by	blocking	his	retreat.
If	you	want	to	change	a	woman's	mind,	agree	with	her.
If	you	want	 to	know	what	a	woman	really	means,	 look	at	her	 --	don't	 listen	 to
her.
The	lady	walked	up	to	the	policeman	and	said,	"Officer,	that	man	on	the	corner
is	annoying	me."
"I	have	been	watching	the	whole	time,"	said	the	cop,	"and	that	man	wasn't	even
looking	at	you."
"Well,"	said	the	woman,	"isn't	that	annoying?"
The	romantic	young	man	turned	to	the	beautiful	young	girl	in	his	bed	and	asked,
"Am	I	the	first	man	you	ever	made	love	to?"
She	 thought	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 said,	 "You	 could	 be	 --	 I	 have	 a	 terrible
memory	for	faces."
A	young	girl	 said	 to	 an	 old	maid,	 "You	must	 have	missed	 a	 great	 deal	 by	 not
marrying!"
"Only	the	ceremony!"	replied	the	old	maid.
In	 the	Garden	 of	Eden,	Eve	was	 nagging	Adam,	 as	 usual.	 "I	 saw	you	 playing
around	with	 another	woman	underneath	 the	 tree	of	 knowledge	 last	 night!"	 she
screamed.
"But	Eve,"	said	Adam,	"you	know	that	there	is	only	you	and	I	here	in	Eden!"
"Don't	lie	to	me!	I	always	know	when	you	are	lying!"	Eve	whined.
"Eve,	listen!	This	is	just	a	fantasy	brought	on	by	your	menopause."
"Don't	give	me	any	psychological	bullshit!	I	know	what	I	saw!"	Eve	roared.
"Okay,	okay,	then	if	you	don't	believe	me,	just	count	my	ribs."
A	man	went	 on	 a	 safari	with	 his	wife	 and	his	mother-in-law.	One	day	he	was
lying	morosely	in	his	tent	when	he	heard	a	cry	from	his	wife.	He	jumped	up	and
rushed	into	the	clearing.	There,	out	in	the	open,	he	saw	mama-in-law	shaking	her
fist	at	a	huge	lion	who	was	standing	five	feet	away	from	her,	ready	to	move.
"Do	something!"	pleaded	his	wife	in	alarm.
"Why	should	 I?"	 retorted	 the	 frustrated	hunter.	 "That	 lion	got	himself	 into	 this
mess	--	let	him	get	himself	out	of	it!"
Everything	is	mysterious:	it	is	better	to	enjoy	it	rather	than	trying	to	understand
it.
Ultimately	 the	man	who	goes	on	 trying	 to	understand	 life	proves	 to	be	 a	 fool,
and	 the	man	who	 enjoys	 life	 becomes	wise	 goes	 on	 enjoying	 life,	 because	 he
becomes	more	and	more	aware	of	the	mysterious	that	surrounds	us.
The	greatest	understanding	is	to	know	that	nothing	can	be	understood,	that	all	is
mysterious	and	miraculous.	To	me	this	is	the	beginning	of	religion	in	your	life.
Question	2
BELOVED	MASTER,
I	LOVE	TO	DO	T'AI	CHI	AND	IT	HAS	BECOME	MY	DAILY	MEDITATION,
BUT	I	HAVE	A	TENDENCY	TO	BECOME	TOO	SERIOUS	ABOUT	IT.	CAN
YOU	DRIVE
OUT	THE	MONKEY?
Anand	 Srajan,	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 anybody	 to	 drive	 the	 monkey	 out	 of	 your
mind,	because	it	does	not	exist;	your	seriousness	is	creating	it.	And	nobody	can
change	 your	 seriousness	 either.	 It	 is	 your	 life	 attitude	 which	 is	 making	 you
serious.	What	is	there	to	be	serious	about?	Existence	is	a	continuous	celebration,
a	festival	that	knows	no	holidays.
You	are	serious	because	for	thousands	of	years	people	have	been	telling	you	that
the	serious	man	is	a	better	man,	higher	man,	more	evolved	than	the	nonserious.
The	nonserious	have	never	been	taken	into	account.
But	 to	me	 the	 situation	 is	 just	 the	 reverse.	The	nonserious	one	 is	 the	one	who
will	come	to	know	the	real	life	and	its	experiences.	Seriousness	is	closing	you,
making	 you	 hard,	 making	 you	 sad.	 Seriousness	 comes	 from	 ambition,	 from
desire	which	you	are	not	being	able	to	attain.
But	the	religions	have	paid	too	much	respect	to	seriousness.	I	have	never	come
across	 in	 any	 religious	 scripture	of	 any	 religion	 --	 and	 there	are	 three	hundred
religions	on	the	earth
--	that	anybody	has	paid	respect	to	nonseriousness,	to	playfulness,	to	a	sense	of
humor.
They	all	make	you	dodos.
I	have	heard...	one	day	as	the	bishop	entered	a	church	in	New	York,	he	could	not
believe	his	eyes:	he	saw	Jesus	Christ	standing	there.
He	said,	"My	god!	I	thought	that	prayers	are	never	heard.	I	never	believed	that
there	is	any	God	or	any	son	of	God	--	but	what	to	do	with	this	fellow?	Either	he
is	a	hippy	or	he	is	Jesus	Christ.	I	am	in	trouble."
He	approached	the	man	and	asked,	"Can	I	ask	you	who	you	are?"
And	 the	man	 said,	 "You	 have	 been	 serving	me,	 spreading	my	word,	 and	 you
don't	recognize	me!"
The	bishop's	heart	started	sinking:	"My	god!	He	is	Jesus	Christ!	And	now	there
is	bound	to	be	trouble."
He	 phoned	 the	 pope	 in	 Rome:	 "What	 am	 I	 supposed	 to	 do?	 In	 our	 teaching
courses	there	is	not	even	a	single	mention	that	`Jesus	will	come	one	day	to	your
church.'	 So	 what	 has	 to	 be	 done,	 what	 is	 the	 right	 course?	 How	 should	 I
behave?"
The	pope	said,	"Don't	create	trouble	for	me!	It	is	good	that	he	has	come	to	New
York.	 Do	 two	 things:	 first,	 the	 most	 important,	 look	 serious	 and	 busy.	 Who
knows,	he	may	be...
And	second,	don't	forget	to	inform	the	police."
Religions	have	been	teaching	people	to	be	serious	because	seriousness	creates	a
certain	 kind	 of	 dullness	 in	 your	 consciousness.	 Seriousness	 is	 not	 a	 help.	 It	 is
poisonous;	 nobody	 can	 take	 it	 away,	 unless	 you	 understand...	 then	 it	 will
disappear.
A	psychiatrist	and	a	friend	were	walking	down	the	street,	and	a	stranger	passing
by	 suddenly	 kicked	 the	 psychiatrist	 in	 the	 shins.	 The	 shrink	 walked	 on	 as	 if
nothing	 had	 happened.	 His	 friend	 was	 astounded.	 "Aren't	 you	 going	 to	 do
anything	about	it?"	he	cried.
"Why	should	I?"	asked	the	psychiatrist.	"It's	his	problem."
If	the	monkey	is	there	inside	you,	it	is	his	problem!	He	must	be	getting	tortured
with	 your	 seriousness	 and	 your	 t'ai	 chi.	 Don't	 be	worried.	 He	 himself	 will	 be
trying	to	find	a	way	to	get	out	of	the	mess.
A	man	who	is	playful	does	not	bother	about	things	like	t'ai	chi!	There	is	so	much
to	enjoy	around	and	you,	 like	an	idiot,	do	t'ai	chi!	Naturally	you	are	becoming
serious.	A	beautiful	woman	passes	by...	and	you	are	doing	t'ai	chi!	Can't	you	do
anything	playful,	blissful,	pleasant?	Naturally	you	are	becoming	serious	because
you	are	losing	contact	with	life.
There	are	all	kinds	of	idiots	in	the	world.	Somebody	is	doing	t'ai	chi,	somebody
is	doing	aikido,	somebody	is	doing	jujitsu,	somebody	is	doing	yoga,	standing	on
his	head.	Now,	I	don't	think	any	woman	is	going	to	be	interested	in	you:	this	kind
of	 fellow	who	 is	 standing	 on	 his	 head	 is	 already	 dead!	 So	 then	 nobody	 takes
interest	in	you,	and	you	become	serious.	You	are	creating	it,	and	you	want	me	to
chase	it	out.	I	am	not	responsible	for	it.	Who	suggested	you	do	t'ai	chi?
I	have	heard	that	three	missionaries	were	caught	by	cannibals	in	southern	Africa.
The	chief	of	the	cannibals	asked	the	first,	"Which	do	you	want	--	you	can	choose
--	do	you	want	`chi-chi'	or	do	you	want	death?"
The	man	thought	about	it	and	he	said,	"Whatever	chi-chi	is,	it	cannot	be	worse
than	death."	So	he	said,	"I	want	chi-chi."
So	 he	 was	 given	 the	 treatment	 they	 called	 chi-chi.	 He	 was	 sexually	 abused,
beaten...	 and	 as	 chi-chi	 started,	 he	 started	 thinking,	 "It	 was	 better	 to	 choose
death.	 These	 people	 will	 kill	 me	 by	 chi-chi,	 and	 they	 are	 unnecessarily
humiliating	me."
And	the	other	two	missionaries	were	watching	what	was	going	on.	Then	the	turn
came	to	the	second:	"What	do	you	want?"
Death	 is	 such	 a	 dangerous	 thing...	 he	 thought,	 "One	 can	 survive	 chi-chi,	 but
death	you	cannot	survive."	He	also	said,	"Chi-chi."
So	again	the	whole	game	began.	All	the	cannibals	were	beating	him	and	doing
all	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 sexual	 perversions	 --	 and	 the	 poor	missionary	 had	 come	 to
save	them...!
Now	the	turn	came	of	the	third,	who	was	the	chief	missionary.	The	chief	asked,
"What	do	you	think	--	chi-chi	or	death?"
He	said,	"It	will	be	a	great	mercy	if	you	allow	me	death.	Chi-chi	I	have	seen."
But	the	chief	said,	"This	is	a	problem:	we	don't	kill	anybody	before	chi-chi,	and
after	chi-chi	nobody	survives!"
Now	what	are	you	interested	in	t'ai	chi	for?	Naturally	it	will	make	you	serious.
You	will	forget	laughing,	you	will	forget	a	sense	of	humor	--	a	man	of	t'ai	chi	has
to	be	serious.
And	 you	 are	 asking	 me	 to	 take	 out	 the	 seriousness...	 and	 the	 monkey.	 The
monkey	comes	in	the	same	package!	You	become	serious	and	the	monkey	will
come	in.
And	as	far	as	the	monkey	is	concerned,	it	is	his	problem	--	you	don't	worry.	You
just	get	rid	of	this	chi-chi.
Just	to	deceive	you	they	have	changed	the	name	to	t'ai	chi!
Question	3
BELOVED	MASTER,
PLEASE	FORGIVE	ME.
I	CANNOT	PUT	MYSELF	ON	THE	LINE	ENOUGH.	I	AM	AT	YOUR	FEET.
Nirupa,	 you	must	 be	 living	 in	 a	misunderstanding,	 because	 I	 have	 never	 been
angry	at	you;	I	have	never	been	angry	at	anyone,	Ronald	Reagan	included!
Asking	 to	 be	 forgiven...	 you	 are	 asking	 something	 which	 must	 be	 your
projection.	I	have	never	been	angry	at	anyone.	You	have	been	always	forgiven,
but	you	must	be	carrying	something	in	your	mind.	You	say,	"I	cannot	put	myself
on	the	line	enough."
Who	 is	 asking	 you	 to	 put	 yourself	 on	 the	 line	 enough?	 As	 you	 are,	 you	 are
perfectly	okay	and	acceptable	and	lovable	--	but	you	seem	to	be	a	martyr.
Who	can	be	perfect	in	this	world?
The	world	 itself	 is	not	perfect,	because	perfection	means	death.	 If	you	want	 to
live,	 you	 have	 to	 remain	 a	 little	 bit	 imperfect	 always,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 go	 on
perfecting	yourself.
Evolution	is	nothing	but	a	constant	 imperfection.	Imperfection	gives	you	space
to	grow	into.
And	remember	one	thing:	you	will	never	be	perfect.	You	will	be	coming	closer
and	closer	and	closer,	but	you	will	never	be	perfect.	Perfection	is	not	allowed	by
the	laws	of	nature	itself.
And	the	idea	that	"I	cannot	put	myself	on	the	line	enough"	--	 there	is	no	need.
Put	on	the	line	as	much	as	you	enjoy	--	that	is	enough.
But	I	have	a	feeling	that	you	want	to	go	up	the	ladder	to	the	highest	rung...	But
you	don't	know	that	 the	 ladder	at	 the	highest	 rung	goes	nowhere.	You	come	to
the	highest	rung	and	then	you	look	stupid.	Then	your	whole	life	is	wasted:	you
have	become	the	president,	you	have	become	the	prime	minister	and	all	kinds	of
nonsense	 people.	But	 they	 all	 feel	 awkward;	 that's	why	 they	 go	 on	 smiling	 to
hide...	so	that	nobody	suspects	that	they	have	been	stupid.	There	are	ladders	and
ladders....
Hymie	Goldberg	 is	 right.	He	 became	 the	 richest	man	 and	when	 asked,	 "What
have	you	learned?"	he	said,	"Nothing	but	climbing	ladders	--	and	at	the	end	there
is	nothing."
But	you	cannot	even	say	that	at	the	end	there	is	nothing.
Nirupa,	you	are	perfectly	good.	You	have	always	been	good.	My	love	to	you	has
never	wavered.	It	does	not	waver	to	anybody.	And	I	know	your	devotion,	your
dedication;	it	is	immensely	valuable.
But	you	are	living	in	some	misunderstanding.	Drop	that	misunderstanding.	You
are	on	 the	 line,	 and	 there	 is	 no	need	 to	be	 forgiven.	You	have	 all	my	 love,	 as
everybody	else	has.
Here	there	is	no	hierarchy.	Here	there	is	nobody	higher	and	nobody	lower.
There	was	to	be	a	christening	party	for	 the	new	baby,	but	before	the	ceremony
the	priest	took	the	new	father	aside	and	asked,	"Are	you	prepared	for	this	solemn
event?"
"I	think	so,"	replied	the	father.	"I've	got	cheese	rolls,	salad	and	cake."
"No,	no,"	interrupted	the	priest,	"I	mean	spiritually	prepared?"
"Well,	 I	 don't	 know,"	 said	 the	 man	 thoughtfully.	 "Do	 you	 think	 two	 cases	 of
whiskey	are	enough?"
You	 are	 living	 in	 some	 fantasy	 about	 yourself	 and	 torturing	 yourself.	 A	 few
people	like	torturing...	And	I	told	you,	here	there	is	no	hierarchy.	And	that's	one
of	 the	most	 important	 things	 to	be	 remembered:	 the	people	who	are	doing	 the
work	are	just	functional;	they	are	not	higher	than	you.
In	 the	 commune	 in	 America...	 because	 I	 was	 silent	 and	 in	 isolation,	 people
created	hierarchies	just	out	of	their	routine	habit.	As	I	came	out,	those	who	were
at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 hierarchy	 tried	 to	 persuade	me	 that	 I	 should	 not	 speak,	 that
things	are	going	well	and	I	should	not	see	anybody	--	everybody	is	okay.
I	 asked,	 "Then	 what	 is	 the	 purpose	 of	 me	 being	 here?	 If	 they	 are	 all	 okay,	 I
should	go	back	to	my	country	where	nobody	is	okay."	I	had	to	insist:	"Now	it	is
enough.	Three	years	is	enough,	and	I	want	to	come	to	my	people	and	see	what	is
happening."
And	 when	 I	 started	 speaking	 the	 whole	 gang	 that	 had	 created	 the	 hierarchy
escaped,	 because	 now	 there	 was	 no	 possibility...	 wherever	 I	 am	 there	 is	 no
hierarchy,	only	 functions.	Somebody	 is	doing	cleaning,	 somebody	 is	doing	 the
work	of	the	secretary,	somebody	is	doing	the	work	of	the	person	in	charge	of	the
ashram,	but	there	is	nobody	higher	and	lower.
And	you	should	remember,	Nirupa,	a	very	significant	 law:	The	organization	of
any	bureaucracy	is	very	much	like	a	septic	tank	--	the	really	big	chunks	always
rise	to	the	top!
Don't	be	bothered.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
SEVERAL	 TIMES	 I	 HAVE	 READ	 IN	 YOUR	 BOOKS,	 OR	 HEARD	 YOU
MENTION,	 THE	 PSYCHOLOGICAL	 FACT	 THAT	MAN	 THINKS	ABOUT
WOMAN	ONCE
EVERY	THREE	MINUTES,	WHILE	WOMAN	ONLY	THINKS	ABOUT	MAN
ONCE
EVERY	 SEVEN	 MINUTES.	 IS	 THIS	 ONLY	 A	 PSYCHOLOGICAL
DIFFERENCE,	 OR	 DOES	 IT	 GO	 DEEPER?	 TO	 BE	 MORE	 SPECIFIC,
PLEASE	EXPLAIN	THE	TWO
(OR	 FOUR)	 SIDES	 OF	 THE	 MIDNIGHT	 BEDROOM	 DILEMMA	 OF	 "I
HAVE	A	HEADACHE."
A	few	things	first.	The	psychological	 fact	of	man	thinking	about	woman	every
three	 minutes	 --	 they	 cannot	 wait	 more	 than	 that	 --	 is	 only	 average,	 because
science	talks	only	about	averages.	Don't	believe	that	you	are	the	average	person;
the	average	person	does	not	exist.	There	may	be	people	who	are	thinking	only	of
women	all	the	time!
A	psychologist	was	 testing	a	patient.	He	drew	a	 straight	 line	on	 the	paper	 and
asked	the	patient,	"What	does	it	remind	you	of?"
He	said,	"It	reminds	me	of	women."
The	 psychologist	 said,	 "Strange.	A	 straight	 line?"	But	 he	 tried	more	 lines.	He
made	a	triangle	and	asked	the	man,	"What	does	this	remind	you	of?"
The	man	said,	"You	seem	to	be	a	strange	person.	This	reminds	me	of	women!"
The	psychologist	made	a	 round	circle.	The	man	got	very	angry.	He	said,	"You
are	coming	too	close.	I	am	suffering	from	women,	and	you	are	reminding	me	of
them	again	and	again.	Are	you	a	sex	maniac	or	something?"
The	psychologist	said,	"It	 is	a	very	strange,	peculiar	case.	Why	do	these	things
remind	you	of	women?"
The	man	said,	"Everything	reminds	me	of	women!	Look	out	of	the	window"	--	a
camel	was	going	by.	"That	camel	too	reminds	me	of	women.	You	remind	me	of
women!	 In	 fact,	 I	 don't	 think	 about	 anything	 else	 --	 this	 is	 my	 whole	 life
philosophy."
Those	three	minutes	are	for	average	people	--	and	average	people	don't	exist.	It
is	just	a	mathematical	calculation	in	which	children	are	included	who	don't	think
of	 women;	 in	 which	 really	 ripe	 and	 grown-up	 people	 are	 included	 who	 don't
think	 of	 women;	 in	 which	 sex	 maniacs	 are	 included	 who	 don't	 think	 about
anything	else....	So	don't	be	satisfied	with	the	average;	just	look	at	yourself	and
find	out	how	many	minutes	you	can	remain	without	thinking	of	women.
My	 own	 experience	 of	 thousands	 of	 men	 is	 that	 the	 gap	 is	 at	 the	 most	 one
minute.	You	can	keep	a	watch	in	front	of	you	and	test	whether	in	one	minute	the
idea	of	women	comes	or	not.	And	you	will	be	surprised:	"My	god.	Every	minute
I	am	thinking	of	women."
The	case	with	women	is	totally	different.	Seven	minutes	is	also	an	average,	but
ordinarily	no	woman	thinks	of	man	every	seven	minutes.	The	average	is	because
women	sex	maniacs	also	exist.	There	are	women	who	don't	think	of	men	at	all	--
hours	pass	--	and	they	feel	great	relief.
And	you	are	asking	me	--	this	has	become	the	midnight	bedroom	dilemma	of	"I
have	a	headache."	That	is	a	female	thing,	not	a	male	thing.	It	is	a	female	strategy.
Unless	 you	 are	 very	 close	 to	 female	 chemistry	 you	 will	 not	 say,	 "I	 have	 a
headache."
Man	uses	 the	woman	 just	 like	 sleeping	 pills.	 Sex	 gives	 him	 a	 good	 sleep.	All
energy	is	gone	out	of	him.	Now	there	is	nothing	else	to	do	except	to	fall	asleep
and	hope	that	in	the	morning	he	can	get	up.
Man's	 mind	 is	 different	 than	 woman's	 mind.	 They	 function	 in	 different
directions.
Doctors,	who	are	mainly	men,	have	researched	and	come	to	the	conclusion	that
no	man	has	died	while	making	love.	That's	true.	In	the	whole	history	of	billions
of	human	beings	no	man	has	died	by	making	love,	while	making	love.	Nobody
has	suffered	a	heart	attack	while	making	love.
So	 for	man,	woman	 is	 almost	 a	 commodity	 to	 be	 used	 for	 good	 sleep,	 for	 no
heart	attack,	for	avoiding	death	as	far	as	he	can.
But	 the	 woman	 has	 been	 almost	 tortured.	 First	 she	 has	 had	 her	 orgasmic	 joy
taken	away,	because	man	finishes	too	soon,	before	the	woman	has	even	begun.
The	difference	in	the	orgasmic	capacity	between	man	and	woman	is	immense;	it
is	a	recent	discovery,	in	this	century	--	the	whole	humanity	in	the	past	has	lived
in	darkness.
Man's	sexuality	 is	 local,	genital.	Woman's	sexuality	 is	widespread,	all	over	her
body.
Naturally,	to	attain	an	orgasmic	experience	her	whole	body	has	to	throb	with	joy,
tremble	with	ecstasy	 --	but	 that	will	 take	 time.	By	 the	 time	her	whole	body	 is
ready	and	trembling	and	feeling	a	dance	of	energy	in	her	being,	the	man	is	fast
asleep.	He	is	finished,	he	has	gone	to	sleep.
Man	has	been	in	many	ways	cruel,	primitive	and	barbarous	towards	women.	He
has	never	cared	what	she	feels;	he	is	only	concerned	with	himself.	He	has	been
using	women	--	and	remember	the	most	humiliating	thing	in	the	world	is	to	be
used,	because	that	brings	you	down	from	your	dignity	into	a	commodity.
Commodities	are	used.	Human	beings	are	not	used,	but	women	have	been	used
for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 In	 fact,	 they	 have	 even	 forgotten	 that	 they	 have	 any
orgasmic	 capacity.	 Naturally,	 they	 try	 to	 avoid	 this	 ugly	 scene	 as	 much	 as
possible;	hence	"I	have	a	headache"	is	a	feminine	strategy.
You	are	in	a	deep	misunderstanding;	put	things	right!	If	you	want	a	woman	not
to	have	a	headache,	then	be	playful	with	her:	sing,	dance,	bring	to	your	bedroom
the	 atmosphere	 of	 a	 temple,	 burn	 incense,	 take	 a	 good	 bath	 after	 the	 whole
day's...	And	your	love	should	be	the	climax.
But	wait!	Unless	the	woman	starts	throbbing	and	trembling	and	starts	becoming
ecstatic,	only	then	making	love	to	her	will	you	have	an	orgasmic	experience	and
she	 will	 have	 an	 orgasmic	 experience.	 And	 when	 both	 orgasmic	 experiences
happen	 simultaneously,	 it	 is	 a	 tremendous	 phenomenon.	 Religiously	 it	 is	 a
tremendous	 phenomenon,	 because	 it	 will	 give	 you	 the	 first	 glimpse	 of
meditation.
My	own	understanding	is	that	man	has	come	to	know	about	meditation	from	no
other	 source,	because	 there	 is	no	other	 source	available.	How	did	man	 start	 to
think,	 in	 the	 very	 beginning,	 about	 meditation?	 Mind,	 you	 know,	 is	 natural;
meditation	has	to	be	achieved.
Something	must	have	given	him	a	glimpse	beyond	mind.	Orgasmic	experience
gives	you	a	state	when	time	stops,	mind	stops,	and	you	are	sheer	joy.
That	has	been,	according	to	me,	the	source	of	thinking	that	going	beyond	mind	is
possible.	 And	 if	 it	 is	 possible	 in	 sexual	 orgasm,	 a	 few	 adventurous	 people,
pioneers,	must	have	 tried...	why	can't	 it	be	possible	alone?	Because	 two	 things
they	have	got	absolutely	correct:	time	stops,	mind	stops.
Of	 course	you	 cannot	 stop	 time	directly;	 hence	 the	 conclusion:	 stop	 the	mind.
And	 the	moment	mind	 is	 silent	and	has	stopped,	 time	stops,	and	suddenly	you
find	yourself,	without	any	sexuality,	in	an	orgasmic	joy	which	is	far	deeper	than
the	sexual.	In	sex	you	are	dependent	on	the	other	person;	now	you	are	absolutely
free.
If	 people	 like	 Gautam	Buddha	 or	Mahavira	 became	 celibate...	 it	 was	 not	 that
through	 being	 celibate	 they	 became	 Gautam	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira.	 The
situation	 is	 just	 the	 reverse:	 they	 became	 Gautam	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira	 by
meditation	 and	 they	 found	 a	 far	 bigger	 freedom	 and	 orgasmic	 joy.	 Sex
disappeared	from	their	life.
But	 people	 have	 looked	 at	 it	 wrongly.	 From	 the	 outside	 you	 cannot	 see	 their
orgasmic	 joy;	you	can	only	 see	 that	 this	man	has	become	celibate.	Perhaps	by
becoming	 celibate	 you	will	 also	 attain	 the	 orgasmic	 joy.	 It	 does	 not	work	 that
way.
Mind	 has	 to	 stop	 first,	 then	 time	 stops.	 And	 when	 both	 time	 and	 mind	 are
stopped	 you	 have	 tremendous	 ecstasy,	 ecstasy	 so	 great...	 There	 is	 not	 only	 a
difference	of	degree	between	sexual	orgasm	and	spiritual	orgasm;	the	difference
is	qualitative:	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own,	a	blissfulness	of	its	own,	a	contentment
of	its	own.
But	the	whole	of	humanity	has	been	misled	because	of	a	logical	fallacy.	People
saw	 that	Bodhidharma	 or	 Sanai	 or	Ta	Hui	 have	 become	 celibate...	 perhaps	 by
becoming	 celibate	 we	 will	 attain	 to	 their	 enlightenment.	 But	 by	 becoming
celibate	you	will	become	only	a	pervert.
Just	the	other	day	my	news	service,	Anando,	has	brought	the	news	that	in	Europe
Catholic	bishops	and	priests	are	 leaving	the	churches	and	getting	married.	And
the	fear	has	arisen...	in	the	backward	countries	many	people	have	been	converted
and	 now	 they	 are	 becoming	 bishops	 and	 cardinals.	 Perhaps	 the	 day	 is	 not	 far
away	when	black	people	will	be	teaching	in	the	white	countries	as	bishops	and
cardinals.	And	 then	 the	 final	 step	 is	 the	 first	 black	man	 becoming	 the	 pope	 --
because	it	is	a	question	of	majority	or	minority,	and	white	bishops	are	becoming
the	minority	every	day.
But	 those	 priests	 are	 on	 the	 right	 path.	 They	 have	 suffered	 unnecessarily	 and
now	they	have	gathered	courage	and	they	are	marrying.	My	feeling	is	it	is	a	good
sign.
But	 the	Catholic	church	 is	afraid	 that	black	people	may	dominate	Catholicism.
That	would	 be	 a	 strange	 situation,	 because	 the	white	man	 has	 always	 thought
that	 he	 is	 carrying	 the	 whole	 burden	 of	 humanity,	 that	 he	 is	 responsible	 for
everybody's	salvation.	It	is	not	going	to	be	so	anymore.	Soon	black	people	will
be	 the	 saviors	 of	white	 people.	You	 have	 saved	 for	many	 centuries,	 now	 give
them	a	chance.	You	have	not	been	able	to	save	anything;	perhaps	black	people
may	be	able	to	save.
The	 danger	 is	 greater	 because	 black	 people	 are	 sexually	 more	 powerful	 than
white	people...	perhaps	because	of	the	climate,	their	situation,	their	food.	If	black
people	 start	 dominating	 the	 Catholic	 church,	 then	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 an
immense	perversion	of	sexuality;	it	is	now	Africa	which	is	suffering	most	from
the	disease	AIDS.	But	this	influx	cannot	be	stopped;	the	Catholics	have	invited	it
themselves.
Just	 try	 to	 be	 alert	 and	 don't	 imitate,	 and	 your	 seriousness	will	 be	 gone,	 your
headache	will	be	gone.
Father	John,	a	Catholic	priest,	was	astonished	one	day	to	see	his	friend,	Father
Michael,	 driving	 a	Mercedes-Benz.	He	 asked	him	how	he	 could	 afford	 such	 a
great	car	when	all	he	could	afford	was	a	bicycle.
So	Father	Michael	told	him	that	one	day	during	the	prayer	before	the	collection
he	was	 swinging	his	 rosary	when	he	 realized	 that	 the	whole	 congregation	was
hypnotized.	So	he	told	everyone	to	empty	their	wallets	and	when	he	counted	the
money	he	had	enough	to	buy	a	car.
Father	John	said,	"That's	great.	I'm	going	to	try	it."
But	 a	 few	 weeks	 later	 when	 they	 met	 again,	 Father	 John	 was	 still	 riding	 his
bicycle.
"What	happened?"	asked	his	friend.
"Well,"	said	Father	John,	"everything	went	just	as	you	said	and	the	congregation
was	 completely	 in	my	power.	But	 just	 then	 I	 dropped	 the	 rosary	 and	 said,	Òh
shit,'	and	I'm	still	cleaning	the	church!"
Paddy	and	Maureen	live	in	an	old	house,	very	close	to	the	railway	station,	and
every	time	a	train	goes	by,	the	door	of	their	bedroom	wardrobe	opens	by	itself.
Maureen	gets	so	fed	up	with	this	that	one	day	she	calls	a	carpenter	to	come	and
fix	it.	But	he	can't	locate	the	problem	and	he	decides	that	the	only	thing	to	do	is
to	get	inside	it,	close	the	door	and	watch	what	happens.
Just	then	Paddy	comes	home.	He	sees	a	pair	of	men's	shoes	in	the	bedroom	and
starts	looking	around	for	the	owner,	but	before	Maureen	can	explain	a	train	goes
by,	the	wardrobe	opens	by	itself,	and	the	carpenter	is	revealed	inside.
Paddy	is	furious.	"And	what	the	hell	are	you	doing	here?"	he	cries.
"You	won't	believe	this,"	says	the	man,	"but	I'm	waiting	for	a	train!"
Life	is	so	hilarious,	and	you	are	having	a	headache!
Enjoy	life	and	you	will	forget	not	only	the	headache	but	even	the	head,	because
one	remembers	the	head	only	when	he	has	a	headache	--	have	you	noticed	that?
My	 definition	 for	 a	 healthy	man	 is	 that	 he	 does	 not	 feel	 his	 body	 at	 all.	 The
moment	 you	 have	 a	 heartache	 you	 feel	 the	 heart;	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 a
stomachache	you	feel	the	stomach;	when	you	have	a	headache	you	feel	the	head.
If	you	are	perfectly	healthy	you	will	not	feel	the	body	at	all.	It	is	simply	there.
But	mistakes	happen	because	our	clarity	about	existence	is	not	meditative.	Our
mind	is	continuously	creating	unnecessary	problems,	unnecessary	dilemmas.
Hymie	Goldberg	was	a	string	salesman	from	New	York.	His	boss	sent	him	to	the
deep	 South	 in	 order	 to	 open	 some	 new	 accounts	 for	 the	 company,	 but	Hymie
encountered	 discrimination	 everywhere	 he	 went	 and	 was	 unable	 to	 do	 any
business.	 Finally,	 in	 Mississippi,	 an	 anti-Semitic	 store	 owner	 said	 to	 Hymie,
"Okay,	Jew,	I'll	buy	as	much	string	as	reaches	from	the	end	of	your	Jewish	nose
to	the	tip	of	your	Jewish	prick."
A	 month	 later,	 the	 same	 store	 owner	 was	 surprised	 to	 receive	 four	 hundred
cartons	 of	 grade	 "A"	 string.	 Inside	was	 a	 bill	 for	 twenty-five	 thousand	 dollars
and	 a	 note	which	 said:	Thank	 you	 for	 your	 generous	 order.	 I	 hope	we	 can	 do
business	again	soon.	Signed:	Hymie	Goldberg.	Living	in	New	York,	circumcised
in	Warsaw.
That	 much	 length...!	 Just	 be	 clever	 and	 you	 can	 use	 any	 situation	 for	 being
happy.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
SITTING	 IN	 FRONT	OF	US,	WHAT	DO	YOU	 SEE?	DO	YOU	 FIND	ALL
THESE
JOKES	WHILE	LOOKING	AT	US?
Svabhavo,	you	are	 right.	 I	have	 to	confess	 it:	 looking	at	you,	what	else	can	be
found?	You	are	all	a	joke	unto	yourself.
Gautam	Buddha	said	as	his	last	statement:	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself."	The	day	I
leave	 the	body	please	 remind	me,	 so	 that	 I	can	make	my	 last	 statement:	 "Be	a
joke	unto	yourself."
That	is	far	more	joyful	than	being	a	light	unto	yourself.	What	are	you	going	to
do	with	a	light?	Light	your	cigars,	or	burn	people's	houses?
But	being	a	joke	unto	yourself,	you	will	be	a	bliss	for	everyone.
You	are	right...	this	is	the	way	I	find	jokes	--	looking	at	you.	So	be	aware	when	I
look	at	you;	I	am	searching	for	a	joke!
A	big	old	Indian	was	sitting	in	a	bar	out	West	when	a	dirty	hippy	came	in	and
started	to	drink	a	lot	and	insult	all	the	other	people	there.	Soon	everyone	had	left
the	 bar	 in	 disgust	 except	 for	 the	 old	 Indian	who	 just	 watched	 the	 hippy	with
interest.
So	 the	hippy	walked	over	 to	him	and	said,	"Hey,	 Indian,	what	 the	hell	are	you
staring	at?"
"Well,"	 said	 the	 Indian,	 "many	 years	 ago	 I	was	 arrested	 for	making	 love	 to	 a
buffalo,	and	I	just	had	a	feeling	that	maybe	you	are	my	son."
I	 see	 your	 troubles	 and	 really...	 I	 take	 them	 seriously,	 but	 deep	 inside	 I	 am
giggling.	Not	to	offend	you	I	talk	about	your	problems,	which	are	sheer	nonsense
--	but	don't	tell	it	to	anybody!
Once	there	was	a	man	who	had	everything	a	man	could	desire:	a	wonderful	job
that	 he	 liked,	 a	 wonderful	 wife	 and	 wonderful	 children,	 but	 then	 one	 day	 he
began	to	see	spots	in	front	of	his	eyes.	At	first	he	tried	to	ignore	them,	but	they
began	to	get	worse.	So	finally	he	paid	a	visit	to	the	doctor.	The	doctor	examined
him	 but	 could	 find	 nothing	wrong	with	 him,	 so	 he	 sent	 him	 to	 a	 specialist,	 a
neurosurgeon,	 who	 examined	 him	 thoroughly	 with	 many	 tests.	 He	 also	 could
find	nothing.
But	he	said	to	the	man,	"Although	I	can	find	nothing	specific,	I	have	seen	cases
like	this	before;	often	it	 is	some	pressure	on	the	brain,	which	usually	results	 in
death	after	six	months	to	a	year."
The	man	became	very	upset,	but	then	he	decided	that	if	indeed	he	only	had	such
a	short	time	to	live,	he	would	enjoy	life	and	do	everything	he	ever	wanted.	The
man	loved	nice	clothes,	so	he	went	to	the	best	tailor	in	town	and	said,	"Give	me
the	 best	 clothes	 you	 have	 in	 your	 store:	English	 imported	 suits,	 Italian	 leather
shoes,	hand-stitched	silk	ties,	and	one	dozen	of	the	best	tailored	silk	shirts,	size
fourteen	neck."
The	tailor	who	had	taken	all	his	measurements	said	to	him,	"Fourteen	neck?	You
don't	have	a	fourteen	neck	--	you	have	a	fifteen	neck!"
"Don't	tell	me	what	I	have,"	said	the	man,	"I	have	been	wearing	a	size	fourteen
neck	all	my	adult	life."
"Well,	if	that's	so,"	said	the	tailor,	"then	you	must	be	seeing	spots	in	front	of	your
eyes!"
Seeing	you,	certainly	I	rejoice.	So	many	jokes	all	around!	Perhaps	this	is	the	first
gathering	in	the	world	where	jokes	are	being	used	for	your	spiritual	growth....
And	 you	 cannot	 be	 otherwise	 --	 unless	 you	 become	 enlightened.	 Only
enlightened	people	don't	have	anything	in	life	which	you	can	make	a	joke	of.	But
in	ignorance	and	unconsciousness,	whatever	you	do	is	somehow	hilarious	--	your
fights,	 your	 love	 affairs,	 your	marriages,	 your	 divorces.	 If	 you	 start	 watching
your	behavior,	you	will	find	out	for	yourself	--	"My	god.	My	whole	life	is	full	of
jokes!"
And	it	will	be	a	great	revelation...	far	greater	than	the	revelation	of	God,	because
that	too	is	only	a	joke	and	nothing	else.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Into	the	open	sky
7	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709075
ShortTitle:
PILGR03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
81
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN	WHEN	YOU	DON'T	ANSWER	A	QUESTION?
Kala	Shreeman,	not	answering	a	question	is	also	answering	it	--	but	you	have	to
be	more	intelligent	to	understand	it.	People	don't	understand	even	the	answered
questions,	but	my	approach	is	hope	for	the	best	and	expect	the	worst!	Whether
you	get	it	or	not,	I	will	haunt	you	until	you	get	it.
There	 are	questions	which	 can	be	 answered	only	by	not	 answering	 them;	 they
are	real	questions.	Only	unreal	questions	can	be	answered,	only	questions	arising
out	of	the	mind	can	be	answered.
But	 there	are	also	questions	which	arise	not	out	of	your	mind,	but	our	of	your
very	being.
They	 are	 not	 questions	 of	 curiosity,	 but	 questions	 of	 deep	 longing,	 searching,
seeking.
They	 are	 not	 accidental	 --	 you	 have	 not	 asked	 them	 just	 "by	 the	 way."	 Their
meaning	 is	as	precious	as	 life	 itself.	Those	questions	can	be	answered	only	by
silence.
Jesus	spoke	continuously	for	three	years;	that	was	his	whole	period	of	work.	He
started	his	work	at	the	age	of	thirty,	and	people	crucified	him	at	the	age	of	thirty-
three.	His	 period	 of	work	was	 very	 short,	while	Buddha	worked	 for	 forty-two
years,	Mahavira	worked	for	forty	years.
There	 is	 only	 one	 question	 that	 Jesus	 did	 not	 answer.	 In	 those	 three	 years,
thousands	of	questions	were	asked,	and	he	answered	them.	He	answered	the	way
people	have	very	rarely	answered	--	with	such	sincerity	and	such	authority	that
even	his	enemies	used	to	say,	"We	have	never	heard	a	man	speak	this	way!	The
same	language,	the	same	words,	but	from	an	authentic	individual	their	fragrance
is	different,	 their	music	 is	different.	Their	penetration	 is	deep;	 they	 touch	your
very	heart."
Jesus'	words	are	not	 just	words,	empty	and	contentless;	his	words	are	his	very
being.	He	is	pouring	himself	 in	his	words	--	and	that	makes	 the	difference,	 the
great	difference.
But	 one	 question	 he	 has	 not	 answered,	 and	 that	 was	 the	 question	 asked	 by	 a
sympathizer	who	wanted	 to	 save	 him.	 It	was	 asked	 by	 the	 governor	 of	 Judea,
Pontius	Pilate.	Judea	was	a	slave	country	under	the	Roman	Empire,	and	Pontius
Pilate	was	the	Roman	governor	of	Judea.	He	was	not	a	Jew,	hence	he	could	not
understand	why	 the	 Jews	were	 so	mad	 against	 an	 innocent	 young	man.	 Jesus
may	have	been	saying	things	which	they	don't	agree	with,	but	that	does	not	mean
that	 a	 person	 should	 be	 crucified.	 It	 shows	 really	 the	 weakness	 of	 you	 who
cannot	answer	his	arguments.
The	 Jews	 had	 a	 great	 number	 of	 learned	 rabbis	 --	 they	 could	 have	 challenged
Jesus.	Jesus	was	an	uneducated	carpenter's	son;	he	knew	nothing	of	scriptures,
but	he	knew	something	more	valuable.	It	seems	he	knew	himself.	And	that	is	the
only	holy	scripture	there	is.
The	 learned	 rabbis	were	 angry	because	an	uneducated	man	was	 speaking	with
such	 authority.	 They	 were	 hesitant	 about	 their	 own	 beliefs...	 they	 were	 also
talking	great	 things,	but	all	 those	great	 ideas	were	borrowed.	He	was	speaking
directly,	spontaneously,	according	to	his	own	experience	--	not	within	quotes.
Pontius	Pilate's	wife	was	a	very	educated	woman;	she	heard	many	stories	about
Jesus,	 and	many	 times	 she	went	 in	 disguise	 to	 hear	 him.	 She	was	 immensely
impressed,	and	it	was	she	who	convinced	Pontius	Pilate	that	what	is	going	on	--
this	insistence	of	the	Jews,	of	the	crowd,	of	the	masses,	to	crucify	a	young	man	-
-	is	simply	ugly,	inhuman..."and	you	have	to	do	something."
Pontius	 Pilate	 called	 Jesus	 to	 his	 palace.	 The	 man	 was	 so	 beautiful	 and	 so
simple,	 so	 poor,	 so	 humble,	 that	 there	 was	 immediately	 a	 rapport	 between
Pontius	Pilate	and	Jesus.
Pontius	Pilate	was	a	very	learned	Roman	scholar.	He	could	see	at	least	that	the
young	man	had	something	in	his	being	which	was	radiant,	which	those	learned
rabbis	didn't	have.	But	they	had	power....
He	 wanted	 to	 save	 Jesus,	 although	 it	 was	 risky...	 risky	 because	 if	 the	 whole
Jewish	population	of	 Judea	 --	 and	 they	were	 the	only	people	 in	 Judea	 --	were
against	 Pontius	 Pilate,	 he	might	 lose	 his	 tremendously	 powerful	 position.	 The
Roman	 government,	 the	Roman	 emperor	would	 not	want	 a	 governor	 in	 Judea
who	 is	not	 liked	by	 the	people,	so	 it	was	against	his	own	position.	But	still	he
wanted	to	do	everything	to	save	him.
The	last	question	he	asked	was	not	answered	by	Jesus.	The	question	was,	"What
is	truth?"	Jesus	looked	into	his	eyes,	utterly	silent,	and	did	not	say	a	single	word.
Pontius	Pilate	understood	the	meaning	of	the	not	answered	question,	and	he	felt
even	more	sorry	and	in	a	dilemma	--	what	to	do?	Still	he	tried....	As	he	went	into
his	house,	the	first	thing	he	did	was	to	wash	his	hands.	That	act	--	of	washing	his
hands	--	remained	uncommented	on	for	two	thousand	years.
It	was	Sigmund	Freud	in	the	early	part	of	this	century	--	strangely,	himself	a	Jew
--	who	first	made	the	statement	that	Pontius	Pilate	washed	his	hands	because	he
wanted	 to	 be	 clear,	 at	 least	 before	 God,	 that	 he	 was	 not	 responsible	 for	 the
crucifixion	of	this	beautiful	young	man.	"I	wash	my	hands,	I	don't	have	his	blood
on	my	hands."
He	 tried	 to	 put	 up	 three	 people	 for	 crucifixion.	 It	 was	 an	 ancient	 tradition	 in
Judea	that	the	people	could	ask	for	at	least	one	person	to	be	released	from	being
crucified,	and	he	was	hoping	 that	by	putting	up	 three	persons,	 the	Jews	would
certainly	ask	for	Jesus	to	be	released.
Jesus	 was	 a	 Jew;	 he	 was	 not	 a	 Christian	 --	 he	 had	 never	 heard	 the	 word
Christian.	He	was	born	a	Jew,	he	lived	a	Jew,	he	died	a	Jew.	The	word	Christian
came	into	existence	three	hundred	years	later.
But	when	Pontius	Pilate	came	and	asked	the	people	--	and	thousands	of	people
had	 gathered	 --	 "According	 to	 the	 convention,	 I	 can	 release	 one	 person	 from
crucifixion.	 He	 will	 be	 made	 completely	 free..."he	 was	 shocked	 that	 they	 all
shouted	only	one	name.	That	name	was	not	Jesus;	that	name	was	of	a	murderer
who	had	murdered	at	 least	seven	people.	I	say	at	 least	because	that	was	on	the
record	of	the	government;	he	may	have	murdered	more,	he	was	a	born	murderer
and	criminal.	His	name	was	Barabbas	 --	 and	 the	whole	 Jewish	crowd,	without
exception,	asked	that	Barabbas	should	be	released.
No	man	of	any	intelligence	could	have	believed	it,	and	even	Barabbas	could	not
believe	it.	He	was	also	thinking	that	this	young	man	--	he	has	not	done	anything
wrong,	he	has	not	harmed	anybody,	he	has	not	committed	anything	criminal	--	is
bound	to	be	released.
He	could	not	 believe	his	 own	ears	when	he	heard	 that	 people	were	 asking	 for
Barabbas.
Even	when	he	was	released,	going	out	in	the	crowd,	he	looked	again	and	again
with	unbelieving	eyes:	What	is	happening...?	All	these	people	know	him;	he	is	a
drunkard,	he	is	a	murderer,	he	is	a	robber	--	there	is	not	any	crime	that	he	has	not
committed.	These	are	the	people	who	know	him,	and	these	are	the	people	who
have	put	him	into	the	hands	of	the	government.	Strange,	why	have	they	asked...?
And	Jesus	was	crucified.
It	is	a	very	strange	story:	his	whole	life	he	answered	every	question,	and	at	the
last,	when	a	significant	question	was	asked,	he	remained	silent.	Do	you	think	he
did	not	answer?	He	answered	by	his	silence.	Nothing	can	be	said	about	truth,	and
anything	that	is	said	about	truth	is	not	truth.
You	can	be	truth,	but	you	cannot	say	anything	about	it.
A	truth	uttered	immediately	becomes	a	lie.
So	when	sometimes	it	happens	that	I	don't	answer	a	question,	Kala	Shreeman,	it
means	the	question	is	of	the	category	which	can	be	answered	only	in	silence.	But
I	don't	want	you	to	be	so	serious...!	Truth,	or	untruth	--	but	don't	be	serious!	If
you	want	me	to	answer	any	question...	I	am	ready	to	lie,	but	I	will	answer.
I	care	more	about	you	than	any	truth.
Eunice	came	home	with	a	brand-new	mink	coat.
"Where	did	you	get	that?"	asked	her	husband,	Bernie.
"I	won	it	in	a	raffle,"	she	replied.	The	following	night,	Eunice	walked	in	with	a
beautiful	diamond	bracelet.
"Where	did	that	come	from?"	asked	Bernie.
"I	won	it	in	a	raffle,"	said	Eunice.	"I'm	going	to	another	raffle	party	tonight,	and
I'm	in	a	hurry.	Would	you	mind	drawing	my	bath?"
Bernie	did	as	 instructed,	but	when	Eunice	came	 in	 to	 take	her	bath,	 she	 found
that	there	was	only	a	half-inch	of	water	in	the	tub.
"Bernie,"	she	asked,	"Why	didn't	you	fill	the	tub?"
"Well,	darling,"	he	answered,	"I	didn't	want	you	to	get	your	raffle	ticket	wet!"
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WILL	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 HOW	 YOU	WORK	 ON
US?
Swami	Antar	Aseem,	 have	 I	 to	 say	 even	 that	 too?	Can't	 you	 figure	 out	 how	 I
work	on	you?	You	are	asleep,	 that	 is	 true,	but	not	 that	much	asleep!	And	why
have	you	written	behind	your	name,	"Indian"?	Because	here,	in	this	temple,	there
is	no	one	who	 is	 Indian,	 and	 there	 is	 no	one	who	 is	German.	This	 is	 the	only
gathering	 in	 the	whole	world	where	 there	are	only	human	beings.	Perhaps	 it	 is
because	of	your	Indian	mind	that	is	still	hanging	around	you	that	such	a	question
arises.
I	am	working	on	you	from	morning	to	evening,	from	evening	to	morning...	even
in	 the	 night,	 even	 in	 your	 dreams	 I	 am	 working	 on	 you	 --	 and	 you	 don't
understand	how	I	am	working?	That	means	I	will	have	to	say	a	few	things	about
Indians!
Indians	are	all	alike,	but	they	have	different	faces	so	you	can	tell	them	apart.
There	are	two	types	of	people	in	this	world:	those	who	come	into	the	room	and
say,
"Well,	here	I	am!"	and	those	who	come	in	and	say,	"Ah,	there	you	are!"
The	first	ones	are	the	Indians;	 they	are	the	most	egoistic	people	on	the	earth	--
"Here	 I	 am."	 Their	 "I"	 perhaps	 is	 the	most	 subtle	 and	 strong	 and	 ancient	 "I."
Every	Indian	thinks	he	is	spiritual;	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	an	Indian	who	is	not
a	great	saint!	At	least,	I	have	not	found	one	yet.
There	 is	 an	 Indian	 saying,	 "Opportunity	 always	 knocks	 at	 the	 least	 opportune
moment."
That	 is	 true	 for	 India.	This	 reminds	me	of	Carnegie,	one	of	 the	 richest	men	 in
America.
He	 was	 delivering	 a	 talk	 in	 a	 university,	 and	 he	 said	 something	 about
opportunity,	 and	 a	 student	 asked,	 "You	 are	 right	 in	 saying,	 Ìf	 you	 use	 the
opportunity	you	can	also	become	as	rich	as	I	am'	--	but	how	to	know	when	the
opportunity	comes?	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	 I	become	aware	only	when	it	 is
gone,	and	then	I	say,	`My	god,	it	was	an	opportunity'	--	but	it	is	too	late.	So	what
do	you	suggest	I	should	do?"
Carnegie	said,	"As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	keep	on	jumping.	I	don't	wait	for	the
opportunity;	whenever	 it	 comes	 I	will	 ride	 on	 it	 --	 but	 I	 go	 on	 jumping.	 I	 am
always	 ready...	 it	 will	 come.	 But	 if	 you	 are	 not	 ready,	 then	 you	 will	 become
aware	only	when	it	has	passed,	because	opportunity	passes	in	a	single	moment."
India	has	been	losing	all	kinds	of	opportunities	because	people	go	on	waiting,	as
if	 it	 is	 God's	 responsibility	 to	 do	 things	 for	 you.	 People	 go	 on	 repeating	 that
when	 things	will	 become	worse	 --	 and	 I	 am	amazed	how	 things	 can	be	worse
than	 they	 are!	 --	 then	God	will	 come	 in	 an	 incarnation	 and	 save	 people.	 This
means:	 Try	 to	make	 your	 opportunities	 and	 life	worse,	 so	God	 comes	 sooner.
And	 they	 are	 trying	 hard!	 They	 are	 becoming	 more	 poor,	 they	 are	 becoming
more	retarded,	they	are	becoming	more	addicted	with	the	past,	 they	don't	 think
of	the	future.
These	are	the	signs	of	a	country	which	is	too	old:	in	the	future	there	is	only	death
and	nothing	else.
Indians	 must	 have	 one	 of	 the	 best	 countries	 in	 the	 world,	 with	 all	 kinds	 of
climates,	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 different	 cultures,	 people.	 But	 it	 has	 not	 used	 any
opportunity;	 it	 is	a	 fatalist	country,	 it	believes	 in	 fate.	 If	 things	are	going	 to	be
better,	they	will	be	better;	if	they	are	going	to	be	worse,	they	will	be	worse	--	you
cannot	do	anything.	This	impotence	has	become	symbolic	of	the	Indian	mind.
There	 is	 another	 Indian	 saying	 --	 and	 these	 sayings	 show	 the	 wisdom	 of
centuries	 --	 "If	 the	 shoe	 fits,	 it	 is	ugly."	A	strange	 statement!	Whenever	 things
are	good,	 Indians	don't	 feel	good:	 if	 the	 shoe	 fits,	 it	 is	 ugly.	The	 shoe	 is	good
only	when	it	pinches....
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	purchasing	a	pair	of	shoes,	and	the	shopkeeper	was	saying,
"Mulla,	 you	 are	 trying	 an	 almost	 impossible	 job.	You	 are	 trying	 to	 force	 your
foot	into	a	shoe	which	is	one	size	smaller	than	you	need."
Mulla	said,	"You	keep	quiet!	I	know	what	kind	of	shoes	I	need."
The	 shopkeeper	was	 very	much	 puzzled,	 but	Mulla	managed	 to	 force	 his	 foot
into	a	 small	 shoe,	and	 tears	came	 to	his	eyes.	The	shopkeeper	 said,	 "What	are
you	doing?"
Mulla	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	philosophy	of	it."
The	shopkeeper	said,	"There	is	some	philosophy	in	it?"	--	in	India	everything	is
philosophical!
Mulla	said,	"Yes,	this	is	not	an	ordinary	philosophy,	but	a	great	philosophy.	This
is	the	only	thing	that	keeps	me	happy."
The	man	said,	"And	tears	are	coming	to	your	eyes...."
Nasruddin	said,	"That's	why	I	cry	 the	whole	day:	 it	 is	pinching	so	much	 that	 I
forget	all	worries,	all	difficult	problems	--	the	wife	that	is	waiting	at	home,	the
difficult	children,	the	ugly	neighbors,	business	failures	--	everything	is	forgotten
when	the	shoe	is	pinching.
And	when	I	reach	home	and	I	take	the	shoes	off,	 it	 is	such	a	relief!	This	is	the
only	relief	in	twenty-four	hours.	I	feel	so	good	and	so	grateful	to	God	that	one
day	has	passed....
Now	 the	 problem	will	 arise	 again	 the	 next	 day,	 in	 the	morning;	 I	 can	 rest	 the
whole	night,	and	my	sleep	is	really	deep,	because	of	the	whole	day's	torture."
But	 this	 is	 the	 philosophy	 of	 this	 country.	 People	 are	 living	 in	 self-inflicted
torture.
Torture	 has	 become	 something	 of	 a	 religious	 discipline:	 the	more	 you	 torture
yourself,	the	more	religious	you	are	and	the	closer	to	God.
Another	proverb	for	you:
The	advantage	of	a	bad	memory	is	that	one	enjoys	several	times	the	same	good
things	for	the	first	time.
That's	 how	 Indians	 go	 on	 remaining	 in	 utter	 misery,	 but	 still	 contented.	 It	 is
simply	a	case	of	bad	memory;	they	forget	that	it	was	the	same	yesterday,	and	it
was	 the	same	 the	day	before	yesterday.	Every	day	seems	 to	 them	to	be	new	--
and	it	has	been	so	old	and	so	dirty.	It	has	been	for	centuries	the	same	slavery,	the
same	poverty,	 the	 same	 suffering,	 but	 every	day	 the	 Indian	gets	 up	 and	 thinks
that	 everything	 seems	 to	 be	 new.	 Just	 a	 case	 of	 bad	 memory...	 but	 very
advantageous:	you	will	not	find	anywhere	in	the	world	people	so	contented	and
so	miserable	at	the	same	time.
You	 should	 look	 into	 Indian	 proverbs	 and	 you	will	 find	 the	 very	 heart	 of	 the
Indian	personality.	Another	proverb	says:
Don't	worry	over	what	other	people	are	 thinking	about	you.	They	are	 too	busy
worrying	over	what	you	are	thinking	about	them.
He	who	laughs	last	is	most	likely	a	German.	The	Indian	never	laughs.
For	an	Indian,	cleanliness	is	next	to	impossible!
To	an	Indian,	to	err	is	human,	but	it	feels	divine!
To	the	Indian	mind,	it	is	absolutely	clear:
Never	put	off	until	tomorrow	what	you	can	avoid	altogether!
There	is	no	time	like	the	present	for	postponing	what	you	don't	want	to	do!
A	small	ad	in	a	Poona	newspaper:	"Young	farm	worker	wishes	to	marry	beautiful
girl	with	a	tractor.	Please	send	photo	of	the	tractor!"
For	an	Indian,	it	is	a	simple	task	to	make	things	complex,	but	a	complex	task	to
make	them	simple.
Why	have	you	written	"Indian"	after	your	name?	Such	things	provoke	me!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVEN	THOUGH	IT	SEEMS	THAT	LIFE	FOR	ME	IS	WONDERFUL,	I	SEE
THIS
HAPPENING	 ONLY	 ON	 THE	 SURFACE.	 WHEN	 I	 MOVE	 A	 LITTLE
DEEPER,	MY
REALITY	IS	OF	A	RESTLESS	BEING	WORRYING	ABOUT	ALL	SORTS	OF
THINGS.
I	FIND	THIS	CIRCLE	BORING	WHERE	I	AM	STUCK	NOW.	MAYBE	IT'S
BECAUSE	 OF	 MY	 LACK	 OF	 MEDITATION;	 STILL	 I	 DON'T	 SEEM	 TO
FIND	THE
WAY	IN,	DEEPER	--	EVEN	WHEN	THE	DOOR	IS	WIDE	OPEN.
OSHO,	 I	 HAVE	HEARD	YOU	 SAY,	 "BEFORE	YOU	DIE,	DESTROY	THE
EGO."	 I	 AM	 GRATEFUL	 TO	 EXISTENCE	 FOR	 EVERYTHING,
INCLUDING	THIS	EGO,	BUT	NOW	IT	FEELS	TO	BE	THE	RIGHT	TIME
TO	MAKE	ROOM	AND	BE
FINISHED	WITH	IT.
BELOVED	OSHO,	IS	THIS	HAPPENING	BECAUSE	I	DON'T	KNOW
MEDITATION?
Nivedano,	you	will	always	remain	crazy!	What	are	you	doing	here	if	you	don't
know	 meditation?	 You	 have	 perhaps	 got	 lost	 and	 forgotten	 your	 way,	 and
somehow	ended	up	here	--	because	here	everybody	is	doing	meditation.
I	have	been	telling	you	to	be	thankful	to	existence,	but	I	have	never	told	you	to
be	thankful	for	 the	ego.	Ego	has	not	been	given	to	you	by	existence.	It	 is	your
own	great	creation!	And	now	you	feel	that	it	is	the	right	time	to	make	room	and
be	finished	with	it.
Great	idea!	--	but	the	problem	is	that	you	don't	know	whether	this	is	happening
or	not,	because	you	don't	know	meditation.
Nivedano,	 if	 it	 is	 happening	 then	 you	 must	 be	 knowing	 meditation	 without
knowing	it.
There	are	many	people	who	have	qualities	 they	are	not	 aware	of,	but	 this	 is	 a
very	rare	case!	I	have	never	heard	of	anybody	who	is	in	meditation	and	does	not
know	 that	 he	 is	 in	 meditation	 --	 because	 meditation	 is	 such	 a	 tremendous
difference,	such	a	qualitative	difference	from	your	ordinary	life	that	you	cannot
miss	it.	It	is	almost	impossible;	that's	why	I	said	you	are	going	to	remain	crazy.
This	is	possible	only	if	you	are	crazy.
Contemplate	over	this	small	story:
A	man	decided	one	day	that	he	was	not	paying	enough	attention	to	his	family,	so
that	evening	he	went	home,	kissed	his	children,	gave	flowers	to	his	wife,	shaved,
showered	 and	 changed	before	 dinner,	 and	 told	 lots	 of	 funny	 stories	 during	 the
meal.	Afterwards	he	whistled	while	he	cleared	the	table,	and	insisted	on	washing
and	drying	all	the	dishes.
When	he	had	finished	he	went	into	the	living	room	and	found	his	wife	in	tears.
"Everything	 has	 gone	wrong	 today,"	 she	 sobbed.	 "The	 vacuum	 cleaner	 broke,
Ernie	 threw	his	ball	 through	 the	bedroom	window,	Polly	 fell	 and	 tore	her	best
dress	--	and	now	you	come	home	so	drunk,	you	don't	know	what	you	are	doing!"
Nivedano,	you	are	doing	meditation.	I	look	at	you,	and	I	feel	you	more	grateful
than	anybody	present	here	--	more	prayerful,	more	humble,	more	simple,	more
silent.
Just	this	morning,	passing	by	Buddha	Hall,	I	saw	your	little	child.	He	looked	so
beautiful.
I	enquired	whose	child	he	is,	and	Nirvano	told	me,	"He	is	Nivedano's	child."	For
a	 moment	 I	 thought	 Nivedano	 must	 have	 looked	 exactly	 like	 this	 child	 --	 so
simple...	but	he	still	looks	just	like	a	child	whenever	I	look	at	him.
He	may	not	be	 the	 same	with	others,	 that	 is	 almost	 certain,	but	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am
concerned,	when	I	look	at	him,	he	looks	so	silent,	so	saintly....	Although	he	does
not	know	what	he	is	doing,	he	is	doing	well.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
AGAIN	 ON	 THE	 SUBJECT	 OF	 DESTROYING	 EGO,	 ANOTHER
QUESTION
APPEARS	TO	BE	RELEVANT	TO	ME	RIGHT	NOW,	AND	THAT	 IS	 THE
FACT
THAT	WHEREVER	I	GO,	SOONER	OR	LATER,	TROUBLE	BUBBLES	UP.
USUALLY	IT	HAPPENS	WITH	AUTHORITIES	OF	SOME	KIND.
OSHO,	 I	WONDER	 IF	 THIS	 HAPPENS	 BECAUSE,	 BEING	 UNAWARE,	 I
GO	ON
PUSHING	THE	EDGES?	OR	IS	IT	AN	OLD	HABIT	OF	THE	EGO?	OR....?
Nivedano,	no	matter	where	you	go,	there	you	are!
The	bank	robbers	arrived	just	before	closing	time,	and	promptly	ordered	the	few
remaining	customers,	as	well	as	 the	clerks	and	guards,	 to	 take	 their	clothes	off
and	lie	face	down	on	the	floor.
One	nervous	blond	pulled	off	her	clothes	and	lay	down	on	the	floor,	face	up.
"Turn	over,	Maybelle,"	whispered	the	girl	lying	beside	her.	"This	is	a	stickup,	not
the	office	party."
Nivedano,	it	must	be	just	the	old	habit	--	you	think	it	is	the	office	party!	If	you
feel	 that	 wherever	 you	 go	 sooner	 or	 later	 trouble	 bubbles	 up,	 just	 be	 a	 little
aware!	And	don't	 thank	 existence	 for	 the	 ego,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 cause	of	 the
whole	trouble.	If	you	are	carrying	your	ego,	wherever	you	go	trouble	is	bound	to
bubble	up.
Ego	is	the	only	trouble	in	the	world.
If	everybody	in	the	world	just	for	one	hour	decides	to	put	the	ego	aside	--	just	for
one	hour	--	there	will	be	no	trouble,	no	problem;	there	will	be	such	great	peace
and	silence	and	love	that	we	have	not	known	before.	This	whole	planet	has	not
known	that.
But	the	ego	is	nourished	on	troubles.	If	it	cannot	create	trouble,	it	will	starve	to
death.	 It	 needs	 continuous	 nourishment,	 and	 that	 nourishment	 comes	 from
trouble.	So	if	you	understand	that	the	trouble	is	a	pain	in	the	neck,	and	you	are
tired	of	it...	If	you	are	not	tired	of	it,	 then	I	am	not	saying	you	have	to	drop	it;
first	get	really	tired,	then	there	is	no	need	for	me	to	tell	you	to	drop	it.	You	will
just	drop	it.
Trouble	is	your	spiritual	cancer;	it	is	better	to	get	rid	of	it.	It	is	the	only	agony	of
the	human	soul,	the	only	hell	that	really	exists.	And	it	is	within	your	hands	to	get
out	of	it.
I	have	told	you	a	story	that	I	love....	A	Japanese	king	went	to	see	Master	Lin	Chi.
He	touched	the	feet	of	the	master	and	before	he	could	say	anything,	Lin	Chi	said,
"You	idiot!
You	don't	know	even	manners."
The	king	completely	forgot	for	what	he	had	come.	He	pulled	out	his	sword,	and
Lin	 Chi	 laughed.	 He	 said,	 "You	 have	 forgotten	 your	 question.	 Now	 I	 remind
you"	--	because	 the	king	had	sent	his	prime	minister	before	him	to	 inform	Lin
Chi	 that	 he	 is	 coming	and	his	question	 is,	 "What	 is	 hell	 and	what	 is	 heaven?"
Now,	when	the	sword	was	 just	about	 to	fall	on	his	neck,	Lin	Chi	said,	"Wait	a
minute!	This	is	the	door	of	hell."
The	king	was	shocked.	His	hand	stopped.	He	put	back	the	sword	in	the	sheath,
and	Lin	Chi	said,	"That	is	the	door	of	heaven.	You	had	forgotten	your	question,
but	your	prime	minister	told	me.	It	was	good	that	he	told	me	before,	otherwise
you	would	have	killed	a	poor	man	unnecessarily,	and	you	would	have	suffered
hell	 --	 because	 hell	 is	 not	 anywhere	 else	 but	 in	 your	 ego.	When	 I	 said,	 `You
idiot!'	what	was	the	trouble?	Why	did	you	become	so	angry?	Who	was	hurt?	It	is
your	ego	that	was	hurt."
If	you	don't	have	any	ego,	it	doesn't	matter	whether	somebody	says	you	are	an
idiot	 or	 somebody	 says	 you	 are	 a	 genius.	 It	 does	 not	 matter...	 they	 are	 their
opinions.	You	know	who	you	are	--	you	don't	depend	on	other	people's	opinions.
Your	ego	depends.	Your	ego	keeps	you	a	slave	of	the	society	in	which	you	live.
Ordinarily	people	 think	 that	 their	ego	 is	 something	very	precious.	 It	 is	nothing
but	their	slavery.
A	man	becomes	independent	and	free	and	individual	only	when	he	has	dropped
his	 ego,	when	 he	 is	 just	 a	 silent	 being,	without	 any	 idea	 of	 "I"	 --	 just	 a	 pure
silence...	THIS
silence.	And	 if	 in	 this	 silence	you	 look	 inward,	 you	will	 not	 find	 any	 "I,"	 any
ego,	any	self,	but	just	a	pure	space.
This	pure	space	is	your	spirituality.
This	pure	space	is	your	enlightenment.
This	pure	space	is	your	ultimate	ecstasy.
The	ego	is	preventing	everything.	Ego	is	making	you	a	beggar,	while	you	are	an
emperor	of	a	great	empire.	Of	course,	that	empire	does	not	belong	to	the	outside
world;	it	is	in	your	own	being,	but	its	vastness	is	as	big	as	the	universe	itself.
Your	ego	is	keeping	you	encaged,	imprisoned.	Don't	nourish	it...	and	I	am	saying
it	because	I	know	it	is	everybody's	possibility	not	to	nourish	the	ego	and	to	get
out	into	the	open	sky.
One	day	at	the	London	zoo	two	Jewish	ladies,	both	blond	and	middle-aged,	were
standing	in	front	of	the	cage	of	Guy	the	gorilla,	and	no	doubt	passing	remarks	on
aspects	of	his	physique.
Suddenly	 Guy,	 who	 was	 kept	 alone	 and	 whose	 life	 was	 very	 boring,	 was
possessed	by	a	tremendous	urge.	He	gripped	the	bars	before	him,	and,	such	was
the	force	of	his	lust,	wrenched	them	apart.	He	leaned	out,	seized	the	blonder	of
the	two	ladies,	drew	her	into	the	cage	and	pulled	the	bars	together.	The	hapless,
screaming,	 blonder	 lady	 was	 dragged	 towards	 the	 inner	 sleeping	 quarters,
screened	from	public	view.
Some	days	later,	recovering	in	a	Harley	Street	clinic,	the	lady	was	visited	by	her
friend.
"Oy	Veh,	Rachel,"	 the	friend	commiserated.	Then,	whispering	hoarsely	"...	and
tell	me	how	you	feel?"
Came	 the	 reply,	 "How	 do	 you	 THINK	 I	 feel?...	 he	 hasn't	 written,	 he	 hasn't
phoned."
Nivedano,	learn	to	laugh	at	your	own	ego.	The	moment	you	are	gripped	by	your
ego,	relax	and	have	a	good	laugh.
And	don't	be	worried...	and	I	know	you	are	crazy,	you	will	not	be	worried	what
people	think	about	you.	But	if	you	can	laugh	at	your	ego,	that	is	the	best	way	to
kill	it.	Don't	be	serious	about	your	ego,	because	that	is	very	nourishing	food	for
the	ego.	That's	why	all	egoists	are	serious	people.
The	people	who	can	 laugh	and	enjoy	and	be	playful	are	never	egoists.	 It	 is	on
this	particular	point	that	I	disagree	with	all	the	religions	of	the	world.	They	have
made	people's	egos	very	strong	by	teaching	them	to	be	serious	about	life.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 erase	 the	 tremendous	 impact	 of	 millions	 of	 years	 of	 religious
training.	On	the	one	hand	they	say,	"Drop	the	ego,"	and	on	the	other	hand	they
don't	 allow	 the	 childlike	 playfulness....	 On	 the	 one	 hand	 they	 go	 on	 insisting,
"Drop	the	ego,"	and	on	the	other	hand	they	don't	have	any	sense	of	humor.
No	 religion	 in	 the	 world	 has	 accepted	 a	 sense	 of	 humor	 as	 one	 of	 the
fundamental	 religious	 qualities.	 I	 accept	 it,	 and	 I	 want	 that	 no	 religion	 can
possibly	 exist	 in	 the	 future	unless	 it	 has	 as	 a	 fundamental	 quality	 the	 sense	of
humor.
A	religion	without	laughter...	a	God	who	cannot	laugh	and	dance	and	sing	is	not
worthy	of	being	God.	Send	him	to	hell!
Question	5
CARISSIMO	OSHO,
BECOMING	MORE	AWARE	OF	MYSELF,	I	HAVE	OFTEN	BEEN	FEELING
MORE
INTENSELY	 "UP	 AND	 DOWN,"	 AND	 SINCE	 BEING	 IN	 THE	 ASHRAM
THIS
FEELING	HAS	GROWN.
WHENEVER	 I	 ASK	 SOME	 SANNYASINS	 "HOW	 DO	 YOU	 FEEL?"	 THE
MOST
POPULAR	ANSWER	IS,	"UP	AND	DOWN."
I	CAN	RECOGNIZE	A	TRICK	OF	THE	MIND	 IN	THIS	FEELING,	BUT	A
DOUBT
ARISES:	 ISN'T	THIS	 (UP	AND	DOWN)	THE	SHAPE	OF	THE	VERTICAL
GROWTH
LINE	AND	THE	RHYTHM	OF	HUMAN	BEINGS,	GIVEN	THAT	HUMAN
LIFE
STARTS	FROM	AN	"UP	AND	DOWN"?
Kala	Shreeman....
Maurice	came	home	from	work	early	one	day	and	found	his	wife	in	the	arms	of
his	best	friend,	Max.
He	staggered	back	and	said,	"Max!	I	am	married	to	her,	so	I	have	to	do	that.	But
you?
You	are	a	free	man!"
Old	 Finkelstein	 was	 seventy-five	 when	 he	 decided	 to	 marry	 a	 young	 girl	 of
twenty.	His	friends	were	scandalized,	and	one	of	them	said,	"Finkelstein,	do	you
realize	 that	 a	 man	 of	 your	 age	 having	 sex	 with	 a	 young	 girl	 could	 be	 very
dangerous	--	even	fatal?"
Finkelstein	considered	for	a	while,	then	shrugged	and	said,	"Oh,	well,	if	she	dies,
she	dies!"
Life	is	such...	 it	 is	up	and	down!	It	 is	up	and	down	everywhere,	not	only	here.
And	the	moment	it	stops	being	up	and	down,	you	are	dead!	So	let	it	go	as	up	as
possible	and	as	down	as	possible....	The	higher	 it	goes,	 the	deeper	 it	goes,	 the
better.	Why	 are	 you	 worried	 because	 everybody	 says,	 "Up	 and	 down"?	 They
know...	and	you	know	also.
Paddy	was	known	 for	 his	 foul	 language	by	 everyone	 in	 his	 congregation.	The
parson	took	him	aside	on	Sunday	and	said,	"Every	time	you	swear	you	must	give
five	dollars	to	the	nearest	stranger.	That	will	cure	you	soon	enough."
As	Paddy	left	the	preacher,	he	stubbed	his	toe	and	then	silently	handed	the	five
dollars	to	a	woman	just	entering	the	church.
"Okay,"	whispered	the	woman,	"But	can	you	wait	until	after	the	service?"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Suddenly	you	have	blossomed
8	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709080
ShortTitle:
PILGR04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
71
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	THE	DEVIL	REALLY	MALE?
Deva	 Prachurya,	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 question	 because	 the	 women's	 liberation
movement	is	talking	about	God	being	a	woman;	they	have	started	pronouncing
him	not	 he	but	 she.	But	 none	of	 them	has	 thought	 about	 the	devil,	which	 is	 a
counterpart.	They	both	exist	together,	just	like	light	and	darkness,	life	and	death.
Both	are	hypothetical.	God	does	not	exist	 the	way	you	exist	and	the	trees	exist
and	the	mountains	exist;	it	is	just	a	hypothesis.	And	because	of	the	hypothesis	of
God,	theologians	have	had	to	create	his	other	pole,	the	other	polarity,	the	devil.
So	the	devil	becomes	darkness	and	God	becomes	light.
The	Hindu	UPANISHADS	have	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	prayers,	perhaps	 the
most	beautiful	in	the	whole	world	of	religion.	I	love	its	poetry,	but	I	don't	agree
with	 its	philosophy.	The	prayer	 is	very	 small,	 but	very	pregnant	with	meaning
and	 significance.	 It	 says,	 "Lead	 me	 from	 darkness	 to	 light"	 --	 tamsoma
jyotirgamaya.	It	says,	"Lead	me	from	untruth	to	the	truth"	--	astoma	sadgamaya.
And	 in	 the	 final	 stage	 it	 says,	 "Lead	 me	 from	 death	 to	 life"	 --	 mrityorma
amritamgamaya.
It	 is	sheer	poetry,	you	cannot	 improve	upon	 it	 --	but	 it	 is	utterly	 false,	because
darkness	and	light	are	one	phenomenon.	You	cannot	go	from	darkness	to	light,
because	light	is	nothing	but	a	little	less	darkness,	and	darkness	is	nothing	but	a
little	less	light.	It	is	a	difference	of	degrees.	Neither	can	you	go	from	untruth	to
truth	--	the	same	differentiation	of	degrees	is	there.	Every	untruth	has	something
true	about	it,	and	every	truth	expressed	has	to	join	hands	with	untruth.
And	you	cannot	go	from	death	to	eternal	life,	because	death	is	part	of	life.	It	is
not	against	it	--	it	is	the	very	crescendo	of	life.	They	both	exist	together.	A	person
who	cannot	die,	cannot	live	either.	Life	exists	with	death	almost	like	two	wings
of	 a	 bird:	 you	 cannot	 have	 the	 bird	 flying	 in	 the	 sky	 across	 the	 sun	with	 one
wing.	Life	and	death	are	just	like	your	two	legs	--	you	cannot	move	with	one	leg.
Existence	is	dialectical:	 it	always	has	 its	opposite.	Without	 the	opposite,	 it	will
not	exist.
Because	man	created	God	as	the	very	holy	of	the	holiest,	he	had	to	create	a	devil.
It	was	 just	 an	absolute	philosophical	necessity!	The	devil	 is	 the	counterpart	of
God.	You	will	be	surprised	to	know...	your	name	is	Deva	Prachurya.	Deva	means
divine,	and	devil	also	comes	from	the	same	root;	it	also	means	divine.
But	both	are	hypothetical.	I	have	no	objection	if	God	is	a	woman,	but	certainly	I
am	immensely	happy	if	the	devil	is	a	woman!	God	may	be,	may	not	be,	but	the
devil	is	certainly	a	woman;	otherwise	for	such	a	long	eternity	the	devil	could	not
have	been	nagging	God	continuously!	From	whom	is	God	escaping?	Where	is	he
hiding,	and	from	whom?	Why	has	he	not	the	guts	to	come	out,	at	least	once	in	a
while,	to	remind	people	that	he	is	still	alive?	The	woman	does	not	allow	it.
So	I	am	not	certain	about	God,	but,	Deva	Prachurya,	woman	is	certainly	a	devil	-
-	and	vice-versa!
Mrs.	Markovitz	got	a	knock	on	the	door.
"It	 is	your	husband,"	 shouted	her	neighbor,	 "he	 is	 face	down	 in	 the	 swimming
pool.	I	think	he	is	drowned."
"Is	today	Wednesday?"	asked	Mrs.	Markovitz.
"Yes,"	said	her	neighbor,	"it	is,	but..."
"What	time	is	it?"	Mrs	Markovitz	asked.
"Eleven	o'clock,	but..."	replied	her	neighbor.
"Then	don't	worry	 about	 a	 thing,"	 said	Mrs.	Markovitz,	 "the	pool	man	will	 be
here	in	an	hour!"
The	 husband	 has	 drowned...	 but	 the	 wife	 and	 the	 husband	 are	 the	 greatest
enemies	 in	 the	 world;	 psychologists	 call	 them	 "intimate	 enemies."	 They	 have
always	been!	It	is	a	very	recent	development	of	insight.
God	being	a	woman	will	create	trouble.	Then	the	devil	will	be	a	man	--	because
they	have	 to	be	polar	opposites.	Perhaps	 the	women's	 liberation	movement	has
not	thought	about	the	implications	of	what	they	are	doing.	I	would	like	God	to	be
the	man	and	 tortured	by	 the	devil,	 the	woman,	 rather	 than	vice-versa,	 because
good	 can	 be	 tortured	 by	 bad,	 but	 bad	 cannot	 be	 tortured	 by	 good.	 But	 the
question	simply	has	not	come	up	around	 the	world	 --	and	women	are	 insisting
that	God	is	a	woman.
It	 is	 really	 strange	 that	 nobody	 has	 bothered	 about	 the	 devil,	 who	 is	 a	 more
important	person	 than	God.	God	 is	only	a	VIP,	 the	devil	 is	 a	VVIP!	God	may
have	created	the	world,	but	the	devil	is	running	it	--	and	running	it	so	devilishly
and	so	perfectly.
Genghis	 Khan,	 Tamerlane,	 Nadirshah,	 Adolf	 Hitler,	 Joseph	 Stalin,	 Benito
Mussolini,	 Ronald	 Reagan	 --	 who	 do	 you	 think	 they	 represent?	 Certainly	 not
God!	 They	 represent	 the	 devil,	 and	 they	 have	made	 our	 history.	 They	 are	 the
people	who	go	on	creating	more	and	more	evil	in	the	world.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	declared,	"God	is	dead	and	man	is	free."	His	statement	is
incomplete;	he	has	forgotten	about	the	devil.	God	may	be	dead	--	most	probably
he	cannot	manage	to	survive	the	devil	for	so	long	--	but	the	devil	is	there.	And
unless	the	devil	is	also	dead,	man	cannot	be	free.
Man's	real	problem	is	not	God;	that	poor	fellow	has	never	been	seen	after	those
first	six	days	when	he	created	the	world.	Since	then	nobody	knows	where	he	is	--
whether	 he	 is	 sick,	 or	 got	 so	 tired	 of	 creating	 the	 world	 in	 six	 days	 that	 the
seventh	 day	 he	 rested...	 that	 is	 allowed.	 But	 what	 happened	 on	Monday?	 On
office	 days	 you	 should	 be	 back.	 Since	 then	 he	 has	 been	 on	 holiday...	 it	 is	 an
eternity.	Most	probably	he	died.
But	 the	 devil	 is	 still	 alive,	 and	 shows	 himself	 again	 and	 again.	 You	 cannot
conceive	of	Adolf	Hitler	in	any	other	way	than	an	incarnation	of	the	devil;	you
cannot	think	of	Nadirshah	and	his	great	company,	Tamerlane	and	Genghis	Khan,
as	anything	other	than	incarnations	of	the	devil.
I	 remember	 one	 case...	 Nadirshah	 attacked	 India	 --	 and	 he	 was	 a	 man	 who
enjoyed	killing	people	so	greatly	 that	his	whole	 life	he	was	killing	and	killing.
One	night	he	asked	his	soldiers	to	bring	the	most	beautiful	woman	of	the	area,	so
they	brought	a	prostitute	 from	a	nearby	village.	 In	 India,	prostitutes	are	a	 little
different	than	in	the	West.	In	the	West	they	are	only	sex	objects.	In	the	East	they
are	artists,	dancers,	singers;	their	being	sex	objects	is	secondary.
She	danced,	and	Nadirshah	was	very	happy.	The	night	was	almost	coming	to	an
end	when	Nadirshah	said,	"Now	I	want	to	go	to	sleep,	you	can	go	back."
He	gave	immense	rewards	to	the	woman,	but	the	woman	said,	"It	is	dark	outside.
With	 so	much	money,	 so	many	diamonds...	 I	 am	 a	woman	 and	 alone,	 and	 the
path	goes	through	a	dark	forest	--	I	cannot	go."
Nadirshah	told	his	soldiers,	"You	go	ahead	of	her,	and	go	on	burning	everything
that	you	find	--	forest,	village,	anything.	Make	it	a	light."
Nobody	 has	 made	 light	 that	 way	 --	 just	 a	 small	 torch	 would	 have	 done.	 But
Nadirshah	 had	 such	 a	 devilish	mind:	 he	 burned	 seven	 villages	 and	 the	 whole
forest	to	make	it	almost	look	like	day.	He	told	the	prostitute,	"Now	you	can	go.
And	you	will	remember	that	you	had	come	to	see	not	some	Tom,	Dick,	Harry;
you	had	come	to	see	the	great	emperor,	Nadirshah.	He	can	make	the	night	into
day."	Thousands	of	villagers	were	burned	alive.
You	cannot	say	such	a	man	represents	God	in	any	way.
The	devil	is	spread	all	over	your	history;	even	today,	the	devil	is	ruling	you.	The
devil	is	a	politician,	has	always	been	a	politician.	God	is	a	nice	guy	--	if	he	exists
--	very	gentlemanly,	has	 remained	almost	anonymous,	almost	a	nobody.	 If	one
has	to	think	about	who	is	more	important,	indubitably	it	is	the	devil.
I	would	like	him	to	be	a	woman,	because	the	woman	has	many	devilish	qualities.
But	 then	 God	 will	 have	 to	 be	 a	 man,	 because	 the	 polarity...	 both	 cannot	 be
women,	 both	 cannot	 be	 men.	 If	 both	 were	 women,	 there	 would	 have	 been
constant	struggle	and	fight	and	jealousy	and	envy.	If	both	were	men,	there	would
have	been	homosexuality	and	AIDS.	So	that	 is	not	acceptable;	 they	have	to	be
polar	opposites.
My	 feeling	 is	 that	 the	 devil	 is	man	 and	God	 is	woman	 --	 at	 least	 he	 has	 been
functioning	 as	 very	womanly.	 The	 devil	 is	 very	 aggressive,	 and	God	 goes	 on
retreating.
So	your	question	is	very	important	theologically	--	although	in	reality	they	both
don't	exist.	Hypotheses	cannot	be	male	or	female:	two	plus	two	is	four	--	do	you
think	it	is	male	or	female?	It	is	just	neutral,	it	has	no	genital	difference.
God	and	the	devil	are	just	theological	hypotheses.	It	simply	shows	the	weakness
of	the	theologians	that	they	could	not	manage	the	world	without	false	hypotheses
to	 support	 their	 systems.	God	 they	 needed	 to	 create	 the	world	 --	without	 ever
bothering	who	 created	God.	 Their	 fundamental	 idea	 is	 that	without	 somebody
creating,	 nothing	 can	 be	 created;	 that's	 why	 they	 have	 accepted	 God	 as	 the
creator	of	the	world.	But	why	stop	with	God?
What	happened	to	the	original	thesis?
The	thesis	was	that	nothing	can	be	created	without	a	creator.	Who	created	God?
According	to	all	religions...	the	question	has	remained	unanswered.	They	know
that	if	 they	say	God	A	was	created	by	God	B	they	will	get	 into	more	trouble...
then	God	C	and	God	D,	and	 the	whole	alphabet.	Still,	when	 they	reach	X,Y,Z,
nothing	will	be	solved	--
who	created	God	Z?
In	 fact	 they	have	 started	 from	a	very	wrong	premise.	Existence	 is	 intrinsically
self-generated.	 It	 has	 always	 been	 here,	 so	 the	 question	 of	 creation	 does	 not
arise.	And	it	will	always	be	here,	so	the	question	of	destruction	does	not	arise.	It
may	pass	through	many	phases	of	evolution,	but	it	will	remain.
If	God	can	be	dropped,	there	is	no	need	for	the	devil.	They	are	a	married	couple
--
because	nobody	has	seen	either	of	them,	it	is	very	difficult	to	say	who	is	man	and
who	is	woman.	But	the	devil	seems	to	have	been	functioning	around	the	world
for	centuries;	after	those	six	days,	he	has	been	in	charge.
Most	probably,	 if	you	want	hypotheses	also	 to	be	divided	as	male	and	 female,
then	he	seems	to	be	the	male,	because	he	has	been	working	all	along...	and	God
must	be	a	housewife	--	that's	why	you	don't	see	her	any	more	in	the	marketplace.
But	 the	 devil	 you	 will	 find	 anywhere.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 look	 for	 him;	 he	 is
looking	for	you!
I	am	more	 interested	that	you	get	rid	of	both	--	whoever	 they	may	be,	male	or
female.
Getting	 rid	 of	 both	 of	 them,	 existence	 becomes	 absolute	 freedom;	man	 attains
dignity	and	self	respect.
The	very	idea	of	God	and	devil	makes	you	either	the	slave	of	one	or	the	slave	of
another.
The	sinners	are	the	servants	of	the	devil,	and	the	saints	are	the	servants	of	God.
But	to	be	a	servant,	to	be	a	slave,	is	against	human	dignity.
Hence	 I	 say	 unto	 you:	 God	 is	 dead,	 the	 devil	 is	 dead.	 Their	 death	 is	 very
necessary	 for	 you	 to	 be	 alive.	 If	 they	 are	 alive,	 you	 are	 dead.	 Then	 you	 are
imprisoned	from	both	sides.
Then	man	has	 to	do	 a	 strange	game	continuously:	 he	works	 for	 the	devil,	 and
worships	God	--	because	you	have	to	keep	both	of	them	happy.
An	old	man	was	dying	and	suddenly	he	started	worshiping	first	God,	repeating
his	name,	and	then	the	name	of	the	devil.	His	family	was	aghast!	They	said,	"Are
you	mad?	In	the	last	moments	of	your	life	you	are	remembering	the	devil?"
He	said,	 "I	don't	want	 to	 take	any	chance...	who	knows	where	 I	am	going	and
whom	 I	 am	 going	 to	 meet?	 And	 it	 costs	 nothing,	 so	 I	 will	 remember	 both.
Whoever	meets	me,	I	have	remembered	him,	and	if	nobody	meets	me,	 there	 is
no	 problem.	 If	 both	 meet	 me,	 then	 too	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 I	 am	 calculating
every	possibility."
Man	is	crushed	between	the	devil	and	God,	between	good	and	evil.	I	want	man
not	 to	be	crushed,	not	 to	be	enslaved,	but	 to	be	an	 individual	 in	his	own	right,
free.	 And	 out	 of	 his	 freedom,	 and	 out	 of	 his	 awareness,	 he	 should	 act	 --	 not
according	to	what	God	wants.
I	have	told	you	the	story	of	the	ten	commandments.	When	God	made	the	world,
he	went	to	the	Babylonians	and	said,	"Would	you	like	to	have	a	commandment?"
They	said,	"First	we	would	like	to	see	what	it	is."
And	he	said,	"Thou	shalt	not	commit	adultery."
The	Babylonians	said,	"What	would	we	do?	We	don't	want	any	commandment,
please	forgive	us."
He	 went	 to	 the	 Egyptians,	 and	 he	 went	 to	 other	 races.	 Nobody	 was	 willing,
because	 everybody	 asked,	 "What	 is	 the	 commandment?"	 And	 they	 said,	 "We
don't	want	to	be	encaged	in	any	commandment.	We	want	to	live	on	our	own."
Finally	 he	 reached	 Moses	 and	 asked	 him,	 "Do	 you	 want	 to	 have	 a
commandment?"
Moses	asked,	"How	much	does	it	cost?"
This	 is	 a	 rare	 question!	God	 had	 gone	 all	 around	 the	world...	 and	 it	was	 only
Moses	who	asked	the	price,	the	first	thing.	God	said,	"It	costs	nothing."
Moses	said,	"Then	I	will	have	 ten!"	 If	 it	does	not	cost	anything,	why	not	have
ten?	--
that's	how	there	are	ten	commandments.
Every	religion	has	created	its	own	commandments	--	strange,	unnatural	--	out	of
fear	or	out	of	greed.	But	they	have	made	this	poor	humanity	that	you	see	around
the	world.
Even	 the	 richest	man	 is	 so	 poor	 because	 he	 does	 not	 have	 the	 freedom	 to	 act
according	to	his	own	consciousness.	He	has	to	act	according	to	principles	given
by	somebody	else,	and	one	does	not	know	whether	that	man	was	a	con-man,	a
fraud,	a	poet,	a	dreamer.	There	 is	no	evidence...	because	so	many	people	have
claimed	that	they	are	incarnations	of	God,	that	they	are	messengers	of	God,	that
they	are	prophets	of	God,	 and	 they	all	bring	different	messages.	Either	God	 is
mad	or	these	people	are	simply	lying.	Nost	probably	they	are	lying...!
It	gives	you	a	great	egoistic	feeling	if	you	are	a	prophet,	a	messiah,	an	avatara,	a
tirthankara	--	somebody	special,	not	just	an	ordinary	human	being.	Then	you	can
dominate.	This	is	a	different	kind	of	politics.	Wherever	there	is	domination,	there
is	politics.
The	 politician	 is	 dominating	 because	 of	 physical	 force	 --	 his	 armies,	 his
armaments,	 his	 nuclear	 weapons.	 The	 religious	 prophets,	 messiahs,	 saviors,
avataras	are	dominating	you	spiritually.	Their	domination	 is	more	dangerous	--
they	 are	 far	 greater	 politicians.	 They	 are	 dominating	 your	 life	 not	 only	 from
outside	but	from	inside.	They	have	become	your	inside,	they	have	become	your
morality,	 they	 have	 become	 your	 conscience,	 they	 have	 become	 your	 very
spiritual	being.
From	inside	they	go	on	dominating	you,	saying	what	is	right,	what	is	wrong.	You
have	 to	 follow	 them,	otherwise	you	 start	 feeling	guilty,	 and	guilt	 is	one	of	 the
greatest	 spiritual	 diseases.	 If	 you	 follow	 them,	 you	 start	 feeling	 unnatural,
neurotic,	 perverted,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 following	 your	 nature.	 If	 you	 follow
your	nature,	you	are	not	following	your	prophets	and	your	saviors.
All	 these	 religions	 have	 created	 for	man	 a	 situation	 in	which	 he	 cannot	 be	 at
ease,	he	cannot	enjoy	life,	he	cannot	live	it	in	its	totality.	So	my	suggestion	is,	it
is	better	to	let	both	guys	be	dead.	And	what	does	it	matter?	--	when	one	is	dead,
whether	he	is	man	or	woman	does	not	matter.	A	dead	woman	is	not	dangerous,
neither	is	a	dead	man.	They	are	not	alive.
Let	humanity	be	free	from	all	 these	old	superstitions	which	have	dominated	so
badly,	and	distorted	human	nature	so	immensely.	You	can	see	the	humanity	that
is	the	result.	You	say	that	a	tree	is	known	by	its	fruits.	If	that	is	true	--	and	that	is
true	 --	 then	 your	 whole	 past	 of	 prophets,	 saviors,	 avataras,	 tirthankaras,	 God,
devil,	should	be	judged	by	the	humanity	that	you	find	today.
This	insane	humanity	--	miserable,	suffering,	full	of	anger,	rage,	hate...	If	this	is
the	result	of	all	your	religions,	of	all	your	leaders	--	whether	political	or	religious
--	 then	 it	 is	 better	 to	 let	God	 and	 the	 devil	 die.	With	God	 and	 the	 devil	 gone,
political	leaders	and	religious	leaders	will	not	have	any	support;	they	will	be	the
next	to	die.
I	 want	man	 to	 be	 politically	 free,	 religiously	 free,	 free	 in	 every	 dimension	 to
function	out	of	his	own	still	small	voice,	out	of	his	own	consciousness.	And	that
will	be	a	beautiful	world,	a	real	revolution.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	SO	BLESSED	TO	HAVE	THIS	OPPORTUNITY	TO	FLOAT	IN	YOUR
OCEAN	 OF	 SILENCE.	 DOES	 MY	 WANTING	 MORE	 BLOCK	 MY
AVAILABILITY
TO	RECEIVE	IT?
Anand	Saten,	I	am	sorry	to	say	to	you	that	your	wanting	more	is	certainly	going
to	 block	 your	 availability	 to	 receive	 the	 bliss	 that	 you	 are	 receiving	 without
expectations.	This	is	a	simple,	basic	rule.
Jesus	says,	"Ask	and	it	shall	be	given	to	you."	I	say,	"Don't	ask,	otherwise	it	will
be	not	given	to	you;	not	only	that,	whatever	is	given	to	you	will	be	taken	away."
Jesus	says,
"Knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened,"	and	I	say	unto	you,	"Knock,	and	even	if
the	doors	are	open,	they	will	be	locked!"
Jesus	 says,	 "Seek	and	ye	 shall	 find,"	and	 I	 say	unto	you,	 "Seek,	 and	you	have
missed	forever.	Don't	seek,	and	you	are	it	--	there	is	nothing	else	to	find."
The	bliss	that	you	are	finding	here	is	not	coming	from	outside;	it	has	been	within
you	always	--	you	just	have	never	been	in	the	company	of	blissful,	madly	divine
people.
Seeing	so	many	people	flowering,	suddenly	you	have	blossomed.
Blissfulness	is	contagious.	That's	my	whole	idea	of	creating	small	oases	around
the	world,	where	people	can	find	blissful	people	all	around.	The	very	presence	of
those	blissful	people	will	transform	them.	Intrinsically	everyone	has	the	capacity,
but	they	are	always	surrounded	by	miserable	people	so	they	never	become	aware
that	there	is	a	possibility	of	being	blissful.	Everybody	is	miserable	and	it	looks	a
little	weird	 and	 awkward	 and	 embarrassing:	when	 everybody	 is	miserable	 and
you	are	enjoying,	one	feels	guilty.	You	have	to	be	part	of	the	company	you	have
chosen.
The	whole	world	can	be	blissful	because	everybody	carries	it	within	himself.	But
there	are	a	few	points	to	be	remembered,	and	the	most	important	is:	don't	ask	for
it,	don't	knock	for	it,	don't	seek	it,	don't	expect	it	--	otherwise	you	will	become
closed.	Remain	available	and	open,	and	it	comes...	and	it	comes	in	abundance.
Paddy	 drove	 through	 the	 red	 light	 and	 smashed	 into	 a	 car	 driven	 by	 Father
O'Hagan.	The	 car	 turned	 over	 three	 times	 and	 the	 priest	was	 thrown	 from	 the
vehicle	into	the	gutter.
Paddy	rushed	over	and	said,	"I	am	terribly	sorry,	Father".
"Saints	above!"	said	the	shaken	priest,	"You	almost	killed	me."
"Here,"	said	Paddy,	"I	have	got	a	small	bottle	of	whisky.	Take	some	and	you	will
feel	a	lot	better."
Father	 O'Hagan	 took	 a	 couple	 of	 large	 gulps	 and	 then	 continued	 his	 tirade:
"What	were	you	doing?	You	nearly	launched	me	into	eternity."
"I	 am	 sorry,	 Father,"	 said	 Paddy.	 "Take	 a	 few	more	 sips	 and	 it	will	 ease	 your
nerves."
The	 priest	 took	 another	 large	 gulp	 and	 almost	 finished	 the	 bottle,	 which	 he
offered	to	Paddy	saying,	"Why	don't	you	have	a	drink?"
"No	 thanks,	Father,"	 said	Paddy,	"I	will	 just	 sit	here	and	wait	 for	 the	police	 to
arrive!"
Just	 be	 a	 little	 alert,	 that's	 all!	 If	 you	 can	 learn	 only	 one	 lesson,	 that	 of	 being
conscious,	blissfulness	will	arrive.	And	it	is	natural	--	I	can	understand	--	when	it
comes,	 you	 want	 more.	 But	 you	 have	 to	 be	 alert	 not	 to	 want	 more.	 On	 the
contrary,	be	thankful	for	that	which	has	come,	and	more	will	be	coming	--	that	is
absolutely	certain.	I	say	it	on	my	own	experience,	not	according	to	any	scripture,
or	according	to	any	religion,	or	according	to	any	saint.
Don't	expect!	Whatever	you	get,	be	grateful	for	it.	Instead	of	expecting	more	say,
"This	 is	 too	 much!	 I	 don't	 deserve	 it,	 I	 have	 not	 earned	 it."	 Bow	 down	 to
existence	 in	 deep	gratitude,	 and	you	will	 feel	 flowers	 of	 bliss	 and	benediction
showering	on	you	from	all	sides.
Once	you	have	 learned	 the	 simple	 rule,	 you	will	 never	 expect	 --	 and	 you	will
always	 be	 getting	 more	 and	 more.	 Just	 remain	 available,	 keep	 the	 doors	 and
windows	of	your	heart	open.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	A	FEW	DAYS	MY	HEART	HAS	BEEN	JUMPING	ALL	AROUND	THE
ASHRAM	 AND	 IT	 FEELS	 LIKE	 I	 AM	 LOSING	 CONTROL.	 BELOVED
MASTER,	HOW	FAR	CAN	I	GO?
Nirgrantha,	you	have	already	gone	too	far	if	your	heart	is	jumping	all	around	the
ashram!
And	you	are	still	saying,	"It	feels	like	I	am	losing	control."	You	have	lost	control
long	ago;	otherwise	how	can	your	heart	go	on	jumping	all	around	the	ashram?
You	forget	all	about	control.	This	place	is	not	for	people	who	control;	this	place
is	for	people	who	let	their	heart	dance	wherever	it	wants	to	dance!
Remember	 a	 famous	 proverb:	 Talent	 is	 what	 you	 possess,	 genius	 is	 what
possesses	you.
You	 cannot	 control	 genius;	 you	 can	 control	 talents.	 Here	 we	 are	 creating	 the
possibility	for	your	sleeping	genius	to	be	awake.	Once	your	genius	is	awake,	you
are	going	to	be	possessed,	you	will	not	be	in	control	--	and	there	is	no	need	to	be
in	control.	The	sky	is	vast,	millions	of	stars	are	moving	without	crashing,	and	no
traffic	 control!	 Here	 I	 see	 thousands	 of	 hearts	 dancing,	 running	 --	 no	 traffic
control!	Nature	manages	 itself	so	perfectly	 that	 if	you	don't	disturb,	everything
goes	alright	--	and	very	smoothly.
A	man	 dressed	 as	 Adolf	 Hitler	 visited	 a	 psychiatrist.	 "You	 can	 see	 I	 have	 no
problems,"
he	said.	 "I	have	 the	greatest	army	 in	 the	world,	all	 the	money	 I	ever	need	and
every	conceivable	luxury	you	can	imagine."
"Then	what	seems	to	be	the	trouble?"	asked	the	doctor.
"It	is	my	wife,"	said	the	man,	"she	thinks	she	is	Mrs.	Jones."
So	just	remember	one	thing:	you	can	be	dancing	all	around	joyously,	just	don't
get	caught	up	with	a	wife,	otherwise	she	will	control	you!	You	have	lost	control	-
-	and	here	in	my	place	there	are	great	women	controllers!	The	moment	they	see
that	some	fellow	is	getting	out	of	control,	they	immediately	control.	So	avoid	a
wife.	Once	in	a	while	you	can	dance	with	any	woman,	but	remain	free.
Control	is	not	my	message;	control	is	repression.	Nirgrantha...	I	have	given	you
the	name	Nirgrantha;	do	you	understand	its	meaning?	One	who	is	absolutely	free
--	without	 any	 complexes,	without	 any	 chains,	without	 any	bondage.	And	you
are	asking	me	about	control...?
I	 had	 explained	 to	 you	when	 I	 gave	you	 the	name	 to	 drop	 all	 chains,	 drop	 all
bondages.
Just	be	yourself	and	do	whatsoever	pleases	you.	Just	remember	one	thing:	don't
interfere	 into	 anybody's	 life,	 and	 don't	 allow	 anybody	 else	 to	 interfere	 in	 your
life.	This	is	true	humanity	--	authentic,	honest,	pure.
It	was	a	 rough	ocean	crossing,	and	Mr.	Levensky	was	suffering	 the	 tortures	of
sea-sickness.	During	one	of	the	more	unsettled	periods,	he	was	leaning	over	the
rail	 retching	miserably,	 when	 a	 kindly	 steward	 patted	 him	 on	 the	 shoulder.	 "I
know	sir,"	said	the	steward,	"that	it	seems	awful,	but	remember	--	no	man	ever
died	of	sea-sickness."
Mr.	Levensky	 lifted	his	green	 face	 to	 the	steward	and	said,	 "For	heaven's	 sake
man,	don't	say	that.	It	is	the	wonderful	hope	of	dying	that	is	keeping	me	alive!"
It	is	a	very	strange	life!
"Be	careful,"	the	doctor	told	the	relatives	of	an	elderly	man	who	was	dying.
One	by	one	they	went	up	to	him,	"You	look	so	much	brighter	today,"	exclaimed
his	daughter.
"You	must	be	on	the	mend,"	said	his	son.
"I	have	not	seen	you	look	so	healthy	for	years,"	said	his	wife.
The	old	chap	opened	his	 eyes	and	 said,	 "Thank	you	 for	your	kind	words;	 it	 is
good	to	know	that	I	am	going	to	die	cured!"
Nirgrantha,	rather	than	dying	cured,	why	not	live	cured?
You	are	cured	if	your	heart	is	jumping	--	I	have	never	heard	of	any	dead	man's
heart	jumping	all	around	the	ashram.	We	have	three	enlightened	dead	men	in	the
ashram.	This	 day	 is	 in	 their	memory,	 and	 even	on	 this	 day,	 they	 are	 not	 here!
Dead	men,	even	if	they	want	to	jump,	cannot	jump.	So	while	you	are	alive,	enjoy
it	to	its	fullest.	Don't	be	worried	about	being	tired	or	anything,	because	finally	in
your	grave	you	will	have	enough	rest!
Live	a	life	of	immense	intensity	and	totality	so	that	in	your	grave	you	don't	toss
and	turn,	because	there	 is	not	much	space!	Don't	miss	 this	moment	 in	 thinking
about	 control.	 In	 graveyards	 you	 can	 think	 about	 all	 these	 great	 things,	 and
nobody	will	prevent	you.	You	can	keep	control,	you	will	have	to	keep	control!
You	can	follow	all	ten	commandments,	you	will	have	to	follow	--	how	can	you
commit	adultery	in	a	grave?
Before	that,	it	is	good	to	live	as	joyously	and	as	freely	as	possible,	because	who
knows	when	you	will	be	coming	back	to	this	beautiful	earth,	 to	these	beautiful
people?	Even	today	you	will	not	find	a	gathering	of	such	beautiful	people.
This	is	my	only	crime:	I	am	condemned	all	over	the	world	for	simply	one	reason,
that	 I	 am	 making	 people	 live	 totally	 and	 intensely,	 not	 bothering	 about	 their
commandments,	 not	 bothering	 about	 their	 holy	 scriptures,	 not	 bothering	 about
their	gods	and	their	devils,	their	heaven	and	their	hell.
All	 those	 things	 are	 to	 be	 thought	 about	 and	 contemplated	 in	 your	 grave.	You
will	have	enough	 time,	almost	 the	whole	of	eternity.	So	 lie	down	 there	and	be
philosophical,	be	moral,	don't	commit	any	sin.	But	right	now,	don't	be	bothered
about	all	these	superstitions.
Only	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered,	and	that	is	to	be	as	conscious	as	possible,
because	that	will	make	you	dance	rightly,	in	right	places,	with	right	people!	Your
consciousness	will	not	allow	you	 to	 jump	on	somebody	else's	 toes.	That	 is	 the
only	sin.
According	 to	me,	 to	 interfere	 in	 somebody's	 life	 is	 the	 only	 sin,	 and	 the	 only
virtue	 is	 not	 to	 interfere	 in	 anybody's	 life.	Let	 him	be	 himself,	 and	 let	 you	 be
yourself...	your	freedom.
This	is,	according	to	me,	the	authentic	religiousness.
This	is	the	only	holy	pilgrimage:
From	here	to	here	--	you	don't	have	to	go	anywhere.
From	now	to	now	--	you	don't	have	to	travel	in	time	or	space.
Nirgrantha,	you	are	in	a	good	spirit;	don't	lose	the	track	of	it.	Control	is	an	old
habit	 which	 every	 child	 is	 being	 taught	 from	 the	 very	 childhood:	 control	 --
control	everything	-
-	discipline,	behave.
Now	you	are	no	more	a	child,	and	 I	am	not	your	 father	 --	 I	am	not	even	your
uncle!
Throw	all	control,	throw	all	licenses,	throw	all	boundaries.	Life	is	so	short,	don't
destroy	it	in	controls	and	boundaries	and	mannerisms	and	etiquette	and	all	kinds
of	nonsense.
Rejoice!	I	repeat,	rejoice	--	and	rejoice	totally.	And	if	your	heart	is	dancing,	give
it	full	energy.	Everybody's	heart	is	dancing.	This	is	a	place	of	dance,	of	song,	of
laughter.	And	I	say	this	is	the	only	kaaba,	the	only	holy	place	in	the	world	today.
All	holy	places	have	become	unholy,	 they	have	become	prisons	for	man	in	 the
name	of	morality,	control,	discipline.
This	is	a	small	place	with	a	vast	territory	of	independence,	freedom.	The	whole
sky	is	yours	--	even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	You	have	never	looked	inside
8	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709085
ShortTitle:
PILGR05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
86
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
GIVE	ME	SOME	SUTRAS	TO	MEDITATE	ON.
Devageet...	 Devageet	 is	 a	 dental	 doctor,	 but	 lately	 he	 is	 turning	 into	 a
philosopher!	Just	today	he	has	sent	a	telegram	to	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi,	saying
"Drop	the	idea	of	saving	the	world	through	transcendental	meditation.	I	have	a
better	suggestion...."	His	suggestion	is	`transdental	medication'!	And	I	think	that
if	the	world	can	be	saved	by	yogic	hopping,	then	there	seems	to	be	no	problem
why	it	cannot	be	saved	by	transdental	medication.
He	 is	 asking	 for	 some	 sutras	 to	 meditate	 on,	 but	 sutras	 are	 serious,	 and
meditation	 does	 not	 need	 any	 sutra.	 Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 where	 absolute
emptiness	exists,	not	even	a	sutra;	 there	 is	not	any	possibility	of	any	object.	A
philosopher	never	meditates,	a	philosopher	contemplates.	So	I	can	give	sutras	for
contemplation,	but	not	for	meditation	because	that	will	be	absolutely	wrong.
Meditation	simply	means	silence	--	absolute,	unconditional	serenity	of	the	heart,
of	the	mind,	of	the	being...	no	stirring	of	any	kind.	Even	a	sutra	is	enough	of	a
disturbance.	You	can	contemplate	on	a	sutra;	sutra	is	Sanskrit	for	maxim.
The	first...	a	successful	man:	one	who	earns	more	than	his	wife	can	spend.
And	second,	a	successful	woman:	one	who	finds	such	a	man!
Third:	A	jealous	man	always	finds	more	than	he	is	looking	for.
Fifth:	Some	minds	are	like	concrete	--	mixed-up	and	permanently	set.
Sixth:	The	first	half	of	life	consists	of	the	capacity	to	enjoy	without	the	chance.
The	last	half	consists	of	the	chance	without	the	capacity.
Seventh:	What	Poona	really	needs	is	a	vegetarian	mosquito.
Eighth:	The	man	who	admits	he	is	wrong	is	wise.	The	man	who	gives	in	when
he	is	right	is	married!
Ninth:	The	rich	get	richer	and	the	poor	get	children.
Tenth:	Middle	age	is	when	it	takes	longer	to	rest	than	to	get	tired.
Eleventh:	You	never	know	how	many	friends	you	have	until	you	rent	a	cottage	in
Poona.
Twelfth:	You	can't	tell	how	deep	a	puddle	is	until	you	step	in	it.
Thirteenth:	Virtue	is	its	own	punishment.
Fourteenth:	By	the	time	a	man	is	wise	enough	to	watch	his	step,	he	is	too	old	to
go	anywhere.
Fifteenth:	 Prayer	 must	 never	 be	 answered.	 If	 it	 is,	 it	 ceases	 to	 be	 prayer	 and
becomes	a	correspondence.
Fifteenth:	An	asylum	for	the	sane	would	be	empty	in	this	world.
You	don't	get	it!	You	belong	to	this	world!
Sixteenth:	 It	 is	 always	 the	 best	 policy	 to	 speak	 the	 truth	 unless	 you	 are,	 of
course,	an	exceptionally	good	liar.
Seventeenth:	He	who	does	not	mind	a	big	belly	will	hardly	mind	anything	else.
Devageet,	contemplate	as	much	as	you	can,	but	 it	will	not	 lead	you	anywhere.
Anything	that	can	bring	you	some	light,	some	conclusion,	is	not	contemplation,
it	is	meditation.
It	has	been	an	old	fallacy	that	meditation	also	needs	an	object	to	meditate	upon.
The	very	word	`meditation'	 is	wrong	because	it	gives	the	idea	that	you	have	to
meditate	upon	something.	Meditation	simply	means	that	you	don't	have	anything
left	to	meditate	upon.
All	 is	 empty:	 there	 is	 no	 object,	 no	 chanting,	 no	mantra,	 no	 sutra...	 just	 pure
emptiness.
And	 suddenly	 all	 your	 energy	 of	 awareness	 turns	 upon	 yourself,	 without	 any
effort	on	your	part.
And	 the	 turning	 of	 the	 energy	 of	 awareness	 upon	 yourself	 is	 the	 ultimate
experience	of	 life,	of	 light,	of	everything	 that	 is	 really	valuable;everything	 that
cannot	 be	 purchased	 but	 can	 be	 attained,	 everything	 that	 is	 not	 a	 commodity
anybody	 else	 can	 give	 you	 but	 is	 something	 that	 you	 already	 have	 --	 but	 you
have	never	looked	inside.
Looking	inside	is	meditation	--	just	pure	looking	inwards,	a	turning	of	the	eyes
inwards	 one	 hundred	 and	 eighty	 degrees,	 and	 you	 have	 arrived	 home.	 Not	 a
single	step	has	to	be	taken,	because	you	are	not	going	anywhere;	you	are	simply
coming	from	here	to	here.
You	 are	 already	 there	 where	 you	 need	 to	 be,	 just	 you	 are	 not	 aware.	 Hence,
meditation	can	be	called	awareness,	watchfulness,	alertness,	witnessing	--	but	it
is	not	thinking.
Contemplation	is	thinking;	it	will	not	lead	you	anywhere.
No	philosopher	has	reached	to	any	conclusion	that	solves	the	ultimate	question
of	life,	Who	am	I?	But	you	are	not	to	think	about	it...	what	will	you	think	about
it?
There	are	many	people	who	have	followed	Maharishi	Raman.	His	teaching	was
very	 simple	 --	he	was	a	 simple	man,	uneducated,	not	 learned.	He	had	escaped
from	his	home	when	he	was	only	seventeen.	He	escaped	because	his	father	died.
When	 the	 whole	 family	 was	 weeping	 and	 crying,	 and	 the	 neighbors	 were
preparing	to	take	the	dead	body	to	the	funeral	pyre,	nobody	noticed	that	Raman
had	disappeared.
The	 experience	 of	 the	 death	 of	 his	 father	 became	 a	 tremendous	 revolution	 in
Raman's	mind.	He	was	 only	 seventeen,	 the	 only	 son	 of	 a	 poor	 family,	 and	 he
escaped	 to	 the	 mountains.	 He	 remained	 his	 whole	 life	 on	 the	 mountain	 of
Arunachal	where	he	did	nothing	but	 just	 sit	 and	watch	 inside.	He	never	 asked
anybody	 anything.	 He	 had	 no	 master,	 he	 had	 nobody	 to	 guide	 him,	 but	 just
sitting	silently	watching	his	own	mind,	he	transcended	his	mind	and	he	came	to
know	himself.
And	by	knowing	himself	he	came	to	know	the	ultimate	bliss	--	the	ecstasy	that
surrounded	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 the	 enlightenment	 that	 was	 radiating	 from
Mahavira,	the	joy,	the	dance	of	all	those	who	have	awakened.	So	whoever	was
asking	him,	"What	are	we	supposed	to	do?"	he	had	only	one	answer	his	whole
life:	"Meditate	on	`Who	am	I?'"
But	people	have	misunderstood	him...	even	such	a	simple	statement.	He	was	not
saying,
"Contemplate,"	he	was	not	saying,	"Think	about	`Who	am	I?'"	--	what	can	you
think?
Either	you	know	or	you	don't	know;	thinking	is	impossible.	What	will	you	think?
If	 you	 start	 you	 will	 think,	 "This	 is	 my	 name,	 this	 is	 my	 country,	 this	 is	 my
family,	this	is	my	race,	this	is	my	caste,	this	is	my	profession...."	But	what	will
you	find	by	doing	this?	You	will	not	find	out	who	you	are.	These	things	are	all
on	the	periphery.
But	Raman	was	not	 a	master	 in	 the	 sense	 that	he	 could	 explain	 to	people	 that
watching	 the	 mind,	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 the	 mind,	 the	 whole	 traffic	 of
thoughts...	Even	"Who	am	I?"	is	a	thought;	don't	get	stuck	to	it.	Just	watch	that
thought	 too,	 and	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 all	 thinking	 disappears	 --	 just	 by
watching.	Just	as	you	bring	 light	 into	a	dark	 room	and	darkness	disappears,	as
you	bring	watchfulness	to	your	mind,	mind	disappears.
And	the	disappearance	of	the	mind	is	the	beginning	of	knowing	yourself.
This	is	the	highest	peak	of	consciousness,	and	unless	a	man	achieves	it,	he	has
wasted	 his	 life	 in	 trivia.	He	 lived	 only	 in	 name;	 in	 fact	 he	 vegetated.	He	may
have	 been	 a	 very	 rich	 vegetable...	 They	 say	 there	 are	 only	 two	 kinds	 of
vegetables,	 cabbage	 and	 cauliflower;	 the	 cabbage	 category	 is	 uneducated,	 and
the	cauliflower	is	a	cabbage	with	college	degrees.
But	there	is	not	much	difference.
If	you	 really	want	 to	 live	and	not	 to	vegetate,	meditation	 is	 the	only	way;	and
meditation	means	no-mind...	just	silence.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	HAVE	SPOKEN	TO	US	ABOUT	BEING	 IN	THE	WORLD	YET	NOT
OF	IT.
HOW	COME	YOU	HAVE	NOT	SPOKEN	TO	US	ABOUT	BEING	IN	THE
COMMUNE	YET	NOT	OF	IT?
Deva	Shravan,	I	have	spoken	about	being	in	the	world	but	not	of	it.	A	commune
is	not	a	community,	a	commune	is	not	a	world,	a	commune	is	not	a	society.	A
commune	is	a	very	friendly	gathering	of	people	who	live	in	the	world	but	are	not
of	the	world.
A	commune	 is	not	an	organization,	 it	 is	 simply	 the	gathering	of	 individuals.	 It
does	 not	 take	 away	 anybody's	 individuality.	 It	 does	 not	 destroy	 your	 dignity,
your	pride,	your	self-respect.	On	the	contrary,	it	gives	you	dignity,	respect,	love:
it	accepts	you	as	you	are.	It	does	not	demand	that	you	should	be	somebody	else,
then	only	will	you	be	thought	worthy;	it	does	not	ask	you	to	be	a	saint.	It	simply
loves	you	as	you	are.	That's	why	in	the	commune	there	is	no	question	at	all...
How	 can	 I	 say	 to	 you,	 "Be	 in	 the	 commune	 but	 don't	 belong	 to	 it"?	 The
commune	is	basically	individuals	who	have	learned	to	be	in	the	world	and	not	of
the	 world.	 That	 statement	 is	 true	 about	 the	 world,	 because	 the	 world	 tries	 to
strangle	you,	the	world	tries	to	make	you	a	prisoner	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways.
The	 commune	 gives	 you	 total	 freedom	 to	 be	 yourself;	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
belonging	 to	 it.	 Each	 individual	 exists	 as	 an	 individual,	 not	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the
commune.
In	the	larger	world	each	individual	is	only	a	cog	in	the	wheel,	he	does	not	exist
as	himself.	He	is	only	a	number,	just	like	in	the	armies.	A	soldier	dies...	on	the
board	of	the	office	appears	the	notice	that	"number	sixteen	has	died."	In	the	army
names	are	not	recognized,	but	only	numbers.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 what	 the	 psychology	 is	 behind	 it;	 there	 is	 tremendous
meaning.	If	your	name	is	recognized,	then	you	have	a	wife,	you	have	children,
you	have	old	parents,	an	old	father,	an	old	mother,	who	must	be	waiting	for	you,
who	must	be	praying	that	you	come	back	home	alive.	If	you	have	a	name,	you
are	irreplaceable;	but	if	you	are	just	a	number	--	number	sixteen...
Numbers	don't	have	wives,	 they	don't	have	children,	 they	don't	have	parents	 --
nobody	is	waiting	for	them.	In	fact	numbers	can	be	replaced,	but	names	cannot
be,	individuals	cannot	be.	Hence	for	centuries	armies	have	been	changing	people
into	numbers.	So	when	somebody	looks	at	the	board	--	how	many	numbers	have
died	 --	he	does	not	 feel	 anything	about	 their	wives,	 their	 children,	 their	 father,
their	mother,	their	friends,	all	their	hopes,	all	their	prayers....	It	is	a	very	cunning
strategy	to	deceive	people.	And	these	numbers	can	be	immediately	replaced	by
other	numbers;	somebody	else	will	become	number	sixteen.	There	is	no	problem
in	replacing	numbers.
Society	also,	 in	a	more	 subtle	way,	makes	you	 just	 a	part;	 it	never	allows	you
total	freedom	to	be	yourself.	You	are	a	husband,	you	are	a	wife,	you	are	a	father,
you	are	a	brother...	you	are	never	yourself,	you	are	somebody	else.	There	are	a
thousand	and	one	expectations	 from	you	 to	be	 fulfilled;	 those	are	your	chains.
There	are	responsibilities	and	duties;	those	are	your	prisons.
In	a	commune	you	don't	have	a	duty,	you	don't	have	a	responsibility.	You	don't
have	to	be	somebody	else	to	be	worthy,	to	be	respected,	to	be	prestigious.	Just	as
you	 are,	 in	 your	 utter	 nudeness,	 you	 are	 accepted,	 loved.	 Your	 very	 being	 is
enough,	nothing	more	is	needed.
You	don't	ask	a	roseflower	to	be	somebody	else,	and	you	don't	ask	a	lotus	to	be
somebody	 else.	 A	 marigold	 is	 as	 beautiful	 as	 the	 rose.	 The	 world	 would	 be
poorer	 if	 there	were	no	marigolds,	and	only	roses.	The	world	 is	 richer	because
more	variety	is	there.
Each	individual	in	a	commune	is	unique;	in	the	world	he	is	just	a	carbon	copy.	In
the	commune,	everybody	is	original;	in	the	world,	only	a	true	copy.
The	 world	 expects	 you	 to	 follow,	 imitate	 --	 everything	 others	 are	 doing	 you
should	do.
The	 commune	 does	 not	 ask	 anything	 of	 you;	 you	 should	 simply	 do	 what	 is
spontaneous	 to	 you,	 what	 you	 feel	 like	 doing.	 You	 should	 allow	 yourself
absolute	 freedom	for	your	potential	 to	blossom.	Hence	 I	have	not	 talked	about
the	other	part	of	your	question,	because	that	will	be	against	the	very	idea	of	the
commune.
A	commune	is	not	an	alternative	society.
A	commune	is	a	brotherhood	of	rebellious	souls.
Bernie	was	more	than	a	little	annoyed	when	a	neighbor	telephoned	at	3:OO	a.m.
and	complained,	"Your	dog	is	barking	so	loudly	that	I	can't	sleep!"	The	neighbor
hung	up	before	he	could	reply.
The	 following	 morning	 at	 3:OO	 a.m.	 Bernie	 called	 his	 neighbor	 and	 said,	 "I
don't	have	a	dog!"
This	is	your	world	--	utterly	insane!	That's	why	I	say	that	unfortunately	you	have
to	 be	 in	 it.	 Be,	 but	 don't	 belong	 to	 it;	 keep	 yourself	 as	 much	 unimpressed,
uninfluenced	 by	 others	 as	 possible.	 Keep	 your	 originality;	 don't	 lose	 it	 in	 the
crowd.
The	 young	 bride	was	 inconsolable,	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 her	 dead,	 seventy-
five-year-old	 husband	 had	 left	 her	 ten	 million	 dollars	 in	 his	 will.	 Her	 friends
tried	to	make	her	understand:	"You	are	so	young,"	they	said.	"You	have	a	great
life	ahead,	and	ten	million	dollars!	He	had	to	die	sooner	or	later."
"You	don't	understand,"	 she	sobbed.	 "He	was	 the	greatest	 lover.	We	 lived	next
door	to	the	church	and	he	used	to	make	love	to	me	by	the	sound	of	the	church
bells	--	ding-dong,	ding-dong.	And	he	would	be	alive	today	if	it	wasn't	for	that
damn	fire	truck!"
That's	why	I	say:	Don't	belong	to	this	world.	Be	in	it,	but	be	alert	that	you	don't
get	lost	in	the	madness	that	is	all	over	the	earth.
Old	man	Finkelstein,	aged	eighty-five,	went	to	a	sperm	bank	to	make	a	deposit.
The	young	woman	at	the	reception	was	skeptical.	"Are	you	sure	that	you	want	to
do	this?"	she	asked.
"Yes,"	said	old	Finkelstein.	"I	feel	it	is	my	duty	to	give	something	from	myself	to
the	world."
The	woman	 gave	 him	 a	 jar	 and	 directed	 him	 to	 a	 room	 down	 the	 hall.	When
thirty	minutes	had	passed	and	he	did	not	return,	the	girl	began	to	worry	that	he
might	have	had	a	heart	attack.	But	just	then	the	old	man	came	out	of	the	room
and	approached	the	woman.
"Listen,"	he	said,	"I	tried	it	with	one	hand,	then	I	tried	it	with	two	hands,	then	I
got	it	up	and	hit	it	on	the	sink,	then	I	ran	warm	water	on	it,	then	cold	water	over
it,	and	I	still	can't	get	the	lid	of	the	jar	open!"
It	is	better	not	to	be	part	of	this	insane	world!	Remain	sane.	Insanity	is	normal	in
the	world	 --	 that's	why	 you	 don't	 detect	 it.	Once	 you	 understand	 that	 it	 is	 the
normal	 insanity,	 and	 you	 start	 looking	 deeply	 into	 it,	 you	 will	 be	 immensely
surprised	that	you	are	living	in	a	big	madhouse.
The	 commune	 is	 a	 rebellion,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 revolution.	 A	 revolution	 creates	 an
alternative	 society.	 For	 example,	 what	 happened	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 was	 a
revolution;	it	created	an	alternative	society.	But	that	society	is	as	insane	as	any
other	 society;	 perhaps	 it	 has	 different	 names	 for	 its	 insanity,	 but	 nothing	 has
changed.
Seventy	years	after	the	revolution,	people	are	standing	in	queues	just	to	get	bread
--	even	 today.	Seventy	years	ago	 they	 revolted	against	 the	czar	 to	make	a	new
world	where	nobody	will	be	poor,	but	what	actually	happened	is	that	they	have
created	a	world	where	nobody	is	rich.	They	have	brought	equality	to	the	world,
that's	 certainly	 true:	 they	 have	 made	 everybody	 equally	 poor.	 People	 in	 the
Soviet	 Union,	 which	 is	 one	 sixth	 of	 the	 whole	 world,	 are	 living	 in	 a
concentration	camp.
I	have	been	in	America,	and	my	sannyasins	in	the	Soviet	Union	are	trying	for	me
to	 enter	 into	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 some	 day.	 Today	 they	 must	 have	 gathered	 to
celebrate	--	they	have	informed	me	that	they	will	be	gathering	at	the	same	time
as	we	are.	They	have	to	gather	in	basements.	They	have	to	read	books	silently,
"underground,"	so	nobody	can	hear.
The	KGB,	 the	 Intelligence	Department,	 has	 caught	 hold	 of	 twenty	 sannyasins
and	has	 interrogated	 them	continuously	 for	weeks,	 harassed	 them	 just	 because
they	had	my	books.	They	have	taken	away	all	their	books,	and	they	were	trying
to	 force	 them	to	 tell	who	 the	other	sannyasins	are.	And	because	 they	were	not
telling,	they	were	harassed	continuously	in	the	middle	of	the	night;	they	would
be	called	to	the	police	station	and	the	whole	night	continuous	interrogation...	and
this	is	revolution!
Man	has	become	even	more	a	slave	than	he	was	ever	before.	Man	was	not	such	a
slave	 even	 in	 the	 days	 of	 the	 czar	 before	 the	 revolution;	 society	 was	 not	 so
dominant	and	so	afraid	of	people	and	their	freedom.
America	makes	claims	of	democracy.	I	lived	there	for	five	years,	and	there	is	no
democracy	at	all.	It	is	one	of	the	most	hypocritical	societies;	it	is	deceiving	the
whole	world	in	the	name	of	democracy.	It	is	another	kind	of	dictatorship.	But	the
whole	world	is	like	this....
I	have	been	refused	entry	by	twenty-one	countries.	Even	before	I	had	applied	for
a	tourist	visa,	the	German	parliament	decided	and	ordered	all	the	borders	and	all
the	 airports	 that	 if	 I	 try	 to	 enter	 into	 the	 country	 from	 anywhere	 I	 am	 not
allowed...	not	only	that	I	am	not	allowed	in	the	country,	my	airplane	has	not	to
be	allowed	to	land	at	any	airport.
What	kind	of	world	have	we	made?
I	have	not	done	 any	harm	 to	 those	people.	 I	 have	never	been	 in	 their	 country.
And	 what	 harm	 can	 I	 do	 if	 my	 airplane	 just	 lands	 for	 refueling	 in	 their
international	airport?	--	and	why	do	you	call	it	an	international	airport?	In	what
way	can	I	affect	their	morality,	their	religion,	their	tradition?
I	was	never	aware	that	people	can	be	so	afraid	of	rational	thinking,	of	intelligent
behavior.	I	had	never	thought	that	the	whole	world	lives	under	different	kinds	of
superstitions.	 They	 are	 so	 afraid	 that	 somebody	may	 create	 an	 upheaval	 --	 at
least	in	the	younger	generation	--	by	making	them	aware	of	their	superstitions.
But	to	live	under	superstitions	is	to	live	blindly.	That's	why	I	say:	don't	belong	to
this	 world.	 This	 is	 not	 the	 world	 for	 human	 beings,	 this	 is	 not	 the	 world	 for
intelligent	 people;	 this	 is	 an	 ugly	 world	 created	 by	 millions	 of	 years	 of
superstition	and	darkness,	exploited	by	the	religious	leaders,	politicians	and	so-
called	moralists.	They	have	all	proved	to	be	parasites	--	and	nothing	else.
A	commune	 is	not	 an	alternative	 society.	A	commune	 is	 simply	a	brotherhood
without	any	organization,	without	any	hierarchy.	Nobody	is	your	religious	leader
and	 nobody	 is	 your	 political	 leader.	 Everybody	 is	 simply	 allowed	 to	 be	 his
natural	self,	without	any	judgment	and	without	any	evaluation.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 FOUND	 OUT	 THAT	 MY	 TWO	 BASIC	 INTERESTS	 ARE	 SEX	 AND
MEDITATION.
AM	I	DOING	RIGHT?	I	WANT	TO	BE	YOUR	FAVORITE	DISCIPLE.	WHAT
TO
DO?	WHICH	IS	THE	WORST	QUESTION	TO	ASK	YOU?
Chaitanya,	 you	 have	 asked	 it!	 You	 say	 your	 interests	 are	 two:	 sex	 and
meditation.	 If	 sex	 is	 your	 interest,	 forget	 all	 about	 meditation.	When	 you	 get
tired	of	sex,	fed	up	with	it,	then	the	same	energy	that	was	involved	in	sex	can	be
used	for	meditation.	But	you	can't	have	both	together	--	 that	will	be	like	riding
on	two	horses	together.	Either	you	have	sex,	or	you	have	meditation.
But	one	 thing	you	have	 to	understand:	you	cannot	have	meditation	unless	you
have	 transcended	 sex.	 But	 transcendence	 should	 not	 be	 understood	 in	 the	 old
ways	as	 repression.	Transcendence	 is	experience,	 so	much	experience	 that	you
don't	think	anymore	about	attraction,	infatuation.
Sex	simply	drops	like	dry	leaves	from	the	trees.
It	is	not	that	you	have	to	make	some	effort.	If	you	have	to	make	some	effort	to
drop	 it,	 it	will	 remain	with	you.	And	 if	 it	 is	 there,	meditation	 is	 impossible;	 it
won't	 let	you	be	silent.	It	 is	one	of	 the	most	 torturous	biological	slaveries.	It	 is
good	to	get	rid	of	it	by	experiencing	it	with	totality	and	intensity	--	don't	think	of
meditation	 at	 all.	 Sex,	 lived	 totally,	 will	 bring	 you	 to	 meditation;	 and	 then
meditation	will	be	very	easy,	because	there	will	be	no	biological	pull	against	it.
Your	so-called	priests,	monks,	saints,	cannot	meditate.
Even	 a	 man	 like	Mahatma	 Gandhi,	 at	 the	 age	 of	 seventy,	 was	 having	 sexual
dreams.	This	was	the	result	of	a	whole	life	of	repression.	And	finally	at	the	age
of	seventy-five	he	started	to	sleep	with	young	naked	girls.
His	disciples,	who	had	become	 the	 rulers	of	 the	country	 --	he	was	 the	greatest
spiritual	 and	 political	 leader,	 both	 --	 tried	 to	 hide	 this	 fact;	 the	masses	 of	 the
country	should	not	know	about	 it.	They	protected	him	in	every	way.	The	news
should	not	 become	common;	 people	 should	not	 come	 to	know	about	 it.	There
was	a	danger	 that	he	might	 lose	all	his	saintliness.	People	have	 respected	him,
followed	him...	and	before	his	death,	he	will	see	himself	fallen,	failed.
They	tried	to	persuade	him	to	stop	this,	but	he	had	his	explanations	and	excuses.
He	used	to	tell	them,	"This	is	an	experiment	to	check	on	my	celibacy	--	whether
I	am	really	celibate	or	not."
Mind	is	very	cunning.	Nobody	in	the	world	has	ever	checked	celibacy	this	way
before.	 If	you	are	celibate,	 I	don't	 think	you	will	not	know	whether	you	are	or
not,	whether	the	idea	of	the	other	sex	comes	to	your	mind	or	not.	You	don't	need
any	test.	You	yourself	will	be	enough	to	know	whether	your	mind	is	visited	by
sexual	ideas,	dreams,	fantasies,	or	not.
But	 the	 reality	 was	 he	 was	 tortured...	 and	 the	 reason	 was	 not	 that	 he	 was
insincere;	he	was	 a	very	 sincere	man,	but	he	 followed	a	wrong	path	 sincerely.
Always	 remember:	 just	 sincerity	 is	not	going	 to	help.	You	can	be	very	honest,
very	sincere,	very	arduous...	but	if	you	are	on	a	wrong	path	all	your	sincerity	will
lead	you	not	to	the	goal	you	wanted	to	reach,	but	exactly	to	its	opposite.
Gandhi	 could	 never	 understand	 what	 meditation	 is,	 and	 that	 was	 one	 of	 his
greatest	failures.	He	could	not	understand	that	you	can	be	free	from	any	desire
only	if	you	have	lived	it	completely,	entirely.	If	something	has	remained	unlived
it	is	going	to	haunt	you.
Chaitanya,	you	are	saying	sex	and	meditation	are	your	two	basic	interests.	Please
have	 one	 basic	 interest!	 And	 sex	 is	 absolutely	 first,	 because	 that	 is	 your
biological	bondage.
You	have	to	get	free	of	it,	and	the	way	to	get	free	of	it	is	not	to	fight	with	it	--
that's	 what	 religious	 people	 have	 been	 doing	 for	 centuries.	 They	 have	 not
succeeded.
Not	 a	 single	 person	 has	 succeeded	 in	 transcending	 sex	 by	 fighting	 it,	 by
repressing	it.
Live	it!	--	and	don't	live	it	with	guilt,	don't	live	it	as	if	it	is	something	wrong,	it	is
a	sin.	It	is	not.	It	is	neither	a	sin	nor	a	crime,	it	is	an	absolutely	natural	way	of
reproducing.	You	are	not	responsible	for	it.
You	are	produced	through	sex.	Your	every	cell	is	sexual.	Nature	has	found	a	way
to	 go	 on	 reproducing	 life	 in	 new	 forms;	 sex	 is	 simply	 a	 methodology	 which
nature	has	chosen.
You	cannot	 fight	with	nature.	Nature	 is	vast	 and	 tremendously	 strong,	but	you
can	get	beyond	 it,	 and	 the	way	beyond	 is	 through	 it	 --	 not	by	 fighting,	but	by
understanding,	experiencing....	And	the	more	you	become	experienced,	capable
of	understanding,	it	is	absolutely	easy	to	move	your	energy	into	the	second	stage
of	evolution:	from	sex	to	meditation.
Meditation	is	very	simple	if	sex	has	been	lived	completely	without	any	fear,	any
repression,	any	guilt.	My	own	understanding	is	that	by	the	time...	 just	as	at	 the
age	of	 fourteen	you	become	 interested	 in	 sex,	 if	 you	 live	 perfectly	 and	 totally
and	sincerely	--
religiously	--	your	sexual	life,	by	the	age	of	forty-two	you	will	be	out	of	it.
Life	has	 seven	year	 cycles.	 If	you	 take	as	 an	average	 seventy	years,	 it	 has	 ten
cycles	of	seven	years.	The	first	seven	years	you	are	absolutely	 innocent	--	you
are	just	as	a	saint	should	be.	Your	second	seven	years	are	a	preparation	for	sex;
slowly,	 slowly,	 the	 snake	 of	 sex	 starts	 uncoiling	 within	 you.	 By	 the	 age	 of
fourteen	 you	 are	 mature	 and	 you	 can	 reproduce	 children.	 From	 fourteen	 to
twenty-one	your	 sexual	 energy	 is	 at	 its	highest	peak,	 exactly	between	 fourteen
and	twenty-one:	that	means	seventeen	and	a	half	is	the	climax	of	sexual	energy.
But	this	society	has	lived	with	such	repressive	and	unnatural,	unscientific	ideas
that	these	are	the	years	when	you	are	told	to	be	celibate.	And	these	are	the	years
when	you	could	have	lived	sex,	and	celibacy	would	have	come	by	itself	by	the
time	you	are	forty-two.
Between	 twenty-one	 and	 twenty-eight,	 sex	 is	 very	 normal,	 very	 natural.	 From
twenty-eight	to	thirty-five,	sex	starts	declining.	From	thirty-five	to	forty-two,	sex
reaches	its	ultimate	decline.	From	forty-two	to	forty-nine,	sex	disappears.	That's
why	 in	ancient	 India	 the	wise	people	decided	 that	by	 the	 time	one	 is	 fifty-one
should	 start	 preparing	 for	 vanprashtha.	 His	 face	 should	 be	 now	 towards	 the
mountains,	towards	the	forest	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	vanprashtha.	He	is	still	in
the	world,	but	now	his	whole	consciousness	has	turned	and	he	is	getting	ready	to
move	into	the	deep	forest	to	be	alone.	The	days	of	meditation	have	come.
By	 the	 time	 a	 person	 is	 fifty	 his	 children	will	 be	 nearabout	 twenty-five.	They
must	be	getting	married,	 they	must	be	getting	into	a	profession.	The	father	can
look	forward	 to	 twenty-five	years	more...	 these	are	 the	 twenty-five	years,	 from
fifty	to	seventy-five,	that	he	can	watch	--	he	can	live	in	the	world	yet	not	be	of
the	world.	He	can	watch	his	children	slowly	taking	over.	And	after	seventy-five
all	 his	 interest	 in	 the	world	will	 have	disappeared;	 then	meditation	will	 be	 his
only	interest.
But	this	is	just	a	formal	categorization.	It	depends	on	you	and	your	intensity	of
living.
You	can	be	beyond	sex	by	the	time	you	are	thirty-five.	You	can	be	beyond	sex
without	much	difficulty	when	you	are	forty-two.	But	it	is	unfortunate	that	people
die	still	as	foolish	as	young	people.
Psychologists	have	come	to	the	conclusion	that	most	people	die	with	the	idea	of
sex...
that	 is	 their	 last	 idea.	They	may	be	repeating	the	name	of	God,	but	 inside	 they
are	thinking,	If	only	it	was	possible	one	time	more...!	They	have	not	lived	their
life	wholeheartedly.	That's	why	something	 that	 should	have	ended	at	 forty-two
has	continued	up	to	eighty,	up	to	ninety.
Chaitanya,	live	your	first	interest	and	be	finished	with	it.	But	be	finished	with	it
by	living	it,	 joyously!	There	is	nothing	wrong,	there	is	no	sin.	Then	meditation
will	become	absolutely	simple	and	easy,	because	your	mind	will	not	be	burdened
with	 sexual	 infatuation	 and	 desires.	 That	 is	 your	 only	 bondage.	 All	 other
bondages	are	secondary,	all	other	bondages	are	branches	of	your	sexuality.
For	what	do	you	want	money?	For	what	do	you	want	power?	Have	you	watched
that	 all	 other	 interests	 are	 centered	on	 sex?	A	man	without	money	will	 not	 be
able	to	get	the	most	beautiful	woman;	a	man	without	power	will	not	be	able	to
get	the	most	beautiful	woman.
All	your	so-called	desires	are	centered	on	a	single	fact,	a	single	interest,	and	that
is	sex.
Just	 live	it,	and	live	it	 joyously	without	any	fear	of	hell	or	heaven.	There	is	no
hell,	no	heaven.
Once	you	are	out	of	 sex,	once	 it	has	disappeared	 like	smoke	disappearing	 into
the	sky	and	you	cannot	see	it,	then	meditation	is	so	easy.	You	don't	have	to	make
any	effort,	you	have	just	 to	sit	silently	with	your	eyes	closed,	relaxed,	and	you
will	find	meditation	is	there.
Sex	and	meditation...?	You	will	not	be	able	to	live	sex	fully,	and	that	will	go	on
lingering	 with	 you.	 And	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 meditate	 because	 sex	 will
continuously	interfere.
You	know	the	stories	of	the	old	seers,	that	even	at	their	height,	in	their	old	age,
after	 a	 long,	 long	 preparation	 of	 austerities,	 fasting,	 chanting,	 studying	 holy
scriptures	--	doing	everything	--	when	they	come	to	the	point	of	realization,	the
stories	 say	 that	 suddenly	 apsaras	 from	 heaven...	 Apsaras	 are	 nothing	 but
heavenly	 prostitutes,	 specially	 provided	 for	 the	 saints.	 They	 are	 sent	 down	 to
disturb	these	poor	fellows'	meditation.
This	is	strange,	why	should	anybody	be	bothered	about	these	poor	fellows	who
have	been	torturing	themselves	in	every	possible	way	--	starving,	fighting	with
their	body,	repressing	their	sex?	There	is	nobody	who	is	sending	these	apsaras,
and	these	apsaras	are	nowhere.	It	is	just	their	own	repressed	sexuality	that	starts
coming	up	in	fantasies,	in	hallucinations.
And	it	is	so	simple...	if	you	want	to	experiment	with	what	hallucination	is,	just
go	to	a	mountain	cave	alone,	fast	three	weeks,	and	don't	meet	anyone.	By	the	end
of	 the	 second	week	you	will	 start	 talking	 to	 yourself	 --	 and	 not	 only	will	 you
talk,	you	will	answer	also!
By	the	 third	week	you	will	start	seeing	people...	 if	you	are	a	man	you	will	see
women;	if	you	are	a	woman	you	will	see	men.	By	the	fourth	week	you	will	not
be	 able	 to	make	 a	distinction	 at	 all	whether	 the	woman	 that	 you	 see	 sitting	 in
front	of	you	in	the	cave	is	real	or	an	hallucination...!
Just	 four	weeks'	 experiment	and	you	will	know	how	apsaras	have	come.	They
will	 come	 to	 you	 too;they	 have	 not	 stopped	 the	 process	 of	 coming.	 But	 it	 is
simply	 the	 hallucination	 of	 your	 repressed	 desire,	 so	 deeply	 repressed	 that	 it
takes	revenge	--	with	a	vengeance.
My	suggestion	to	you	is,	first	sex,	because	it	is	more	basic	to	your	body,	to	your
life;	 it	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 life.	Meditation	 is	 the	 highest	 peak,	 but	 sex	 is	 the
roots.	First	think	of	the	roots.
Meditation	is	the	flowers.	They	come	at	the	very	end,	at	the	very	top	of	the	tree;
they	will	 come.	But	 don't	 try	 both	 together,	 otherwise	 you	will	 remain	wishy-
washy,	always	halfhearted...	meditating	and	thinking	about	sex,	making	love	and
thinking	about	Gautam	Buddha!	This	will	simply	drive	you	crazy.
And	you	are	asking,	"I	want	to	be	your	favorite	disciple."
I	 feel	 scared!	Please	 just	 remain	a	disciple!	 I	don't	have	any	 favorite	disciples,
because	 to	 have	 favorite	 disciples	 means	 people	 who	 will	 betray	 you,	 people
who	will	become	Judases,	people	who	will	assassinate	you.	People	who	are	first
trying	to	be	favorite	disciples	soon	would	like	you	to	move	over,	give	place	to
them;	now	they	want	 to	be	masters.	 I	don't	want	any	favorite	disciples.	This	 is
simple	politics.	 Just	keep	 to	 the	space	where	you	are.	 I	am	feeling	perfectly	at
ease;	when	you	come	too	close...	I	am	allergic!
And	you	are	saying,	"What	to	do?	Which	is	the	worst	question	to	ask	you?"	You
cannot	ask	 it.	What	worse	question	can	you	ask?	You	have	asked	 it.	But	 I	can
answer	 you,	 as	 bad	 as	 you	 like!	 Just	 I	 am	 looking	 for	 a	 worse...!	 So	 just	 be
patient!	It	is	really	the	worst,	so	just	be	quiet.
An	English	lady	was	on	holiday	in	the	wild	west.	One	day	she	decided	to	visit	an
Indian	reservation	and	became	interested	in	the	number	of	feathers	in	the	men's
headdresses.	So	she	asked	one	brave,	and	he	replied,	"Me	only	have	one	feather
because	me	only	have	one	squaw."
Thinking	this	was	a	joke,	she	asked	another	brave.	"Me	only	have	four	feathers
because	me	only	have	four	squaws,"	he	replied.
Somewhat	 perturbed,	 the	 English	 lady	 decided	 to	 ask	 the	 chief,	 who	 had	 a
magnificent	headdress	full	of	feathers.	"Me	Chief,"	he	replied,	"so	me	fuck	them
all!	Big,	small,	short,	tall...	me	fuck	them	all!"
The	lady	was	horrified.	"You	ought	to	be	hung!"	she	cried.
"You	damned	right,"	said	the	Chief,	"me	hung	like	a	buffalo!"
The	English	lady	cried,	"You	don't	have	to	be	so	hostile!"
"Hoss-style,	dog-style,	any	style...	me	fuck	them	all!"
With	tears	in	her	eyes,	the	lady	cried,	"Oh,	dear...."
"No	deer,"	said	the	Chief,	"Deer	run	too	fast	and	asshole	too	high!"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Expectation	breeds	frustration
9	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709090
ShortTitle:
PILGR06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
109
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	NEED	MY	GUITAR	TO	PLAY	MY	MUSIC.
I	HEAR	YOUR	BLESSED	MUSIC,	BUT	I	DON'T	SEE	YOUR	GUITAR.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	IS	YOUR	INSTRUMENT?
AND	A	FEW	SUTRAS	FOR	ME	TOO.
Milarepa,	 neither	 the	 music	 is	 mine	 nor	 the	 guitar.	 The	 music	 belongs	 to
existence,	and	the	guitar	belongs	to	you.	You	are	the	guitar,	and	this	whole	vast
universe	is	the	music.
I	am	at	the	most	just	a	passage	for	the	music	to	reach	to	the	guitar.	That's	why
you	 don't	 see	my	 guitar	 --	 because	 you	 don't	 see	 yourself.	Who	 are	 you?	On
whom	 am	 I	 playing	 my	 music?	 You	 hear	 my	 words	 and	 you	 also	 hear	 my
silences,	 and	naturally	you	 feel	 a	certain	music	 surrounding	me.	That	music	 is
your	response,	your	love,	your	trust.
In	a	way	I	am	not	here.	It	has	been	a	long	time	since	I	left	this	small	house	for
the	eternity.	 It	 is	 the	 compassion	of	 eternity	 that	 this	 small	house	 still	 goes	on
continuing	 to	 function.	 It	 is	 also	 your	 love,	 your	 prayers,	 your	 gratitude	 that
helps	my	body-mind	system	to	function.	I	don't	have	any	desire	to	be	fulfilled.
All	 is	 fulfilled	 --	 and	 when	 all	 is	 fulfilled	 a	 music	 arises.	 I	 don't	 have	 any
ambition.
Just	 the	other	day	Hasya	was	 telling	me	about	one	beautiful	man	who	is	being
followed	by	many	people.	Lovingly	he	 is	called	Dada.	Bhadra's	husband	is	his
follower,	and	he	stays	at	Bhadra's	house.	He	told	Bhadra,	"I	agree	with	Osho	on
every	point	except	one	--
that	is,	he	wants	to	save	the	world.	I	have	been	around	the	world,"	he	said,	"and	I
am	fed	up,	and	I	don't	see	any	hope	for	the	world."
He	is	going	to	come	to	Poona.	I	told	Hasya	to	meet	him	and	tell	him	one	thing,
"You	must	have	had	a	desire	to	save	the	world	and	you	are	feeling	frustrated."
I	 don't	 have	 to	 save	 anybody.	 The	world	 is	 perfectly	 saved	 --	 this	moment	 at
least.	Why	not	enjoy	this	moment?
I	 love	 talking	 to	my	people	without	any	purpose.	 It	 is	 just	my	 joy	seeing	your
faces,	 seeing	your	 intrinsic	capacities.	Who	cares	about	 the	world?	 --	 if	 it	dies
next	moment,	we	will	still	be	playing	guitars,	singing,	dancing,	celebrating	a	last
farewell	to	the	world.
Who	has	given	the	idea	to	this	man	Dada	that	I	am	a	savior?	It	is	enough	to	save
yourself.
I	 am	 not	 a	 savior	 and	 I	 am	 not	 at	 all	 interested	 what	 happens	 to	 the	 world
ultimately.	 I	 enjoy	 the	 idea,	 the	 dream	 that	 some	miracle	will	 happen	 and	 this
world	will	be	saved,	but	it	is	not	my	goal;	I	am	not	an	optimist.	Only	optimists
turn	 into	pessimists.	Dada	must	have	been	 thinking	himself	 to	be	a	savior,	and
seeing	 the	whole	world	he	 is	 feeling	 frustrated.	 I	 have	never	 felt	 frustrated	by
anything,	 because	 I	 have	 never	 expected	 in	 the	 very	 beginning.	 If	 you	 don't
expect	you	avoid	frustration.
I	am	a	man	of	total	acceptance.
If	this	world	exists,	good;	if	it	does	not	exist,	better.	But	why	should	I	be	puzzled
about	it?	It	is	my	joy,	and	this	joy	is	not	the	kind	which	makes	people	serious.
I	 have	 looked	 into	 Dada's	 books	 before;	 his	 famous	 book	 is	 BEYOND	 THE
MIND.
Strange	that	a	man	who	knows	beyond	mind	should	be	frustrated....	Who	can	be
frustrated?	No-mind	has	never	been	heard	to	be	frustrated.	And	he	thinks	he	has
given	 up	 the	 idea,	 and	 this	 is	 his	 disagreement	with	me.	He	 has	 given	 up	 the
idea;	 I	 never	had	 the	 idea.	And	whatever	he	 is	 saying	 is	 just	 a	 repetition	of	 J.
Krishnamurti.
J.	 Krishnamurti	 has	 left	 many	 orphans	 in	 the	 world,	 illegitimate	 children,
because	he	never	accepted	them	as	his	disciples.	But	deep	down	they	enjoyed	the
idea	that	without	being	a	disciple	they	are	gathering	so	much	wisdom.	Soon	all
of	them	have	become	masters.	I	have	come	across	many	masters	who	have	never
been	disciples.	It	is	simply	ego.
With	J.	Krishnamurti's	idea	that	"nobody	is	my	disciple,"	you	feel	relaxed:	this	is
great	you	don't	have	to	love	this	man,	you	don't	know	the	beauties	of	grace	that
exist	between	the	master	and	the	disciple.	You	enjoy	only	one	thing:	the	ego	that
you	 are	 nobody's	 disciple.	 And	 then	 these	 who	 are	 nobody's	 disciples	 start
collecting	 disciples	 --	 and	 of	 all	 that	 they	 are	 saying,	 not	 a	 single	 thing	 is
original;	it	is	all	borrowed.
I	 have	 told	Hasya	 and	Kaveesha	 that	when	Dada	 comes	here,	 "Encounter	 him
and	put	him	right.	He	is	misguiding	many	people."
I	am	a	man	who	lives	moment	to	moment,	and	I	want	those	who	love	me	to	learn
the	 art	 of	 living	 moment	 to	 moment.	 What	 happens	 tomorrow	 we	 will	 see
tomorrow.	At	least	one	thing	is	certain:	whatever	happens,	our	blissfulness,	our
ecstasy,	our	dance,	our	song	will	continue	--	if	not	on	this	planet,	then	on	another
planet.
There	 are	 millions	 of	 solar	 systems,	 and	 each	 solar	 system	 has	 hundreds	 of
planets,	 each	 planet	 has	 many	 moons.	 Our	 earth	 is	 very	 poor,	 with	 just	 one
moon.	Our	 sun	 is	mediocre;	 it	 is	 six	 thousand	 times	bigger	 than	 the	 earth,	but
compared	 to	 other	 suns,	 which	 are	 millions	 of	 times	 bigger	 than	 this	 sun,	 it
stands	nowhere	in	the	queue.
What	is	the	problem?	We	have	not	asked	this	planet	to	be	born;	it	was	existence's
decision	to	be	here.	Why	should	one	worry	if	existence	wants	us	to	take	our	song
and	our	music	and	our	consciousness	to	another	planet?	We	will	be	there...	one
thing	is	certain:	this	commune	is	going	to	exist.	The	whole	existence	is	there....
Ronald	Reagan	cannot	manage	 to	destroy	 the	universe.	This	poor	earth	will	be
destroyed...	 that	 too	 is	 possible	 if	 existence	 deep	 down	wills	 to	 destroy	 it.	Or
perhaps	the	earth	itself	has	become	old,	tired,	fed	up	with	all	kinds	of	nonsense
that	man	has	been	doing,	and	it	wants	to	go	into	eternal	sleep.	It	is	a	living	being.
But	these	are	not	our	problems.	Our	only	problem	is	how	to	be	in	this	moment,
so	totally,	so	intensely	that	we	don't	need	another	moment.	This	will	be	enough
to	give	us	 fulfillment,	contentment,	ecstasy,	which	 I	don't	 think	 this	man	Dada
has	ever	glimpsed.
Pessimists	 cannot	 get	 it;	 optimists	 only	 hope	 for	 it.	 We	 are	 realists,
existentialists:	we	have	it	right	now.
It	is	not	a	question	of	getting	fed	up,	it	is	not	a	question	of	hoping	for	the	future.
We	 take	 the	 present	 moment	 and	 squeeze	 the	 whole	 juice	 of	 it	 --	 that's	 our
religion.	Wherever	we	will	be,	one	thing	is	certain:	we	will	recognize	each	other
just	by	the	style	of	squeezing	the	juice	from	the	present	moment.
Faces	may	be	different,	planets	may	be	different,	 that	does	not	mean	anything.
We	 have	 a	 key	 to	 recognize	 our	 people:	 in	 their	 eyes,	 in	 their	 faces,	 they	 are
always	existential.
Milarepa,	you	are	my	instrument.	Your	guitar	is	my	guitar.	Your	fingers	playing
on	the	instruments	are	my	fingers.	Can't	you	allow	that?
Ramakrishna	was	dying.	He	had	a	cancer	of	the	throat;	he	could	not	eat,	could
not	drink.
His	disciples	continuously	were	harassing	him	saying	"Why	don't	you	close	your
eyes	 and	 tell	 the	mother	 goddess?"	 --	 he	was	 the	priest	 of	 a	 temple	of	mother
goddess	Kali	--
"Just	saying,	`Remove	this	cancer'	will	be	enough."
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 angry	with	me.	 I	 have	 tried	 it,	 but	 the	moment	 I
close	my	eyes	and	I	see	the	mother	goddess,	I	forget	about	the	cancer."
All	the	disciples	gathered	with	Ramakrishna's	wife,	Sharda,	and	told	her,	"Now
only	you	can	help."
Sharda	went	to	Ramakrishna	and	said,	"This	time	you	are	not	going	to	forget	the
cancer.
Why	are	you	making	so	many	people	miserable?"
And	Ramakrishna	respected	his	wife	so	much;	she	was	almost	a	mother	to	him
rather	than	a	wife.	He	touched	her	feet	the	very	moment	he	had	been	shown	her
as	a	candidate	for	marriage.	Everybody	thought,	"This	boy	is	mad.	Who	touches
the	feet	of	the	wife?	--
and	she	is	not	your	wife	yet."
And	the	first	thing	he	called	to	her	was,	"Mother,	don't	forget	me;	I	had	chosen
you."
Everybody	in	the	village	tortured	him,	"You	idiot,	the	wife	is	not	called	mother.
And	touching	her	feet..."	He	had	three	rupees.	He	offered	those	three	rupees	to
the	feet	of	Sharda.	The	family	of	Sharda	also	became	puzzled:	"The	man	seems
to	be	crazy."
But	 Sharda	 insisted	 that	 if	 she	 will	 marry	 anyone,	 that	 is	 the	 man:	 "The
innocence,	the	purity...	he	is	no	ordinary	human	being.	He	has	something	of	the
beyond	already"	--	and	he	was	only	thirteen	years	old.
Since	Sharda	married	Ramakrishna	he	always	called	her	mother.	It	doesn't	look
good	not	to	follow	the	advice	of	the	mother.	He	said,	"I	will	try	one	time	more,
and	because	you	are	telling	me,	I	will	put	my	whole	energy	to	remember	what	I
have	to	say	to	the	mother	goddess."
He	closed	his	eyes...	and	then	opened	them	laughing.	He	said,	"Sharda,	call	all
the	disciples	in	who	have	made	you	their	mouthpiece,	because	I	remembered	and
I	told	her.
And	she	said,	`Ramakrishna,	you	have	been	using	this	throat	for	so	many	years.
Now	you	have	so	many	throats,	your	disciples,	your	lovers	--	why	can't	you	eat
through	 their	 throats,	why	 can't	 you	 drink	 through	 their	 throats?	Why	 cling	 to
this	 body?	 Why	 not	 spread	 into	 everybody's	 body	 who	 loves	 you,	 who	 will
welcome	you	in	the	silences	of	his	heart?'"
There	was	great	silence,	there	was	nothing	to	say.
Milarepa,	you	hear	my	music;	that	music	comes	from	the	beyond.	I	cannot	claim
any	monopoly,	any	copyright	on	it.	And	you	want	to	see	my	guitar	--	just	look	at
your	guitar,	just	look	at	your	hands.	In	deep	love	a	synchronicity	happens.	You
start	doing	things	which	my	deepest	being	wanted	to	do,	but	I	don't	know	music;
I	cannot	even	recognize	which	is	a	guitar	and	which	is	a	harmonium	and	which
is	a	saxophone.
I	 have	 never	 been	 a	 singer,	 not	 even	 a	 bathroom	 singer.	 I	 have	 lived	 in	many
houses	 in	 this	 country	with	many	 friends,	 and	many	 times	 people	 have	 asked,
"At	 least	we	were	 thinking	you	will	be	 singing	 in	 the	bathroom,	but	you	don't
sing?"
I	don't	know	singing...	I	am	a	song.	I	don't	know	singing	--	you	will	have	to	sing
in	me.
You	will	have	to	allow	yourself	to	be	totally	available	to	me.
You	can	dance	and	it	will	be	my	dance.
You	can	sing	and	it	will	be	my	song.
You	can	play	on	instruments,	but	your	fingers	will	be	in	synchronicity	with	me,
and	I	am	in	synchronicity	with	the	whole.	So	it	is	just	formal	to	say	that	you	are
my	songs,	that	you	are	my	music.	I	am	just	a	small	passage;	the	beyond	comes
through	me	 to	your	eyes.	And	because	 it	 is	of	 the	beyond	 it	has	a	 tremendous
capacity	to	transform	you.
I	have	not	said	a	single	word	to	you	on	my	own;	hence	I	can	claim	originality	in
the	literal	sense	of	the	word.	Ordinarily	originality	means	nobody	else	has	said
it,	only	I	am	saying	it;	that	is	using	the	word	wrongly.	Originality	should	mean	it
is	coming	from	the	origins...	origins	of	life,	origins	of	love,	origins	of	existence.
And	you	are	asking,	"And	a	few	sutras	for	me	too."
Milarepa,	 that	 is	 not	 your	 business.	Devageet	 has	 gone	mad	 contemplating	 on
transdental	medication.	You	are	already	crazy,	you	can	go	 far	 --	Devageet	you
can	leave	far	behind	--
so	I	am	a	little	worried	about	you.	But	whatever	has	to	be,	has	to	be.	These	are	a
few	sutras	for	you:
If	your	neighbor	does	you	harm,	just	buy	each	of	his	children	a	drum.
All	you	need	in	this	life	is	ignorance	and	confidence,	and	the	success	is	sure.
Sex	is	what	happens	between	a	man	and	a	woman	before	they	get	to	know	each
other.
Reality	is	what	your	mother	thinks	you	ought	to	live	in.
You	know	you	are	getting	old	when	the	girls	at	the	office	start	confiding	in	you.
A	woman	can	keep	one	secret	--	the	secret	of	her	age.
...	Except	for	that,	she	cannot	keep	any	secret!
God	invented	man	because	he	was	disappointed	in	the	monkey.
A	man	never	knows	what	a	fool	he	is	until	he	hears	himself	imitated	by	one.
...	It	is	natural.	How	can	you	see	your	face	without	a	mirror?...
Be	 nice	 to	 people	 on	 your	way	 up	 because	 you	will	meet	 them	 on	 your	way
down.
A	mistake	is	evidence	that	someone	tried	to	do	something.
...	You	can	see	 the	mistake	all	over	 the	world.	This	 is	 the	only	proof	 that	God
tried	to	do	something.	Perhaps	he	was	the	creator.	Creation	may	not	need	some
creator,	but	mistakes	need	someone	to	do	them.	This	whole	world	is	a	mistake,
and	 I	 think	 this	 is	 the	 only	 proof	 that	 God	 may	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 do
something....
If	a	person	does	not	learn	from	the	mistakes	of	others,	he	won't	live	long	enough
to	make	all	of	them	himself.
The	 art	 of	 medicine	 consists	 of	 amusing	 the	 patient	 while	 nature	 cures	 the
disease.
Everyone	is	as	God	made	him,	and	often	a	good	deal	worse.
Gossip	is	what	no	one	claims	to	like,	but	everybody	enjoys.
It	is	difficult	to	climb	a	ladder	with	your	hands	in	your	pockets,	but	it	is	possible
if	your	hands	are	in	someone	else's	pockets...
Then	you	can	climb	any	ladder.	The	people	you	see	at	the	top,	those	big	chunks,
their	hands	are	always	in	somebody	else's	pocket.
So	whenever	you	meet	 the	so-called	leaders,	popes,	shankaracharyas,	 take	care
about	your	pockets.	They	are	not	 interested	 in	you,	 they	are	 interested	only	 in
your	pockets....
Familiarity	breeds	contempt	--	and	children.
The	hardest	 task	of	a	woman's	 life	 is	 to	prove	 to	a	man	 that	his	 intentions	are
serious.
How	do	you	know	your	therapy	group	is	right	for	you?
One:	It	is	too	expensive.
Two:	All	your	friends	have	done	it.
Three:	It	focuses	on	problems	you	never	knew	you	had.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVERY	TIME	I	COME	TO	YOU,	I	FEEL	LIKE	ONE	OF	THOSE	ANCIENT
WARRIORS	WHO	CAME	TO	PAY	HIS	RESPECTS	TO	THE	EMPEROR.	HE
WOULD	 ENTER	 INTO	 HIS	 PRESENCE,	 TAKE	 OFF	 HIS	 HELMET	 AND
PUT	IT	AT
THE	FEET	OF	THE	EMPEROR.
THE	ONLY	DIFFERENCE	IS	THAT	I	AM	PUTTING	MY	HEAD	AT	YOUR
FEET.
MORE	 SO	WHEN	 I	 ASK	 YOU	A	 QUESTION,	 AND	 EVEN	 TREMBLING
INSIDE,	I	PUT	MY	HEAD	AS	CLOSE	AS	POSSIBLE,	FOR	YOU	TO	CUT	IT
WITH	YOUR
SWORD.
BUT	 EVERY	 TIME,	 TO	 MY	 INFINITE	 SURPRISE,	 YOU	 SHOWER	 THE
NECTAR
OF	YOUR	GRACE	ON	MY	POOR	HEAD,	THE	FRAGRANCE	OF	YOUR
COMPASSION,	AND	AN	OCEAN	OF	LOVE	IN	WHICH	I	FIND	MYSELF
DROWNING	DEEPER	AND	DEEPER	EACH	TIME.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	HAS	HAPPENED	TO	YOUR	SWORD?
HOW	 MANY	 TIMES	 WILL	 I	 HAVE	 TO	 PROVOKE	 YOU	 TO	 CUT	 MY
HEAD?
Sarjano,	it	surprises	me	to	know	that	you	have	a	head.	Some	idiot	guy	must	have
given	you	the	idea.
I	have	not	 lost	my	sword	--	you	have	forgotten	your	head	somewhere...	maybe
drowned	in	spaghetti!...	or	do	you	prefer	pizza?
But	as	far	as	I	know	you	don't	have	any	head.	I	have	tried	to	cut	it,	but	what	to
cut?
Certainly	you	are	brave	enough	to	go	on	trying	again	and	again	and	again.	This
does	not	suit	the	Italian;	this	is	the	American	stupidity!	Try	again	and	again	and
again...	For	what?
--	 for	 the	 sake	of	 trying.	Everybody	 in	America	 is	 so	busy	 trying,	and	nobody
knows	for	what.	Trying	itself	has	become	the	goal;	speed	itself	has	become	the
destination.
But	Italians	are	far	more	loving	beings,	far	more	centered	in	the	heart.	Perhaps
that's	why	you	go	on	living	without	a	head	--	the	heart	is	enough.	And	no	master
in	the	whole	of	history	has	cut	anybody's	heart	with	the	sword.	But	I	am	not	a
reliable	man,	so	you	be	alert!
A	story	for	you...
The	English	pirate	ship	was	alone	on	the	high	seas.	Suddenly	the	lookout	came
running.
"Captain!	Captain!"	he	cried,	"there	are	five	Spanish	galleons	on	the	horizon!"
"Quick!"	said	the	captain.	"Bring	me	my	red	coat."
So	 he	 did,	 and	 the	 captain	 put	 it	 on,	 and	 the	 pirate	 ship	 defeated	 the	 Spanish
galleons.
The	next	day	the	lookout	came	running	again.	"Captain!	Captain!	There	are	TEN
Spanish	galleons	on	the	horizon!"
"Okay,"	said	the	captain.	"Bring	me	my	red	coat."
He	put	it	on	and	they	defeated	the	ten	galleons.
"Captain,"	asked	the	lookout.	"Would	you	tell	me	why	you	always	ask	for	your
red	coat	before	we	go	into	battle?"
"Oh,	that's	because	if	I'm	wounded,	the	blood	will	not	show;	then	the	men	will
not	be	frightened	and	we	will	fight	to	victory!"	the	captain	replied.
The	next	day	the	lookout	came	running.	"Captain!	Captain!"	he	cried,	"there	are
a	hundred	Spanish	galleons	on	the	horizon!"
At	 these	 words	 the	 captain's	 face	 turned	 white,	 and	 he	 called	 to	 his	 lookout,
"Quick,	bring	me	my	brown	pants!"
Just	be	alert!
I	love	you,	so	I'm	going	to	kill	you	--	that's	certain.	Love	is	a	sure	killer.	But	I
kill	 gradually,	 because	 in	 my	 experience	 if	 you	 kill	 suddenly,	 people	 start
escaping.
Gradually,	 they	 don't	 know	what	 is	 happening,	 they	 come	 to	 know	only	when
they	are	gone.
And	 this	 place	 is	 for	 only	 those	who	 are	 ready	 to	 be	 gone.	You	 become	 your
ultimate	 flowering	 only	when	 you	 are	 not.	 It	 is	 a	 strange	 fundamental	 law	 of
existence,	and	there	is	no	way	to	change	it.
The	more	you	are,	the	less	you	are.
The	less	you	are,	the	more	you	are.
If	 you	 are	 all,	 then	 you	 don't	 exist.	 If	 you	 are	 a	 nothingness,	 you	 have	 tasted
existence	for	the	first	time.
So,	 Sarjano,	 while	 I	 go	 on	 taking	 small	 pieces	 from	 your	 ego,	 from	 your	 so-
called	 personality,	 you	 keep	 yourself	 engaged	 in	 spaghetti	 and	 pizza.	 It	 is	 a
perfect	art!
The	 authentic	 master	 kills	 the	 disciple,	 so	 that	 he	 also	 can	 become	 a	 pure
nothingness,	 and	 can	 become	one	with	 the	 universe.	The	 ancient	 sages	 of	 this
country	have	said	that	the	master	is	a	death.	Unless	you	find	a	master	who	can	be
a	death	 to	you,	don't	waste	 time.	Go	on	 searching,	 somewhere	you	will	 find	a
master	who	 is	 going	 to	 erase	 you	 completely.	He	will	 give	 you	 your	 real	 and
authentic	being.
Your	question	is	right:	I	have	not	lost	my	sword.	It	is	just	because	you	don't	have
your	 head,	 so	 you	 can't	 see	 it.	 But	 you	 can	 feel,	 and	 that	 is	 far	 better	 --	 to
function	through	the	heart.
Question	3
BELOVED	MASTER,
KAHLIL	GIBRAN	HAS	 SAID,	 "I	WILL	 TELL	YOU	A	THING	YOU	MAY
NOT
KNOW:	THE	MOST	HIGHLY	SEXED	BEINGS	UPON	THE	PLANET	ARE
THE
CREATORS,	THE	POETS,	 SCULPTORS,	 PAINTERS,	MUSICIANS	 --	AND
SO	IT
HAS	BEEN	FROM	THE	BEGINNING.	AND	AMONGST	THEM,	SEX	IS	A
BEAUTIFUL	AND	EXALTED	GIFT."
PLEASE	 TALK	 ON	 SEX	 AS	 PART	 OF	 THE	 CREATIVE	 LIFE	 OF	 THE
ARTIST.
Dhyan	David,	Kahlil	Gibran	 is	 a	man	 of	 tremendous	 insight.	What	 he	 says	 is
always	 significant	 and	 worth	 contemplating	 over.	 He	 has	 forgotten	 just	 one
thing,	which	 is	natural,	because	he	had	no	experience	of	 that	 faraway	horizon.
He	talks	about	the	creators
--	 the	 poets,	 the	 sculptors,	 the	 painters,	 the	 musicians	 --	 but	 he	 forgets
completely	about	the	awakened	ones.	It	 is	not	right	to	forget;	in	fact	he	had	no
idea	--	and	they	are	the	highest	creators.	Poets	and	sculptors	and	musicians	and
dancers	 are	 very	 low	 categories	 in	 comparison	 to	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha,
Bodhidharma,	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu.
What	he	is	saying	is	absolutely	right:	sex	is	the	only	energy	you	have.	But	you
can	use	it	in	a	destructive	way	--	and	that	too	he	has	forgotten.	An	Adolf	Hitler
or	a	Joseph	Stalin	or	a	Benito	Mussolini	or	Ronald	Reagan,	these	people	are	all
abnormally	highly	sexual.	 In	a	few	people	 the	sex	energy	 is	so	much	that	 they
cannot	be	satisfied	by	only	creating	children.
This	 is	 simply	 a	 known	 fact,	 that	 children	 are	 created	 through	 sex.	 So	 sex	 is
certainly	a	creative	force,	which	can	even	create	life.	But	there	are	highly	sexed
people,	 and	 just	 to	 produce	 children	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 exhaust	 their	 sexuality.
They	 create	 music;	 music	 becomes	 their	 outlet.	 They	 create	 art,	 they	 create
paintings,	poetries...	and	they	are	thought	of	always	by	the	society	as	outsiders,
they	are	not	accepted	as	normal	human	beings.	Something	is	crazy	about	them;
they	are	eccentric.
So	he	has	forgotten	two	things.	One	is	that	the	destructive	people	are	also	highly
sexed	 people,	 but	 they	 use	 their	 energy	 in	 destruction.	 It	 is	 not	 automatically
decisive	 that	a	highly	sexed	person	will	be	always	a	creator;	most	probably	he
will	be	a	destroyer.
But	he	is	right	that	sex	creates	children,	creates	painting,	creates	music,	creates
sculpture.
The	world	is	divided	into	 three	kinds	of	people:	 the	normal	sexual	people	who
only	 create	 children,	 the	 abnormally	 sexual	 people	 who	 either	 become
destructive,	create	wars,	destroy	as	much	as	 they	can	--	and	 the	 third	category,
the	creators.
Kahlil	 Gibran's	 insight	 is	 right,	 but	 incomplete.	 He	 himself	 is	 a	 poet	 and	 a
painter,	but	he	knows	nothing	about	awakened	consciousness.	That	is	the	highest
point	 of	 creation:	 creating	 yourself	 as	 an	 immortal.	 Because	 it	 is	 an	 inner
creation,	people	don't	count	Gautam	Buddha	as	a	creator,	or	Mahavira	or	Naropa
or	 Tilopa;	 they	 don't	 consider	 these	 people	 as	 creators,	 because	 they	 can't	 see
what	 they	have	created.	They	have	created	 themselves,	 and	 that	 is	 the	greatest
creation	 in	 the	world.	 Just	 look	 at	Gautam	Buddha,	 his	 silence,	 his	 peace,	 his
understanding,	his	clarity,	his	blissfulness,	his	ecstasy...
unwavering.
No	enlightened	person	has	ever	committed	suicide,	but	the	great	creators	Kahlil
Gibran	 is	 talking	 about	 are	well	 known	 for	 two	 things:	 either	 they	 go	mad	 or
they	commit	suicide.
They	 go	mad	when	 their	 energy	 cannot	 find	 an	 outlet.	 They	 are	mad	 in	 their
paintings,	 in	 their	 poetry	 --	 but	 nothing	 satisfies,	 everything	 falls	 below	 their
standard.	That	drives	them	mad.	Almost	every	great	artist	in	the	West	has	at	least
once	visited	the	madhouse	for	a	few	years.	Or	when	they	feel	they	are	exhausted
and	 now	 there	 is	 no	 more	 energy	 left	 to	 create,	 their	 whole	 meaning	 of	 life
disappears.	 Creation	 was	 their	 meaning.	 In	 creating	 things	 they	 had	 become
small	gods,	and	now	they	are	nobody,	exhausted,	used	cartridges.	These	are	the
people	who	commit	suicide.
Van	Gogh	I	can	give	you	as	an	example	--	one	of	the	greatest	painters	the	world
has	ever	known	passed	through	all	the	stages,	so	he	is	a	perfect	example.	He	was
so	mad	 in	 creating.	He	was	a	poor	 coal	miner's	 son,	uneducated,	but	 from	 the
very	beginning	he	started	painting	 laborers,	old	people,	children.	And	whoever
looked	at	them	was	amazed:	his	painting	was	almost	photographic.
His	parents	wanted	him	to	be	a	priest.	Fortunately,	he	did	not	listen	to	them.	He
went	to	the	school	to	become	a	priest,	but	all	that	he	did	there	was	drawings	of
the	professors,	the	missionaries.	He	never	learned	anything	else.	Finally,	he	was
brought	back	home.	The	parents	were	 tired;	 they	 told	him,	"Now	you	are	 free.
Whatever	 you	 want	 to	 do...	 but	 we	 are	 not	 going	 to	 take	 any	 financial
responsibility."	He	was	even	happy	in	this	situation.
He	left	for	Paris.
He	was	Dutch.	His	younger	brother	was	employed,	and	out	of	compassion	every
week	he	used	to	send	him	the	exact	money	so	that	he	could	purchase	bread	and
butter	 for	seven	days.	He	was	afraid	 to	send	him	enough	for	 the	whole	month,
because	 that	 would	 go	 into	 purchasing	 paints	 and	 canvases.	 But	 he	 was	 not
aware	what	he	had	done	to	his	brother.
Out	of	seven	days	he	used	to	eat	three	days	--	one	day	here,	one	day	there	--	and
four	 days	 he	 saved	money	 to	 purchase	 canvases,	 colors,	 brushes,	 whatever	 is
needed	for	painting.
No	man	has	been	so	mad	 that	he	was	dying	of	hunger	and	starvation,	but	 that
was	the	only	way	to	paint.	And	the	great	difficulty	was	--	otherwise	things	would
have	 been	 easier	 and	more	 comfortable	 --	 he	 did	 not	manage	 to	 sell	 a	 single
painting,	 because	 his	 paintings	 were	 the	 paintings	 of	 a	 genius,	 and	 a	 genius
always	comes	before	his	time.	This	existence	has	strange	laws.
Now	 his	 paintings...	 only	 two	 hundred	 have	 been	 saved.	 He	 used	 to	 give
paintings	to	his	friends	just	for	a	cup	of	tea,	just	for	a	packet	of	cigarettes.
Now	his	paintings	are	the	costliest	paintings	in	the	world.	The	last	painting	was
sold	 for	 thirty-five	million	 dollars	 --	 that	 is	 the	 record.	Never	 before	was	 any
painting	 sold	 at	 thirty	 million	 dollars;	 the	 last	 record	 was	 only	 nine	 million
dollars.	I	don't	think	any	painting	is	ever	is	going	to	outdo	him.
Why	could	people	not	purchase	his	paintings?	He	was	ready	to	give	at	any	price,
just	 the	 cost	 price.	He	worked	 for	 days	 and	he	was	not	 asking	 even	 for	 labor.
They	could	not	understand	 those	paintings;	 those	paintings	needed	a	genius	 to
understand	them.	He	has	painted	stars,	not	the	way	you	see	them,	but	as	spirals.
Now	who	is	going	to	believe	that	these	are	stars?	--	everybody	knows	what	stars
are!	Only	just	this	year	it	has	been	found	that	stars	are	not	the	way	you	see	them,
but	the	way	Vincent	van	Gogh	saw	them.
Strange,	 without	 any	 scientific	 instruments	 without	 a	 big	 lab...	 tremendous
clarity.
It	took	one	hundred	years	for	science	to	find	out	that	his	stars	are	the	only	right
stars,	and	all	other	stars	painted	are	just	rubbish.	The	same	has	happened	about
his	other	paintings.
If	he	could	have	sold	his	paintings,	he	could	have	made	more	paintings,	but	he
became	tired,	starved.	His	only	desire	was	to	paint	all	the	phases	of	the	sun,	from
the	sunrise	to	the	sunset,	a	whole	series	of	paintings.
The	 day	 that	 series	was	 complete	 he	 had	 exhausted	 all	 his	 energy.	He	 simply
wrote	a	letter	to	his	brother,	"I	am	not	committing	suicide.	I	have	burned	myself
out.	 But	 I	 am	 dying	 happily	 because	 what	 I	 wanted	 to	 accomplish	 is
accomplished	 --	 I	 am	 one	 of	 the	 most	 contented	 men.	 The	 last	 painting	 is
complete	 today."	And	 he	 shot	 himself	 dead.	He	was	 only	 thirty-three	 years	 of
age.
It	is	true	that	you	have	no	other	energy	than	sexual	energy.	All	creation	is	out	of
sexual	 energy.	 In	 other	 words,	 every	 creation	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 your	 sexual
energy;	even	if	you	become	the	richest	man	in	the	world,	that	is	sexual	energy.
But	 Kahlil	 Gibran	 has	 forgotten	 two	 things:	 one,	 that	 sexual	 energy	 can	 be
destructive;	 second,	 that	 sexual	 energy	 never	 brings	 you	 to	 self-realization,
which	is	the	ultimate	creation.
It	seems	he	was	not	actually	aware.	Although	he	has	written	books	on	Jesus,	and
he	 spoke	 in	 the	 language	 of	 tremendous	 beauty	 and	 poetry,	 he	was	 looking	 at
Jesus	as	a	poet.	He	was	not	aware	of	Ta	Hui	or	Bodhidharma	or	Gautam	Buddha,
and	he	was	not	 aware	what	 the	problem	 is.	 In	 the	East,	no	enlightened	person
goes	mad,	no	enlightened	person	commits	suicide.	Going	mad	is	the	function	of
the	mind.	Committing	suicide	is	also	the	function	of	the	mind.
And	 because	 the	 enlightened	 person	 is	 beyond	 mind,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
madness,	and	 there	 is	no	question	of	suicide.	He	 lives,	and	he	 lives	 totally.	He
lives,	 and	 he	 lives	 at	 the	 very	 peak	 of	 intelligence	 and	 understanding	 and
awareness.
But	I	want	to	add	this	much	to	Kahlil	Gibran's	statement:	that	these	people	are
also	 immensely	 sexual,	 perhaps	 more	 sexual	 than	 the	 poets,	 than	 the	 singers,
than	 the	 musicians.	 They	 have	 so	 much	 energy	 that	 they	 are	 capable	 of	 self-
realization,	that	they	are	capable	of	giving	a	rebirth	to	themselves.
But	 basically	 I	 agree	with	 the	 incomplete	 statement	 of	Kahlil	Gibran.	 I	would
have	loved	it	if	he	had	made	it	complete,	but	he	himself	was	not	complete.	It	is	a
great	 exercise	 of	 understanding	 if	 you	 look	 at	Kahlil	Gibran's	 statements,	 and
then	 you	 look	 at	 Kahlil	 Gibran's	 life.	 You	 will	 be	 amazed;	 his	 life	 was	 very
ordinary,	perhaps	below	ordinary,	and	the	poetry	is	reaching	to	the	stars.
Because	they	are	not	artists	of	life	--	 they	are	artists	creating	objects	who	have
forgotten	 themselves	 --	 their	situation	 is	exactly	 like	 the	scientist's.	A	man	 like
Albert	Einstein	has	immense	energy,	and	that	energy	is	sexual,	because	there	is
no	other	energy.	The	word
`sex'	 has	become	 so	 condemned	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 say	 it	 is	 life	 energy,	 just	 to
protect	the	energy	from	the	centuries	of	condemnation.
Albert	 Einstein	 worked	 on	 objects,	 faraway	 stars,	 the	 speed	 of	 light...	 and	 he
managed	 to	 figure	 it	 all	 out.	 But	 he	 never	 bothered	 about	 his	 own	 life;	 he
remained	focused	on	the	outside.
If	a	poet	turns	inwards	he	becomes	a	mystic.
If	a	scientist	turns	inwards	he	becomes	a	mystic.
The	energy	is	the	same,	but	the	direction	changes.
Kahlil	Gibran	lived	a	very	miserable	life,	sometimes	ugly.	He	was	a	man	of	great
anger,	quarrelsome,	but	he	has	created	great	poetry.	If	you	just	look	at	his	words,
they	 are	 pure	 twenty-four-carat	 gold.	 But	 avoid	 the	 man,	 don't	 look	 at	 him;
otherwise	your	respect	for	his	words	will	be	lost.
The	 poets,	 the	 scientists,	 the	 musicians	 and	 other	 creators	 have	 a	 double
personality,	 a	 split	 personality,	 some	 kind	 of	 schizophrenia.	 One	 part	 of	 them
goes	on	creating,	and	one	part	lags	far	behind.
The	 mystic	 is	 the	 only	 person	 in	 existence	 who	 is	 not	 schizophrenic,	 who	 is
unique	and	one,	organically	one,	undivided.	His	life	and	his	words	have	the	same
flavor.	But	I	 think	Kahlil	Gibran	 in	 the	first	place	was	not	capable	of	knowing
the	interiority	of	a	mystic;	and	in	the	second	place,	perhaps	he	was	afraid	to	say
that	a	Buddha	is	created	by	great	abundance	of	sexual	energy.	Nobody	bothered
him,	nobody	condemned	him	when	he	called	poets	and	sculptors	and	musicians
and	 other	 creators	 oversexed.	 But	 if	 he	 had	 called	 Jesus,	 Gautam	 Buddha,
Mohammed,	 Moses	 oversexed,	 he	 would	 have	 been	 condemned	 all	 over	 the
world.
But	I	want	to	say	that	all	great	people	in	the	world,	destructive	or	creative,	are
people	 of	 so	 much	 energy,	 life	 energy,	 life	 force,	 that	 they	 cannot	 contain	 it
within	 themselves;	 they	 have	 to	 do	 something.	 I	 would	 like	 that	 they	 all	 turn
inwards,	so	their	life	is	not	a	split	and	an	agony,	and	so	it	becomes	an	ecstasy.
Joe	was	 sitting	 at	 the	 bar,	 slowly	 sipping	 his	 drink,	 when	 his	 friend,	Mickey,
came	running	in.
"Joe,"	he	shouted,	"get	over	 to	your	house	 real	quick.	 I	 just	 stopped	off	 to	 see
you	 and	 I	 heard	 a	 man's	 voice	 in	 your	 bedroom.	 So	 I	 looked	 through	 your
window	and	I	saw	your	wife	in	bed	with	another	man."
"Is	that	so?"	said	Joe,	matter-of-factly.	"What	does	this	guy	looks	like?"
"Oh,	he's	tall	and	completely	bald,"	said	Mickey.
"And	did	he	have	a	thick	red	mustache?"	asked	Joe.
"Right,	right!"	yelled	Mickey.
"Did	he	have	a	front	gold	tooth?"	asked	Joe.
"Damn	it,	you	are	right!"	replied	Mickey.
"Must	be	that	idiot	Dick	Roberts,"	said	Joe.	"He	will	screw	anything."
There	are	people	of	 that	category	also	--	no	 life	energy,	at	 the	most	 lukewarm.
They	never	create	anything.	Even	to	create	children	is	such	a	task.
And	by	the	way,	I	should	also	mention	to	you	--	to	make	Kahlil	Gibran's	insight
more	clear	--	that	no	impotent	man	has	been	a	poet	or	a	sculptor	or	a	scientist;
the	 question	 of	 being	 a	mystic	 does	 not	 arise.	 Perhaps	 impotency	 is	 the	worst
situation	 a	man	can	 find	himself	 in.	But	 strangely	 enough	 all	 the	 religions	 are
teaching	people	to	be	impotent;	they	call	it	celibacy.
Because	of	this	idea	of	celibacy,	religions	have	been	absolutely	uncreative.	The
energy	was	there	in	people...	they	could	not	create,	because	to	create	you	need	an
esthetic	 sense,	 you	 need	 a	 loving	 heart,	 a	 feeling	 individuality.	 To	 become
celibate	they	have	destroyed	all	these	qualities.	So	the	only	possibility	for	their
expression	of	sexual	energy	 is	either	perverted	sex,	homosexuality,	 lesbianism,
or	 destruction	 in	 the	 name	 of	 God,	 in	 the	 name	 of	 truth,	 in	 the	 name	 of
Christianity,	 in	 the	 name	 of	 Islam....	 They	 have	 been	 continuously	 destroying
each	other.
Perhaps	nobody	has	looked	at	the	psychology	of	why	it	happens.	It	has	nothing
to	do	with	their	metaphysics;	 it	has	something	to	do	with	their	 inner	life	force.
They	cannot	contain	 it...	 then	a	crusade,	 jihad,	a	 religious	war	 --	 Jews	fighting
with	 Mohammedans,	 Mohammedans	 killing	 Jews,	 Christians	 killing
Mohammedans,	Christians	killing	Jews.
Hindus	have	completely	destroyed	Buddhism	in	India.	Buddha	was	the	greatest
man	 on	 the	 earth	 in	 the	 past	 history...	 and	 he	 has	 left	 such	 a	 great	 impact	 on
every	 intelligent	 being	 in	 this	 country.But	 when	 he	 died,	 within	 five	 hundred
years	 the	old	priesthood	of	 the	Hindus,	 the	brahmins	destroyed	everything	 that
they	could.
You	will	not	believe	that	Mohammedans	not	only	killed	human	beings,	they	also
destroyed	 great	 pieces	 of	 art,	 because	 they	 were	 worshiped	 as	 religious	 --
beautiful	statues	of	Buddha,	great	temples.
In	every	ancient	well	in	India	there	are	beautiful	statues,	because	out	of	fear	that
their	 statues	would	 be	 destroyed,	 people	 have	 thrown	 them	 into	 the	wells.	 So
whenever	an	ancient	well	is	cleaned	or	looked	into,	they	are	surprised..."What	is
the	 matter?"	 In	 every	 well	 are	 beautiful	 statues	 of	Mahavira,	 of	 Bahubali,	 of
Gautam	Buddha.
There	was	no	need	to	destroy	the	whole	statue	because	a	superstition	exists	all
over	India	that	if	a	statue	is	a	little	bit	damaged	--	one	ear	is	missing	--	it	is	no
more	 worshipable;	 it	 has	 to	 be	 removed.	 There	 are	 millions	 of	 statues	 so
beautiful...	somebody's	ear	 is	missing,	somebody's	nose	is	missing,	somebody's
hand	has	been	cut	--	that	was	enough,	and	they	have	been	thrown	out.
I	happened	to	be	in	a	city	near	Katni	in	a	small	place	in	Madhya	Pradesh.	There
are	thousands	of	statues	--	 the	village	consists	only	of	statues,	so	beautiful	 that
thousands	 of	 people	 must	 have	 worked	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 --	 but	 nobody
lives	there.	I	enquired,	tried	to	find	out	in	old	gazettes	of	the	government,	and	I
found	 only	 one	 reference	 in	 an	 old	 scripture.	 That	 village	 was	 the	 village	 of
sculptors.	 Being	 afraid	 that	 their	 statues	 will	 be	 destroyed,	 they	 covered	 their
statues	 with	mud	 and	 escaped,	 burned	 their	 houses	 so	 nobody	 will	 think	 that
there	is	a	village.
Now	it	has	become	a	thick	forest,	wild	trees	have	grown,	but	it	must	have	been	a
very	great	place	when	it	was	alive.	Those	statues	show	that	the	village	must	have
contained	 thousands	 and	 thousands	 of	 great	 artists.	 Now	 it	 is	 a	 ghost	 village.
Only	statues...	 they	have	been	discovered	during	 the	British	 regime;	 their	mud
has	been	taken	away.	It	was	one	of	the	great	discoveries.
In	Khajuraho,	one	of	the	most	famous	cities	of	temples,	there	were	one	hundred
temples.
It	is	simply	mind-boggling	to	see	a	single	temple;	it	takes	almost	one	day,	there
are	 so	many	 statues.	You	 cannot	 find	 a	 single	 inch	which	 is	 not	 carved...	 and
huge	temples.
They	were	also	buried	under	mud,	small	mud	hills.	Only	thirty	could	be	saved;
the	Mohammedans	destroyed	seventy.
They	 have	 been	 discovered	 again,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 sculpture	 anywhere	 in	 the
world	--	 I	have	 looked	 into	all	kinds	of	sculpture	 that	existed	and	exists	 in	 the
world,	 but	 the	 beauty	 that	 Khajuraho	 sculpture	 has	 is	 just	 superhuman	 --	 so
perfect	that	one	cannot	believe	things	can	be	made	so	perfect,	so	beautiful.
Religions	have	only	destroyed,	because	 they	prevented	 the	creative	dimension.
In	the	name	of	celibacy	only	two	things	have	happened:	destruction	and	AIDS.
These	 are	 the	 two	 great	 contributions	 of	 all	 your	 religions.	 And	 if	 man	 is
intelligent	enough,	there	is	no	need	to	say	that	these	religions	should	disappear.
They	have	done	 enough	harm.	We	don't	 need	 them	at	 all;	we	 can	be	 religious
without	religions.
I	have	made	you	serious	again!	Once	in	a	while	I	forget.	So	for	no	reason	at	all,
just	for	a	good	laugh,	because	I	hate	to	leave	Buddha	Hall	unless	I	see	you	all	are
rejoicing	and	laughing...
A	Polish	worker	went	to	a	local	bank	to	deposit	his	wages	of	one	week.	Worried
about	the	dire	conditions	of	the	Polish	economy,	he	enquired	what	would	happen
if	the	bank	collapsed.
"All	our	deposits	are	guaranteed	by	the	ministry	of	finance,"	the	teller	replied.
"But	what	if	the	ministry	of	finance	could	not	honor	the	guarantee?"	the	worker
persisted.
"In	that	case	the	Polish	government	itself	would	intercede,"	the	teller	said	with
growing	irritation.
"But	 what	 if	 the	 government	 would	 go	 bankrupt?"	 the	 worker	 asked	 with
undiminished	concern.
"In	that	case	our	socialist	comrades	in	the	Soviet	Union	would	naturally	come	to
our	assistance,"	the	teller	retorted.
"But	what	if	the	Soviet	Union	collapsed?"	the	Polish	worker	persisted.
"Idiot,"	snapped	the	teller,	"is	not	that	worth	losing	one	week's	wages?"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	First	have	your	cup	of	tea
9	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709095
ShortTitle:
PILGR07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
LAST	NIGHT	AS	YOU	WERE	GIVING	SUTRAS	FOR	DEVAGEET	TO
CONTEMPLATE,	 YOU	 WENT	 DIRECTLY	 FROM	 THE	 THIRD	 TO	 THE
FIFTH,	WITHOUT	 SPEAKING	 ABOUT	 THE	 FOURTH.	 IS	 THERE	 SOME
SIGNIFICANCE
IN	THIS?
Sarito,	I	don't	know	much	arithmetic...	that's	why	I	continuously	go	on	counting
on	my	 fingers!	But	 that	 is	 the	 original	way.	That's	why	 there	 are	 ten	 digits	 in
every	language	--
man	started	to	count	on	his	fingers.	Because	there	are	ten	fingers,	that's	why	ten
is	the	basic	number	in	all	languages.
I	am	an	original	man.
But	 aside	 from	 that,	 there	was	 really	 something	 significant.	The	 fourth	 I	 have
saved	for	you.	So	now	I	will	have	to	begin	from	the	fourth.
The	fourth	is:	There	are	four	stages	of	getting	old.
First,	when	you	forget	names.
Second,	when	you	forget	places.
Third,	when	you	forget	to	zip	up.
And	fourth,	when	you	forget	to	zip	down.
The	fifth	sutra	for	you:	A	ninety-three-year-old	man	married	a	ninety-one-year-
old	lady	and	they	spent	the	first	three	days	of	their	honeymoon	just	trying	to	get
out	of	the	car.
Sixth:	Middle	age	is	when	you	have	stopped	growing	at	both	ends	--	and	have
begun	to	grow	in	the	middle.
Seventh:	An	optimist	is	a	man	who	goes	to	the	window	every	morning	and	says,
"Good	morning,	God!"
The	 pessimist	 goes	 to	 the	 window	 every	 morning	 and	 says,	 "Good	 god	 --
morning!"
Eighth:	There	are	two	ways	to	be	rich.	One	is	to	have	all	you	want,	the	other	is	to
be	satisfied	with	all	you	have.
Now	I	have	forgotten	the	number...	I	assume	it	is	ninth:	Freedom	is	a	great	thing.
It	means	a	man	is	free	to	do	just	what	his	wife	pleases.
Tenth:	A	man	does	not	stop	playing	because	he	grows	old,	he	grows	old	because
he	stops	playing.
Eleventh:	Tolerance	is	sometimes	the	uncomfortable	feeling	that	the	other	person
may	be	right	after	all.
Twelfth:	To	have	average	intelligence	is	to	be	less	stupid	than	half	of	the	people
and	more	stupid	than	the	other	half.
...	My	god,	I	have	forgotten	the	number!	I	hope	it	is	thirteenth:	If	all	else	fails,
give	up.
Fourteenth:	It	is	always	best	not	to	tell	people	your	troubles.	Half	of	them	are	not
interested,	and	the	other	half	are	glad	you	are	getting	what	is	coming	to	you.
Fifteenth:	 When	 Henry	 Ford	 was	 asked	 for	 the	 recipe	 for	 a	 long	 and	 happy
marriage,	he	replied:	"Always	stick	to	the	same	model."
Sixteenth:	 A	 man	 who	 can	 smile	 when	 things	 go	 wrong	 has	 probably	 just
thought	of	someone	to	blame	it	on.
Seventeenth:	Inscription	on	the	tombstone	of	a	notorious	hypochondriac:	"See!"
Eighteenth:	A	pessimist	is	a	man	who	thinks	all	women	are	bad.	An	optimist	is
one	who	hopes	they	are.
Nineteenth:	The	definition	of	alimony:	"The	screwing	you	get	for	the	screwing
you	got."
Twentieth:	 The	 ten	 best	 years	 of	 a	 woman's	 life	 are	 between	 thirty-five	 and
thirty-six.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THIS	GENERATION	GAP?	I	HEAR	SO	MUCH	ABOUT	IT	THESE
DAYS.
Jayesh,	two	old	men	of	eighty	were	sitting	in	their	club	when	one	said,	"Do	you
think	there	is	as	much	love,	as	much	fun	going	on	as	there	used	to	be?"
"Yes,	certainly,"	said	the	other,	"but	there	is	a	whole	new	bunch	doing	it."
That's	what	the	generation	gap	is.
A	 large	 crowd	had	been	waiting	 quietly	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 a	mountain.	Moses	 had
been	gone	for	hours.	Suddenly	his	white	robe	was	seen	fluttering	in	the	breeze,
and	now	the	lawgiver	stood	before	his	flock:	"People	of	Israel!	I	have	been	with
the	 Lord	 for	 seven	 hours	 and	 I	 now	 have	 some	 good	 news,	 and	 some	 bad
news...."
"Speak,	O	Moses!"	shouted	the	crowd.
"The	good	news,"	says	Moses,	"is	 that	I	have	managed	to	bring	the	number	of
commandments	down	to	ten!"
The	people	cheered.	Then	they	cried,	"Moses,	what	is	the	bad	news?"
Moses	sadly	replied,	"Adultery	is	still	in."
For	the	new	generation	it	is	no	longer	in.	That's	the	generation	gap,	Jayesh.	Now
the	whole	meaning	of	adultery	has	changed:	it	simply	means	to	be	adult.
There	 has	 never	 been	 any	 generation	 gap	 in	 the	 past.	 Hence,	 one	 has	 to	 look
deeply	into	it	because	this	is	the	first	time	in	the	whole	history	of	man	that	even
the	expression
"generation	gap"	has	been	used.	And	the	gap	is	growing	bigger	and	bigger	every
day.
Things	seem	to	be	unbridgeable.
There	 is	certainly	a	great	psychology	behind	 it.	 In	 the	past	 there	used	 to	be	no
young	age.
You	will	be	surprised	 to	know	about	 it:	children	used	 to	become	adult	without
being	young.	A	six-year-old,	seven-year-old	child	would	start	working	with	his
father;	if	the	father	was	a	carpenter	he	would	learn	carpentry,	or	at	least	help	his
father.	If	the	father	was	a	farmer	he	would	go	to	the	farm	with	the	father,	would
help	 him	 with	 the	 animals,	 cows,	 horses.	 By	 the	 age	 of	 six	 or	 seven	 he	 had
already	entered	into	life.	By	the	age	of	twenty	he	would	be	married	and	have	a
few	children.
In	 the	 past	 there	 was	 no	 "younger	 generation"	 hence	 there	 was	 no	 gap.	 One
generation	 followed	 another	 generation	 in	 a	 continuity,	 with	 no	 gap	 between
them.	By	 the	 time	 the	 father	died	his	 son	would	have	 already	 replaced	him	 in
every	field	of	his	 life.	There	was	no	 time	 to	play	and	 there	was	no	 time	to	get
educated;	there	were	no	schools,	no	colleges,	no	universities.
The	new	generation	is	a	by-product	of	many	things.	In	the	past	the	only	way	of
learning	was	to	participate	with	the	older	generation,	work	with	them	--	that	was
the	only	way	to	learn.	And	of	course	the	older	generation	was	always	respected,
because	they	were	the	teachers.	They	knew,	and	you	were	ignorant;	the	ignorant
necessarily	 respected	 the	 knowledgeable.	 Hence	 in	 the	 past	 it	 was	 almost
inconceivable	that	the	younger	people	would	disrespect	the	old	people,	or	could
even	 think	 in	 their	 dreams	 that	 they	 knew	 more	 than	 the	 older	 people.
Knowledge	was	very	decisive.
The	people	who	knew	had	the	power,	and	the	people	who	did	not,	had	no	power.
It	was	in	those	old	days	that	the	proverb	must	have	been	coined:	"knowledge	is
power."	That	was	the	only	criterion	in	life,	so	you	never	heard	of	any	revolt	of
the	young	against	the	old.
This	 generation	 has	 come	 to	 a	 new,	 totally	 new	 stage.	 The	 child	 never	 goes
following	in	his	father's	footsteps.	He	goes	to	the	school;	his	father	goes	to	his
shop	 or	 to	 the	 office	 or	 to	 the	 farm.	 By	 the	 time	 he	 comes	 back	 from	 his
university	he	is	twenty-five	years	old.
For	these	twenty-five	years	he	has	no	connection	with	the	older	generation.	His
only	connection	is	financial;	they	help	him	financially.	In	these	twenty-five	years
many	 things	happen:	one,	he	knows	more	 than	his	parents	because	his	parents
had	been	to	school	at	least	twenty,	twenty-five	years	before.	In	these	twenty-five
years,	knowledge	has	taken	such	quantum	leaps	--	it	has	grown	so	much....
I	 was	 very	 much	 puzzled	 when	 I	 was	 in	 the	 university:	 my	 professor	 of
psychology	was	quoting	names	and	books	which	had	been	out	of	date	for	almost
three	decades.	And	because	 I	was	 so	 interested	 to	know	everything	 --	before	 I
entered	 into	myself,	 I	 had	 to	 know	 everything	 that	was	 happening	 around	 --	 I
was	continuously	in	the	library.
And	it	is	impossible	to	respect	a	professor	who	knows	less	than	you	know,	who
is	outmoded.	He	should	be	ashamed	to	remain	in	the	seat	of	the	professor.	That's
what	 I	 told	 my	 professor	 of	 psychology:	 "It	 is	 simply	 undignified	 for	 you	 to
remain	 in	 that	 seat,	 because	 you	 don't	 know	what	 is	 happening	 in	 the	 field	 of
psychology	today.	You	know	what	was	happening	thirty	years	before.	Since	the
day	you	left	your	university	you	have	not	touched	a	single	book."
He	was	very	angry.	He	said,	"Who	says	that?"
I	 said,	 "Come	with	me,	 I	 have	 checked	 in	 the	 university	 register."	 For	 twenty
years	he	had	been	a	professor	 in	 that	university	 and	he	had	not	 taken	a	 single
book	 from	 the	 library.	 I	 had	 looked	 into	 twenty	 years'	 registers,	 just	 to	 check
whether	this	man	had	ever	had	issued	in	his	name	even	a	single	book.
He	could	not	believe...	when	I	 took	him	to	the	library	he	said,	"Where	are	you
taking	me?"
I	said,	"This	is	the	library."
He	said,	 "But	what	 is	 the	point	of	 it?	What	are	we	going	 to	do	 in	 the	 library?
How	are	you	going	to	prove	that	I	have	not	been	reading?"
I	said,	"You	just	come	in."	And	I	had	 those	 twenty	years'	 registers	 there,	and	I
told	him,
"These	 are	 the	 registers	 for	 all	 twenty	 years	 and	 your	 name	 is	 not	mentioned
even	a	single	time.	And	now	I	am	coming	with	you	to	your	home."
He	said,	"For	what?"
I	 said,	 "Just	 to	 see	 what	 you	 go	 on	 doing,	 how	 many	 books	 on	 modern
psychology	are	in	your	home.	I	am	giving	you	a	chance:	perhaps	you	have	your
own	collection	and	you	don't	come	to	the	library."
He	said,	"No,	there	is	no	need!"
I	said,	"You	don't	be	worried.	I	have	been	there	 this	morning	already	--	I	don't
take	 chances.	 I	 asked	 your	 wife	 and	 she	 said,	 `That	 idiot,	 all	 he	 reads	 is	 the
newspaper.'"
Education	has	created	one	of	the	most	important	elements	of	the	generation	gap.
Teachers	complain	that	students	don't	respect	them	--	why	should	they?
When	 addressing	 a	meeting	 of	 professors,	 I	 said	 to	 them,	 "Every	 professor	 is
complaining	about	only	one	thing:	`Something	has	to	be	done;	students	don't	pay
respect	to	us.'	And	I	am	here	to	say	something	exactly	the	opposite:	Something
certainly	has	to	be	done,	because	no	professor	seems	to	be	respectable.	It	is	not	a
question	of	students	not	paying	respect	to	you;	it	is	a	question	of	your	own.	You
are	 no	 longer	 respectable.	 Why	 were	 you	 respectable	 in	 the	 past?	 --	 do	 you
understand?	You	knew	more.	Today,	students	know	more	than	you.	Unless	you
remain	ahead	of	your	students	you	cannot	be	respected."
Respect	 needs	 some	 rationale.	 Parents	 are	 continually	 complaining	 that	 their
children	 don't	 respect	 them,	 because	 children	 are	 no	 longer	 the	 old	 kind	 of
children	who	were	 following	 in	 their	 footsteps.	A	new	dimension	of	education
has	 opened	 in	 this	 century	 which	 is	 not	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 old.	 The	 old
direction	was	simple:	follow	the	elders,	because	they	know	and	you	don't	know.
There	was	only	one	way	of	knowing	and	that	was	by	experience.	Naturally,	the
older	person	had	more	experience.
Now,	 through	 education,	 experience	 is	 not	 at	 all	 a	 necessity.	 By	 learning,
studying,	you	can	know	as	much	as	you	want.	Just	sitting	in	the	library	you	can
know	the	whole	world	in	all	its	dimensions,	whatsoever	is	happening.	You	need
not	even	move	out	of	the	library.
It	reminds	me	of	Karl	Marx	--	the	founder	of	communism,	the	last	religion	in	the
world.
He	 spent	 his	whole	 life,	without	 a	 single	 holiday,	 in	 the	British	Museum,	 just
reading	and	reading	and	reading.	He	used	to	reach	the	British	Museum	before	it
opened;	he	would	be	waiting	on	the	steps.	And	there	were	many	occasions	when
he	was	pushed	out	forcibly	because	the	museum	had	to	be	closed.	There	were	a
few	occasions	when	he	was	taken	away	in	an	ambulance...	because	he	had	been
reading	all	day	since	the	morning	--	without	eating,	without	drinking,	and	he	had
fainted	on	the	table.
Now	if	this	man	knew	more	than	anybody	else	of	his	generation,	however	old	he
was...
he	could	not	respect	old	age.	Old	age	has	lost	respect	because	a	new	territory,	a
new	space	of	learning	and	knowledge	has	opened	up.
You	are	going	to	see	a	still	bigger	gap	--	one	of	which	humanity	is	still	not	aware
--	 and	 I	 am	 talking	 about	 it	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 One	 gap	 has	 been	 created	 by
education.	 If	meditation	becomes	 a	worldwide	movement,	 another	 gap	will	 be
created	which	will	be	immense.	Then	the	old	man	and	the	young	man	will	be	as
far	apart	as	 the	 two	poles	of	 the	earth.	Even	communication	between	them	has
already	become	difficult;	it	will	become	impossible.
The	people	who	are	here	with	me	can	understand	what	I	am	saying.	If	you	start
moving	 into	 the	 world	 of	 no-mind,	 then	 the	 people	 who	 are	 old,	 who	 have
gathered	much	knowledge	in	the	mind,	will	look	to	you	retarded,	undeveloped,
very	 ordinary.	 There	 is	 no	 reason	why	 you	 should	 respect	 them;	 they	 have	 to
respect	you	--	you	have	transcended	mind.
And	the	world	is	becoming	more	and	more	interested	in	meditation.	It	will	not
be	 long	 before	 the	 day	 when	 meditation	 will	 become	 your	 education	 for	 the
ultimate.	Your	 ordinary	 education	 is	 about	 the	 outside.	Meditation	will	 be	 the
education	about	your	interiority,	about	your	inner	being.
Of	course	it	will	take	a	little	time,	because	there	will	be	many	frauds;	there	will
be	 many	 pretenders,	 false	 prophets,	 technicians.	 You	 have	 to	 understand	 the
difference	 between	 a	 meditator	 and	 a	 man	 who	 knows	 the	 technique	 of
meditation;	he	is	not	himself	a	meditator	--	he	is	a	technician.
For	example,	I	have	not	seen	Dulari	here;	she	is	one	of	my	old	fellow-travelers.
So	I	enquired	today	what	has	happened	to	Dulari,	and	I	have	heard	that	she	has
been	 in	one	man's	meditation	camp.	That	man	 is	utterly,	utterly	 stupid.	But	he
knows	the	technique,	about	that	there	is	no	doubt.	He	has	been	in	Burma...	and	in
Burma...	he	was	only	a	businessman,	but	he	 learned	 the	Burmese	 technique	of
Vipassana.
Vipassana	 has	 many	 forms:	 the	 Burmese,	 the	 Ceylonese,	 the	 Tibetan,	 the
Chinese,	 the	 Korean,	 the	 Japanese.	 The	 Japanese	 is	 the	 best.	 But	 all	 those
techniques	 have	 come	 from	Gautam	Buddha;	 perhaps	 he	 never	 thought	 that	 it
would	 be	 possible	 to	 learn	 the	 technique	 and	 not	 to	 do	 the	 meditation.	 The
technique	is	simply	how	to	do	it.
This	man,	Goenka...	 I	 have	never	 thought	 it	worthwhile	 to	 say	 anything	 about
him.	Many	 of	 you	must	 have	 been	 in	 his	Vipassana	 camps....	 Just	 a	 few	 days
before	I	left	America	I	received	a	newsletter	in	which	he	had	made	a	statement
about	me.	That	amazed	me	--	that	was	the	beginning.	I	started	looking	into	this
man's	capacity,	potentiality,	realization.	He	made	a	statement	that	he	had	seen	me
and	 talked	with	me	 for	hours	 in	Madras.	Now,	 I	have	been	 to	Madras	 in	 India
only	 once.	 That	was	 twenty-five	 years	 ago,	 and	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 I
have	met	nobody	and	 talked	with	nobody	for	hours	about	Vipassana.	Even	 the
word	Vipassana	was	not	mentioned	while	I	was	in	Madras	for	three	days.
Seeing	this	statement	gave	me	the	idea	that	this	man	cannot	be	a	meditator.	If	he
can	lie	so	easily....	Now	Dulari	has	been	in	his	camp,	and	after	the	camp	she	has
been	meditating,	using	the	technique	given	by	him,	for	ten	hours	a	day.
I	 want	 Dulari	 to	 be	 alert.	 And	 particularly	 her	 husband	 should	 report	 to	 the
police,	because	meditation	--	particularly	Vipassana	meditation	--	should	not	be
done	more	than	two	hours.	And	those	two	hours	have	to	be	early	in	the	morning;
the	best	time	is	before	sunrise.	If	somebody	goes	on	meditating	for	ten	hours,	the
ultimate	consequence	is	going	to	be	insanity.	And	there	will	be	by-products	also;
for	example,	a	man	meditating	for	ten	hours	will	lose	his	sleep	completely.
I	had	a	case	sent	to	me	from	Ceylon,	which	is	a	Buddhist	country,	with	so	many
Buddhist	priests	preaching	Vipassana	meditation....	The	technique	is	so	simple,
but	they	have	never	done	it	themselves.	To	teach	anything	to	anybody	which	you
have	not	done	--	and	experienced	all	its	possibilities,	consequences,	difficulties,
problems	that	it	can	lead	you	into	--	then	you	are	a	criminal.
This	man	who	was	sent	 to	me	was	a	Buddhist	monk.	He	had	lost	his	sleep	for
three	years,	and	every	 treatment	was	done	but	no	 treatment	was	successful;	no
medicine	would	work.
He	had	been	told	by	his	teacher	--	I	cannot	call	him	a	master	--	to	do	Vipassana
in	the	night.	Even	if	you	do	Vipassana	in	the	day,	its	effects	will	carry	into	the
night;	that's	why	I	am	suggesting	the	most	distant	point,	before	sunrise.	Just	two
hours	are	enough;	more	than	that...	even	nectar	can	become	poison	in	a	certain
quantity.
Vipassana	for	ten	hours	a	day	can	drive	anybody	mad.	That's	why	I	want	to	make
it	clear,	because	if	Dulari	goes	mad	I	will	be	condemned	because	she	has	been
associated	with	me	 for	 twenty	years.	She	 should	 stop	doing	 that	 technique.	At
the	most,	for	two	hours	before	sunrise	she	can	do	it;	that	will	be	healthy	and	that
will	bring	her	deep	 insight	 and	understanding.	But	 ten	hours	 is	 too	much.	Her
consciousness	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 contain	 that	 much.	 Instead	 of	 having	 a
breakthrough,	the	greater	possibility	is	of	having	a	breakdown.	It	can	become	a
strain	--	it	will	become	a	strain.
That's	 why	 I	 am	 saying,	 if	 she	 continues	 then	 her	 husband	 should	 inform	 the
police.	And	if	she	goes	mad	then	he	should	sue	this	utterly,	utterly	stupid	Goenka
for	driving	his	wife	mad.
There	 are	many	 idiots	 all	 around.	And	because	 humanity	 has	 come	 to	 a	 crisis
point	where	it	needs	a	new	dimension	for	consciousness,	naturally	many	people
will	come	with	false	 ideas.	Or	maybe	the	 ideas	are	right	but	 the	person	who	is
bringing	them	is	not	right;	then	too	the	idea	is	going	to	harm	humanity.
Meditation	 is	 not	 something	mechanical;	 hence	 there	 can	be	 no	 technicians	 of
meditation.
Goenka	 is	 a	 technician:	 he	 knows	 exactly	what	 is	 being	 done	 in	 the	Burmese
style	 of	 Vipassana,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 a	 man	 of	 meditation	 --	 he	 is	 not	 a	 man	 of
enlightenment.
And	now	he	has	made	 teaching	Vipassana	his	profession;	now	it	 is	a	business.
He	is	still	a	businessman.	He	was	a	businessman	in	Burma;	just	the	commodity
has	 changed.	He	must	have	been	 selling	 something	else;	 here	he	 is	 selling	 the
technique	 of	Vipassana.	And	people	 are	 gullible.	When	 they	 see	 that	 so	many
people	are	going,	they	start	thinking	perhaps	they	should	also	go.
The	 generation	 gap	 that	 education	 has	 created	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the
generation	gap	that	meditation	can	create.	This	gap	is	quantitative,	that	gap	will
be	qualitative.	A	man	with	meditation	has	no	age:	he	is	neither	a	child	nor	is	he
young	nor	is	he	old.	He	is	eternity	itself.	How	can	you	expect	from	him	that	he
should	be	respectful	to	old	idiots,	donkeys	and	all	kinds	of	animals	all	around?
But	 this	 is	 also	 a	 time	 to	 be	 very	 alert	 and	 very	 aware:	 don't	 be	 too	 much
impressed	 by	 what	 a	 person	 says.	 Look	 deeper	 into	 the	 person	 and	 his
individuality.	See	whether	he	has	ecstasy	in	his	eyes,	watch	whether	his	gestures
have	the	grace	of	a	Gautam	Buddha,	look	very	carefully	to	see	whether	his	inner
being	 radiates	 light	and	 fragrance.	 Is	he	a	man	of	 love,	 compassion	and	 truth?
Look	at	 the	man,	 not	 at	 his	 knowledge,	 because	knowledge	 is	 available	 in	 the
books	 so	 easily;	 anybody	 can	 collect	 it.	But	 your	 being	 is	 not	 available	 in	 the
holy	scriptures.
Your	being	you	have	to	find.	You	have	to	sharpen	your	intelligence	and	you	have
to	 bring	 the	 ultimate	within	 you	 as	 a	 guest.	And	when	 the	 ultimate	 is	 a	 guest
within	you,	you	are	a	 flame,	you	are	a	 fire.	Of	course	your	 fire	does	not	burn
anybody,	but	heals.	Your	fire	is	cool,	not	warm.	Your	fire	is	just	a	lotus	flower.
The	seeker	should	look	at	the	master	first	--	not	at	what	he	says,	but	what	he	is.
Is	he	something	 transcendental?	 Is	his	 life	a	 laughter,	a	song,	a	dance,	a	 joy,	a
blissfulness?	Or	is	he	just	a	pretender,	a	businessman	fulfilling	your	expectations
--	of	course,	showing	humbleness,	humility...	just	business	tactics.
A	man	of	real	truth	has	no	need	to	be	humble.	He	is	neither	egoist	nor	humble,
because	 those	 are	 the	 same	 things	 in	 different	 quantities.	 Only	 the	 egoist	 can
become	humble.	I	cannot	say	I	am	a	humble	man.	I	cannot	say	that	I	am	a	simple
man,	because	simplicity	is	only	a	lesser	form	of	complexity,	and	humbleness	is
on	a	lower	strata,	the	same	as	ego.
They	are	not	different;	the	degrees	are	different.
I	am	neither	humble	nor	egoist.
I	am	simply	just	the	way	I	am.
These	people	will	pretend	everything.	They	will	behave	 in	every	way	 that	you
expect	them	to	behave.	That	is	their	whole	strategy	of	catching	people.	But	the
intention	is	to	exploit.
Vipassana	is	one	of	the	greatest	meditations,	but	only	in	the	hands	of	a	master.	In
the	hands	of	 a	 technician	 it	 is	 the	greatest	 danger.	Either	 the	man	can	become
enlightened	 or	 the	 man	 can	 become	 mad;	 both	 possibilities	 are	 there,	 it	 all
depends	under	whose	guidance	it	is	being	done.
When	the	Ceylonese	monk	was	sent	to	me	I	said,	"I	am	not	a	Buddhist,	and	you
have	been	under	the	guidance	of	Buddhist	monks.	What	was	the	need	for	you	to
come	to	me?"
He	said,	"They	have	all	 failed.	They	have	taught	me,	but	 they	cannot	cure	me.
And	I	am	going	crazy.	I	cannot	sleep	a	single	wink."
When	he	 told	me	 this...	Buddhist	monks	 are	 not	 supposed	 to	 laugh,	 but	 I	 told
him	a	joke.
For	a	moment	he	was	shocked,	because	he	had	come	very	seriously.	I	told	him
that	a	man	in	England,	no	ordinary	man	but	a	very	rich	lord,	was	asking	another
lord	--	with	the	English	attitude,	mannerism:	"Is	it	right	that	you	slept	with	my
wife	last	night?"	And	the	other	lord	said,	"My	friend,	not	a	wink."
Even	 the	Buddhist	monk	 laughed.	He	 said,	 "You	 are	 a	 strange	 person.	 I	 have
come	from	Ceylon	and	you	tell	me	a	joke!	And	I	am	a	religious	man."
I	said,	"That's	why	I	am	telling	you	a	religious	joke.	If	you	stay	with	me	I	will
tell	you	irreligious	jokes	too."
I	said,	"Your	problem	is	not	curable	by	any	medicine.	Your	problem	is	created	by
your	Vipassana."
He	 said,	 "Vipassana?	 But	 Vipassana	 was	 the	 meditation	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha;
through	it	he	became	enlightened."
I	said,	"You	are	not	a	Gautam	Buddha,	and	you	don't	understand	that	Vipassana
done	after	sunset	is	very	dangerous.	If	you	do	Vipassana	for	just	two	hours	in	the
night,	then	you	cannot	sleep.	It	creates	such	awareness	in	you	that	that	awareness
continues	the	whole	night."
And	 if	 somebody	 is	 doing	Vipassana	 for	 ten	 hours,	 almost	 the	whole	 day,	 the
sanity	will	give	way.	And	then	Goenka	will	not	come	to	help,	because	he	will	not
even	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 that	 this	 has	 happened	 because	 of	Vipassana.	And
you	cannot	sue	him	in	the	court,	because	even	the	law	does	not	understand	that
Vipassana	can	create	madness	in	people.
My	whole	effort	here	 is	 to	keep	you	as	non-serious	as	possible,	 for	 the	simple
reason	 that	meditation,	 all	 kinds	 of	meditation,	 can	make	 you	 too	 serious	 and
that	seriousness	will	create	a	spiritual	disease	and	nothing	else.
Unless	a	meditation	brings	you	more	laughter,	more	joy,	more	playfulness,	avoid
it.	It	is	not	for	you.
Jayesh,	the	generation	gap	is	unfortunate.	I	am	not	in	favor	of	it.	I	have	my	own
strategy	for	how	it	can	be	avoided.
The	whole	system	of	education	has	to	be	changed	from	the	very	roots.	In	short...
we	prepare	 people	 in	 education	 for	 livelihood	 rather	 than	 life.	 For	 twenty-five
years	we	prepare	--	that	is	one	third	of	the	life	--	for	livelihood.	We	never	prepare
people	for	death,	and	life	is	only	seventy	years;	death	is	 the	door	to	eternity.	It
needs	tremendous	training.
According	to	me	--	and	I	feel	with	great	authority	that	this	is	going	to	happen	in
the	 future	 if	 man	 survives	 --	 that	 education	 should	 be	 cut	 into	 pieces:	 fifteen
years	 for	 livelihood,	and	again	after	 forty-two	years,	 ten	years	 in	preparing	for
death.	 Education	 should	 be	 divided	 in	 two	 parts.	 Everybody	 goes	 to	 the
university	--	of	course	to	different	universities,	or	to	the	same	university	but	to
different	departments.	One	 is	 to	prepare	children	 for	 life	and	one	 is	 to	prepare
people	who	have	lived	life	and	now	want	to	know	something	more,	beyond	life.
Then	the	generation	gap	will	disappear.	Then	the	people	who	are	of	an	older	age
will	be	more	quiet,	more	silent,	more	peaceful,	more	wise;	 their	advice	will	be
worth	listening	to.
Just	 sitting	 at	 their	 feet	 will	 be	 a	 great	 blessing;	 the	 respect	 for	 the	 old	 will
return.	Except	this,	there	is	no	other	way.
Education	divided	in	two	parts	means	young	people	study	for	life,	and	middle-
aged	people	study	for	death.	Of	course,	the	middle-aged	people	will	be	studying
meditation,	 singing,	 dancing,	 laughing;	 they	will	 be	 learning	 celebration.	They
have	to	make	their	death	a	festival	--	that	should	be	the	goal	of	the	second	part	of
education.
They	will	paint,	they	will	play	music,	they	will	sculpt,	they	will	compose	poetry;
they	will	 do	 all	 kinds	 of	 creative	 things.	 Livelihood	 they	 have	managed;	 now
their	children	are	doing	that.	Geography,	history	and	all	kinds	of	idiotic	subjects,
their	children	are	learning.	Let	them	know	where	Timbuktu	is.
I	have	always	wondered	why	--	with	my	geography	teacher	I	was	continually	in
conflict	-
-	"Why	should	I	know	where	Timbuktu	is?	What	business	is	it	of	mine?"
He	said,	"You	are	strange,	nobody	has	ever	asked	this."
I	 said,	 "I	 am	 going	 to	 ask	 on	 every	 point...	 Constantinople,	 which	 in	 Hindi
becomes	even	worse:	Kustuntunia.	 I	have	no	business	with	 these	 things.	Teach
me	something	valuable."
And	my	geography	teacher	used	to	hit	his	head...	he	would	say,	"The	whole	of
geography	is	this!"
The	history	teacher	was	teaching	about	the	ugliest	people	that	have	existed	in	the
world.
From	the	history	teacher	I	never	got	any	idea	about	Bodhidharma	or	Zarathustra
or	Baal	Shemtov	or	Lin	Chi	or	Chuang	Tzu;	I	never	got	any	idea,	and	these	are
the	people	who	have	made	humanity	evolve.
But	I	have	heard	about	Tamerlane.	Do	you	know	what	lang	means?	He	was	one-
legged.
It	is	Tamurlang.	Giving	him	respect,	nobody	called	him	"one-legged	Tamer"	but
he	created	 so	much	nuisance	 that	very	 few	people	can	be	compared	with	him.
And	for	almost	three	generations...	his	son	was	worse	than	him,	and	his	grandson
defeated	both.
About	these	people,	who	were	just	murderers	and	criminals,	the	whole	history	is
full.
And	they	are	called	emperors,	conquerors,	"Alexander	the	Great."	Even	if	 they
were	 really	 bad,	 still	 history	 repeats	 their	 names,	 their	 great	 acts:	 "Ivan	 the
Terrible!"
This	kind	of	history	is	bound	to	create	wrong	kinds	of	people	in	the	world.	All
these	histories	should	be	burned	simultaneously	all	over	 the	world,	so	all	 these
names	 disappear	 completely.	 And	 they	 should	 be	 replaced	 by	 those	 beautiful
people	who	have	all	the	credit	for	your	being	human.	They	are	the	people	who
have	made	humanity	worthy	of	respect,	who	have	given	it	a	dignity	and	a	pride,
and	who	have	opened	doors	of	mysteries,	of	the	beyond.
The	second	part	of	education	should	consist	of	meditativeness,	of	awareness,	of
witnessing,	of	love,	of	compassion,	of	creativity	--	and	certainly	we	will	again	be
without	any	generation	gap.	The	younger	person	will	 respect	 the	older	person,
and	not	for	any	formal	reasons	but	actually	because	the	old	person	is	respectable.
He	 knows	 something	 beyond	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 young	 person	 knows	 only
something	within	the	mind.
The	 young	 person	 is	 still	 struggling	 in	 the	 trivia	 of	 the	 world,	 and	 the	 older
person	has	gone	beyond	the	clouds;	he	has	almost	reached	to	the	stars.	It	is	not	a
question	 of	 etiquette	 to	 respect	 him.	 You	 are	 bound	 to	 respect	 him,	 it	 is
absolutely	a	compulsion	of	your	own	heart	--	not	a	formality	taught	by	others.
In	my	childhood...	in	India	it	is	an	absolute	formality:	anybody	who	comes	as	a
guest,	you	have	to	touch	their	feet.	Before	my	father	became	completely	aware
of	my	 behavior	 he	 used	 to	 push	 down	my	 head:	 "Touch	 the	 feet,	 the	 guest	 is
God.	And	he	is	an	old	relative,	you	should	follow	the	custom."
One	day	a	male	goat	with	a	beard	entered	just	 in	my	house.	I	 touched	his	feet.
My	father	said,	"What	are	you	doing?"
I	 said,	 "A	 guest	 is	 a	 God	 --	 and	 moreover	 with	 a	 beard!	 An	 old	 goat	 needs
respect.	You	come	here	and	touch	his	feet."
He	said,	"Your	mind	functions	in	a	very	different	way	than	anybody	else's."
I	said,	"You	have	to	understand	it:	from	now	onwards	if	I	meet	an	old	dog	on	the
road	I'm	going	to	touch	his	feet,	an	old	donkey	and	I'm	going	to	touch	his	feet.
What	is	the	difference	between	an	old	dog,	an	old	donkey,	and	your	old	guest?
To	me	they	look	all	the	same.	In	fact	the	old	donkey	looks	so	philosophical;	the
old	dog	looks	so	ferocious,	like	a	warrior	--	they	have	some	qualities.	That	old
fellow	that	you	were	forcing	my	head	down	for....	Next	time	you	force	my	head
down	you	will	repent!"
He	said,	"What	are	you	going	to	do?"
I	said,	"I	will	show	you,	because	I	believe	in	doing	things,	not	in	saying	things."
Next	time	one	of	my	faraway	relatives	came	and	my	father	forgot.	He	pushed	my
head	down.	And	I	had	a	big	needle	ready	in	my	hand,	so	I	pushed	the	needle	into
the	old	man's	foot.	He	shrieked.	He	almost	 jumped.	My	father	said,	"What	has
happened?"
I	said,	"I	have	warned	you,	but	you	never	listened.	I	don't	have	any	respect	for
this	person.	I	don't	know	him,	I	have	never	seen	him	before;	why	should	I	touch
his	feet?	I	am	ready	to	touch	the	feet	of	someone	whom	I	feel	is	respectable."	He
understood	 that	 it	 is	better	not	 to	 force	me	because	 this	was	dangerous.	Blood
was	coming	out	of	that	old	man's	foot.
I	never	stood	in	my	university	classes	when	the	professors	entered.	In	India	you
have	to	stand	up.	The	professors	looked	immediately	at	me	--	forgot	everybody
else;	they	focused	on	me.	And	if	it	was	just	the	beginning	of	the	year	they	would
ask,	"Why	are	you	not	standing?"
I	said,	"There	is	no	reason."
And	 the	 professor	 would	 say,	 "You	 don't	 understand.	 Have	 you	 never	 stood
before	in	any	class?"
I	said,	"Never,	because	I	don't	find	any	reason.	I'm	perfectly	at	ease."
He	said,	"You....	How	to	make	you	understand	that	when	a	professor	enters	into
the	class,	out	of	respect	you	have	to	stand	up?"
I	said,	"That's	right.	But	I	have	not	seen	yet	anything	respectable	in	you.	If	I	see
something,	 I	 will	 stand	 up.	 And	 remember:	 there	 should	 not	 be	 double
standards."
"You	mean..."	he	said,	"what	do	you	mean?"
I	said,	"I	mean	if	I	enter	the	class,	you	have	to	stand	up	--	of	course,	only	if	you
see	something	respectable	in	me.	Otherwise	there	is	no	question,	you	can	remain
sitting	down,	or	if	you	want	you	can	even	sleep.	I	don't	care	a	bit."
My	professors	used	 to	 try	 to	persuade	me.	Once	 in	a	while	 the	vice-chancellor
would	come	on	a	round,	and	they	would	try	to	persuade	me	that	"Just	for	once...
we	don't	want	you	to	stand	for	us,	but	when	the	vice-chancellor	comes	into	the
class,	don't	create	a	fuss.
Because	then	nothing	else	happens	except	the	discussion	about	it."
I	said,	"I	am	helpless.	I	cannot	do	anything	against	my	will.	Let	the	man	come.	If
I	feel	that	he	is	respectable	I	will	stand	up.	You	don't	have	to	tell	me."
And	the	first	vice-chancellor	under	whom	I	was	studying,	the	first	time	he	came
into	the	class	he	was	drunk.	And	I	am	so	allergic	that	I	immediately	felt	that	he
was	 drunk.	 I	 remained	 sitting.	 The	 teacher	 looked	 at	 me,	 stared	 at	 me,	 gave
indications	that	"You	stand	up."	I	remained	sitting.	When	everybody	was	told	to
sit	down,	then	I	stood	up.
I	said,	"Now	is	the	time	for	me	to	stand	up.	This	man	is	drunk.	It	does	not	matter
who	he	is,	I	am	going	to	report	him	to	the	police."
And	the	vice-chancellor	was	so	much	afraid	and	so	nervous....	He	had	put	his	hat
on	the	table.	In	a	hurry	he	took	my	professor's	hat	and	went	out	of	the	class.	And
my	professor	was	running	behind	him	to	say,	"You	are	taking	my	hat."
I	said,	"You	see	what	happens	when	you	are	drunk?	That	man	has	not	even	the
guts	to	remain	here	and	you	wanted	me	to	stand	for	him?"
The	generation	gap	exists	simply	because	the	reason	for	respect	has	disappeared.
Unless	you	create	the	reason	again,	the	respect	will	not	return.	On	the	contrary,
every	kind	of	disrespect	will	 take	place.	But	 it	 is	possible	 to	change	 the	whole
system.
I	would	love	that	the	older	people	be	not	just	old	but	also	wise,	not	just	in	age
but	also	in	understanding,	not	only	horizontally	old	but	also	vertically	old...	not
only	growing	old	but	growing	up	also.
A	society	where	old	people	are	still	behaving	 like	young	 fools	 is	not	a	 society
worth	 calling	 cultured	 or	 civilized.	Old	 people	 should	 behave	 like	 enlightened
people	 --	 not	 only	behave,	 they	 should	be	 enlightened.	They	 should	become	a
light	 to	 those	 who	 are	 still	 young	 and	 under	 biological	 infatuations,	 natural
bondages.	They	have	gone	beyond;	they	can	become	guiding	stars.
When	 education	 for	 death	 and	 education	 for	 livelihood	 are	 separated,	 when
everybody	 goes	 twice	 to	 the	 university	 --	 first	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 go	 around	 this
world	 of	 trivia	 and	 the	 second	 time	 to	 learn	 about	 eternity	 --	 the	 gap	 will
disappear.	And	it	will	disappear	in	a	beautiful	way.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I'M	IN	A	HURRY	TO	BECOME	ENLIGHTENED.	WHAT	SHOULD	I	DO?
Chitten,	first	just	listen	carefully	to	this	small	story.
The	plane	had	just	taken	off	and	the	captain	was	telling	the	passengers	about	the
altitude	of	the	plane,	the	cruising	speed	etcetera.	But	he	forgot	to	switch	off	the
microphone.
He	then	turned	to	his	co-pilot	and	said,	"First	I'm	going	to	have	a	cup	of	coffee
and	then	I'm	going	to	screw	that	pretty	stewardess,	Denise."
The	 shocked	 stewardess	 was	 down	 the	 end	 of	 the	 plane	 when	 she	 heard	 this
come	 over	 the	 loudspeaker.	 So	 she	 began	 to	 rush	 down	 the	 aisle	 to	 tell	 the
captain	to	switch	off	his	mike.
Halfway	 down	 the	 plane	 an	 old	 lady	 stopped	 her	 and	 said,	 "There's	 no	 hurry,
Denise,	let	him	have	his	cup	of	tea	first."
Chitten,	there	is	no	hurry	at	all.	First	have	your	cup	of	tea!
Enlightenment	will	be	coming,	just	you	have	to	learn	waiting	for	it.	Hurry	will
not	help.
Hurry	is	going	to	hinder.
The	only	thing	that	is	a	hindrance	is	hurry.
The	moment	you	are	 in	a	hurry	you	are	never	here;	you	are	 looking	far	ahead.
You	are	running.	And	for	enlightenment	you	have	to	be	still	and	silent	and	in	this
moment	--
utterly	still,	because	this	whole	pilgrimage	is	from	here	to	here.
For	 centuries	 people	 have	 been	 hurrying,	 and	 missing.	 I	 teach	 you	 a	 totally
different	 approach:	 of	 being	 here,	 without	 any	 hurry	 --	 the	 whole	 eternity	 is
there.	And	don't	be	a	beggar:	the	moment	you	are	ready	and	ripe,	enlightenment
will	happen.
Trust	existence.
This	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 worthwhile	 for	 those	 who	 are	 interested	 in	 becoming
enlightened.
Trust	existence	that	whatever	is	needed,	for	whatever	you	are	worthy,	it	will	be
given	 to	 you.	 You	 need	 not	 even	 ask	 for	 it.	 Only	 the	 unworthy	 ask;	 only	 the
undeserving	desire.
The	deserving	remain	silent;	the	worthy	never	demand,	but	when	it	happens	they
are	full	of	gratitude.	They	wait,	 they	allow	the	spring	to	come	at	 its	own	pace,
and	when	the	flowers	start	blossoming	they	enjoy	the	fragrance	with	tremendous
prayer	in	their	hearts,	of	gratitude.
The	very	desire	to	be	in	a	hurry	can	lead	you	in	a	wrong	direction,	because	there
are	peddlers	all	around	who	are	ready	to	give	you	enlightenment	instantly.	That's
why	I	told	you:	first	have	your	cup	of	coffee	--	that	means	instant	coffee...	but	let
enlightenment	come	on	its	own.
One	day	a	young	woman	was	walking	home	when	a	man	grabbed	her,	dragged
her	into	a	back	alley,	and	started	molesting	her.
"Help!	Help	me	someone,"	she	cried.	"I'm	being	robbed!"
"You	are	not	being	robbed,	lady,"	interrupted	the	man,	"you	are	being	screwed."
"Well,"	 she	 replied,	 "if	 this	 is	 being	 screwed,	 then	 I	 have	 always	 been	 robbed
before."
Don't	 get	 mixed	 up.	 Everything	 in	 the	 world	 needs	 hurry,	 because	 so	 many
people	are	running	for	it.	You	cannot	wait;	otherwise	you	won't	get	it.	You	have
to	 trample	people,	you	have	 to	go	ahead	without	 thinking	what	means	you	are
adopting.	Even	if	people	are	to	be	killed,	kill,	but	remain	ahead;	otherwise	you
are	 going	 to	 miss.	 That	 is	 one	 dimension	 of	 life	 --	 of	 trivia,	 of	 meaningless
things,	money,	power,	prestige.
But	there	is	another	dimension	where	there	is	no	need	to	be	in	a	hurry,	because
there	is	no	competitor.	You	are	alone.	In	your	inner	world	nobody	can	enter.	In
your	 stillness	 you	 suddenly	 find	 yourself,	 absolutely	 alone,	 surrounded	 by
nothingness.	 Just	 rejoice	 in	 it,	 relish	 it.	Your	enjoyment	of	your	 aloneness	 and
nothingness	will	make	you	ripe	for	the	enlightenment	to	happen.
It	happens.
I	can	say	 it	 to	you	because	 it	has	happened	 to	me.	 I	am	not	depending	on	any
Gautam	Buddha	or	any	Jesus	Christ.	Whatever	I	am	saying	I	am	saying	with	my
own	signature.
Hence	I	can	say	with	absolute	authority	without	any	hesitation:	there	is	no	need
to	worry.
It	 comes,	 and	 it	 comes	 without	 giving	 you	 any	 advance	 notice.	 It	 comes	 so
silently	that	you	cannot	even	hear	its	footsteps.
You	 just	have	 to	be	 ready	and	 ripe,	and	 to	be	 ready	and	 ripe	 there	 is	only	one
way:	be	still	and	wait.	Don't	move,	not	even	in	your	thoughts,	not	even	in	your
emotions...	 just	 a	 pure	 pillar	 of	 stillness.	And	 suddenly	 there	 is	 the	 explosion,
and	where	there	was	darkness	is	light	and	where	there	was	death	is	pure	life	and
where	there	was	sadness	is	just	an	explosion	of	song	and	dance	and	laughter.
But	never	think	in	terms	of	hurry.	That	is	a	hindrance.	Be	patient.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Forget	trying	to	get	it!
10	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709100
ShortTitle:
PILGR08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
95
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	THOUGHT	I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	IF	ONE	GOES	DEEPLY	INTO	SEX
IT
WILL	 EVENTUALLY	DROP	OFF	BY	 ITSELF.	 I	 HAVE	THOUGHT	LONG
AND
HARD	 ABOUT	 THIS,	 DESPERATELY	 TRYING	 TO	 PENETRATE	 ITS
HIDDEN
MEANING,	BUT	ALL	I	GOT	WAS	A	HEADACHE.
Devageet,	it	is	a	good	sign,	the	headache	--	the	beginning	of	the	revolution.	Only
one	thing	you	misunderstood.	I	have	not	said	that	sex	will	fall	off,	you	will	fall
off	--	but	enlightened,	don't	be	worried.
Here	people	die	only	enlightened;	otherwise	they	hang	around,	hang	around,	go
deep	and	go	hard...	 and	one	day	 they	drop	off.	And	 this	dropping	off	 is	 really
entering	into	eternity.
You	would	not	need	any	meditation.	Meditation	is	needed	for	those	who	cannot
think	too	hard	and	too	deeply.	The	headache	indicates	what	is	going	to	happen	to
you...
But	it	does	not	matter	whether	sex	falls	off	or	you	fall	off.	Your	physical,	mental,
social	personality	is	what	you	know	about	yourself.	The	moment	sex	drops	off,
you	become	for	the	first	time	really	alone	--	because	sex	is	your	relationship	with
the	world.	For	the	first	time	you	become	immaterial,	because	sex	is	binding	you
to	matter.	For	the	first	time	you	become	transcendental	to	your	body	and	biology.
The	 death	 of	 biology	 or	 chemistry	 or	 society	 in	 you	 is,	 in	 other	 words,	 the
resurrection	of	your	real	life.
I	have	always	loved	the	story	about	Jesus.	Christians	have	misunderstood	him,	as
usual;	they	thought	that	it	was	really	a	factual	resurrection	--	bodily,	biologically,
psychologically.	 That's	 where	 they	 have	 missed	 the	 point.	 He	 certainly
resurrected,	 but	 in	 a	 spiritual	 sense.	 He	 died	 on	 the	 cross	 as	 a	 physical
personality,	and	he	resurrected	as	a	spiritual	being.
So	 whether	 sex	 drops	 or	 you	 drop	 --	 because	 you	 and	 sex	 are	 almost
synonymous	--	what	remains	is	your	authentic	life.
So,	Devageet,	you	are	moving	on	 the	right	path.	Headache...	and	 the	head	will
drop	off;	 then	other	aches	and	other	 things	will	 start	dropping	off.	Finally	you
will	be	left	only	with	that	which	is	immortal.	And	that	is	our	whole	search,	that's
what	we	are	seeking.	These	things	which	can	be	taken	away	will	be	taken	away;
only	that	which	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you	is	yours.
A	reporter	once	asked	Winston	Churchill	whether	he	agreed	with	the	prediction
that	women	would	rule	the	world	by	the	year	2000.
Churchill	replied,	"Yes,	they	will	still	be	at	it."
`Woman'	 is	also	a	symbolic	word.	To	man	it	represents	nothing	but	sex.	If	you
take	it	literally,	then	Churchill	is	to	be	condemned	for	condemning	women.	But
if	 you	 take	 its	metaphorical	meaning,	 then	 `woman'	 is	 replaced	by	 `sex';	 that's
what	it	represents	in	man's	mind.	And	sex	has	been	ruling	over	the	world	from
the	very	beginning,	if	there	was	any	beginning,	and	is	going	to	rule	man	to	the
very	end	--	if	there	is	an	end.
Only	a	few	people	have	transcended	the	physical,	the	sexual,	the	psychological,
and	have	entered	into	a	different	dimension	that	I	call	enlightenment.	And	unless
the	enlightened	are	listened	to,	understood,	there	is	no	hope	for	the	world.
It	 is	 not	 that	 millions	 of	 enlightened	 people	 are	 needed;	 just	 two	 hundred
enlightened	people	on	the	earth,	and	the	whole	earth	will	be	dazzling	with	their
light,	with	their	being.
And	those	two	hundred	will	create	chain	reactions:	they	will	provoke	you	for	the
great	pilgrimage,	they	will	remind	you	who	you	are.	Just	looking	into	their	eyes,
suddenly	 inside	you	will	 click	 --	 it	 is	only	a	 click	 --	 and	 the	whole	dimension
changes.
Paddy	and	his	 friend	Sean	were	sitting	 in	a	bar	moaning	 to	each	other,	 talking
about	how	ugly	their	wives	are	--	a	common	topic	among	husbands.
"My	wife	is	so	ugly,"	said	Sean,	"if	I	want	to	make	love	to	her	I	have	to	put	a	bag
over	her	head."
"That's	nothing,"	said	Paddy.	"My	wife	was	so	ugly	when	she	was	born	that	the
doctor	slapped	her	mother."
But	these	statements	have	become	ugly	in	the	sense	that	they	have	forgotten	that
instead	of	`woman'	they	should	use	the	word	`sex',	because	that's	what	it	means
in	the	deepest	core	of	the	mind	of	the	male.
As	far	as	women	are	concerned,	they	are	not	interested	in	man's	physical	body;
they	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 his	 ideological,	 philosophical,	 mental	 gymnastics.
Their	approach	is	far	more	direct:	they	simply	see	your	spirituality.	The	thing	a
woman	 is	 attracted	 to	 is	 the	 charisma,	 the	 aura	 of	 spirituality	 around	 a	 man;
hence	 they	 never	 talk	 about	 the	 ugliness	 or	 beauty	 of	 men.	 That	 is	 not	 their
concern.	That	is	a	great	difference	between	the	approaches	of	men	and	women.
Women	go	directly	deep	 inside	men.	That's	why	 it	 is	one	of	 the	most	difficult
things	 to	 keep	 a	 secret	 from	 the	woman:	where	will	 you	 keep	 it?	 --	 she	 goes
directly	inside	you.
And	 she	 is	 capable	 of	 going	 directly	 inside	 you	 because	 man	 has	 lived	 very
superficially.
Many	men	are	not	aware	that	they	have	hearts.	Yes,	they	know	they	have	lungs,
but	the	lung	is	not	the	heart;	neither	is	the	brain	the	mind,	nor	is	the	mind	your
being.	These	are	superficial	layers.
No	woman	in	the	whole	world	has	created	any	ideology,	any	great	metaphysics,
any	great	philosophy.	Her	concern	is	not	 the	outside;	her	concern	is	 the	 inside.
That's	why	 I	 have	 immense	 respect	 for	women.	 Perhaps	 no	man	 in	 the	whole
world	ever	had	as	much	respect	for	women	as	I	have.
Women	 have	 been	 loved,	 but	 not	 respected.	 And	 without	 respect	 the	 love	 is
nothing	but	lust;	you	label	it	with	a	beautiful	word,	but	deep	down	inside	you	it
is	always	sex,	always	sex.	Man	has	reduced	woman	and	her	spirituality	to	such	a
state	that	she	has	become	only	an	object	of	sex.
And	if	the	American	trend	has	to	be	followed	--	where	everything	has	to	be	used
once	 and	 thrown	 away	 --	 the	 ultimate	 consequence	 is	 coming	 closer:	 use	 the
woman	once	and	throw	away.	They	are	already	doing	it	in	a	way....
In	 America,	 three	 years	 is	 the	 limit	 for	 everything.	 People	 change	 their	 jobs
every	 three	years,	 they	 change	 their	 cities	 every	 three	years,	 they	 change	 their
wives	 every	 three	 years.	 But	 those	 three	 years	will	 get	 smaller	 and	 smaller	 --
perhaps	 even	 by	 the	 time	 the	 honeymoon	 ends,	 everything	 has	 ended.	 Most
probably	 it	 has	 ended.	 But	 people	 go	 on	 pretending	 that	 it	 is	 still	 continuing,
because	they	have	given	so	many	promises,	so	many	words	to	keep	that	now	it
looks	very	awkward	to	go	against	their	own	promises.
But	a	woman	loves	in	a	different	way.	Her	love	has	some	quality	of	spirituality.
Man's	 love	 is	only	physiological,	biological.	You	may	not	have	 found	a	 single
joke	 in	 any	 language	 of	 the	 world	 from	women	 against	 men.	 It	 is	 below	 her
prestige.	All	jokes	are	from	men	against	the	woman,	because	for	him	woman	is
not	a	spiritual	being	at	all.
In	China	for	thousands	of	years	the	woman	was	accepted	by	law	as	a	commodity
that	a	man	possesses.	He	can	bargain,	he	can	stake	her	in	gambling,	he	can	sell
her,	he	can	even	kill	her	 --	 the	court	was	not	concerned.	 If	you	kill	your	chair
you	will	not	be	arrested...	the	woman	was	not	more	than	that.	And	the	whole	past
has	been	so	ugly	that	man	has	not	even	asked	forgiveness	for	it.
Women	have	been	treated	like	cattle.	But	the	woman	has	not,	in	spite	of	all	this
ugliness	that	has	been	done	to	her,	changed	at	all.	She	still	loves...	and	her	love
has	a	purity	and	a	beauty	and	a	grace.	Man's	 love	 is	ugly,	animalistic;	 it	 is	not
more	 than	 a	 sneeze	 --	 he	 is	 just	 relieving	 himself.	 But	 the	 woman	 is	 not
relieving;	she	is	 living	it	with	its	 totality.	It	 is	a	prayer	 to	her,	as	sacred	as	any
prayer	can	be.
These	are	the	differences	that	have	to	be	bridged.	At	least	for	my	people	I	want
these	differences	to	be	bridged.	Just	as	we	don't	discriminate	between	religions,
we	don't	discriminate	between	nations,	we	don't	discriminate	between	races,	the
final	 discrimination	 that	 has	 to	 be	 dropped	 is	 between	men	 and	women.	They
both	 are	 beautiful.	 If	 they	 become	 a	 little	 more	 alert,	 they	 are	 in	 fact	 two
complementaries	of	one	whole:	man	is	half,	just	as	the	woman	is	half.
My	effort,	in	spite	of	the	whole	world's	condemnation	of	me,	is	to	bring	man	and
woman	to	a	space	where	they	can	accept	each	other	as	their	other	part,	as	their
other	 pole.	 I	 don't	 care	 about	 the	 condemnation	 of	 the	world;	 it	 simply	 brings
giggles	 to	me.	Who	 cares	 about	 idiots	 condemning	 you?	 --	 they	 are	 not	 even
worth	 any	 reply.	 But	 even	 if	 a	 small	 section	 of	 society	 starts	 respecting	 each
other,	there	will	be	a	tremendous	revolution.
My	 own	 understanding	 is	 that	 as	 your	 love	 deepens,	 your	 sex	 disappears	 --
because	love	is	so	fulfilling,	what	is	the	need	of	this	bullock-cart	sex?	It	is	out	of
date....
And	 soon	 the	 day	will	 come	when	 children	will	 not	 be	 born	 out	 of	men	 and
women's	sex.
We	have	suffered	very	much:	blind	children,	retarded	children,	have	had	to	live
their	 life	 in	 utter	 agony	 and	 suffering...	 but	 there	 were	 no	means	 to	 clear	 the
situation.	But	now	we	have	the	means,	now	love	can	be	completely	a	fun,	a	joy,
a	 celebration,	 with	 no	 responsibility,	 no	 fear	 of	 making	 the	 woman	 pregnant,
because	that	keeps	her	in	bondage	and	that	keeps	you	also	in	the	bondage.	You
are	partners	in	creating	a	child;	now	you	have	to	be	a	partner	in	bringing	him	up.
I	have	heard...	in	a	court	a	man,	ninety-five	years	old,	and	a	woman,	ninety-one
years	 old,	 appeared	 for	 divorce.	 The	 judge	 had	 seen	many	 cases	 but	 this	was
really	 shocking.	He	 could	 not	 believe	 it:	 one	 foot	 is	 already	 in	 the	 grave;	 for
what	do	they	want	a	divorce?
He	asked,	"How	long	have	you	been	married?"
They	 said,	 "It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 remember.	 Maybe	 seventy-five	 years,	 or	 it
could	be	a	little	more."
The	judge	said,	"I	cannot	understand:	you	managed	to	live	together	for	seventy
years,	and	now	at	the	very	end	you	have	come	to	divorce."
They	said,	"We	had	to	wait	for	all	our	children	to	die.	Now	we	are	completely
free,	no	burden."
Man's	past	history,	Devageet,	has	been	really	not	human.	It	can	be	human	only	if
the	woman	and	the	man	are	no	longer	just	sex	partners;	that	drags	them	both	to
the	very	lowliest	spaces.	If	they	can	love	each	other	with	respect,	not	using	each
other	 as	 commodities,	 men	 and	 women	 both	 will	 have	 a	 great	 uprising	 of
consciousness.
The	more	your	sex	energy	becomes	love,	the	more	you	are	a	spiritual	being.	Sex
is	only	a	 reproductive	process	 forced	by	nature	on	you.	Nature	has	been	using
you	just	 like	a	factory	--	and	you	don't	have	even	the	dignity	 to	declare,	"I	am
not	a	factory."
But	 this	 can	 happen	 only	 if	 you	 are	 alert,	 aware,	 conscious	 of	 what	 you	 are
doing,	what	you	are	thinking,	how	you	are	behaving.	And	that	brings	such	grace
and	such	beauty,	 that	 the	physical	beauty	simply	disappears.	 I	have	seen	many
beautiful	 women	with	 very	 ugly	minds.	 I	 have	 seen	many	 beautiful	 men,	 but
their	beauty	is	not	more	than	skin-deep.	And	this	is	the	trouble:	beauty	is	always
skin-deep,	and	ugliness	goes	 to	 the	very	bones.	Go	on	digging	to	 the	bones,	 to
the	marrow,	and	you	will	find	it...	it	is	there.
Love	is	the	alchemy	to	change	that	ugliness	from	within.	And	once	it	disappears
from	within,	even	an	ordinary	face,	a	homely	face,	starts	shining	with	the	bliss
and	joy	of	the	beyond.
Don't	be	worried	about	the	headache;	the	headache	is	simply	an	effort	of	biology
to	drag	you	back.	 I	have	not	 suffered	almost	 for	 thirty	years	 from	a	headache.
Slowly,	 slowly	 I	 have	 forgotten	how	 it	 feels.	And	because	 I	 have	not	 suffered
from	headache,	 I	don't	 feel	my	head	either.	 It	 is	only	pain	 that	makes	you	feel
anything.	 But	 thirty	 years	 before	 I	 have	 also	 suffered	 from	 headache,	 and	 the
headache	is	certainly	concerned	very	deeply	with	sex.
No	medical	 researcher	 has	 come	 to	 the	 conclusion,	 but	 I	 say	 it	 from	my	 own
discoveries	 that	 I	 go	 on	 and	 on	making	 --	 I'm	 an	 incurable	 discoverer	 --	 and
sooner	or	later	science	will	have	to	agree	with	me.	The	sex	center	exists	in	the
head,	not	in	the	genitals	--	that	much	science	has	come	to	know.	And	if	the	sex
center	exists	in	the	head	and	not	in	the	genitals,	then	sex	deprivation	can	create	a
headache.	It	will	not	create	genital	ache	because	there	is	nothing...	it	is	only	an
extension	of	a	certain	center	in	your	mind.
Why	have	people	started	thinking	--	and	doctors	have	started	even	advising	their
patients
--	that	sex	is	good	for	your	mental	health?	And	they	are	right:	all	the	people	who
have	 repressed	 sex	 in	 the	 past	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion,	 have	 suffered
tremendously	with	headaches.	Even	a	man	like	J.	Krishnamurti	suffered	for	forty
years	continuously	with	such	great	headaches,	migraine,	that	even	he,	a	man	of
such	 understanding,	 used	 to	 think	 of	 hitting	 his	 head	 with	 the	 wall	 and	 be
finished	--	the	pain	was	too	much.
J.	Krishnamurti	was	brought	up	by	people	with	all	 the	old	 ideas:	Repress	your
sex.	He	was	not	allowed	to	meet	young	women.	Even	when	a	woman	who	was
almost	the	age	of	his	mother	once	had	been	taking	care	of	him	when	he	was	sick,
immediately	great	turmoil	started	in	the	leadership	of	the	Theosophical	Society:
"They	have	fallen	in	love.	Remove	the	woman"	--	and	the	woman	was	removed.
It	was	sheer	stupidity:	Krishnamurti	was	not	more	than	fifteen,	and	the	woman
was	nearabout	fifty.	But	the	woman	was	a	beautiful	woman,	very	understanding.
No	man	can	take	care	of	anybody	else	the	way	a	woman	can	take	care	even	of
strangers.
I	was	in	jail	in	America.	They	had	put	me	in	the	medical	ward,	so	that	nobody
could	say	that	I	had	been	tortured,	harassed.	In	the	medical	ward	there	were	six
women	nurses	and	a	doctor,	and	one	male	nurse.	It	never	used	to	be	that	way	in
the	 past.	 In	 fact,	 in	 this	 country	 you	 cannot	 find	 a	male	 nurse;	 in	 this	 country
`nurse'	means	a	woman.	A	male	nurse	looks	awkward,	unpsychological.
I	watched	the	way	the	woman	doctor	behaved	with	me	--	with	such	respect	and
such	love.
And	all	the	nurses...	the	oldest	nurse	--	a	very	womanly	woman,	almost	a	Jewish
mama	--
took	care	of	me	so	much	that	during	the	three	days	I	was	there	she	dropped	one
of	her	holidays.	She	said,	"I	cannot	go	out...."
All	the	nurses	behaved	as	though	I	had	been	known	to	them	forever:	I	was	not	a
stranger	but	part	of	their	heart.	But	the	male	nurse	was	a	trouble.	One	day	only
was	given	to	the	male	nurse	in	seven	days,	but	that	one	day	he	tortured	me	--	not
physically,	 but	 he	 would	 come	 into	 my	 cabin	 and	 he	 would	 start	 asking
questions...	and	religion	and	theology	and	philosophy....
I	told	him,	"Listen...	with	great	difficulty	I	have	got	these	few	days'	holiday,	and
you	are	destroying	that.	I	have	forgotten	all	about	religion,	all	about	philosophy,
I	don't	know	anything.	Just	don't	torture	me."
But	the	male	mind	functions	only	intellectually;	it	does	not	know	anything	about
the	heart.	Not	a	single	woman	in	the	medical	ward	ever	asked	a	single	question.
They	brought	my	food,	they	managed...	the	doctor	managed	that	I	should	not	go
to	the	common	toilet,	she	gave	me	her	own	bathroom:	"We	will	feel	ashamed	to
send	 you	 there,	 it	 is	 dirty.	 All	 criminals...	 While	 you	 are	 here	 just	 use	 my
bathroom,	 and	 I	 will	 remember	 it:	 because	 you	 have	 used	 my	 bathroom,	 it
becomes	a	temple	for	me.	The	moment	I	enter	it	I	will	remember	you."
The	head	nurse	has	never	gone	 in	her	 life	 to	purchase	 things	for	 the	prisoners;
they	come	on	a	fixed	routine	basis.	But	for	me	she	used	to	go	every	day	--	and
she	 was	 an	 old	 woman	 --	 to	 purchase	 fruits,	 vegetables,	 anything	 that	 was
vegetarian.	I	asked	her,	"You	are	unnecessarily	taking	trouble.	Things	come,	they
are	perfectly	good.	 If	 they	are	good	for	other	human	beings,	 they	are	good	for
me	too.	Just	take	care	because	I	am	a	vegetarian."
She	said,	"No,	those	things	come	mixed	with	non-vegetarian	food.	And	you	are
here	only	for	a	few	days."
The	last	day	when	I	left	the	first	jail,	all	the	nurses	and	the	doctor	and	the	sheriff
and	the	whole	staff	had	tears	in	their	eyes.	The	doctor	said	to	me,	"We	don't	want
you	to	leave."
I	said,	"It	 is	a	 jail.	As	far	as	I	am	concerned	there	 is	no	problem,	I	can	remain
here.	But	millions	of	people	around	the	world	are	waiting	for	me	to	get	out.	Your
tears	prevent	me...	it	looks	very	heartless."
She	said,	"No,	I	understand.	Just	in	three	days	you	have	become	so	much	part	of
us,	we	 have	 forgotten	 completely	 that	 you	 are	 a	 prisoner	 here"	 --	 because	 the
whole	day	I	was	sitting	in	the	doctor's	room.	To	make	me	comfortable,	she	had
moved	to	another	room	--
because	there	prisoners	will	be	coming,	patients	will	be	coming	--	and	they	did
everything	that	a	loving	family	can	do.
She	said,	"Forgive	my	tears.	Don't	take	any	note	of	it.	It	is	my	problem	that	we
will	miss	you	from	tomorrow."
When	I	 shook	hands	with	 the	nurses	 they	were	all	 trembling.	They	had	all	cut
photos	 from	newspapers	and	 they	 said,	 "Please,	give	a	 signature	and	write	my
name.	This	is	our	most	precious	gift.	We	are	enough	rewarded...	otherwise	this
jail	is	a	torture	house.	Even	in	the	medical	part	the	torture	continues;	it	is	just	a
strategy	to	show	to	the	world	that	a	sick	person	is	not	tortured."
But	because	the	whole	staff	was	in	such	a	deep	loving	attitude,	they	could	not	do
anything	to	torture	me.	The	nurses	brought	soaps	from	their	homes,	new	combs
from	their	homes.	If	they	cooked	something	which	was	vegetarian	they	brought
it	from	their	home.	I	said,	"Why	are	you	taking	so	much	care	of	a	prisoner?"
They	said,	"You	are	not	a	prisoner.	You	have	changed	the	whole	climate	of	the
medical	ward."
But	it	is	to	happen	all	over	the	world....	The	woman	has	to	be	respected,	not	only
used.
And	slowly,	slowly	you	will	see	that	sex	is	the	lowliest	form	of	relationship.	It
will	drop.
Just	 go	 a	 little	 higher	 in	 your	 consciousness...	But	 I	 don't	want	 you	 to	 drop	 it
with	effort,	deliberately,	because	 then	 it	will	cling	around	you.	Go	 into	 it.	 It	 is
our	destiny	to	pass	through	that	fire	test.
And	once	you	have	gone	through	it	and	come	out	of	it	into	the	clear,	meditation
becomes	so	easy	that	you	don't	have	to	do	it.	Just	sit	by	the	side	of	any	tree	and
from	 all	 over	 a	 subtle	 showering	 of	 a	 new	 silence,	 of	 a	 virgin	 serenity,	 starts
falling	 over	 you,	 just	 like	 rain,	 or	 just	 like	 flowers	 of	madhukamini	 falling	 in
thousands.
I	have	not	seen	any	other	plant	which	has	so	generous	a	heart	as	madhukamini.
The	word	madhukamini	means	 `honey	woman'.	 Its	 fragrance	 is	 incomparable.
And	 the	 most	 beautiful	 thing	 is	 that	 it	 goes	 on	 showering	 almost	 like	 water,
rainwater.	The	 petals	 of	 its	 flowers	 go	 on	 falling	 the	whole	 night.	You	 can	 sit
underneath	it	and	you	will	be	all	covered	with	flowers.
Something	 like	 this	 is	 bound	 to	 happen,	 Devageet,	 if	 you	 allow	 the	 false
personality	 that	 surrounds	 you	 to	 die.	 Then	 love	 and	 meditation	 are	 not	 two
things	--	they	become	one.
The	loving	is	meditative,	and	meditation	is	nothing	but	the	radiation	of	love.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 MY	 MIND	 I	 AM	 WRITING	 TO	 YOU	 ALMOST	 EVERY	 DAY.	 ALL
THESE
QUESTIONS	AND	STATEMENTS	BOIL	DOWN	TO	THE	FOLLOWING:
GRATITUDE	 --	 I	 WANT	 TO	 SAY	 THANK	 YOU,	 OSHO,	 BELOVED
MASTER	--
AND	 ATTENTION.	 COULD	 YOU	 SAY	 IN	 DISCOURSE,	 ONE	 SINGLE
TIME,
"HELLO,	 HAREESH,"	 SO	 EVERYONE	 CAN	 HEAR	 IT,	 SO	 THAT	 I	 AM
CERTAIN
THAT	YOU	AND	EVERYBODY	ELSE	KNOWS	I	AM	EXISTING	AS	YOUR
LOVER
AND	FELLOW	DANCE-PARTNER?
Hello,	 Hareesh....	 But	 this	 will	 not	 be	 enough.	 It	 will	 be	 just	 plates	 without
anything	to	eat,	to	drink.	It	will	look	like	a	desert	where	nothing	grows.
And	people	are	saying	"hello"	to	each	other	without	any	reason;	so	I	say...	but	I
would	like	to	present	you	also	something,	so	"Hello	Hareesh"	is	not	empty.	My
first	present:	A	man	sitting	in	a	bar	is	complaining	to	the	bartender:	"After	one
year	 and	 three	 thousand	 dollars	 with	 that	 psychiatrist,	 he	 tells	 me	 I'm	 cured.
Some	cure!	A	year	ago,	I	was	Nancy	Reagan	--	now	I'm	nobody."
A	Roman	Catholic,	a	famous	priest,	and	a	Protestant	minister,	also	very	famous
and	 well-known,	 had	 a	 heated	 discussion	 over	 the	 merits	 of	 their	 respective
faiths.
Finally	they	agreed	to	differ,	and	as	they	parted	the	Catholic	said,	"Let	us	go	our
ways	--
you	continue	to	worship	God	in	your	way	and	I	will	continue	to	worship	him	in
his	way."
The	minister's	wife...	my	second	present...	was	becoming	upset	that	her	husband
exclaimed,	"Oh,	Jesus,	sweet	Jesus!"	every	time	he	reached	orgasm.
"It's	 perfectly	 proper,	my	 dear,"	 he	 assured	 her,	 "and	 in	 accordance	with	THE
BIBLE
where	it	says,	`Blessed	is	he	who	comes	in	the	name	of	the	Lord.'"
And	the	third:
The	 Catholic	 priest	 heard	 a	 number	 of	 women	 confess	 that	 the	 grocer's	 new
delivery	 boy	 had	 seduced	 them	 all.	He	made	 them	 each	 put	 ten	 dollars	 in	 the
poor	box.
The	delivery	man	appeared	 last,	 and	 the	priest	 asked	angrily:	 "What	have	you
got	to	say	for	yourself?"
"Just	 this,"	replied	the	boy,	"either	you	cut	me	in	on	those	ten	dollars	or	I	 take
my	business	to	another	parish."
Hareesh,	keep	your	business	here!
I	 can	 understand	 a	 deep	 desire	 in	 everybody	 to	 be	 loved,	 and	 I	 love	 you	 all
whether	I	know	your	names	or	not.	Names	are	just	labels	stuck	to	you.	You	have
come	here	 in	 the	world	without	 names,	 and	 you	will	 leave	 this	world	without
names.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned	you	don't	have	a	name;	and	if	you	look	within	yourself,
you	will	not	 find	any	name	 there.	You	are	a	nameless	 reality	 --	and	 it	 is	good,
because	every	name	creates	a	boundary	around	you,	makes	you	small.
But	 your	 question	 is	 significant.	 Attention	 can	 do	 two	 jobs:	 if	 it	 is	 forced,	 it
nourishes	the	ego;	if	it	is	prayed	with	gratitude,	it	nourishes	the	soul.
I	 cannot	 say	 anything	 against	 your	 question.	 Your	 question	 is	 so	 full	 of	 love,
gratitude,	that	I	can	repeat	as	many	times	as	you	want,	"Hello,	Hareesh."	It	will
not	strengthen	your	ego,	it	will	weaken	it.	And	so	many	people	here,	hearing	me
calling	to	you,	"Hello,	Hareesh,"	are	also	repeating	the	same.	Then	it	becomes	a
tremendous	 energy	 field,	 a	 brotherhood	 of	 spirituality,	 where	 everybody	 is	 to
share	his	abundance.
It	 is	perfectly	right.	Many	would	have	liked	the	same,	but	could	not	gather	the
courage.
You	are	a	courageous	man.	And	you	are	asking	"...	and	everybody	else	knows	I
am	existing	as	your	lover	and	fellow	dance-partner."	Here	we	are	not	gathered	to
talk	 about	 nonsense	 --	 about	God,	 heaven	 and	 hell.	Here	we	 have	 gathered	 to
rejoice,	to	sing,	to	dance	together	in	such	an	ecstasy	that	individualities	melt	into
each	other	and	it	becomes	one	organic	whole.
I	 have	 seen	 it	 becoming	 one	 organic	 whole	 many	 times,	 when	 you	 all	 laugh
together.
Even	 the	 Germans	 don't	 understand	 why	 they	 are	 laughing	 --	 but	 they	 are
intelligent	 people:	 seeing	 that	 everybody	 is	 laughing,	 they	 also	 participate.	 In
fact,	 they	 laugh	 louder	 than	 anybody	 else,	 so	 nobody	 suspects	 that	 they	 are
Germans.	Of	course,	outside	Buddha	Hall	they	enquire	of	people,	"What	was	the
matter?	Why	were	people	laughing	so	much?
I	could	not	get	it."
My	suggestion	to	all	the	German	sannyasins	is:	Forget	trying	to	get	it	--	that	is
what	 is	 troubling	 you!	 You	 are	 engaged	 in	 trying	 to	 get	 it	 and	 the	 moment
passes....	Everybody	is	 laughing,	and	you	are	always	second;	you	cannot	 laugh
first	because	you	have	not	got	it	yet.
Here	 it	 is	 a	 temple	of	 celebration,	utterly	pagan.	Nobody	 is	 serious,	nobody	 is
bothering	about	how	to	reach	heaven,	how	to	get	a	harp,	sit	on	a	cloud	and	go	on
singing	for	eternity,	"Alleluja,	alleluja...."	Those	are	the	idiots.	They	have	been
taken	up	just	to	relieve	the	earth.
If	you	can	rejoice	with	me	you	have	understood	me.
If	my	music	has	touched	your	heart,	it	is	enough.
I	am	not	here	to	convert	anybody;	I	am	just	here	to	help	you	learn	a	little	dance
of	the	soul.	This	is	the	most	religious	phenomenon:	the	dance	of	the	soul	--	no
fear	of	punishment,	no	greed	for	any	reward.
This	moment	is	all	in	all.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WOULD	 YOU	 TELL	 ME	 A	 JOKE	 OR	 GIVE	 ME	 SOME	 SUTRAS,	 OR
ANYTHING
BEFORE	I	LEAVE?
Hari	om	 tat	 sat...	 that	 is	 the	 starting	of	 any	Eastern	holy	 scripture.	 It	 is	 a	very
beautiful	 thing:	hari	means	a	 thief,	OM	means	the	ultimate	music	of	existence.
Tat	sat	means	this	eternal	music	of	existence...	the	thief	is	the	only	truth.
This	question	is	from	Dhyan	Om.	He	is	back.	For	a	few	days	he	had	disappeared
--	not	from	the	ashram,	but	he	had	stopped	asking	questions	because	I	loved	him
so	 much	 that	 I	 gave	 him	 good	 hits.	 The	 greater	 hit	 you	 get,	 remember,	 your
reward	is	much...	you	deserved	it.
First	he	is	asking,	"Would	you	tell	me	a	joke	or	give	me	some	sutras,	or	anything
before	I	leave?"
In	the	first	place,	why	should	you	leave?
In	the	second	place,	you	are	a	joke	unto	yourself;	you	don't	need	any	jokes.	But	I
will	not	disappoint	you.
A	few	sutras	for	you:
A	curved	line	is	the	loveliest	distance	between	two	points.
Get	it?
I	have	also	been	a	German	in	one	of	my	past	lives,	so	I	understand	the	Germans
more	than	anybody	else.
We	are	happier	 in	many	ways	when	we	are	old	 than	when	we	are	young.	The
young	sow	wild	oats,	the	old	grow	sage.
It	is	really	difficult....	But	I	will	go	on	telling	sutras	until	you	get	one.
A	cigar	gives	a	wise	man	some	time	to	think	and	a	fool	something	to	stick	in	his
mouth.
The	principle	thing	an	inquisitive	child	learns	is	how	little	adults	know.
You	know	you	have	reached	middle	age	when	weightlifting	consists	merely	of
standing	up.
We	are	all	born	mad;	some	remain	so.
I	will	not	say	to	which	category	Om	belongs.	Most	probably	he	has	remained	so.
Behind	every	successful	man	is	an	astonished	woman.
A	Japanese	proverb:	Nothing	 is	as	ancient	as	progress.	 It	started	from	the	very
moment	Adam	and	Eve	were	thrown	out	of	the	Garden	of	Eden.
I	have	heard	 the	 first	words	of	Adam	 to	Eve	were,	 "We	are	passing	 through	a
great	crisis...."	These	are	the	first	words,	and	they	continue	to	be	relevant	every
day.	Thousands	 of	 years	 have	 passed,	 but	we	 are	 passing	 through	 the	 greatest
crisis	every	day.
Any	child	who	gets	raised	by	the	book	must	be	a	first	edition.
There	are	books	on	how	to	raise	your	children,	how	to	be	a	mother,	how	to	be	a
father;	it	is	so	unbelievable	that	all	the	animals	are	raising	their	children	without
any	difficulty,	without	reading	any	book.	Only	man	seems	to	be	utterly	retarded.
He	needs	 to	read	how	to	raise	his	children.	He	has	forgotten	even	 the	simplest
things	which	any	animal,	any	bird,	knows	perfectly	well.	Still	we	go	on	calling	it
evolution,	for	the	simple	reason	that	nobody	objects.	And	even	if	they	object	--
for	example	this	bird	is	objecting	--	we	don't	understand	their	language.
Temptation	 usually	 comes	 in	 through	 a	 door	 that	 was	 deliberately	 being	 left
open.
A	man	may	know	his	own	mind	and	still	know	next	to	nothing.
The	latest	thing	in	clothes	is	usually	the	woman	you	are	waiting	for.
When	you	don't	know	what	you	are	doing,	do	it	neatly.
Beauty	is	only	skin-deep,	but	ugliness	goes	right	to	the	bones.
What	 no	 wife	 of	 a	 philosopher	 can	 ever	 understand	 is	 that	 a	 philosopher	 is
working	when	he	is	staring	out	of	the	window.
You	can	be	positive	of	anything	of	which	others	are	as	ignorant	as	you	are.
It	is	because	of	such	fundamental	principles	that	God	goes	on	existing,	the	devil
goes	on	existing,	heaven	and	hell	go	on	existing,	sin	and	virtue	go	on	existing.
And	 you	 can	 be	 positive,	 absolutely	 positive...	 because	 neither	 you	 know	 nor
anybody	 else	 knows,	 so	 nobody	 is	 going	 to	 contradict,	 nobody	 is	 going	 to
negate.	 Only	 an	 innocent	 person	 may	 perhaps	 start	 saying	 things	 which	 go
against	all	the	ignorant	people	of	the	world.
One	of	the	hardest	decisions	in	life	is	deciding	when	to	start	middle	age.
One:	old	age	is	when	your	symptoms	are	the	most	interesting	things	in	your	life.
Two:	old	age	is	when	your	face	in	the	morning	has	more	wrinkles	than	your	bed.
Three:	old	age	is	when	you	not	only	cannot	remember	when	you	first	made	love,
but	also	when	you	last	did	it.
That	is	real	old	age!
And	you	ask	for	a	joke	also.	A	joke	that	I	hope	can	be	understood...	otherwise	I
will	try	another	--	but	I	will	not	allow	you	to	leave	this	place	disappointed.
First:	 Rabbi	 Gideon	 Finkelstein	 died	 and	 went	 to	 heaven.	 He	 saw	 only	 three
people	 there,	 reading	 by	 a	 dim	 light.	 One	 of	 them	 was	 reading	 PLAYBOY,
another	PENTHOUSE,	and	the	other	POPULAR	SCIENCE.	He	decided	to	see
what	hell	was	like.
The	rabbi	got	to	the	devil's	domain	and	it	turned	out	to	be	a	big	night	club	with
every	kind	of	music	being	played.	There	was	an	eight-piece	Dixieland	band,	a
thirty-piece	swing	band,	three	discos,	and	all	the	people	were	dancing.
Rabbi	Finkelstein	went	back	up	to	heaven	and	asked	for	an	audience	with	God.
"I	don't	understand	it,	Lord,"	he	said,	"there	are	only	three	people	here	in	heaven
and	they	are	all	reading.	Down	in	hell	everybody	is	dancing	and	having	a	good
time.	Why	can't	we	have	that	in	heaven?"
The	Lord	said,	"I	can't	hire	a	band	for	just	three	people."
And	second..if	you	have	missed	the	first	joke,	this	certainly	you	will	miss.
Three	old	ladies	were	sitting	together	on	a	park	bench	when	a	flasher	walked	up
to	them,	opened	his	coat,	and	exposed	himself.
The	first	old	lady	had	a	stroke,	and	the	second	old	lady	had	also	a	stroke,	but	the
third	old	lady's	arms	were	too	short	to	reach.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Enlightenment	is	none	of	your	business
10	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709105
ShortTitle:
PILGR09
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
102
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WATCHING	 THE	 MIND,	 IT	 SEEMS	 TO	 ME	 THERE	 IS	 AN	 INFINITE
OCEAN	OF
THOUGHTS.	MEDITATION	GIVES	ME	MORE	PEACE	AND	GROUNDING,
BUT
HEARING	YOU	SPEAK	ABOUT	ENLIGHTENMENT	--	 IT	SEEMS	TO	ME
FAR,	FAR	AWAY.
CAN	YOU	GIVE	ME	SOME	ADVICE?
Dhyan	Jashan,	enlightenment	is	as	far	away	as	you	are	from	yourself;	hence	the
distance	differs	from	individual	to	individual.
You	are	certainly	in	a	difficult	position:	first,	you	are	a	German,	and	nobody	has
ever	 heard	 of	 any	 German	 becoming	 enlightened.	 Only	 one	 of	 my	 German
sannyasins	 used	 to	 become	 once	 in	 a	 while	 enlightened,	 and	 again	 he
understood,	"What	am	I	doing?	It	is	not	for	me,"	and	he	dropped	the	idea.	That
happened	many	times.	Just	now	I	have	heard	that	he	is	washing	dishes	in	a	Zorba
the	Buddha	restaurant.	The	person	who	told	me	about	him	had	asked	him,	"What
happened?	You	had	become	enlightened...."
He	 said,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 it.	 Five	 times	 I	 became	 enlightened,	 and	 then	 I
dropped	 the	 whole	 idea.	 I	 am	 feeling	 far	 happier	 washing	 dishes	 in	 the
restaurant."	What	 was	 happening	 was	 that	 whenever	 he	 would	 come	 here	 he
would	become	unenlightened,	and	whenever	he	would	go	to	Germany	he	would
become	enlightened.	 In	Germany	 there	was	no	question,	no	objection;	nobody
has	even	heard	what	it	means,	so	in	Germany	it	would	be	easier.	Here	it	is	a	little
difficult.
Secondly,	you	are	 really	 in	a	big	dilemma:	you	are	a	 liar!	First	a	German,	and
then	a	liar	makes	things	very	complex	--	otherwise	enlightenment	is	as	easy	as
nothing	else	 in	 the	world.	Everything	needs	some	effort,	except	enlightenment.
Everything	 needs	 you	 to	 go	 somewhere,	 everything	 needs	 you	 to	 do	 some
climbing	the	ladder	--	except	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	is	the	easiest,	because	it	is	not	an	achievement.	Don't	make	a	goal
of	it...
that's	what	is	making	it	difficult	for	you.	If	you	are	feeling	good	and	grounded	in
meditation,	 you	 are	 perfectly	 in	 the	 right	 direction.	 Just	 get	 all	 your	 ocean	 of
thoughts	settled.	Let	it	become	a	lake	without	any	ripples.
You	drop	the	idea	of	enlightenment	--	it	is	none	of	your	business.	Meditation	is
going	well;	 that	means	 the	 tree	 is	growing	well,	 the	 flowers	will	be	coming	 in
their	 own	 time,	 in	 their	 own	 season.	No	 tree	 is	 worried,	 no	 tree	 is	 concerned
about	why	the	flowers	have	not	come	yet;	they	always	come	in	their	own	time.
All	that	you	have	to	take	care	of	is	that	the	tree	should	not	die,	that	it	should	be
nourished,	that	it	should	have	a	good	soil,	that	it	should	be	watered,	that	it	should
have	 your	 love,	 your	 friendship.	 All	 you	 can	 do	 is	 nourish	 your	 meditation,
become	 more	 and	 more	 grounded	 and	 centered.	 One	 day	 suddenly,	 from
nowhere...	the	explosion.
You	don't	have	to	go	to	enlightenment;	it	comes	to	you.	In	fact,	even	that	is	not
right	 to	 say.	 It	 does	 not	 come	 either;	 it	 happens	 --	 and	 it	 happens	 from	 your
innermost	 core.	 It	 is	 an	 explosion,	 just	 like	 the	 explosion	 of	 an	 atom.	Atomic
explosion	 comes	 from	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 the	 atom.	 Enlightenment	 is	 the
explosion	of	your	innermost	life	center.
Suddenly	all	darkness	is	gone!	A	light	has	descended	upon	you	from	every	side,
and	a	light	that	needs	no	fuel...	a	light	that	remains,	that	has	come	forever.
Nobody	can	become	unenlightened;	that	is	an	impossibility,	that's	a	difficult	task
--	even	a	German	cannot	do	that.	But	enlightenment	becomes	a	problem	because
you	 go	 on	 hearing	 me.	 I	 am	 the	 problem.	 I	 cannot	 stop	 talking	 about
enlightenment,	 and	 that	 creates	 the	 desire	 in	 you	 and	 the	 longing	 in	 you.	 Just
don't	listen	to	me!	The	moment	I	say
"Enlightenment..."	simply	say,	"It	is	not	for	us."	If	you	can	avoid...
You	 cannot	 make	 me	 feel	 responsible	 for	 it,	 because	 I	 am	 helpless,	 I	 will
continue	to	talk,	I	cannot	talk	about	anything	else.	Whatever	I	say	suddenly	turns
out	to	be	something	about	enlightenment.	Just	watch...
A	priest	went	to	a	ranch	in	order	to	buy	a	horse,	and	saw	a	beautiful	one	that	he
liked	and	asked	if	he	could	try	it.	"Sure,"	said	the	rancher,	"but	I	have	to	tell	you
something.	That	horse	used	to	be	owned	by	the	bishop,	and	if	you	want	the	horse
to	move,	you	have	to	say,	`Good	Lord,'	and	if	you	want	him	to	stop,	you	have	to
say,	Àmen.'"
"That's	okay,"	said	the	priest	and	jumped	up	and	said,	"Good	Lord."	The	horse
promptly	moved	off	 and	 then	was	 seen	galloping	 in	 the	mountains.	The	priest
was	yelling,	"Good	Lord,	good	Lord."	and	the	horse	was	really	moving.
But	 suddenly	 they	were	coming	 to	 the	edge	of	 the	cliff	 and,	 in	panic,	 stricken
with	 fear,	 he	yelled,	 "Stop,	 stop!"	That	 did	not	work	 and	 then	he	 remembered
and	shouted,	"Amen."
The	horse	stopped	right	on	 the	edge	of	 the	cliff	and,	wiping	his	brow	with	his
relief,	the	priest	said,	"Good	Lord!"
Do	you	think	Gautam	Buddha	could	have	made	this	story	in	any	way	connected
with	 enlightenment?	But	 I	 am	 just	 incurable.	 I	 see	 every	 element	 in	 it	 exactly
leading	to	enlightenment.	All	that	you	need	is	the	last	"Good	Lord"...	finished!
There	is	no	hurry.	You	are	moving	slowly,	gradually,	you	are	getting	grounded,
becoming	centered,	but	listening	to	me	your	desire	catches	fire.	It	starts	thinking,
"If	meditation	 is	 so	beautiful,	 so	silent,	what	will	enlightenment	be	 like?"	And
then	it	becomes	a	constant	worry	and	a	tension.	It	will	not	help	you;	it	will	even
disturb	your	meditation.
But	you	should	look	at	my	trouble	also.	If	I	don't	talk	about	enlightenment,	you
are	not	going	even	to	do	meditation;	if	I	talk	about	enlightenment,	that	disturbs
meditation.	Now	you	tell	me	the	way...!	So	just	be	sane.	Enlightenment	comes	--
I	 can	 guarantee	 you	 it	 comes.	 It	 is	 not	 as	 though	 it	 is	 something	 that	 has	 not
happened	 to	 many	 people.	 You	 have	 the	 potential	 for	 it,	 but	 you	 have	 to
understand	the	whole	process.
In	 the	 beginning	 the	 master	 goes	 on	 telling	 you	 all	 the	 beauties	 and	 all	 the
blissfulness	and	all	 the	ecstasies	of	enlightenment.	He	has	 to	 --	otherwise	who
has	time	to	meditate?
Television	is	there,	football	matches	are	going	on....	The	world	all	around	is	so
full	of	idiots	doing	all	kinds	of	gymnastics:	boxers	are	boxing,	actors	are	acting	-
-	who	has	time	for	meditation,	and	for	what?
If	I	don't	talk	about	enlightenment,	then	naturally	you	will	ask	me,	"Why	should
I	meditate?"	And	the	moment	I	say	"Enlightenment..."	trouble	arises.	Then	your
mind	is	habitually	making	everything	a	goal,	 far	away.	Mind	enjoys	challenge,
and	enlightenment	is	not	a	challenge.
People	 even	want	 to	 go	 to	Everest.	When	Edmund	Hillary,	 the	 first	man	who
reached	 on	 top	 of	Everest,	was	 asked	 by	 the	 news	media,	 "Why	 did	 you	 take
such	a	risky	step	of	going	to	the	highest	peak	of	the	Himalayas?"	His	answer	was
really	beautiful,	an	answer	with	great	understanding.
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	my	 going.	 It	 is	 just	 because	Everest	 is	 there,
unclimbed,	and	 I	cannot	 tolerate	 it.	 It	 is	not	 troubling	me,	 it	has	nothing	 to	do
with	me,	 but	 simply	 the	 idea	 that	 it	 remains	 unclimbed...	 hundreds	 of	 people
have	died	trying	to	climb	it,	and	it	has	become	a	challenge.	I	will	risk	my	whole
life."	You	will	not	gain	anything....
He	 reached	 to	 the	 top,	 looked	 all	 around,	 and	 felt	 embarrassed,	 because	 there
was	not	even	somebody	to	say	"Hello,	hi,	Edmund	Hillary,	how	are	you?"	--	not
even	a	single	tree,	not	even	a	single	bird,	not	even	a	single	animal,	nothing.	Just
miles	 and	miles	 of	 eternal	 snow	which	 has	 never	melted...	He	 did	 not	 remain
there	for	more	 than	 two	minutes;	what	 is	 the	point?	Man	may	go	 to	 the	moon,
man	may	go	to	Mars,	man	may	go	some	day	to	some	star.	They	are	challenging
to	the	mind.	Mind	is	very	interested	in	any	challenge:	provoke	it,	and	it	will	go.
But	enlightenment	 is	not	a	goal,	 it	 is	not	Everest,	 it	 is	not	 the	moon.	 It	 is	you.
You	don't	have	 to	go	anywhere,	not	even	out	of	your	 room.	You	don't	have	 to
take	a	single	step.
You	have	just	to	be	silent,	unmoving,	and	it	is	there.	It	has	always	been	there.
So	you	should	understand:	the	problem	of	the	master	is	that	he	has	first	to	talk
about	enlightenment	to	create	a	little	interest,	a	little	longing	in	you,	and	then	he
has	immediately	to	make	it	clear	to	you	that	you	should	not	make	your	longing
attached	to	a	goal.	You	have	to	find	it	just	within	yourself.	No	effort,	no	doing,
no	action...	nothing	is	needed.
Dhyan	Jashan,	if	you	can	simply	remain	meditating	and	enjoying	the	silence	and
the	 peace	 of	 it,	 you	 have	 done	 whatever	 is	 needed	 on	 your	 part.	 Now	 leave
enlightenment	to	existence.	Existence	is	not	miserly;	it	is	not	exhausted	because
a	 few	 people	 have	 become	 enlightened.	 There	 is	 no	 quota,	 that	 only	 so	many
people	 can	 become	 enlightened.	 The	 whole	 world	 can	 become	 enlightened,
everybody	 has	 the	 intrinsic	 potential;	 you	 just	 have	 to	 disconnect	 your
meditation	from	any	goal-orientation,	 from	any	motivation.	 It	 is	not	difficult	 if
you	understand:	just	a	little	intelligence...
But	we	 live	 in	 a	world	where	 intelligence	 is	 not	 valued,	where	 the	mediocres
rule,	where	 the	mediocres	are	 the	 leaders...	where	 the	 intelligent	people	simply
get	out	of	the	crowd,	they	don't	want	to	be	unnecessarily	hassled	and	hustled	in
the	 crowd;	 they	 stand	 by	 the	 road	 and	 let	 the	 crowd	 pass.	 Once	 you	 become
aware	of	 the	strangeness	of	 the	people	around	you,	you	will	be	surprised:	how
have	you	been	missing	it	up	to	now?
Just	 today	 Neelam	 has	 brought	 a	 news	 which	 has	 been	 published	 by	 all	 the
newspapers	of	India.	The	statement	is	from	a	man	called	Devahar	Baba,	who	is
worshiped	by	thousands	of	Hindus,	thought	to	be	a	great	saint.	All	his	qualities
for	 being	 a	 great	 saint	 are	 very	 peculiar.	 One	 is	 that	 for	 twelve	 years	 he	was
standing	in	the	water	day	in,	day	out.	He	will	eat	standing	up	to	his	chest	in	the
water,	 he	 will	 do	 everything	 there:	 that	 made	 him	 known	 nationwide,	 a	 great
man.	Somehow	people	persuaded	him	that	"it	is	enough,	twelve	years..."	Just	out
of	compassion	he	came	out	of	the	river,	and	since	then	he	has	been	sitting	in	a
small	hut	made	for	him	on	a	tree.	These	are	his	two	qualifications	for	being	one
of	the	representatives	of	Hinduism.
His	statement	was	just	according	to	his	qualifications.	The	statement	was	that	the
world	can	be	saved,	all	problems	can	be	solved,	if	only	cow	slaughter	is	stopped.
Now	 his	 statement	 is	 being	 published	 by	 every	 newspaper	 without	 a	 single
criticism	--	but	my	statement	will	not	be	published	by	anyone.	Now	this	is	sheer
stupidity,	not	intelligence.
How	can	the	world's	problems	be	solved	by	stopping	cow	slaughter?	But	in	India
it	is	a	very	common	way	of	thinking....
Mahatma	Gandhi	used	to	think	that	if	everybody	starts	spinning	his	own	clothes,
all	 problems	 will	 be	 solved.	 India	 is	 great	 in	 finding	 simple	 solutions!	 Now
Maharishi	Mahesh	 Yogi	 is	 saying	 that	 if	 people	 start	 learning	 yogic	 hopping,
which	 he	 calls	 yogic	 flying,	 all	 problems	will	 be	 solved.	There	will	 be	 peace,
serenity,	no	war,	no	hunger.
And	I	am	amazed	that	nobody	criticizes	 them,	nobody	holds	 them	by	the	neck
and	 tells	 them,	 "You	 idiot!..."	 The	 world	 is	 suffering	 with	 so	 many	 complex
problems,	 and	 you	 are	 suggesting	 that	 somebody	 sitting	 in	 the	 lotus	 posture,
hopping,	 will	 solve	 all	 the	 problems.	 Nuclear	 weapons	 will	 disappear,
communism	 will	 not	 be	 against	 capitalism,	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 will	 become	 a
democracy,	 America	 will	 distribute	 all	 its	 wealth	 to	 the	 poor,	 the	 West	 will
distribute	 all	 its	products	 to	 the	poor	 countries	 --	 just	because	a	 few	 idiots	 are
sitting	in	the	lotus	posture	and	hopping.	I	cannot	even	conceive	in	my	dream...
Perhaps	that's	why	I	have	stopped	dreaming	for	 thirty	years.	I	have	not	dreamt
for	 thirty	 years	 --	 what	 to	 dream?	 And	 if	 you	 call	 these	 people	 idiots,
immediately	 somebody's	 religious	 feeling	 is	 hurt.	 Immediately	 an	 arrest
warrant...	I	have	been	summoned	thousands	of	times	--	I	have	even	forgotten	the
number	 --	and	how	many	 times	have	 they	 issued	arrest	warrants	 for	 the	single
reason	that	I	have	made	some	reasonable	statement?
It	is	a	very	unreasonable,	almost	insane	world	in	which	you	are	living.	If	you	can
manage	 just	 to	 meditate,	 you	 have	 done	 more	 than	 is	 expected	 of	 the
contemporary	 man.	 And	 your	 meditation	 is	 going	 good.	 Just	 go	 on	 saying,
"Good	 Lord!"	 In	 meditation	 there	 never	 comes	 any	 cliff.	 You	 don't	 have	 to
remember	"Amen"	--	there	is	no	need.
Meditation	slowly,	slowly	turns	into	your	enlightenment.	You	suddenly	become
aware	 one	 day,	 Where	 is	 that	 darkness?	 where	 is	 that	 continuous	 rush	 of
thoughts?	where	has	the	mind	gone?	Suddenly	you	are	absolutely	as	hollow	as	a
bamboo;	but	your	hollowness	is	not	empty	--	it	is	full	of	joy	and	full	of	rejoicing.
You	will	dance	for	no	reason	at	all,	you	will	sing	for	no	reason	at	all,	songs	that
you	 have	 not	 composed,	 dances	 that	 you	 have	 not	 learned.	 They	 are	 just
bubbling	spontaneously	in	your	consciousness.
That	is	enlightenment,	but	don't	make	it	a	goal.
Meditation	is	enough.
Everything	else	follows	on	its	own.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 YOU	 WERE	 TALKING	 ABOUT	 SEX	 AND	 MEDITATION	 THE
OTHER
EVENING	I	GOT	MIXED	UP.	SO	OFTEN	BEFORE	 I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU
SAY:
"LET	 YOUR	 SEX	 BE	 YOUR	 MEDITATION."	 ALSO,	 HOW	 DO	 YOUR
LATEST
SUGGESTIONS	FIT	INTO	'THE	TANTRA	VISIONS'?
PLEASE	COMMENT,	BELOVED	OSHO,	I	AM	PUZZLED.
Dhyan	Smita,	when	I	said,	"Let	sex	be	your	meditation,"	did	you	do	it?	When	I
was	talking	about	TANTRA	VISION,	what	did	you	do	about	it?
It	 seems	my	work	 is	 talking	 and	 your	work	 is	 listening,	 and	 then	 finding	 out
contradictions	--	what	I	said	yesterday,	what	I	said	the	day	before	yesterday...
You	 get	 puzzled	 because	 you	 don't	 do	 anything.	 If	 you	 had	 done	 sex	 as	 your
meditation,	 the	 question	 about	 sex	 and	 meditation	 as	 two	 interests	 would	 not
have	arisen.	Now	the	question	has	arisen	that	you	have	two	interests.	That	means
my	first	statement	has	not	been	heard.	And	I	am	not	a	person	to	remember	what	I
have	said	yesterday;	I	don't	know	even	what	I	have	said	today	--	otherwise	I	will
be	in	the	same	boat	as	you	are,	puzzled!
I	go	on	making	as	many	contradictions	as	possible	without	any	puzzlement.	 It
doesn't	matter.	I	must	have	said	to	somebody,	"Let	sex	be	your	meditation."	His
question	must	have	been	different,	the	person	must	have	been	different.	It	would
have	been	possible	for	him	to	make	sex	his	meditation.
But	 the	 person	 who	 has	 asked,	 "I	 have	 only	 two	 interests	 in	 life	 --	 sex	 and
meditation,"
cannot	deceive	me,	whoever	he	is.	I	may	not	know	him,	but	his	question	gives
me	 absolute	 perception	 of	 his	 innermost	 being.	 His	 only	 interest	 is	 sex.
Meditation	he	is	putting	in	just	to	make	the	question	look	religious.
I	cannot	say	to	this	person,	"Let	sex	be	your	meditation."	I	can	say	to	this	person,
"Let	meditation	 be	 your	 sex"	 --	 and	 that's	what	 I	 have	 said.	 First	 get	 finished
with	sex,	have	it	as	much	as	you	want	--	because	meditation	can	be	done	even
when	you	will	not	be	able	to	go	into	sex.
You	can	always	go	into	meditation	to	the	very	last	moment	of	your	life	--	it	can
be	postponed.	But	you	cannot	rely	on	whether	tomorrow	sex	will	be	possible	or
not.	 It	 is	not	within	your	hands;	 it	 comes	on	 its	own	at	a	certain	age,	and	at	 a
certain	age	it	disappears.
Then	people	are	talking	about	it	and	thinking	about	it	--	which	is	perfectly	good,
but	there	is	no	sex	at	all.	It	is	all	cerebral,	in	the	mind.	And	sex	in	the	mind	is	the
problem,	not	sex	as	a	generative	force.
I	want	to	tell	you	that	in	the	mind	these	two	things,	sex	and	meditation,	cannot
exist	 together.	 Sex	 is	 pulling	 you	 downwards,	 and	 meditation	 is	 pulling	 you
upwards.
A	 thief	was	 caught	 and	 brought	 to	 the	 court.	 He	 had	 not	 stolen	 anything,	 but
some	drama	was	going	on	 in	 the	house,	 and	he	 forgot	 completely	 for	what	he
had	 come	 there.	And	 he	 enjoyed	 the	 drama	 so	much	 that	 he	was	 caught.	 The
court	asked	him,	"Why	did	you	remain	the	whole	night,	and	not	steal	anything?
For	what	have	you	entered?	You	are	a	well-known	thief."
He	had	been	to	jail	many	times,	and	it	was	the	same	judge.	He	said,	"I	know	you
perfectly	well,	but	this	is	strange,	something	new.	You	have	not	stolen	anything,
and	still	you	remained	inside	the	house	the	whole	night."
The	thief	said,	"These	things	we	can	discuss	later	on.	First	I	want	Your	Honor	to
make	 it	absolutely	clear	 to	me	 that	one	punishment	you	will	not	give	me.	You
can	send	me	to	the	gallows...	but	don't	tell	me	to	be	married	to	two	women."
The	magistrate	 said,	 "What	nonsense	are	you	 talking?	There	 is	no	punishment
like	that."
He	 said,	 "Then	 it	 is	 perfectly	 okay.	 That	 is	 the	 problem.	 I	 had	 gone	 into	 the
house	to	steal....	But	the	man	has	two	wives,	and	one	lives	on	the	first	floor,	one
lives	on	the	ground	floor.	The	man	was	being	pulled	by	one	upwards	and	by	the
other	downwards.
And	it	was	such	a	funny	scene	--	one	was	pulling	him	by	his	hairs,	the	other	was
pulling	by	his	legs	--	that	I	forgot	completely	for	what	I	had	come	there.
"I	enjoyed	it	so	much	that	I	started	giggling,	and	that's	how	I	got	caught.	If	I	had
remained	silent	there	was	no	problem,	I	would	have	escaped	very	easily.	But	the
poor	man...	that's	why	I	said	to	you	from	the	very	beginning,	`Just	don't	give	me
that	punishment!'	One	woman	is	enough,	two	women	are	too	much."
The	man	who	is	saying,	"Sex	and	meditation	are	my	two	interests..."	if	I	say	to
him,	 "Yes,	 go	 ahead,"	 he	 will	 be	 torn	 apart.	 Sex	 will	 give	 him	 continuous
downward	gravitation	and	meditation	will	 try	 to	pull	him	out	of	 the	hands,	 the
chains	and	the	forces	of	gravitation	that	pull	you	down.
Meditation	is	a	way	to	open	your	wings	and	fly	into	the	sky.	It	does	not	believe
in	gravitation.	You	cannot	have	both.
So	always	 remember:	 if	 I	am	saying	something,	do	 it.	You	are	not	here	as	my
examiners	 so	 that	you	have	 to	 find	out	what	contradictions	 I	have	been	 telling
you.	But	people	take	such	self-appointed	positions....
Now	Sarjano	has	written	a	letter	to	me.	He	goes	on	writing	stupid	letters	almost
every	 day.	 Just	 because	 last	 night,	 when	 I	 went	 out,	 Avirbhava	 was	 on	 the
outside	door	to	open	the	car...	And	I	have	my	own	way	of	relating	to	people;	I
scare	 her,	 and	 she	 is	 so	 innocent,	 she	 gets	 scared	 --	 at	 least	 she	 pretends.	 She
never	disappoints	me,	"No..."	Who	is	Sarjano	to	write	 to	me,	"I	cannot	forgive
you	that	you	scare	simple	Avirbhava."	Now,	who	is	he?
I	used	 to	 think	 that	Swabhav	is	 in	charge	of	 the	ashram...	has	 there	been	some
change?
Sarjano	 is	 neither	 in	 charge	 of	 the	 ashram,	 nor	 is	 Sarjano	 a	 guardian	 to
Avirbhava,	nor	is	Sarjano	my	boss.	So	who	gives	him	all	these	appointments?	He
cannot	forgive	me!	--	and	who	has	asked	him	that	he	should	forgive	me?	I	will
not	ask	even	God	himself	to	forgive	me.	Even	if	I	can	manage	to	forgive	God,
that	will	be	enough.	For	this	whole	stupid	idea	that	is	going	on	all	around,	God	is
responsible	 --	 if	 he	 is	 still	 alive.	And	 the	 day	 I	 am	 going	 to	 encounter	 him	 is
going	to	be	really	the	last	judgment	day!
But	who	are	you	to	judge	me,	in	my	own	place,	amongst	my	own	people?	First
he	was	a	disciple;	it	seems	now	he	has	become	my	master.
Dhyan	Smita,	I	will	read	your	question	again	to	make	it	clear	so	that	you	never
repeat	 such	 stupid	 ideas	 again.	 You	 have	 not	 done	 anything,	 whatever	 I	 have
said;	you	are	just	listening	and	waiting	to	find	contradictions.	What	will	you	get
out	of	it?	It	is	a	well-known	thing	that	only	idiots	are	not	contradictory;	they	are
absolutely	consistent.
It	needs	a	little	intelligence	to	be	inconsistent,	and	it	needs	immense	intelligence
to	be	contradictory.	Why	does	 it	need	 immense	 intelligence?	 --	because	unless
you	can	prove	your	contradictions	are	complementaries	of	an	organic	unity,	you
don't	 have	 the	 right	 to	 make	 any	 contradictions.	 I	 have	 never	 made	 any
contradiction,	because	I	can	prove	to	you	each	contradiction	has	its	own	function
in	the	organic	whole	where	opposites	meet	and	merge	and	mingle	into	one	unity.
You	are	not	 supposed	 to	be	here	 to	bother	 about	 these	 things.	But	 this	 is	 how
people	are.
Somebody	is	worried....
Just	today	there	was	an	article	by	Vijayanand.	Eight	years	before	he	left	me;	in
these	eight	years	so	much	water	has	gone	down	the	Ganges,	and	so	many	idiots
have	come	and	gone	here	that	I	cannot	remember	the	names	of	all	of	them.	Now
he	goes	on	writing	articles	against	me,	and	today's	article	I	was	amazed	at.	What
are	his	objections?	He	left	me	because	a	man	who	has	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces,
dozens	of	watches,	cannot	be	enlightened.
But	he	left	me	in	'78,	when	I	had	not	yet	gone	to	America	--	and	the	reason	why
he	left	me	was	still	to	happen	five	years	afterwards!	He	seems	to	be	an	astrologer
or	a	palmist	or	a	prophet.	And	he	should	know	that	those	cars	did	not	belong	to
me:	 I	 have	 never	 looked	 back	 at	 what	 happened	 to	 those	 cars,	 I	 have	 never
bothered	to	enquire	of	anybody	what	happened	to	those	cars.
Here	I	am	a	guest,	 I	don't	possess	anything;	whatever	my	people	provide	me	I
use.	 If	 they	 stop	 providing	me	 even	 clothes,	 I	will	 still	 be	 delivering	 lectures,
naked!	It	does	not	matter.
All	those	ninety-three	cars	were	not	mine.	I	had	never	had	--	or	for	almost	thirty-
five	years,	even	touched	--	money.	I	don't	have	any	pockets	to	keep	it;	I	dropped
having	pockets	 thirty-five	years	 ago.	 I	don't	have	any	bank	account.	Perhaps	 I
may	 be	 the	 only	man	 in	 the	world	who	 can	 be	 called	 the	 richest	 poor	man	 --
richest	because	I	am	loved	by	my	people	so	much	that	what	more	do	you	need.
People	accumulate	money	because	they	are	afraid	no	one	is	going	to	take	care	of
them.	 I'm	not	worried;	 I	 know	 there	 are	millions	of	 people	who	would	 like	 to
take	care	of	me.
Why	should	I	bother	having	a	bank	account	and	paying	income	tax?	I	have	not
paid	any	 income	 tax	 to	anybody,	 I	have	never	purchased	a	 ticket	 in	 thirty-five
years.	Somebody	purchases	it...	somebody	keeps	it...	I	don't	know.	I	don't	know
who	has	my	passport,	or	even	whether	it	exists	or	not!
I	depend	on	my	love,	and	I	trust	that	love	will	manage	things.	And	if	it	does	not
manage,	that	too	is	okay.
Vijayanand	does	not	know	that	the	commune	we	had	managed	in	America	was
no	ordinary	commune	--	perhaps	the	greatest	commune	that	has	ever	existed	in
the	 whole	 history.	 Sannyasins	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world	 had	 put	 at	 least	 three
hundred	million	dollars	 into	 the	 commune.	They	were	not	my	property...	 I	 am
giving	him	the	whole	list,	so	for	his	next	article	he	will	be	able	to	prove	that	"this
type	of	man	cannot	be	enlightened."
The	 commune	 had	 one	 hundred	 and	 twenty-six	 square	 miles	 of	 land	 --	 that
should	be	mentioned	as	my	property.	The	commune	had	one	hundred	more	cars
as	well	as	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces;	they	should	also	be	included	--	make	it	one
hundred	and	ninety-three.
The	 commune	 had	 also	 one	 hundred	 buses,	 twenty	 of	 them	 were	 fully	 air-
conditioned	--
that	should	also	be	included	in	my	property.	The	commune	had	five	airplanes	--
that	should	be	also	included.	The	commune	had	its	own	cranes,	its	own	tractors,
all	kinds	of	construction	instruments,	road-making	mechanisms	--	it	should	all	be
included.	Why	 only	 ninety-three	Rolls	Royces?	 --	why	make	me	 poor?	 It	 had
houses	 for	 five	 thousand	 people	 to	 live	 in,	 and	 it	 had	 temporary	 houses	 for
twenty	thousand	people,	ready	any	time	to	be	erected.	But	do	you	think	all	that
was	my	property?	Do	you	think	anything	here	is	my	property?
But	these	hungry,	starving,	greedy,	sexually	repressed	Indians,	but	pretending	to
be	spiritual,	are	worried	unnecessarily.	 If	 I	am	not	worried	--	and	I	have	never
gone	to	see	the	garage	where	those	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces	were.	The	director
of	that	garage	is	here,	and	I	have	been	telling	him,	"I	will	be	coming	some	day"	-
-	but	I	knew	and	he	knew	that	I	would	be	the	last	person	to	come	there.
He	made	a	beautiful	place	and	he	kept	those	cars	with	care,	with	such	care	that
the	president	of	Rolls	Royce	himself	had	come	to	see	and	was	amazed.	He	said,
"The	cars,	 the	way	you	are	keeping	 them	 --	 even	we	are	not	keeping	our	new
cars	with	such	care."
Now	 all	 those	 cars	 are	 being	 exhibited	 in	 the	 great	 cities	 of	 America,	 on
television,	 because	 one	 of	 the	 sannyasins	 had	 painted	 almost	 thirty	 cars	 in
psychedelic	colors.	All	those	thirty	cars	have	been	purchased	by	some	oil	king	in
the	Middle	East.
...	But	nothing	belonged	to	me.	I	have	never	looked	backwards.
Why	should	these	idiots	be	interested	that	I	had	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces?	They
want	 to	 prove	 that	 if	 a	 man	 has	 ninety-three	 Rolls	 Royces	 he	 cannot	 be
enlightened	 --	 that	 is	 the	 rationale	 of	 the	 whole	 article.	 If	 that	 is	 true,	 then
Vijayanand	 has	 to	 answer	 that	 if	Krishna	 can	 be	 a	 perfect	 incarnation	 of	God
with	 sixteen	 thousand	 wives,	 what	 is	 the	 problem	 with	 ninety-three	 Rolls
Royces?	--	at	least	they	are	not	sex	objects.	If	Krishna	and	Rama	and	Parusram,
Hindu	 gods,	 could	 have	 golden	 chariots,	 solid	 gold,	 and	 still	 be	 gods,	what	 is
wrong	in	having	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces?
And	they	were	not	mine	at	all.	 It	 is	a	strange	thing	that	 the	whole	news	media
goes	on	insisting	that	those	cars	were	owned	by	me.	If	those	cars	were	owned	by
me,	then	those	cars	should	be	here.	The	government	of	America	has	no	right	to
my	cars.
Those	watches	were	not	mine.	Now	they	are	going	to...	They	have	exhibited	first
those	watches	all	over	America.	One	cannot	 think	governments	and	politicians
can	be	so	ugly:	in	the	first	place	not	returning	those	watches	to	the	commune	--
because	it	was	commune	property.	If	it	was	my	property	I	could	have	claimed	it;
but	it	was	not	my	property,	so	naturally	I	cannot	claim	anything.	And	now	they
are	auctioning	those	watches	on	the	sixteenth	in	Christie's	in	New	York.
Vijayanand	 is	 trying	 to	 prove	 that	 I	 am	 not	 enlightened.	 But	 that	 should	 not
trouble	him....
Even	 if	 I	am	not	enlightened,	 I	am	not	a	problem	to	him:	I	don't	harass	him,	 I
don't	haunt	him.	But	for	eight	years	continuously	he	has	not	been	here,	and	he
has	been	haunted	by	me.	He	seems	to	be	something	of	a	nutcase.	He	should	just
look	into	the	Hindu	scriptures,	full	of	pornography;	he	should	look	at	the	highest
Hindu	trinity	of	gods:	all	have	wives,	and	all	are	so	infatuated	with	women	that
even	to	call	them	gods	is	simply	nonsense.
When	Shiva's	wife	died	--	he	was	one	of	the	trinity	--	he	proved	himself	almost
to	be	an	 insane	man.	 I	will	not	call	him	a	god;	 I	will	not	call	him	even	a	sane
man,	because	for	twelve	years	he	carried	the	dead	body	of	his	wife	all	around	the
country	in	search	of	some	physician	who	may	be	able	to	cure	her	of	death.	Now,
any	 idiot	 knows	 nobody	 is	 cured	 of	 death;	 death	 is	 not	 a	 disease,	 it	 has	 no
medicine.	 This	man	must	 have	 been	 insane.	 Even	 ordinary	 people	 have	more
sanity.	But	these	people	are	gods,	they	are	enlightened	by	their	very	birth!
One	should	always	remember:	people	who	live	in	glass	houses	should	not	throw
stones	at	anybody	else.	I	can	destroy	their	whole	Hindu	mythology	without	any
effort.	It	just	needs	exposure	--	it	is	so	full	of	bullshit.
And	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 have	 declared	 myself	 to	 have	 gone	 beyond
enlightenment	just	to	get	rid	of	all	these	idiots.	So	now	there	is	no	problem	for
them	--	I	have	already	gone	beyond.	They	don't	have	to	be	worried	about	me.	I
have	left	enlightenment	also	far	behind.	I	am	just	an	ordinary	man.
But	 something	 goes	 on	 hurting	 their	 egos.	 What	 hurts	 these	 people?	 --	 my
silence?	my	 love?	my	blissfulness?	Everything	hurts	 them,	because	everything
shows	that	they	are	living	in	gutters,	and	they	don't	know	the	flight	of	an	eagle	in
the	sky	across	the	sun.
But	when	I	find	people	here	too	behaving	that	way,	then	certainly	I	start	thinking
that	I	committed	a	mistake	by	becoming	enlightened.	I	could	have	lived	at	ease
without	 any	 idiot	 telling	me	 that	 he	 cannot	 forgive	me...	 and	 I	 have	 not	 done
anything	to	him.
I	will	tell	Avirbhava	to	find	this	Sarjano;	he	needs	to	apologize	to	Avirbhava.	It
is	just	out	of	my	love,	and	everybody	knows	it:	whenever	I	see	her,	I	like	to	scare
her	a	little	--	and	she	enjoys	it.	Many	times	I	wanted	to	pass	without	scaring	her,
and	I	felt,	"No,	 it	 is	not	good,	because	she	will	be	expecting	it	and	I	am	going
without	doing	it.	It	is	inhuman...."
But	what	Sarjano	has	the	right	to	say	any	such	thing	to	me?
You	should	be	completely	aware	here.
If	 you	 are	 here,	 you	 are	 here	 to	 learn	 something,	 not	 to	 teach.	 First	 become
capable	of	 teaching	 something,	 then	people	will	 come	 to	you.	But	 don't	 try	 to
impose	yourself	and	appoint	yourself	as	a	judge.
This	 man	 Vijayanand	 had	 come	 to	 the	 ashram	 just	 to	 hide,	 and	 out	 of	 my
compassion	 I	 allowed	 him.	 Otherwise	 I	 would	 have	 told	 him,	 "Just	 get	 lost.
There	is	no	place	for	you	here"...	because	of	what	he	had	done.	He	was	in	love
with	 his	 sister's	 daughter,	 which	 is	 absolutely	 against	 Hindu	 culture,	 Hindu
religion,	 Indian	 mind	 --	 and	 it	 is	 also	 wrong	 hygienically,	 scientifically,
medically.
I	support	the	Hindu	idea	because	not	only	is	it	morally	wrong,	it	is	scientifically
wrong	to	be	married	with	such	a	close	relationship.	Your	sister's	daughter	is	your
daughter:	 to	 be	married	 to	 your	 daughter...	 That's	why	 he	 had	 left	 Bombay	 --
because	he	was	harassed	and	tortured	by	his	family	and	by	others:	"What	are	you
doing...?"
I	 gave	 him	 shelter	 --	 that	 was	 my	 fault	 --	 I	 told	 him	 he	 could	 remain	 here,
nobody	would	bother	here.	Perhaps	he	has	not	been	able	to	forgive	me	because	I
know	 the	 secret,	 and	 I	 know	 the	 real	 reason	was	 not	 any	 spirituality,	 not	 any
meditation,	nothing	but	a	shelter.
He	has	not	been	able	 to	forgive	me;	otherwise,	 for	eight	years	continuously	he
goes	on	writing	for	no	reason.	This	is	for	the	first	time...	I	thought	it	is	better	to
say	 something,	 because	 this	 idiot	 is	 not	 going	 to	 stop	without	 hammering	 his
skull	as	hard	as	possible.
And	what	did	he	do	here?	Out	of	 fear	he	sent	his	sister's	daughter	 to	England,
because	the	whole	family	was	against,	and	the	whole	community	where	he	lived
and	the	whole	industry	--	he	is	a	director	in	the	film	industry	--	was	against.	All
his	brothers	are	famous	actors,	directors	--	they	were	all	against.	So	he	sent	the
girl	 away,	 and	 here	 he	 married	 another	 girl	 just	 to	 cool	 things	 down,	 so	 the
Bombay	people	start	 thinking,	"Now	the	problem	is	 finished,	he	has	married	a
girl."	And	that	was	a	pure	deception,	an	ugly,	inhuman	behavior.
He	married	the	girl	just	to	cool	down	the	heat	that	was	against	him;	and	once	the
heat	was	 cooled	 down	 he	 dropped	 the	 girl.	He	 called	 the	 girl	whom	he	 really
wanted	to	marry,	his	own	sister's	daughter,	and	he	married	her	--	he	committed
bigamy	too.	The	girl	he	married	belonged	to	a	very	high-class	family	in	Delhi.
She	had	come	here	to	meditate,	but	got	infatuated	with	the	idea....	He	bribed	her,
he	blackmailed	her	by	telling	her	 that	he	was	a	director	--	and	he	 is	a	director,
and	a	good	director	--	that	he	will	make	her	a	heroine	in	his	films.
This	 idea	was	 the	 bribe,	 so	 she	was	 immediately	 ready	 to	marry	 him.	He	 got
married	 to	 her,	 and	 after	 the	marriage	 he	 sent	 her	 back	 to	 her	 home	 in	Delhi
saying,	"I	will	come	and	take	you	back...."	He	never	went	there.	On	the	contrary,
the	mother	of	the	girl	came	to	me	saying,	"We	don't	want	this	third-rate	man	to
be	married	 to	our	daughter."	They	were	very	 rich	people;	 the	daughter's	 father
was	ambassador	 in	Russia.	She	said,	"If	her	 father	comes	 to	know,	he	will	kill
me.	She	is	my	one	and	only	child."
I	said,	"I	will	try."	But	there	was	no	need	to	try.	Vijayanand	escaped	from	here.
He	married	the	other	girl,	and	because	the	first	marriage	was	not	registered,	he
simply	 went	 to	 the	 priest	 who	 had	 married	 them,	 bribed	 him,	 and	 burnt	 the
marriage	 certificate.	 So	 without	 a	 divorce	 he	 has	 married	 his	 own	 sister's
daughter.
Now	all	 this	 only	 I	 know.	That	 is	 the	wound	 that	 he	 is	 carrying	 against	me.	 I
have	 never	 told	 anybody....	 But	 he	 has	 been	 insisting	 for	 eight	 years
continuously;	 now	 comes	 the	 limit.	Now	 I	 expose	 him.	The	 family	 of	 the	 girl
that	he	has	deceived	remains	silent,	because	they	do	not	want	to	create	any	stir.
The	father	was	a	politician	and	an	ambassador,	and	even	to	bring	it	to	the	court
would	have	condemned	the	girl	and	would	have	created	 trouble	for	 the	family,
for	her	marriage.	It	was	already	silent...	because	Vijayanand	got	married	again,
and	 he	 denied	 that	 he	 had	 married	 the	 first	 girl	 --	 because	 he	 had	 burnt	 the
certificate.
Knowing	that	I	am	the	only	person	who	can	expose	him	hurts,	he	goes	on	and	on
writing	against	me,	for	no	reason,	just	to	create	a	defense	around	himself.	I	was
not	going	to	attack	him:	I	know	human	stupidity,	I	know	human	insanity,	I	know
human	frailty	and	weakness	and	I	have	every	compassion	for	it.
But	I	will	not	tolerate	anybody	here	in	the	commune	behaving	as	if	he	owns	the
space.	If	ever	again	I	get	any	letter	like	this,	you	will	be	turned	out	of	the	door.
Whoever	he	is	--
because	 he	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 tricky	 --	 one	 letter	 he	writes	which	 is	 absolutely
ugly,	 then	 another	 letter	 he	 writes	 praising	 me,	 and	 great	 poetry	 and	 great
gratefulness...	this	Italian	spaghetti	cunningness	will	not	do	here!
Dhyan	Smita,	you	are	saying,	"When	you	were	talking	about	sex	and	meditation
the	other	evening	I	got	mixed	up."	The	statement	looks	as	if	you	were	trying	to
do	what	I	had	said	before;	otherwise,	why	should	you	get	mixed	up?	What	got
mixed	up?	--	sex	and	meditation?
What	 got	 mixed	 up?	 Just	 one	 thought	 that	 you	 had	 heard	 before	 and	 another
thought	that	you	have	heard	now	--	only	two	thoughts.	But	this	place	is	not	for
thinking;	 this	 place	 is	 for	 going	 beyond	 thinking.	 And	 if	 you	 had	 meditated,
there	would	have	been	no	mix-up.
You	are	 saying,	 "So	often	before	 I	have	heard	you	 say..."	So	often!	 --	you	are
saying	exactly	the	same	as	the	German	sannyasin	was	doing:	so	often	he	became
enlightened!
"So	often	before	I	have	heard	you	say:	`Let	your	sex	be	your	meditation.'"	What
have	you	done	about	it?	Today	I	want	to	say	to	you,	Let	your	meditation	be	your
sex	--	no	other	sex,	just	meditation.
"Also,	how	do	your	latest	suggestions	fit	into	the	Tantra	Visions?"	Who	bothers?
--	when	 I	was	 talking	 on	Tantra	 you	 did	 not	 listen.	Now	 I'm	 talking	 on	 other
things,	 you	 are	 not	 listening.	 Tomorrow	 I	may	 not	 be	 talking	 about	 the	 same
things:	are	you	going	just	to	listen?
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned	 I	 have	 never	 contradicted	myself.	 Certainly	when	 I
speak	on	Tantra,	I	speak	not	as	a	scholar	on	Tantra	or	about	Tantra;	I	speak	as	an
insider	who	knows	what	Tantra	 is.	When	 I	 speak	 on	meditation,	 I	 don't	 speak
about	meditation;	I	speak	about	my	experience	of	meditation.
Whatever	I	speak,	I	never	speak	without	the	support	of	my	own	experience,	and
in	 my	 experience	 there	 is	 no	 problem:	 the	 Tantra	 vision,	 meditation,	 sex,
enlightenment	--	all	come	into	one	single	organic	unity.
But	that	does	not	mean...	According	to	you,	do	you	want	me	to	say	everything
every	 day	 the	 same?	 Then	 what	 is	 the	 need	 for	 me	 to	 be	 here?	 Just	 a	 tape
recorder	will	do.
I	am	not	a	tape	recorder.	I	am	a	living	human	being,	growing	continuously,	and
according	 to	 my	 growth	 my	 answers	 will	 grow,	 will	 become	 different,	 have
different	colors,	will	have	more	depth,	will	have	new	angles,	new	dimensions.	I
am	 not	 a	 system	 maker;	 I	 am	 simply	 an	 explorer	 of	 the	 whole	 field	 of
consciousness.
So	 I	 will	 make	 all	 kinds	 of	 statements.	Whichever	 suits	 you,	 do	 it.	 Don't	 be
worried	 about	 my	 being	 contradictory,	 because	 that	 is	 my	 problem.	 If	 I	 am
contradictory	you	are	not	going	to	be	responsible	for	it.	I	will	arrange	on	the	last
judgment	 day	 with	 God,	 who	 is	 contradictory:	 am	 I	 contradictory	 or	 is	 he
contradictory?	 But	 that	 is	 my	 problem.	 God	 will	 not	 ask	 you	 about	 my
contradictions,	he	will	ask	about	your	life,	how	you	have	lived	it	--
have	you	lived	it	at	all?
Always	remember	 it	as	a	criterion:	 if	 there	 is	a	God	and	on	the	final	 judgment
day	he	asks	you,	What	is	in	your	hands?	--	they	will	be	just	empty.	You	will	not
have	even	a	few	flowers	to	offer	him,	because	your	concerns	are	all	absolutely
unnecessary,	irrelevant.
Your	concerns	should	be	absolutely	just	you,	and	nobody	else.
First	solve	your	own	Gordian	knot,	first	cut	yourself	asunder,	first	explode	your
own	potentiality;	and	then	you	have	the	right	to	advise,	you	have	the	right	to	say
something	 about	 these	 great	 things	 --	 meditation	 or	 Tantra	 or	 enlightenment.
Right	now	you	don't	have	in	any	way,	any	right	at	all,	to	say	anything.
Do	something!	Be	something!	Then	your	very	being	will	resolve	many	problems
that	right	now	you	feel	are	great	problems.	You	think	this	is	a	great	problem,	and
you	say,	"I	am	puzzled."	Why	should	you	be	puzzled?	I	should	be	puzzled,	it	is
my	contradiction,	not	yours.	But	I	am	not	puzzled...	nothing	puzzles	me.
A	man	was	on	safari	in	Africa,	but	he	lost	his	guide	and	wandered	deep	into	the
jungle.
Suddenly	he	was	surrounded	by	hostile	natives.	He	was	at	a	loss	what	to	do.	But
then	he	remembered	a	trick	he	had	seen	in	an	old	movie.
He	dug	into	his	pocket,	pulled	out	his	cigarette	lighter,	flicked	it	once	and	a	big
flame	popped	up.
"It	is	a	miracle,"	shouted	the	chief,	collapsing	to	his	knees.	"I	have	never	seen	a
lighter	that	worked	first	time."
If	you	can	enjoy	me,	that	is	enough.	If	you	can	celebrate	me,	that	is	enough.
A	 traveling	salesman,	 staying	overnight	 in	a	hotel,	 found	a	BIBLE	by	his	bed.
On	the	front	page	was	this	inscription:	"If	you	are	sick,	read	page	forty-two.	If
you	are	worried	about	your	family,	read	page	sixty-eight.	If	you	are	lonely,	read
page	ninety-two."
He	 was	 lonely,	 so	 he	 opened	 to	 page	 ninety-two	 and	 read	 it.	 When	 he	 had
finished	he	noticed	on	the	bottom	of	the	page	the	hand-written	words:	"If	you	are
still	lonely,	call	62485	and	ask	for	Gloria."
I	call	this	kind	of	BIBLE	really	holy:	this	is	the	service	of	the	poor,	of	the	lonely,
of	the	lost.
Here,	you	are	to	rejoice.	This	is	not	an	academical	institute;	it	is	just	a	divinely
mad	communion	of	people	who	know	how	to	love,	how	to	laugh,	how	to	sing,
how	to	dance.
And	you	bring	academic	questions,	 that	I	said	something	and	now	I	am	saying
something	else....
If	you	go	on	looking	that	way	you	will	simply	waste	your	life,	because	I	will	go
on	saying	anything	every	day.	But	whatever	I	say	is	relevant	to	somebody.	If	you
watch	 carefully,	 you	 should	 choose	whatever	 is	 relevant	 to	 you,	 and	 not	 only
keep	it	in	your	memory,	but	materialize	into	a	realization.
Just	 a	 joke	 to	make	 this	 silence	 deeper....	 First	 experience	 this	 silence,	 so	 that
after	the	laughter	you	can	experience	the	deepness	of	it...	how	laughter	can	make
silence	 deeper,	 how	 laughter	 can	 make	 love	 deeper,	 how	 laughter	 can	 make
meditation	deeper.	But	first,	feel	it....
A	traveling	salesman	was	passing	through	a	small	town	in	Virginia	when	he	saw
a	little	old	man	sitting	in	a	rocking	chair	on	the	porch	of	his	house.	The	little	man
looked	so	contented	that	the	salesman	could	not	resist	going	over	and	talking	to
him.
"You	look	as	if	you	don't	have	a	care	in	the	world,"	the	salesman	said,	"what	is
your	formula	for	a	long	and	happy	life?"
"Well,"	replied	the	little	old	man,	"I	smoke	six	packs	of	cigars	a	day,	I	drink,	I
enjoy	a	large	bottle	of	whiskey	every	four	hours,	and	six	cases	of	beer	a	week.	I
play	the	guitar	and	I	go	out	chasing	women	every	night."
"My	 goodness,"	 exclaimed	 the	 salesman.	 "That's	 just	 great!	 And	 how	 old	 are
you?"
The	little	man	took	the	cigarette	out	of	his	mouth	and	said,	"Twenty-five."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Drunk	with	awareness
11	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709110
ShortTitle:
PILGR10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
123
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	BE	IN	SYNCHRONICITY	WITH	YOU.	WOULD	YOU
MIND
TELLING	ME	WHAT	TIME	 IT	 IS,	 SO	THAT	 I	CAN	SET	MY	WATCH	BY
YOURS?
Anand	Vimal,	it	is	not	difficult	for	me	to	tell	the	time.	But	keeping	your	watch	in
synchronicity	 with	 my	 watch	 is	 not	 the	 real	 thing;	 your	 heart	 has	 to	 be	 in
synchronicity	with	my	heart.	The	watch	will	not	help.	Just	for	your	consolation,
on	my	watch	it	is	eight-ten.	But	you	have	to	synchronize	with	my	heart,	with	my
being.
And	I	know	you	are	coming	along,	slow	but	steady...	and	the	moment	will	come
when	your	heart	will	beat	with	the	same	rhythm	as	my	heart.
Your	question	is,	in	a	way,	significant.	Superficially,	it	is	stupid...	but	there	have
been	many	cases	of	enlightened	people	whose	watches	stopped	when	they	died.
Perhaps	their	disciples	could	not	manage	to	synchronize	with	the	master's	heart,
but	their	watch	did.
One	 famous	 Zen	 master,	 Bokuju	 even	 told	 the	 people	 that,	 "when	 my	 watch
stops,	you	can	understand	I	am	gone.	It	beats	with	my	heart."
But	this	is	not	the	case	with	me.	I	am	in	every	way	eccentric.	Automatic	watches
simply	stop	on	my	hand	--	because	an	automatic	watch	needs	some	movement,
and	I	am	so	still.
Finally,	 I	 had	 to	 change	 from	 automatic	 watches	 and	 turn	 to	 quartz	 watches,
because	whether	I	am	dead	or	alive	they	will	continue.	A	battery	does	not	know
how	to	synchronize,	but	the	automatic	watch	needs	movement.
But	I	rarely	make	any	movement	and	I	don't	keep	the	watch	on	my	hand	twenty-
four	hours	--	just	when	I	come	to	you,	so	that	I	remember	now	it	is	morning	and
I	 have	 to	 go	 to	 you;	 and	 in	 the	 evening	when	 I	 come	 to	 you...	 just	 these	 four
hours	the	watch	is	on	my	hand.
The	remaining	time	I	don't	need	to	know	what	day	it	is,	what	date	it	is,	what	time
it	is.
My	people	love	me	so	much	that	they	know	at	what	time	they	have	to	serve	my
lunch;	at	what	 time	 they	have	 to	put	me	 in	 the	bed;	at	what	 time	 they	have	 to
wake	me	up	and	push	me	into	the	bathroom.
And	as	far	as	days	and	dates	are	concerned,	they	are	absolutely	irrelevant	to	me.
I	have	no	need	of	any	calendar.	Even	Neelam	reminds	me	about	the	year,	that	it
is	1987;	otherwise,	I	have	no	concern.	I	am	not	in	a	hurry,	not	going	towards	a
goal.
Once	in	a	while,	while	speaking,	I	look	at	my	watch;	you	must	be	thinking	that	I
am	 looking	 at	 the	 time,	 but	 really	 I	 am	 looking	 to	 see	whether	 the	watch	 has
stopped	or	not.
If	it	has	stopped,	it	is	better	to	stop	now;	if	it	is	still	running,	I	can	manage.
It	was	 a	 great	 surprise	 to	 scientists	why	many	 people's	watches	 stopped	when
they	died,	exactly	at	that	moment.	Those	watches	were	running	in	deep	harmony
with	 their	heart;	 slowly,	 slowly	 those	watches	had	become	 in	a	dance	with	 the
rhythm	of	the	heart.
But,	Vimal,	making	your	watch	 run	exactly	as	mine	will	not	be	of	much	help.
You	have	to	put	your	heart	with	my	heart,	you	have	to	learn	to	dance	with	my
being	--	and	that	I	cannot	do.	I	can	provide	 the	opportunity,	 then	it	 is	all	up	 to
your	intelligence,	to	take	it	or	not	to	take	it.
If	 you	 want	 to	 be	 in	 synchronicity	 with	 me,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 as	 drunk	 with
awareness	as	I	am.	It	is	a	strange	drunkenness:	you	are	fully	aware	and	still	you
are	as	drunk	with	 joy,	blissfulness	as	no	drunkard	can	be.	You	 just	 look	at	my
eyes:	anybody	will	think	I	am	drunk.	You	just	listen	to	my	words:	anybody	will
think	I	am	drunk.
I	have	not	drunk	even	water	for	twenty	years!	I	have	been	traveling	around	the
country,	 and	 this	 country	 has	 such	 an	 ugly	 culture	 that	 in	 the	 same	 rivers
buffaloes	 are	 enjoying	 their	 bath,	 donkeys	 are	 drinking,	 dogs	 are	 pissing	 and
men	are	standing	amidst	them,	chanting	to	God	--	and	that	water	is	being	used.	It
is	absolutely	polluted.
I	have	heard	that	America	will	destroy	itself	by	its	nuclear	weapons,	Russia	will
follow	 the	 same	 route,	 England	 will	 die	 because	 of	 its	 hypocrisy	 and	 its
seriousness	 and	 France	 will	 die	 from	 its	 sexuality	 and	 sensuality.	 The	 person
who	was	telling	me,	I	asked	him	--
"Because	I	am	here	now	in	India,	tell	me	of	what	India	is	going	to	die."	He	said,
"Shitting	all	over	the	country!"
India	 is	 a	 big	 toilet.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 freedom	 India	 has	 --	 freedom	 to	 shit
anywhere.	 I	wonder	why	 they	 have	 not	 included	 it	 in	 the	 constitution?	Where
they	talk	about	freedom	of	speech	--	although	nobody	has	anything	to	say	--	they
should	 have	 mentioned	 that	 everybody	 is	 free	 to	 urinate	 anywhere	 he	 wants;
everybody	 is	 free	 to	 shit	 anywhere	he	wants.	Those	would	have	been	 realistic
considerations.
Freedom	of	speech	in	this	country?	--	I	have	not	seen	a	single	person	who	can
claim	 that	 he	 is	 a	 free	 thinker.	 They	 are	 learned,	 they	 are	 scholars,	 they	 can
repeat	scriptures,	but	free	thinking?	--	 that	does	not	exist,	has	not	existed	since
Gautam	Buddha.	He	was	 the	 last	 free	 thinker	 in	 this	 country.	 For	 twenty-five
centuries,	nobody	has	bothered	to	think.
In	fact,	nobody	has	 time;	raising	children,	creating	more	misery,	more	poverty,
who	has	time	to	think?
I	 am	 certainly	mad,	 because	 I	 am	 telling	 you	 to	 go	 beyond	 thinking,	 and	 you
have	 not	 even	 started	 thinking!	 Here	 my	 work	 is	 first	 to	 make	 you	 start
thinking...	just	to	drop	it.
You	 cannot	 drop	 anything	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 it.	 A	 beggar	 cannot	 say,	 "I	 have
renounced	 the	 world."	 The	 fact	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	 the	 world	 has	 renounced
him.	Only	 an	 emperor	 can	 say,	 "I	 have	 renounced	 the	world"	 --	 and	 it	makes
sense.
A	few	suggestions	for	you,	Vimal.
Two	drunks	were	staggering	along	the	railway	tracks.	"My	God!"	said	the	first.
"I've	never	climbed	so	many	steps	in	my	whole	life!"
"It's	not	the	steps	that	bother	me,"	replied	the	other.	"It's	the	low	hand-rails."
Just	get	a	little	drunk!	This	temple	belongs	to	drunkards...	and	I	will	know	before
you	know	whether	your	heart	is	in	synchronicity	with	me	or	not.	You	have	come
a	long	long	way	--	just	a	few	steps	more.
The	politician	was	trying	to	calm	a	group	of	angry	farmers	because	he	had	not
fulfilled	any	of	his	promises.
"If	you	put	a	bull	 into	a	field	of	cows	one	night,"	he	declared,	"you	would	not
expect	to	get	a	lot	of	new-born	calves	in	the	morning,	would	you?"
"No,"	said	a	voice	from	the	back	of	the	hall,	"but	you	would	certainly	expect	to
see	a	lot	of	contented	faces."
Just	looking	at	you,	I	know	how	you	are	growing.	Just	the	contented	faces,	just
the	silence	surrounding	you...	just	the	depth	of	your	eyes	going	deeper,	becoming
oceanic...
just	your	gratitude	to	existence	reaching	to	its	peak.	This	is	 the	language	that	I
understand.
If	somebody	comes	to	me	and	says	that	he	is	absolutely	in	synchronicity	with	me
--	that	won't	do,	because	that	is	not	the	language	of	synchronicity.	Synchronicity
speaks	itself.
There	is	an	ancient	proverb,	"Lies	have	to	speak;	truth	remains	silent."	But	lies
deceive	you	forever,	and	the	silent	truth	can	become	your	eternal	treasure.	It	has
not	said	anything.
In	 deep	 silence	 you	 all	 synchronize	 with	 me,	 because	 silence	 knows	 no
distinctions.	 In	 laughing	 together	 you	 synchronize	 with	 me,	 because	 laughter
knows	no	boundaries.	In	understanding	what	I	am	saying	and	where	I	am	leading
you,	you	synchronize	with	me.
Watches	won't	do,	Vimal.	In	fact,	you	don't	want	to	synchronize	with	the	watch;
you	want	to	synchronize	with	me.	That	happens	as	your	meditation	deepens,	as
your	love	becomes	unconditional,	without	any	expectations.	Once	it	happens,	it
has	happened	forever.
And	 the	 synchronicity,	 the	 harmony	 with	 the	 master,	 does	 not	 think	 of
contradictions,	 inconsistencies;	 those	are	all	 far	below	 in	 the	dark	valleys.	The
moment	you	synchronize,	you	start	rising	towards	the	sunlit	peaks,	towards	the
stars.
It	will	 happen....	 The	way	 I	 have	 been	watching	 you,	 it	 is	 already	 happening.
Don't	bother	about	watches	--	because	what	will	you	do	if	I	don't	have	a	watch?
In	fact,	the	watch	I	have	is	not	mine.	Even	if	you	synchronize	with	it,	you	will	be
synchronizing	with	somebody	else,	whose	watch	I	am	wearing.	People	give	me
watches	 to	 wear	 while	 they	 are	 here,	 just	 to	 bless	 their	 watches,	 so	 they	 can
rejoice	when	they	go	that	they	are	going	with	something,	some	heartbeats	of	me.
This	is	difficult	for	the	outside	world	to	understand.
Gayan	makes	my	clothes.	She	could	have	been	paid	highly	anywhere;	 she	 is	a
perfect	 seamstress.	Here	 she	 gets	 nothing	 except	my	 love.	 She	works	 day	 and
night	--	but	perhaps	she	has	got	 the	 insight	 that	 there	 is	nothing	more	valuable
than	the	love	of	one	who	has	arrived.	His	love	will	pull	you	also	with	invisible
strings	to	the	whole.
Everything	I	have	does	not	belong	to	me.	My	shoes	Arpita	goes	on	making;	my
hats	 Veena	 goes	 on	 making.	 They	 rejoice	 that	 I	 am	 wearing	 their	 hats,	 their
shoes,	 their	dresses.	Somebody	brings	a	car	and	 is	grateful	 that	 I	am	using	 the
car	 for	 coming	 to	Buddha	Hall.	 I	 could	have	 come	walking	 --	 it	 is	 not	 such	 a
great	distance,	just	from	one	house	to	another	house	--	but	then	I	would	not	have
made	somebody	happy	without	any	effort.
It	is	difficult	for	the	outsiders	to	understand	me.	They	have	never	known	such	a
thing	--
that	 anybody	will	 give	me	 their	 watches	 just	 to	 wear	 so	 that	 the	watch	 starts
vibrating	with	my	heart,	and	then	it	becomes	sacred	to	them.
One	 of	 the	 best	 television	 interviewers	 in	America,	 Ted	Koppel,	 asked	me,	 "I
cannot	 believe	 why	 people	 should	 go	 on	 giving	 you	 watches	 to	 wear,	 Rolls
Royces	to	drive	in.
And	not	one	but	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces,	and	thousands	of	watches!"
I	said,	"You	don't	know	the	ways	of	love."
He	said,	"But	I	have	friends...."
I	said,	"A	friend	is	one	thing	--	you	don't	have	a	master.	You	have	never	loved
somebody	 more	 than	 yourself.	 The	 moment	 you	 love	 somebody	 more	 than
yourself,	then	you	are	ready	to	do	anything."
It	does	not	matter	whether	it	is	valuable	or	not	valuable...	people	from	around	the
world	go	on	sending	me	strange	 things,	knowing	perfectly	well	what	 I	will	do
with	them.	Just	the	other	day	somebody	sent	a	beautiful	stone	from	Mount	Sinai,
where	Moses	met	God,	according	 to	 the	 theology	of	 the	Jews,	 so	Mount	Sinai
has	become	a	holy	place.
I	respect	the	idea,	although	the	story	may	be	false.	The	story	may	be	just	a	story,
but	the	person	who	sends	a	stone,	packaged	beautifully,	has	a	tremendous	love	in
his	heart.	What	should	he	give	to	me?	--	everything	is	trivial.	But	this	stone	from
Mount	Sinai,	which	is	the	only	place	God	has	ever	spoken	to	any	man,	is	holy.
Although	it	is	just	a	stone,	because	it	is	holy,	somebody	sends	it	to	me.
I	go	on	receiving	all	kinds	of	things,	and	I	will	go	on	distributing	them	to	others.
What	will	 I	do	with	 them?	--	 I	have	come	naked	and	I	will	go	naked	from	the
world.	And	I	am	still	naked	under	my	clothes,	I	know	it!
I	 have	been	 seeing	you,	watching	you,	Vimal.	Perhaps	you	need	 a	 few	 sutras:
they	bring	you	closer	to	me.	Seriousness	separates;	laughter	brings	closer.
Never	put	off	until	tomorrow	what	you	can	enjoy	today....
If	 you	 enjoy	 it	 today,	 you	 can	 enjoy	 it	 tomorrow	 too.	 Why	 postpone	 it?
Postponement	is	a	disease	of	the	mind;	it	always	goes	on	saying,	"Tomorrow"...
particularly	 for	 significant	 things.	Any	 trivia	 and	 rubbish	 it	 will	 do	 today,	 the
significant	 can	 be	 done	 tomorrow.	 But	 that	 tomorrow	 never	 comes:	 all	 that
comes	 is	always	 today.	And	if	you	have	become	accustomed	to	postponing	for
tomorrow,	you	have	postponed	your	life	completely.
If	 you	 have	 two	 wives,	 that	 is	 bigamy;	 if	 you	 have	 many	 wives,	 that	 is
polygamy;	if	you	have	one	wife,	that	is	monotony.
To	avoid	all	 these	 troubles,	I	don't	have	a	wife!	Polygamy	will	drive	you	mad;
bigamy	is	enough	to	destroy	your	whole	life	--	and	even	monotony	is	powerful
enough....
In	my	vision	of	a	future	humanity,	there	will	not	be	polygamy,	there	will	not	be
bigamy,	there	will	not	be	monotony.	Individuals	will	relate	with	each	other,	but
will	not	create	any	relationship.	They	will	remain	free,	independent	individuals.
Now,	Chamanlal	is	sitting	before	me	--	he	is	from	Amritsar	--	and	he	loves	me
immensely.	Very	few	people	have	loved	me	so	deeply.	I	used	to	stay	in	Amritsar
in	his	house.	He	is	suffering	from	monotony:	it	has	taken	all	his	life	and	all	his
juice	and	all	his	joy.	I	have	stayed	in	many,	many	houses	all	around	the	country,
and	it	is	always	monotony.
One	of	my	friends	was	 rich	enough...	 I	asked	him,	"What	are	you	going	 to	do
with	so	much	money?	Whether	you	have	nine	crore	rupees	or	ten	crore	rupees	it
won't	make	any	difference.	With	 ten	crore	 rupees	you	will	not	be	happier	 than
you	are	with	nine	crore	rupees."
He	said,	"That's	right."
I	said,	"Now	you	are	fifty.	This	is	the	time	to	turn	towards	the	mountains."
He	was	a	courageous	man;	he	stopped	all	his	businesses,	all	his	factories.	When
he	met	me	next	time,	he	said,	"You	have	put	me	in	such	trouble."
I	 said,	 "Trouble?...	 I	was	 thinking	you	were	 troubled	continuously	 --	 financing
this,	 financing	 that,	 taking	 loans	 from	 the	 banks.	 I	 have	 put	 you	 out	 of	 all
trouble."
He	said,	"That's	okay	--	but	now	I	am	suffering	from	monotony.	I	have	only	one
wife	and	for	thirty	years...	just	seeing	each	other	is	enough	torture!"
I	told	him,	"Take	a	beautiful	bungalow	in	a	hill	station	and	move	there."
He	said,	"I	can	--	but	you	will	have	to	come	with	me.	If	you	are	there	then	I	don't
care.
But	if	my	wife	and	I	are	there,	we	will	kill	each	other."	They	loved	each	other	--
it	 is	 not	 that	 they	were	 not	 loving	 people.	 They	 loved	 each	 other,	 but	 I	 could
understand	his	psychology.
Having	nothing	to	do,	he	opened	a	dharamshala	--	a	free	house	with	two	hundred
bedrooms,	for	people	who	come	to	visit	in	his	city	to	stay	free	of	charge	--	just	to
create	some	work	for	himself	and	to	avoid	his	wife	the	whole	day.	So	early	in	the
morning	he	would	go	out	--	and	he	was	not	earning	anything...	on	the	contrary	he
was	 losing,	but	he	had	enough	to	 lose.	He	would	return	at	 ten	or	eleven	 in	 the
night.
His	wife	told	me,	"You	have	stopped	him	from	earning	money.	Now	he	is	losing
money,	but	 still	 the	 same	 trouble;	 in	 the	morning	he	goes,	 and	 in	 the	night	he
comes	back."
I	said,	"It	is	not	the	factories,	it	is	you.	Do	you	really	want	him	--	be	frank	and
sincere	--
to	to	twenty-four	hours	in	the	house?"
She	said,	"No.	I	have	taken	a	vow	not	to	lie:	it	is	good	for	an	hour	or	two	that	we
meet,	 but	 twenty-four	 hours...	 then	 it	 becomes	 heavy.	 Then	 we	 start	 torturing
each	other,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	it	is	useless."
Every	 small	 child	 wonders	 why	 his	 father	 did	 not	 go	 into	 the	 ice	 cream
business....
The	great	truth	is	that	women	actually	like	men,	and	men	can	never	believe	it.
Do	you	really	believe	your	girlfriend	likes	you?	When	you	see	your	face	in	the
mirror,	you	cannot	like	yourself.	Either	the	girl	is	an	idiot,	or...	why	should	she
like	and	love	you?
But	 the	reverse	 is	also	 true:	no	woman	believes	 that	her	 lover	 really	 loves	her.
She	thinks	his	desire	is	 to	possess,	she	thinks	his	one-pointed	goal	is	 to	have	a
sexual	object,	available	twenty-four	hours.	Prostitutes	are	costly,	and	you	cannot
depend	 on	 them.	 They	 are	 temporary	 --	 temporary	 structures;	 you	 need	 a
permanent,	 guaranteed	 relationship	 with	 a	 woman	who	 cannot	 deny	 you.	 The
women	always	suspect	they	are	being	used....	I	cannot	say	that	they	are	wrong,
neither	can	I	say	that	the	men	are	wrong.
Love	can	exist	only	after	meditation,	not	before	it.
That	 is	 a	 simple	 existential	 law.	Before	meditation	 --	 only	 lust,	 only	 sexuality.
Before	 meditation	 you	 are	 an	 animal	 and	 not	 really	 a	 human	 being.	 With
meditation	 a	 transformation	 comes:	 you	 become	 human,	 and	 out	 of	 your
humanness,	love	flows.
And	 when	 the	 meditation	 reaches	 to	 the	 highest	 peak,	 the	 Everest	 of
consciousness,	 then	 a	 new	 change	 happens.	 In	 science	 they	 say	 that	 a	 certain
quantity	brings	a	qualitative	change.	You	boil	water	up	to	ninety-nine	point	nine
degrees,	and	it	will	not	start	evaporating.	It	will	evaporate	only	at	one	hundred
degrees.	Now,	nobody	can	say	why.
This	makes	life	mysterious.
At	a	certain	height,	meditation	--	when	it	becomes	so	easy	for	you	to	move	into
it	 that	 no	 thought	 hinders	 --	 becomes	 as	 easy	 as	 breathing.	 Then	 comes	 a
transformation,	a	second	transformation:	you	are	enlightened.
And	 parallel	 to	 it,	 from	 sex	 through	 meditation	 you	 move	 to	 love.	 From
enlightenment	you	will	become	love.	It	will	not	be	a	question	of	loving	anybody;
it	will	be	simply	a	question	of	your	presence.	Your	presence	will	be	love.
The	 moment	 one	 man's	 presence	 becomes	 love,	 he	 has	 fulfilled	 his	 destiny.
There	is	nothing	more	beyond	it.	He	has	come	to	the	beyond.
Home	is	the	only	place	where	you	can	scratch	where	it	itches.
A	diplomat	is	a	man	who	can	make	his	wife	believe	she	would	look	fat	in	a	mink
coat.
Women	like	strong,	silent	men	because	they	think	they	are	listening.
Never	look	back	--	something	might	be	gaining	on	you.
I	was	twelve	years	old	before	I	found	out	that	"Shut	Up"	was	not	my	real	name.
It	always	pays	to	smile	in	the	morning,	because	later	in	the	day	you	may	not	feel
like	it.
Telling	lies	is	a	fault	in	a	boy,	an	art	in	a	lover,	an	accomplishment	in	a	bachelor,
and	second	nature	in	a	married	woman.
Vimal,	you	need	not	worry.	Although	I	may	not	be	able	to	see	all	the	faces	who
are	around	here,	I	can	certainly	feel	their	heartbeat,	whether	they	are	part	of	my
silence	or	just	spectators,	or	they	have	come	here	just	out	of	curiosity,	or	they	are
government	CID
informers.	I	can	feel	at	least	the	heartbeat.
There	 are	 police	 officers,	 and	 naturally,	 they	 are	 the	most	 afraid	 people	 here:
somebody	may	recognize	them.	They	have	changed	their	dress...	but	you	cannot
change	 your	 heart.	 I	 don't	 care	 about	 your	 dress	 and	 about	 your	 uniform;	my
concern	is	with	your	inner	being.
That	you	cannot	change,	because	you	don't	know	about	it.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
FROM	 SOME	 BOOK	 I	 REMEMBER	 THIS	 SENTENCE:	 "FOR	 THE
PILGRIM	TO
REACH	 HIS	 DESTINY,	 IT'S	 ESSENTIAL	 TO	 MOVE	 INSTANTLY,	 BUT
WITHOUT
HURRY.	 IT	 IS	 SO	 URGENT	 THAT	 HE	 REACHES	 HIS	 DESTINY,	 THAT
THERE	IS
NO	TIME	TO	HURRY."
COULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SPEAK	 ABOUT	 IF	 THERE	 IS	 ANY	 URGENCY,
AND	HOW
THAT	RELATES	TO	WAITING?
Rabia,	 you	 have	 got	 caught	 into	 a	 verbiage;	 otherwise	 the	 message	 is	 very
simple.	And	it	should	be	simple	to	you,	because	that's	what	I'm	saying	in	many,
many	ways.
First...	 the	 situation	 is	 every	 moment	 urgent	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 you
cannot	rely	on	the	next	moment;	whether	it	will	come	or	not	is	not	in	your	hands.
So	every	moment	we	are	 living	 in	urgency.	 If	you	want	 to	do	something,	do	 it
now	and	here,	because	how	can	you	postpone	it?
Secondly,	you	say,	"From	some	book	I	remember	this	sentence:	`For	the	pilgrim
to	reach	his	destiny,	it	is	essential	to	move	INSTANTLY...'"	Certainly	if	you	want
to	 come	 to	 yourself	 you	 should	 not	 lose	 a	 single	 moment,	 because	 there	 is
always	a	possibility	that	death	may	interfere.	But	you	must	have	got	into	trouble
because	 the	 sentence	 certainly	 comes	 from	 some	 great	 mystic...	 "but	 without
hurry."
Move	instantly	because	it	is	urgent,	but	without	hurry,	because	in	hurry	you	are
not	together,	 in	hurry	you	are	always	late,	 in	hurry	you	forget	the	essentials,	 in
hurry	you	need	time.	Just	to	be	in	a	hurry	you	will	require	time	--	and	there	is	no
time.	This	moment	is	all	and	all,	and	the	situation	is	urgent.
You	have	been	born	without	your	 agreement,	without	 a	 contract,	 even	without
your	permission;	that	was	not	in	your	hands.	You	will	die	without	any	advance
information,	without	 fixing	 a	 date	 and	 time	 --	 that	 is	 not	 in	 your	 hands.	Once
dead	you	cannot	complain;	and	not	yet	born	you	are	nowhere.	To	whom	should
existence	ask,	"Do	you	want	to	be	born	or	not?"
So	what	you	have	really	got	in	your	hands,	solid	and	real,	is	only	this	moment,	in
which	you	can	act	intelligently	or	stupidly;	in	other	words,	in	which	you	can	act
as	a	meditator	or	as	a	mediocre....
But	the	statement	is	really	beautiful.	You	got	into	a	puzzle	because	you	cannot
think	what	kind	of	madness	this	is.	First	you	say	it	is	urgent,	and	urgency	creates
hurry;	then	you	deny	that	there	should	be	hurry,	but	the	question	is	so	urgent	that
you	 should	 start	 instantly.	You	got	puzzled	 into	 the	words.	 I	will	 tell	you	how
one	can	get	puzzled	into	beautiful	words.
Two	men	met	at	a	bar	and	struck	up	a	conversation.	After	a	while	one	of	them
said,	"You	think	you	have	family	problems?	Listen	to	my	situation.	A	few	years
ago	I	met	a	young	widow	with	a	grown-up	daughter	and	we	got	married.	Later,
my	father	married	my	stepdaughter.	That	made	my	stepdaughter	my	stepmother,
and	my	father	became	my	stepson.	Also,	my	wife	became	the	mother-in-law	of
her	father-in-law.
"Then	the	daughter	of	my	wife,	my	stepmother,	had	a	son.	This	boy	was	my	half
brother	 because	 he	was	my	 father's	 son,	 but	 he	was	 also	 the	 son	of	my	wife's
daughter,	which	made	him	my	wife's	grandson.	That	made	me	the	grandfather	of
my	half	brother.
"This	was	nothing	until	my	wife	and	I	had	a	son.	Now	the	sister	of	my	son,	my
mother-in-law,	is	also	my	grandmother.	This	makes	my	father	the	brother-in-law
of	my	child,	whose	stepsister	is	my	father's	wife.
"I	am	my	stepmother's	brother-in-law;	my	wife	is	her	own	child's	aunt,	my	son	is
my	 father's	 nephew	 and	 I	 am	 my	 own	 grandfather.	 And	 you	 think	 you	 have
family	problems?"
Just	don't	get	caught	into	words!
The	 statement	 is	 very	 clear:	 the	 situation	 is	 urgent	 because	 you	 have	 no
guarantee	 for	 the	 next	 second.	You	 have	 to	 start	 instantly	 because	 you	 cannot
postpone	--	the	future	is	not	insured	--	and	yet	you	cannot	be	in	a	hurry	because
hurry	takes	time.
So	silently,	peacefully,	without	hurry,	without	any	tension,	without	any	anguish,
move	 into	yourself	 instantly.	 It	 is	urgent.	Unless	meditation	becomes	urgent	 to
you,	it	will	never	happen;	you	will	die	before	it.	Put	meditation	on	your	laundry
list	as	the	most	important,	urgent...	number	one.
But	meditation	in	your	life	is	just	at	the	very	end	of	your	laundry	list	--	and	the
laundry	 list	 goes	 on	 becoming	 bigger	 and	 bigger.	And	 before	 you	 finish	 your
laundry	list,	you	are	finished,	so	the	time	for	meditation	never	comes.
So	 I	 take	 that	 statement,	 whoever	 has	 made	 it,	 as	 tremendously	 significant.
Rabia,	don't	 try	 to	understand	the	sentence;	I	have	cut	 it	 into	pieces	clearly	for
you,	so	you	are	not	confused.
There	is	no	time	for	hurry,	there	is	no	time	for	worry;	in	a	single	moment	what
can	you	do?	Only	one	thing:	you	can	settle	within	yourself.	That	will	be	the	great
transformation	of	your	being.	And	certainly	it	is	the	most	urgent	thing	--	which
we	have	been	trying	to	postpone	as	long	as	possible.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	 IS	 IT	 THESE	 DAYS	 THAT	 THE	 MEN	 ALL	 SEEM	 TO	 BE	 GOING
CRAZY,	 YET	 THE	 WOMEN	 JUST	 GO	 ON	 BECOMING	 MORE
BEAUTIFUL,	MORE
SILENT,	MORE	GRACEFUL?
Milarepa,	it	is	so	simple...	that	I	am	amazed	that	you	have	asked	it.	When	men
go	crazy	then	anything	is	beautiful.	The	beauty	does	not	depend	on	the	woman,
the	silence,	the	grace;	it	depends	on	your	craziness.
But	still	it	has	some	significance	to	be	understood.	It	does	not	matter	if	you	ask
something	stupid	or	idiotic,	still	I	will	give	you	a	significant	answer.
You	are	asking,	"How	is	it	these	days	that	the	men	all	seem	to	be	going	crazy,	yet
the	women	just	go	on	becoming	more	beautiful,	more	silent,	more	graceful?"
A	few	fundamentals	our	men	and	our	women	all	have	to	understand:	one	is	that
man's	 sexuality	 is	 positive,	 women's	 sexuality	 is	 negative.	 Negative	 is	 not	 a
condemnation,	it	is	just	indicating	the	nature	of	their	sexuality.	Man	is	the	donor
and	woman	is	the	receiver.
My	own	 experience	 of	 old-style	Hindu	monks,	 Jaina	monks,	Buddhist	monks,
Catholic	priests	is	that	they	don't	understand	the	nature	of	sexuality.	They	have	a
positive	 sexuality;	 they	 collect	 sperm	 and	 they	 don't	 have	 much	 space	 for	 it.
They	go	on	eating,	they	go	on	nourishing	their	body,	they	go	on	exercising,	they
go	on	doing	everything	that	creates	more	sperms	--	and	the	bag	where	the	sperms
collect	has	a	very	limited	capacity.
That's	why	man	can	have	only	one	orgasm	at	a	time:	just	one	shot,	and	his	gun	is
empty!
But	the	woman	has	a	negative	sexuality.	She	can	have	multiple	orgasms,	because
she	 is	 not	 losing	 anything	 in	 orgasm	 --	 except	 she	 is	 getting	 tired	 of	 all	 the
huffing	 and	puffing,	 and	 the	 ugly	 beast	 on	 top	 doing	 push-ups!	That's	 another
thing,	they	get	tired...	they	keep	their	eyes	closed	and	they	lie	down	almost	like
stone	 statues:	 "Let	 him	 do	 it,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 question	 of	 a	 few	 seconds.	 One	 can
survive."
Within	a	few	seconds	the	man	is	finished,	but	those	few	seconds	are	aggressive.
His	 sexuality	 is	 aggressive;	 that's	why	 if	 he	 cannot	 get	 a	woman,	 he	 becomes
crazy.	What	 to	do	with	his	aggressive	sex	energy?	 It	needs	some	outlet.	That's
why	 he	 finds	 all	 kinds	 of	 perversions.	 Strange...	 he	 goes	 to	 a	 woman,	 to	 a
prostitute,	just	pays	her	and	loses	his	energy	--	a	strange	business!
One	prostitute	can	have	many	customers	in	one	night,	because	she	does	not	lose
energy;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 the	 more	 people	 are	 attracted	 towards	 her,	 she	 starts
becoming	more	graceful,	more	beautiful.	And	on	 the	other	hand	 the	man	 is	 in
such	a	hurry	to	get	rid	of	his	energy,	which	is	becoming	a	burden,	that	his	eyes
go	blind.	He	starts	looking	at	anything	resembling	a	woman	--	and	suddenly	he
has	 found	 a	Cleopatra	 or	 a	Sophia	Loren.	His	 eyes	 are	 not	 clean	 and	 clear.	A
great	 fog	 is	 surrounding	 him	 because	 his	 sexual	 energy	 is	 so	 aggressive.	 It	 is
bound	to	happen.
And	why	is	the	man's	semen	so	overpowering?	They	have	their	own	problems.
In	 one	 sexual	 act	 a	man	 releases	 nearabout	 one	million	 living	 cells,	 and	 those
one	million	living	cells	have	a	lifespan	of	only	two	hours.	Once	they	are	out	of
the	 body	 of	 the	man,	 that	 is	where	 politics	 is	 born:	 then	 one	million	 cells	 are
rushing,	trampling	over	each	other	to	reach	to	the	woman's	cell.	And	the	woman
has	only	one	cell....
The	 woman's	 cell	 is	 non-aggressive;	 it	 can	 wait,	 there	 is	 no	 overburdening.
Moreover	 the	woman	has	every	month	a	menstrual	period	 in	which	 that	cell	 is
released.	Then	for	one	month	she	is	completely	free	from	sexual	desire.	In	one
month	another	cell	will	come,	another	egg	will	come,	so	her	situation	is	far	more
non-aggressive.	You	have	not	heard	of	any	woman	raping	a	man.
But	man	goes	mad.	He	is	going	crazy	because	those	cells	want	to	get	out.	It	 is
too	 crowded,	 they	want	 a	 little	 open	 sky,	 a	 little	 air.	Once	 they	 enter	 into	 the
woman's	 body,	 a	 great	marathon	 race	 starts,	 because	 only	 one	will	 be	 able	 to
reach	to	the	cell.	The	cell,	the	egg	of	the	mother,	is	constituted	in	such	a	way	that
it	 is	 very	 loose	 and	 very	 available,	 but	 the	moment	 one	male	 cell	 enters	 it,	 it
naturally	closes,	becomes	hard.	Now	no	other	cell	can	enter	into	it.
The	passage	of	the	woman's	vagina	to	us	seems	to	be	very	small,	but	to	the	poor
male	cell	it	is	almost	two	miles	long	in	proportion	to	his	size.	They	have	never
traveled	that	much,	so	everybody	is	an	amateur.
I	 have	 always	 wondered	 why	 the	 world	 is	 full	 of	 idiots	 and	 mediocres	 and
fanatics,	fundamentalists,	fascists	of	all	kinds	and	sorts	--	they	come	in	all	sizes.
My	 understanding	 is	 that	when	 the	man's	 cells	 start	moving	 into	 the	woman's
body,	the	wiser	ones	stand	aside.	The	intelligent	ones	don't	want	to	mix	with	the
crowd;	only	the	boxers,	football	players,	champions	of	all	kinds	of	stupid	games,
wrestlers...	they	do	their	great	job,	rushing	over	each	other.	It	is	a	question	of	life
and	death:	if	within	two	hours	they	don't	reach	first,	their	life	is	finished,	within
two	hours	they	will	be	dead.
Only	once	in	a	while	it	happens	that	two	wrestlers	of	equal	strength	reach	to	the
woman's	cell	at	the	same	time;	that's	why	twins	are	born.	Sometimes	even	seven
children	have	been	given	birth	--	I	think	nine	is	the	record	--	but	it	is	very	rare
that	out	of	a	million	people,	nine	will	reach	exactly	at	the	same	time,	not	a	single
minute,	 a	 single	 second,	 a	 split	 second	 behind.	 Then	 they	 all	 enter	 into	 the
woman's	egg.
The	world	is	full	of	idiots	and	fools,	bureaucrats,	politicians,	Don	Quixotes	and
all	 kinds	 of	 stupids,	 competitors,	 competing	 in	 every	 field	 of	 life	 --	 it	may	 be
money,	 it	 may	 be	 power,	 it	 may	 be	 prestige,	 it	 may	 even	 be	 saintliness.	 It	 is
expected...	these	are	the	people	who	have	won	the	first	race.
The	 intelligent	 ones,	 the	 poetic,	 the	 silent,	who	 could	 have	 become	 a	Gautam
Buddha,	who	 could	 have	 become	 a	 poet	 like	Rabindranath	 or	Kahlil	Gibran...
We	know	--	it	is	a	simple	fact	--	that	intelligent	people	will	not	compete	with	this
crowd,	and	the	crowd	is	not	small:	one	million....
Rabindranath	 was	 the	 thirteenth	 son	 of	 his	 father.	We	 don't	 know	 how	many
Rabindranaths	we	have	lost,	and	how	many	Albert	Einsteins	are	never	born,	and
how	many	Picassos,	van	Goghs,	Mozarts	have	never	been	able	to	make	the	race.
There	 are	 things	which	 only	 idiots	 can	 do.	Have	 you	 ever	 seen	 any	wise	man
participating	in	a	marathon	race?	Have	you	ever	seen	any	enlightened	one	being
competitive,	begging	for	votes	so	that	he	can	become	the	president?
The	wise	people	keep	aloof.
The	idiots	rule.
And	the	idiots	are	in	the	majority.
I	was	 thinking,	Why	are	 they	 in	 the	majority?	 --	but	 then	I	 found	 that	 the	 first
marathon	 race	 has	 created	 the	whole	 trouble.	 And	 this	 situation	will	 continue
unless	 we	 are	 more	 intelligent	 and	 stop	 this	 accidental	 birth	 --	 what	 I	 call
accidental	birth.
Now	we	are	at	a	stage	where	genetic	engineering	can	manage	very	easily	to	give
us	as	many	Rabindranaths,	as	many	Picassos,	as	many	Bodhidharmas,	as	many
Nijinskys	as	we	want,	on	demand,	because	in	those	one	million	cells	all	kinds	of
people	are	there.
The	 point	 is	 we	 should	 drop	 the	 old	 idea	 that	 you	 have	 to	 produce	 your	 son
yourself.
Strange...	you	order	your	clothes	from	the	best	tailor,	you	purchase	the	best	car,
you	make	the	most	beautiful	house	--	not	with	your	own	hands.	You	don't	insist
that	"I	will	make	my	car,	I	will	make	my	house,	I	will	make	my	clothes,	I	will
make	my	food"...	you	will	go	insane.	So	why	do	we	insist	that	the	son	should	be
ours?	But	just	our	old	superstition	continues.
According	to	me,	each	hospital,	each	medical	college	should	have	semen	banks,
just	 like	blood	banks.	You	can	go	 and	 ask	 for	what	kind	of	 child,	 boy	or	girl,
what	kind	of	face,	what	kind	of	color	you	want,	how	long	a	lifespan,	what	kind
of	 intelligence	 --	poetic,	 scientific,	mystic...	you	can	ask	 for	 it.	They	will	have
categories	sorted	out,	and	your	wife	will	be	injected	with	just	a	single	sperm.
I	don't	think	there	is	anything	wrong	in	it.	You	can	go	on	making	love,	but	you
should	 use	 every	 birth	 control	 method.	 For	 birth	 you	 have	 to	 enquire	 to	 the
medical	authorities....
It	 will	 change	 the	 whole	 face	 of	 the	 earth.	 There	 will	 be	 so	 many	 intelligent
people,	 creative	people,	 loving	people.	 It	will	 raise	 the	 standard	of	 life,	 it	will
raise	 the	 standard	 of	 health,	 it	will	 bring	 about	more	 inventions,	more	 poetry,
more	sculpture,	and	it	will	make	man	no	longer	accidental,	at	the	mercy	of	blind
nature.
Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 even	 to	 get	 married,	 because	 you	 will	 not	 be	 creating
children	of	your	own.	The	possibility	is	already	accomplished	that	the	child	need
not	 be	 raised	 in	 the	 mother's	 womb;	 the	 child	 can	 be	 raised	 in	 a	 mechanical
womb,	far	more	scientifically.
The	 best	 parents	 will	 be	 those	 who	 have	 chosen	 the	 best	 child,	 with	 the	 best
qualities,	with	the	best	scientific	womb,	so	when	he	comes	out	of	the	womb	they
can	take	him	home.
This	will	do	two	things:	the	children	will	become	so	beautiful	and	so	intelligent,
so	healthy,	so	long	living,	and	also	the	parents	will	be	unburdened.
Every	 parent	 is	 harassing	 the	 child	 to	 become	great,	 to	 become	Alexander	 the
Great,	 to	 become	Gautam	Buddha.	What	 can	 the	 child	 do?	 --	 it	 is	 not	 in	 the
program	of	his	basic	cell.	So	parents	are	disturbed	because	children	don't	listen
to	them,	and	children	are	unnecessarily	harassed	and	hurt.	They	cannot	forgive
their	 parents	 their	 whole	 life	 for	 the	 way	 they	 have	 been	 treated	 in	 their
helplessness,	in	their	childhood.
What	you	are	demanding	of	them	they	don't	have	in	their	basic	program.	Every
human	 psychology	 is	 completely	 programmed,	 his	 physiology	 is	 completely
programmed,	 and	 everything	 goes	 according	 to	 the	 program.	 There	 are	 no
accidents.	You	can	have	as	beautiful	women	 in	 the	world	as	you	 like;	you	can
have	as	strong	men	in	the	world	as	you	like.
Now	it	is	within	our	hands.
Who	is	preventing	 it?	Your	priests	and	your	politicians	 --	because	 they	will	be
the	ones	who	will	lose	all	glamour.	Far	more	intelligent	people	will	be	there,	so
these	stupid	politicians	who	know	next	to	nothing...
I	have	seen	education	ministers	who	cannot	even	sign	their	names,	and	they	are
deciding	the	education	for	the	whole	country.	I	have	seen	finance	ministers	who
don't	 know	 the	meaning	 of	 finance,	who	 have	 not	 any	 idea	 how	 the	 economy
runs.	I	have	seen	soldiers	who	don't	have	any	courage.
This	whole	society	is	upside	down.
Milarepa,	particularly	amongst	my	people	it	is	going	to	be	this	way.	Man,	unless
he	 meditates,	 will	 go	 crazy	 --	 crazy	 after	 women.	 And	 man	 finds	 meditation
more	difficult	than	the	woman.	Experienced	mothers	who	have	given	two,	three
births	can	be	asked	before	the	birth	and	can	say	whether	there	is	a	girl	or	a	boy	in
their	womb,	because	a	girl	remains	silent,	and	a	boy	starts	playing	football.	He
starts	kicking	here	and	there.
In	 meditation	 girls	 can	 enter	 deeper.	 On	 the	 one	 hand	 they	 can	 go	 deeper	 in
meditation;	on	the	other	hand	their	sexuality	is	negative,	it	 is	not	a	compulsion
on	them.
I	was	amazed	in	my	experience	moving	amongst	all	kinds	of	monks	and	nuns,
because	no	monk	is	really	celibate,	but	nuns	are	celibate.	They	can	manage	to	be
celibate;	 they	don't	 have	 an	 aggressive	 sex,	 and	moreover	nature	has	provided
that	every	month	their	sex	energy	goes	out	of	their	body	automatically,	they	are
clean	 again	 for	 one	month.	 But	man	 is	 in	 a	 difficulty.	 His	 sex	 energy	 can	 be
subdued	only	by	deeper	meditation.	Then	he	will	not	go	crazy.
You	have	to	understand	another	basic	law:	the	woman	looks	more	beautiful	the
more	she	runs	away	from	you.	She	does	not	want	to	run	away;	she	waits	for	you
to	come	closer,	and	then	she	starts	running	again.	She	wants	to	be	caught,	but	she
is	 not	 going	 to	 take	 the	 initiative	 so	 that	 later	 on,	 after	 the	 honeymoon,	when
there	will	be	continuous	struggle,	she	can	always	say	to	you,	"You	were	after	me.
I	had	never	intended	to	marry	you."
After	the	honeymoon	all	beauty	disappears,	because	your	sexual	energy	has	gone
down	the	drain.	Even	the	most	beautiful	woman	will	no	longer	look	beautiful	to
you	because	you	have	used	her.	You	know	her	whole	geography,	you	know	her
whole	 topography;	 now	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 explore.	And	man	 is	 by	 nature	 an
explorer,	a	hunter,	an	adventurer.
You	may	not	have	perceived	that	all	the	great	cities,	all	the	beautiful	houses,	all
the	beautiful	gardens	are	not	to	man's	credit;	they	are	to	be	credited	to	woman.
She	 never	 wanted	 to	 be	 a	 hunter,	 she	 never	 wanted	 to	 run	 continuously	 after
animals,	she	never	wanted	to	move.	She	wanted	to	live	peacefully	in	a	beautiful
house	surrounded	with	a	beautiful	garden.
But	man	basically	is	a	nomad.	That	nomadness	comes	from	his	basic	sexual	cell.
He	is	made	of	those	sexual	cells	which	keep	telling	him,	"Go	on,	go	on."	He	will
go	 to	all	kinds	of	 strange	places	 for	no	 reason,	 just	because	he	needs	money...
and	once	he	has	money	he	starts	traveling.	A	home	he	does	not	have.
You	will	see	 it	 in	 tourists:	ninety	percent	are	Americans,	because	 they	have	so
much	money	that	what	to	do?...	Go	on,	anywhere.	And	when	they	go	on	to	the
Taj	Mahal	or	to	Khajuraho	or	to	Ajanta	or	to	Ellora,	they	cannot	stay	there.	They
cannot	watch	the	beauty	silently,	look	at	the	great	art	that	has	taken	thousands	of
years	 to	make,	 thousands	of	people	were	 involved	to	make	it;	 they	will	simply
go	on	running,	taking	photographs.
Back	at	home	they	will	make	a	good	album	and	then	they	will	see	how	beautiful
are	 the	 things	 they	 have	 seen.	 And	 they	 have	 not	 seen...	 they	 have	 only
photographed!	Those	photographs	could	have	been	purchased	from	the	market;
there	was	no	need	to	go	around	the	world.
But	man	is	a	nomad.	Woman	is	not.
In	Hindi	we	have	a	word	for	 the	wife,	gharwali,	one	who	owns	 the	home.	But
that	word	we	cannot	use	for	the	man,	who	really	owns	it;	nobody	can	say	to	any
man,	"You	are	gharwala."	He	has	paid,	he	has	earned	the	money,	but	the	woman
is	called	the	owner	of	the	home.
But	 it	 is	 exactly	 right.	 Man	 may	 have	 earned,	 but	 the	 woman	 has	 made	 the
house.	Woman	has	forced	man	to	live	a	life	settled,	silent,	peaceful,	not	to	go	on
running	like	stray	dogs	from	one	place	to	another.
In	my	people's	world,	Milarepa,	unless	you	are	meditating	deeply	you	will	not	be
able	 to	 transcend	 your	 sexual	 craziness.	 And	 I	 can	 see	 --	 I	 have	 been
continuously	observing	--
women	get	into	meditation	quickly.	It	comes	to	them	easily.	The	more	meditative
they	become,	 they	will	become	more	beautiful,	more	 serene,	more	calm,	more
quiet,	more	graceful.
But	you,	not	doing	meditation,	not	creating	a	state	of	no-mind,	will	fall	a	victim
of	jazz	music	or	skinheads;	you	will	do	something	stupid.
The	 doctor	 was	 explaining	 to	 Paddy	 how	 nature	 makes	 up	 for	 a	 person's
deficiencies.
"For	 example,"	 he	 told	 Paddy,	 "if	 a	 man	 is	 deaf,	 he	 may	 have	 very	 good
eyesight,	and	if	a	man	is	blind,	he	may	have	a	very	good	sense	of	smell."
"I	think	I	see	what	you	mean,"	said	Paddy.	"I	have	often	noticed	that	if	a	man	has
one	short	leg,	then	the	other	one	is	always	a	little	bit	longer."
Great	thinkers,	coming	to	great	conclusions!
The	student	demonstration	had	turned	into	a	riot.	Suddenly	a	man	staggered	out
of	the	crowd	carrying	a	limp	girl	in	his	arms.
"Here,"	shouted	a	cop	running	up	to	the	man,	"give	her	to	me.	I	will	get	her	out
of	this."
"The	hell	with	you,"	replied	the	man,	"go	and	find	one	of	your	own!"
Even	 in	 a	 riot,	 when	 people	 are	 being	 killed,	 shot,	 the	 man's	 mind	 remains
continuously	thinking	of	sex.
Sex	is	man's	greatest	bondage.
You	have	to	make	every	effort	for	meditativeness,	so	that	all	your	sexual	energy,
instead	 of	 moving	 downwards,	 starts	 moving	 upwards.	 Instead	 of	 finding	 a
beautiful	woman,	start	creating	a	beautiful	man	within	you.	Rather	than	finding	a
graceful	woman,	your	energy	can	make	you	graceful.
But	man	is	more	stupid	than	woman.	The	whole	of	history	has	been	made	up	by
man,	 and	 you	 can	 see	 the	 madness:	 it	 is	 a	 history	 not	 of	 mankind,	 but	 of
madness,	 wars,	 rape,	 burning	 living	 people,	 destruction.	 And	 now	 they	 have
come	to	 the	peak;	perhaps	Ronald	Reagan	will	be	 the	 last	chapter	of	history	--
although	there	will	be	no	one	to	read	it,	and	perhaps	no	one	will	be	able	to	write
it	even.
A	married	 couple	 took	 their	 little	 boy	 to	 the	 circus.	During	 the	 gorilla	 act	 the
husband	had	to	go	to	the	bathroom,	and	while	he	was	gone,	the	little	boy	nudged
his	mother	and	said,
"What	is	that	long	thing	hanging	down	between	the	gorilla's	legs?"
His	mother	was	very	embarrassed	and	said	quickly,	"Oh,	that's	nothing,	dear."
When	the	husband	returned,	the	wife	went	off	to	buy	some	popcorn,	and	while
she	was	gone,	the	little	boy	nudged	his	father	and	said,	"Daddy,	what	is	that	big
thing	hanging	down	between	the	gorilla's	legs?"
The	father	smiled	and	said,	"That	son,	is	his	penis."
The	 little	 boy	 looked	 puzzled	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 said,	 "Then	 why	 did
mummy	just	say	it	was	nothing?"
"Son,"	said	his	father	proudly,	"I	have	spoiled	that	woman."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	Meditation	--	now	or	never!
11	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709115
ShortTitle:
PILGR11
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
133
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
COULD	DRY	LEAVES	REALLY	BE	FALLING	AT	SUCH	A	YOUNG	AGE?	I
AM
THIRTY,	AND	I	ENJOY	SEX	WHEN	IT	COMES,	THOUGH	I	DON'T	COME
SO
OFTEN.	I	DON'T	FEEL	I	AM	HOLDING	SOMETHING	DOWN;	ON	THE
CONTRARY,	I	FIND	I	USUALLY	HAVE	TO	HOLD	IT	UP.
BELOVED	OSHO,	IT	NOW	TAKES	ME	ALL	NIGHT	TO	DO	WHAT	I	USED
TO	DO
ALL	NIGHT.	AM	I	MISSING,	OR	IS	IT	MISSING?
Nityanando,	 this	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 Eastern	 evolution	 of
consciousness	and	the	Western	mind.
In	the	East,	to	get	rid	of	sex	is	a	blessing;	in	the	West,	it	is	the	ultimate	calamity,
it	 is	 dying	 before	 death.	 The	 day	 one	 starts	 feeling	 that	 his	 sexual	 energy	 is
getting	down,	he	starts	counting	days	--	that	death	is	not	far	away.
In	 the	East,	 the	day	one	gets	beyond	sex,	he	rejoices	--	 the	earlier	 the	better	 --
because	 now	 the	 time	 has	 come	 to	 grow	 into	 a	 new	 dimension,	 into	 freedom
from	 biology,	 into	 freedom	 from	 body,	 into	 freedom	 from	 mind.	 It	 is	 the
beginning	of	the	experience	of	your	innermost	self.
Sex	is	continuously	taking	you	away	from	yourself.	Whether	you	are	a	man	or	a
woman,	it	doesn't	matter:	sex	takes	you	away	from	yourself.	The	moment	sex	is
not	there,	there	is	no	drive	to	go	away	from	yourself.	You	start	settling	within.
So,	Nityanando,	old	leaves	are	really	falling	because	new	leaves	want	 to	grow.
And	old	leaves	have	to	go	and	give	space	for	new	experiences,	new	spaces.	It	is
a	blessing	--	don't	take	it	according	to	the	Western,	rotten	mind.
The	West	has	everything,	but	it	has	forgotten	itself.	And	once	you	are	no	longer
aware	of	yourself,	then	sex	becomes	the	ultimate	reality.	In	the	West,	sex	is	God.
Sex	is	now	the	only	God	worshiped	in	the	West.	But	sex	simply	means	you	are
no	 longer	 independent:	 you	 depend	 for	 your	 happiness,	 for	 your	 joy,	 on
somebody	else	--	and	that	dependence	is	the	greatest	misery.
It	is	not	incidental	that	men	and	women,	husbands	and	wives,	are	continuously
quarreling.	Even	if	they	are	not	quarreling,	they	are	in	the	mood,	and	the	reason
is	 that	 nobody	wants	 deep	down	 to	be	dependent	 on	 the	other.	 It	 brings	many
other	diseases	by	the	side:	if	you	are	dependent	on	the	woman	you	love,	you	will
be	 jealous,	 you	 will	 be	 continuously	 watchful...	 you	 will	 start	 becoming	 a
detective,	a	CIA,	a	KGB,	an	FBI	agent,	upon	your	own	wife!	You	will	put	your
children	on	alert:	Be	careful,	when	I	am	away...	what	happens	in	the	house.
Why	this	jealousy...?	The	fear	is	that	perhaps	she	may	start	loving	someone	else.
And	the	fear	 is	natural,	because	you	are	starting	to	think	of	other	women:	why
should	 she	 not	 think	 of	 other	men?	This	 is	 a	 natural	 corollary	 that	 goes	 on	 in
both	 the	minds.	 So	 she	 goes	 on	 detecting	 you,	 she	 goes	 on	 looking	 into	 your
letters,	 she	 goes	 on	 searching	 into	 your	 pockets,	 any	 address,	 any	 phone
number...
One	night	a	phone	rang,	and	as	the	bell	was	ringing	Mulla	Nasruddin	went	there,
said
"Okay,"	and	put	it	down.
The	wife	said,	"Who	was	there?"
He	 said,	 "It	was	nobody.	 I	 have	 just	 been	unnecessarily	disturbed	by	 someone
phoning	on	the	wrong	number."
The	wife	said,	"What	is	the	number	from	where	the	phone	came?"
These	kind	of	 things	go	on	continuously	 in	 every	house,	because	 the	wife	has
already	read	the	number	in	his	diary.	And	when	he	quoted	the	number,	the	wife
said,	"Don't	lie	to	me	that	it	was	a	wrong	number.	This	is	your	diary,	and	this	is
the	number....	Now	tell	me,	what	is	her	name?"	--	now	it	is	no	more	his,	now	it	is
her:	"Tell	me,	what	is	her	name?"
Under	pressure	--	and	every	husband	is	under	pressure	--	he	said,	"It	is	nobody,
although	her	name	looks	like	a	woman's	name.	Her	name	is	Kamala...	but	this	is
only	the	name	of	a	horse.	And	because	it	 is	 the	season	of	horse	racing	and	I'm
thinking	to	go	to	the	races	tomorrow...."
Tomorrow	morning	 again	 the	 phone	 rang,	 and	Mulla	 was	 standing	 by	 it.	 The
wife	said,
"Wait.	This	time	I	will	take	the	call"	--	and	she	listened	and	told	Mulla,	"Come
on,	your	horse	is	calling!"	It	is	very	difficult...	one	of	the	most	difficult	things	is
to	 deceive	 your	 wife.	 But	 man	 goes	 on	 making	 his	 efforts,	 and	 is	 defeated
continuously.
I	have	been	going	 to	 ask	one	of	my	childhood	 friends,	Sukhraj,	who	 is	 sitting
here...	 For	 years	 it	 has	 been	 that	 whenever	 he	 comes,	 I	 never	 see	 his	 wife
smiling.	I	don't	see	in	her	that	she	has	come	with	joy;	it	is	as	if	she	has	come	just
to	keep	an	eye	on	him,	because	here	there	are	so	many	beautiful	women,	and	he
is	a	beautiful	man.	And	this	 is	a	world	of	people	who	are	absolutely	free,	who
don't	live	in	bondage	of	anybody.
She	 comes	 to	me,	 she	 touches	my	 feet,	 but	 I	 have	 never	 felt	 that	 there	 is	 any
deep	 love,	 respect,	 feeling,	 emotion.	 She	 seems	 almost	 like	 a	 zombie,	 and	 the
reason	is	clear	to	me.
Perhaps	it	may	not	be	clear	to	her	or	to	Sukhraj,	but	I	want	it	to	be	made	clear	to
them.
He	would	 like	 to	come	every	day;	 in	 fact,	he	would	 like	 to	 live	here	with	me.
What	 is	he	doing	 there?	 --	 there	 is	nothing	 left	 there	 for	him.	And	when	 I	 am
here,	and	millions	of	people	around	the	world	are	coming	and	going	every	day....
He	loved	me	when	we	were	so	young	that	now	even	the	memories	of	those	days
are	difficult	to	catch	up...	and	he	is	the	only	one	left.	I	had	many	other	friends:
they	came	and	they	are	gone,	but	he	has	remained	with	me	unwavering,	because
it	was	not	a	question	of	any	ideological	agreement,	it	was	a	question	of	love.	It
does	 not	 matter	 what	 I	 say,	 what	 I	 do,	 what	 he	 says,	 what	 he	 does;	 that	 is
absolutely	irrelevant.
So	he	 comes	 again	 and	 again	when	he	 can	manage.	The	wife	 certainly	 comes
reluctantly;	otherwise	she	should	be	so	joyful	and	she	should	enjoy	all	the	people
around	who	are	living	in	peace,	in	love,	in	freedom,	and	each	moment	rejoicing.
Here,	sitting	like	a	dead	corpse	simply	shows	that	she	has	not	come.	She	has	to
come:	 she	 has	 to	 come	 because	 she	 cannot	 leave	 the	 husband	 alone	 in	 this
strange	place.
Nityanando,	 let	 the	 dry	 leaves	 fall.	 You	 are	 fortunate	 that	 they	 are	 falling	 at
thirty.	And	they	are	falling	at	thirty	because,	as	I	say,	if	you	live	intensely,	totally,
then	 the	 year	 forty-two...	 it	 is	 only	 the	 average,	 and	 in	 existence	 nothing	 is
average.	It	all	depends	on	you:	there	are	people	who	will	be	at	the	age	of	ninety
and	 still	 thinking	 of	 nothing	 but	 sex.	 All	 other	 things	 are	 finished...	 the	 only
thing	left	is	sex.	That	continues	to	the	very	end	of	their	life,	because	they	never
lived	it	intensely;	they	have	spread	a	thin	layer	of	sexuality	over	all	their	life.	If
you	live	intensely,	it	is	going	to	disappear	sooner.
The	thirtieth	year	is	perfectly	the	right	time.	That	leaves	you	--	because	you	are
from	 the	 West	 --	 at	 least	 fifty	 to	 sixty	 years	 to	 work	 upon	 yourself,	 to	 find
yourself,	 and	 to	 find	 the	 innermost	mysteries	of	existence.	 In	 fact,	now	begins
the	real	life;	up	to	now	you	were	a	slave.	Now,	boundaries	are	dropping	and	the
whole	sky	is	becoming	available	to	you	with	all	its	stars.
But	in	the	West	it	is	certainly	a	very	difficult	problem.	The	whole	conditioning
of	centuries	has	brought	man	to	such	a	state	that	sex	seems	to	be	everything:	it	is
money,	it	is	power,	it	is	position.	Everything	is	sacrificed	for	sex,	and	everything
is	achieved	only	for	sex.
Nobody	 bothers	 that	 sex	 is	 not	 your	 reality,	 sex	 is	 not	 love,	 and	 nobody	 even
bothers	whether	you	are	getting	anything	out	of	it	or	not.	What	are	you	getting
out	of	 it?	 --	 it	 is	almost	 like	people	smoking	cigarettes:	one	wonders	why	they
are	smoking,	and	once	in	a	while	they	also	wonder	why.	But	just	a	habit...	and	it
is	only	a	mental	habit.	Sex	is	a	biological	habit,	very	deep-rooted.
You	say,	"It	now	takes	me	all	night	to	do	what	I	used	to	do	all	night."	That's	why
--	you	did	well.	Soon	it	will	take	you	twenty-four	hours	to	do	what	you	used	to
do	the	whole	night!
Now,	try	to	understand:	you	have	lost	the	infatuation	and	the	foolishness	and	the
slavery,	and	this	is	the	time	to	start	meditating.	If	you	cannot	meditate	now,	then
when	will	you	be	meditating?	I	will	not	prevent	you...	once	in	a	while	you	can
have	your	sex,	but	it	will	become	more	and	more	sparse.
There	is	a	saying	in	Tibet:	If	you	feel	tired,	lie	down.	If	you	feel	energetic,	move
over.
But	first,	feel	whether	you	are	energetic,	otherwise	it	is	better	to	lie	down.
And	from	me	the	advice	is:
If	you	do	not	know	what	to	do,	at	least	laugh.
Grandma	 was	 in	 her	 eighties.	 She	 tired	 easily,	 had	 little	 appetite,	 and	 was
sometimes	 confused	 mentally.	 Her	 son	 called	 the	 gynecologist,	 who	 arrived
shortly	 and	 was	 shown	 up	 to	 Grandma's	 room,	 where	 he	 examined	 her
thoroughly.	Half	an	hour	later	he	came	down.
"There	is	no	need	to	worry,"	he	explained.	"There	is	nothing	really	wrong	with
her	except	her	age.	She	will	be	alright."
The	son	was	very	relieved	and	went	upstairs	to	see	her.	"Well,	mother,"	he	asked,
"how	did	you	like	the	gynecologist?"
"So	 that	 was	 the	 gynecologist?"	 she	 said.	 "My	 god,	 I	 thought	 he	 acted	 very
familiar	for	a	priest."
Priests	and	monks	and	saints,	Nityanando,	are	in	more	difficulty	than	you	think
you	are,	because	 the	 time	when	 they	could	have	been	deeply	 into	 sex	 is	gone.
Now	only	the	thought	goes	on	and	on	like	a	continuous	record.	And	the	needle
of	the	record	has	stuck	at	sex;	it	does	not	move	from	there.
Ronald	Reagan	 gets	 into	 bed	with	Nancy.	Ronnie	 is	 feeling	 very	 horny,	 so	 he
turns	to	Nancy	and	says,	"Oh,	Nancy,	I	would	like	to	launch	my	missile	into	your
Gulf."
Nancy	 says,	 "Oh,	Ronnie,	 you	 are	 so	 romantic,	 but	 you	have	not	 been	 able	 to
bring	your	missile	up	since	the	second	world	war."
Ronnie	pleads,	"But	Nancy,	 I	 think	I	can	do	 it	 if	you	would	only	have	faith	 in
me."
Nancy	replies,	"But	honestly,	Ron,	it	has	been	so	long	since	we	made	war	that	I
would	not	know	where	to	begin."
Frustrated,	Ronnie	says,	"God,	I	hate	peace!"
Don't	 be	 an	 old	 fool.	And	 if	 you	 can	 become	wise	while	 you	 are	 young,	 just
thirty,	thank	God.	Be	grateful	to	existence	that	he	is	allowing	you	so	much	time
to	explore	much	that	is	not	available	to	any	other	animal,	which	is	only	available
to	 man.	 And	 the	 more	 time	 you	 have	 to	 explore	 it,	 the	 deeper	 will	 be	 your
insight,	 the	 greater	 will	 be	 your	 consciousness	 and	 tremendous	 will	 be	 your
splendor.	You	will	not	die	an	ugly	death;	you	will	die	with	a	grace	and	with	a
smile	on	your	face.
A	life	that	cannot	reach	to	enlightenment	has	been	a	sheer	waste.	It	is	good	that
your	thirty	years	were	passed	in	the	West.	Thirty	years	in	the	East	are	bad	luck;
thirty	years	in	the	West	are	good	luck	--	but	good	luck	only	if	after	thirty	years
you	 can	 come	 into	 contact	 with	 the	 Eastern	 mysteries.	 Then	 you	 have	 more
chances	than	the	Eastern	counterpart,	because	the	Eastern	counterpart	has	been
repressing	sex,	so	it	will	not	be	possible	for	him	to	meditate	at	the	age	of	thirty.
If	he	can	manage	to	meditate	even	at	the	age	of	sixty,	it	will	be	a	surprise.
It	is	a	tremendously	fortunate	moment,	at	least	for	my	people,	because	the	East	is
so	orthodox,	so	traditional,	so	blind,	so	deaf,	that	they	will	not	hear	me.	They	can
hear	Morarji	Desai	and	even	can	start	drinking	their	own	urine.	That	is	possible
because	for	centuries	they	have	been	drinking	the	urine	of	the	cows,	so	in	fact	it
is	better	to	drink	your	own	--	self-sufficiency!	Why	be	dependent	on	a	cow?	And
who	knows	what	kind	of	dirty	water	 she	has	been	drinking?	As	 far	 as	 I	know
Morarji	Desai	has	no	need	of	any	water.	The	same	water	goes	on	circulating,	so
naturally	 he	 never	 falls	 sick,	 because	 infections	 are	 difficult,	 pollution	 is
difficult....
But	 they	 will	 not	 listen	 to	 me.	 They	 cannot	 listen	 to	 any	 reasonable,	 logical,
scientific	truth.
So	it	is	a	very	strange	situation.	I	am	here	in	the	East,	but	my	people	are	going	to
be	 from	 the	 West,	 because	 only	 the	 Western	 youth	 can	 understand.	 Sex	 has
become	futile,	he	has	lived	with	too	many	women;	drugs	have	become	useless,
he	 has	 known	 too	much...	 now	what	 else?	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 nothing	 around
which	can	keep	the	youth	in	the	West	interested,	intrigued,	still	feeling	that	life
may	have	some	significance.
All	the	modern,	contemporary	Western	philosophers	are	talking	about	one	thing
only:	meaninglessness.	And	they	appeal	to	the	Western	youth	because	he	can	see
himself:	it	is	not	a	question	to	be	convinced	about,	to	be	argued	--	he	has	lived
everything	and	he	 finds	everything	 falls	 flat	 sooner	or	 later.	He	has	 lived	with
many	women;	 the	woman	 has	 lived	with	many	men.	 They	 are	 all	 alike...	 you
have	just	to	put	the	light	off!	The	question	is	only	whether	the	light	is	on	or	off;
that	much	difference	and	the	most	beautiful	woman	or	the	most	ugly	woman	are
the	same.
Because	they	have	known	many	women	and	many	men,	the	hope	that	still	can	be
helpful	in	the	East	is	no	more	for	them.	In	the	East	everybody	is	caught	up	with
one	woman,	and	that	means	monotony.	People	call	it	monogamy,	but	that	is	not
the	right	word.	They	are	so	fed	up	with	the	woman,	the	woman	is	so	fed	up	with
the	man,	but	there	is	no	other	way.	It	is	a	lifelong	contract.
So	they	go	on	hoping	that,	perhaps	what	my	wife	does	not	have,	other	women
have;	what	my	husband	is	not	able	for,	other	people	seem	to	be	able....	But	in	the
West,	 that	 hope	 has	 died.	 People	 have	 tried	 and	 found	 that	 it	 is	 all	 nonsense;
every	woman	has	 the	same	physiology,	 the	difference	 is	 just	superficial.	Every
man	has	the	same	physiology,	and	everything	comes	to	the	same	end.
Then	 they	 tried	 grass,	 they	 tried	 marijuana,	 they	 tried	 hashish,	 they	 tried
transcendental	 meditation.	 Now	 they	 are	 trying	 yogic	 flying	 and	 making
themselves	so	foolish.	But	what	to	do?	--	they	have	to	do	something,	otherwise
life	seems	to	be	empty.
Nityanando,	 you	 are	 fortunate	 that	 life	 need	 not	 be	 empty	 for	 you.	 If	 sex	 is
going,	say	goodbye	 to	 it.	 It	was	good	when	 it	was	 there;	 it	 is	better	when	 it	 is
gone.	Now	begins	a	 totally	different	space	of	experiencing.	Now	begins	a	new
adventure,	more	free,	more	individual,	more	unfettered.	And	the	sky	is	so	vast	to
explore...	and	on	each	step	there	are	miracles	and	miracles.
So	sing	and	dance	and	meditate.	And	life	is	immensely	beautiful:	it	has	all	that
Gautam	 Buddha	 experienced	 and	 more,	 because	 twenty-five	 centuries	 have
passed;	man	has	become	far	more	mature,	and	evolution	has	gone	higher.	We	can
produce	greater	Gautam	Buddhas	with	more	dimensions	to	them.
In	 the	 past	 it	 was	 thought	 that	 a	 man	 can	 only	 experience	 himself	 or	 God	 --
which	 are	 only	 different	 names	 --	 if	 he	 tortures	 himself.	 That	was	 a	 primitive
idea.
I	give	you	a	sophisticated,	cultured	version,	the	latest	edition:	there	is	no	need	to
torture	 yourself	 --	 it	 is	 absolutely	 absurd!	 You	 can	 be	 blissful,	 you	 can	 be
ecstatic,	you	can	be	meditative,	comfortably.	I	don't	see	the	connection	that	you
can	be	meditative	sitting	in	a	bullock	cart	but	you	cannot	be	meditative	sitting	in
a	Rolls	Royce.	If	you	can	be	meditative	sitting	on	a	camel,	then	why	can't	you	be
meditative	flying	in	a	jumbo	jet	--
which	is	far	more	comfortable,	far	more	silent,	far	more	peaceful.
Have	you	ever	tried	sitting	on	an	animal	like	a	camel?	--	sex	is	exactly	like	that!
It	is	the	ugliest	vehicle....	I	have	suffered	it,	I'm	not	saying	it	without	experience.
And	those	two,	three	hours	I	was	on	a	camel,	I	said,	"My	god,	whether	I'm	going
to	survive	or	not..."
Life	has	gone	on	--	in	spite	of	all	hindrances	from	politicians,	from	priests,	from
traditionalists,	from	the	orthodox.	Life	has	gone	on,	although	it	could	have	gone
far	 faster	 if	 all	 these	 hindrances	 were	 not	 there.	 But	 still,	 after	 twenty-five
hundred	 years	 we	 are	 in	 a	 position	 to	 create	 better	 Gautam	 Buddhas,	 better
Mahaviras.	We	know	much	more	about	human	physiology,	we	know	much	more
about	human	biology,	we	know	much	more	about	human	sexuality.
The	 ancientmost	 book	 on	 sex	 was	 written	 in	 India;	 that	 was	 Vatsyayana's
KAMASUTRAS,	sutras	on	sex.	But	looking	at	it,	it	looks	as	if	a	child	is	writing
about	 sex.	After	 Sigmund	Freud	 and	Masters	 and	 Johnson,	 and	 after	 so	many
discoveries	in	biology,	in	genetics,	we	are	in	such	a	position	that	we	can	create
far	 greater	 giants	 of	 enlightenment,	 awareness,	 illumination.	 But	 if	 you	 are
feeling	too	much	attached	to	that	which	is	gone,	then	your	life	will	be	a	life	of
misery,	continuously	thinking	of	something	which	you	cannot	do.	It	is	up	to	you.
Being	my	sannyasin,	I	don't	think	you	will	accept	this	despair.	Less	than	ultimate
ecstasy	is	not	our	concern.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	NIGHT	YOU	SAID	THAT	IT	IS	IMPOSSIBLE	TO	GO	INTO
MEDITATION	UNTIL	ONE	HAS	EXPERIENCED	SEX	TO	THE	MAXIMUM,
AND
THAT	IT	DROPS	BY	ITSELF.
OSHO,	THIS	 IS	VERY	DISHEARTENING	TO	ME.	YOU	MUST	BE	WELL
AWARE
OF	THE	FACT	OF	HOW	DIFFICULT	IT	IS	TO	HAVE	GIRLFRIENDS	AND
EXPERIENCE	SEX	IN	INDIA.
MARRIAGE	IS	NO	SOLUTION	BECAUSE	THEN	I	HAVE	TO	FORGET
MEDITATION	FOREVER.
OSHO,	ISN'T	IT	POSSIBLE	TO	GO	BEYOND	SEX	BY	BEING	A	WATCHER
OF
OUR	 BIOLOGY	 JUST	 AS	 WE	 CAN	 GO	 BEYOND	 OUR	 MIND	 BY
WATCHING	IT?
Manatit	 Bharti,	 I	 can	 understand	 your	 problem.	 But	 you	 have	 to	 understand
something	more	difficult	than	your	problem.
You	 cannot	 watch	 your	 biology.	 You	 can	 watch	 your	 mind,	 because	 mind	 is
available	 just	 like	 a	 TV	 screen	 before	 your	 consciousness.	 But	 your	 biology,
your	physiology,	your	chemistry	 --	 that	 is	not	 available	 to	your	consciousness.
You	cannot	watch	how	your	food	is	being	digested;	you	cannot	watch	how	your
food	is	being	transformed	into	blood,	into	bones,	into	nerves.	You	cannot	watch,
because	 for	a	certain	 reason	nature	has	not	 left	any	door	 for	you	 to	watch	 that
which	belongs	to	the	body.
I	 agree	 with	 nature	 that	 it	 is	 wise	 that	 it	 has	 closed	 all	 the	 doors:	 biology,
physiology,	 chemistry	 --	 nothing	 is	 available	 to	 your	 consciousness,	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 there	 are	 things	which	 change	 their	 nature	 immediately	 the
moment	you	watch.	I	will	have	to	explain	to	you....
You	are	in	your	bathroom	making	faces	in	front	of	the	mirror,	and	then	suddenly
you	become	aware	of	somebody	--	just	a	small	child	it	may	be	--	looking	from
the	 keyhole	 at	 what	 you	 are	 doing.	 Suddenly	 you	 change.	 He	 has	 not	 said
anything,	neither	have	you	deliberately	done	anything;	 spontaneously,	with	 the
very	 feeling	 that	 you	 are	 being	 watched,	 you	 become	 a	 different	 personality.
When	you	are	alone	you	relax,	you	put	your	mask	aside.
Albert	Einstein	was	tremendously	mystified;	he	died	in	a	great	disappointment.
He	was	one	of	the	most	successful	men	in	the	world....	But	when	he	reached	to
the	farthest	inside	of	the	atom,	where	electrons,	neutrons	and	protons	constitute
its	 body,	 he	 simply	 felt	 he	 was	 going	 mad,	 because	 it	 was	 against	 all	 logic,
against	all	mathematics,	against	all	the	science	that	we	have	developed	in	three
hundred	years.	Those	electrons	were	behaving	 in	such	a	way	that	he	could	not
have	conceived	even	in	the	wildest	dream.
What	he	came	to	know	was	that	the	moment	you	watch	--	and	you	are	watching
through	 very	 sophisticated	 scientific	 instruments,	 not	 with	 naked	 eyes	 --	 they
start	 behaving	 differently.	 He	 was	 thinking	 that	 they	 are	 dead	 particles	 of
electricity	--	but	they	are	not.
They	 are	 in	 their	 bathroom...	 and	 now	 somebody	 is	watching	 them,	 they	 start
behaving	differently,	in	a	more	gentlemanly	way.
He	 could	 not	 believe	 that	watching	 can	make	 a	 difference	 to	matter.	 He	 said,
"Perhaps	 the	 mystics	 are	 right,	 that	 everything	 is	 full	 of	 life,	 we	 are	 just	 not
aware	of	it."
Secondly,	he	became	aware	that	an	electron	can	take	a	quantum	leap.	I	have	used
that	word	many	 times...	 but	 perhaps	most	 of	 you	may	 not	 have	 understood	 it,
because	it	 is	out	of	modern	physics.	It	 is	a	made-up	word;	 it	had	never	existed
before	Albert	Einstein.
One	electron	 is	 called	quanta,	because	 that	 is	 the	ultimate	particle	of	quantity;
you	cannot	go	below	it,	you	cannot	divide	it	anymore.	So	according	to	the	word
`quantity',	he	named	it	quanta.	Finished,	you	have	come	to	 the	end	of	 the	 line;
now	you	cannot,	at	least	for	the	moment...	Perhaps	in	the	future,	better	scientific
instruments	may	be	able	to	cut	it	down	more,	but	whatever	happens,	the	end	will
be	called	quanta.
That	quanta	dazzles	every	mind,	because	it	takes	a	jump	from	place	A	to	place
B.	It	does	not	travel	the	distance;	between	A	and	B	it	disappears.	At	A	point	you
see	 it,	 and	 then	 suddenly	 you	 see	 it	 at	 B	 point.	 What	 happens	 in	 the	 space
between?	Howsoever	fast	it	can	go	--	we	have	now	instruments	even	to	know	the
speed	of	light,	the	greatest	speed	--
there	 is	 no	 problem	 of	 any	 speed.	 A	 tremendous	 discovery,	 a	 tremendous
miracle...	it	simply	dematerializes	at	one	point	and	again	materializes	at	another
point.	The	space	between	is	never	traveled.
It	 was	 very	 shocking	 in	 the	 beginning,	 but	 slowly,	 slowly	 the	 shock	 was
absorbed.
Einstein	 could	 see	 a	 tremendous	 possibility	 in	 it:	 the	 possibility	 of	 making	 a
machine	 which	 can	 make	 a	 man	 disappear	 from	 one	 place	 and	 allow	 him	 to
appear	in	another	place	without	traveling	the	space	between.
That	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 possible	way	 if	man	 has	 ever	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 stars;
otherwise	no	vehicle	 can	 take	him.	The	nearest	 star	 is	 four	years	 away	 --	 four
light-years	away.	So	if	you	go	to	the	nearest	star	it	will	take	four	years	to	reach,
with	 the	 speed	 of	 light,	 not	 with	 the	 speed	 of	 your	 railway	 trains	 or	 your
airplanes	 --	 these	 are	 now	outdated.	The	 speed	 has	 to	 be	 exactly	 the	 speed	 of
light;	that	is	one	hundred	and	eighty-six	thousand	miles	per	second.
And	the	problem	is	that	at	that	speed	everything	will	melt,	because	it	will	create
such	heat,	such	friction	that	we	don't	have	any	metal	to	survive	in	that	friction.
So	anything	at	 that	 speed	will	become	 light,	 and	all	 the	passengers	 inside	will
also	become	light.	So	that	is	out	of	the	question,	that	cannot	be	done.
At	 first	 it	 had	 been	 thought	 that	 we	may	 find	 or	 we	may	 create	 some	metal,
synthetic,	which	will	be	able	to	survive	the	speed.	But	that	has	been	dropped;	it
is	 impossible.	At	 that	speed	everything	will	become	light.	That	cuts	our	planet
off	 from	 the	whole	 universe	 completely.	 Then	 it	will	 not	 be	 possible	 ever	 for
man	to	visit	the	stars.
But	 this	 quantum	 leap	 opened	 a	 new	 vista.	Albert	 Einstein	was	 so	 happy	 that
night,	 he	 could	 not	 sleep.	 His	 wife	 said	 again	 and	 again,	 "Why	 are	 you	 not
sleeping?"
He	said,	"I	am	so	full	of	joy!	A	tremendously	new	dimension	has	opened.	One
day	--
perhaps	 I	 will	 not	 be	 here,	 but	 one	 day	 some	 man,	 one	 of	 our	 children,	 our
children's	 children,	 may	 be	 able	 to	 find	 a	 mechanism	 which	 can	 transform	 a
human	being	here...
and	 he	 will	 appear	 far	 away	 on	 another	 planet,	 on	 another	 solar	 system,	 on
another	star,	millions	of	light	years	away,	within	a	second."
Always	look	at	life	as	opening	new	doors.
Never	be	hopeless,	never	be	meaningless.
Never	for	a	moment	settle	down	with	the	idea	that	all	is	finished	because	sex	is
finished.
It	is	good	that	it	is	finished...	it	is	good	that	you	are	not	created	by	nature	in	such
a	 way	 that	 you	 can	 disturb	 its	 inner	 mechanism.	 If	 you	 can	 look	 into	 your
chemistry,	suddenly	your	chemical	elements	will	start	behaving	differently.	They
don't	 like	 to	be	watched;	 they	are	naked,	 they	don't	want	 to	be	watched!	They
have	 their	 own	etiquette,	 their	 own	culture,	 their	 own	behavior.	They	are	very
traditional	people.
So	one	thing	you	should	remember:	biology	cannot	be	dropped	just	by	watching.
But	 sex	 is	 not	 really	 oriented	 in	 biology.	 In	 biology	 is	 its	 manifestation;	 its
orientation	is	in	the	brain,	which	can	be	watched.
So	 there	 is	no	need	 to	be	worried	because	you	are	 in	 India	 and	girlfriends	are
very	difficult.	They	are	difficult	because	of	your	fathers,	your	grandfathers,	and
all	 the	 idiots	 that	 have	 preceded	 them.	Otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 reason	why	 they
should	not	be	available;	the	number	is	almost	equal.
But	all	your	great	seers	have	prevented	you	from	getting	rid	of	an	ugly	slavery,
although	they	are	thought	to	be	people	who	have	been	teaching	you	to	go	beyond
sex.	I	say	unto	you:	They	are	the	people	who	have	been	keeping	you	under	the
slavery	of	sex	for	centuries.
The	only	way	to	go	beyond	it	is	either	to	experience	it	and	be	finished	with	it,	or
the	second	way,	which	is	a	little	difficult,	 is	to	watch	your	mind.	The	center	of
sex	is	in	the	mind,	it	 is	not	in	your	genitals	--	they	are	only	branches.	It	shows
there,	but	it	is	not	there.
This	was	discovered	after	the	second	world	war,	a	very	recent	discovery.	A	man
was	shot	on	the	battlefield,	and	was	brought	to	the	hospital.	He	survived,	but	his
whole	 leg	 was	 to	 be	 amputated.	 His	 whole	 leg	 was	 hurt	 in	 an	 explosion	 and
particularly	 his	 big	 toe.	 It	 was	 hurting	 terribly,	 and	 he	 was	 continuously
complaining,	"Do	something	about	my	toe,	it	is	unbearable."
Finally,	they	had	to	give	him	anesthesia,	and	when	they	looked	they	found	it	was
not	only	the	big	toe,	but	his	whole	leg	had	to	be	amputated,	otherwise	he	would
not	 be	 able	 to	 survive.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 have	 one	 leg	 and	 to	 be	 alive	 than	 the
alternative....
There	was	no	time	to	ask	the	man,	there	was	no	time	to	ask	his	family;	it	was	on
the	battlefield,	and	the	doctor	simply	decided,	"We	have	to	do	it;	otherwise	the
man	is	gone."
They	 amputated	his	 leg,	 and	when	he	 came	back	 to	 consciousness	 after	 a	 few
hours	he	said	immediately,	"Do	something.	My	big	toe	is	hurting	very	much."
The	doctors	 laughed,	because	 they	knew	now	there	was	no	big	 toe.	The	whole
leg	was	gone,	so	how	could	it	be	hurting?	But	he	was	covered	with	blankets,	so
he	had	no	idea	what	had	happened.	He	insisted,	and	the	doctors	said,	"You	don't
understand.	It	is	not	possible,	it	is	only	your	imagination."
He	said,	"What	nonsense	are	you	 talking?	 I	am	suffering	and	you	are	 teaching
me	about	imagination...?"
So	 the	 doctor	 threw	 the	 blanket	 off	 and	 showed	 him,	 "Now	 tell	me,	where	 is
your	toe?"
The	man	could	not	believe	it:	his	whole	leg	was	gone!	The	toe	was	gone	but	it
was	still	hurting!	He	said,	"I	understand	now	why	you	cannot	understand	me	and
why	you	are	still	unaware	of	the	fact	that	my	toe	is	hurting	very	badly."
The	man	was	perfectly	sane,	and	the	doctors	had	to	work	out	what	the	problem
was.	Then	they	found	that	it	is	not	the	toe,	but	some	center	in	his	brain	which	has
been	hurt,	which	 is	 connected	with	 the	 toe.	So	whether	 the	 toe	 is	 there	or	 not
does	not	matter;	 the	toe	will	hurt,	because	the	center	continues	vibrating	in	the
same	way.
So	a	man	can	amputate	his	genitals,	but	don't	believe	 that	he	has	gone	beyond
sex.	His	sexual	center	will	go	on	vibrating.	You	can	watch	that	sexual	center:	in
your	meditations	it	will	come	in	sexual	fantasies,	just	as	it	comes	in	your	dreams.
Don't	be	disturbed,	and	don't	call	it	evil,	sin....
Don't	condemn	it,	 it	 is	natural,	perfectly	natural.	 It	 is	 just	 that	your	society	has
gone	unnatural;	otherwise	 there	would	not	have	been	 so	much	 trouble.	 If	your
center	of	sex	in	the	brain	was	exhausted	by	your	genitals,	there	would	have	been
no	trouble.	But	your	society	has	prevented,	blocked	the	way,	so	the	whole	of	sex
has	become	cerebral.	Now	it	is	only	in	the	mind.	It	goes	on	and	on...	and	it	has
no	outlet.
Jean-Paul	 Sartre	 has	written	 a	 very	 beautiful	 book,	NO	EXIT.	He	 says,	 "Any
situation	in	which	you	find	no	exit	becomes	hell."	How	long	can	you	go	on	and
on,	and	you	don't	find	any	door	to	get	out?	The	situation	may	be	comfortable....
Jean-Paul	Sartre's	story	--	it	is	a	beautiful	story:	in	a	sitting	room,	on	comfortable
sofas,	a	few	people	are	sitting,	all	strangers.	Whatever	they	need	is	immediately
supplied...	but	there	is	no	exit;	they	cannot	go	out.	How	long	can	you	remain?	--
it	 is	comfortable,	 luxurious,	whatever	you	need	is	supplied,	but	you	don't	have
any	privacy,	those	people	are	always	there.	It	is	a	very	confined	space;	you	don't
have	 enough	 space	 for	 yourself,	 and	 the	 ultimate	 problem	 is	 how	 to	 get	 out.
There	is	no	door	at	all,	and	there	is	nobody	to	ask.	Everybody	is	a	stranger,	and
they	all	said,	"We	are	in	the	same	trap."
This	is	his	description	of	modern	hell.	But	I	understand	that	this	is	the	situation
of	the	modern	mind:	you	are	closed	in	your	skull,	there	is	no	door,	things	go	on
and	on....
So	your	question,	Manatit	Bharti,	is	meaningful,	but	not	impossible	to	solve.	You
will	 just	have	to	be	more	meditative	than	the	Western	counterpart,	Nityanando.
Nityanando	can	meditate	more	easily,	more	relaxedly	--	in	fact	joyously:	"This	is
perfectly	good;	otherwise	the	despair..."
You	will	 find	 it	 difficult	 --	 but	 I	 am	 not	 responsible	 for	 your	 difficulty.	 Your
saints,	 your	 tirthankaras,	 your	 avataras,	 your	mahatmas	 --	 all	 these	whom	you
have	been	worshiping,	all	your	jailers,	have	imprisoned	you	in	such	a	way	that
you	will	never	become	enlightened.
But	 if	you	make	a	 real,	 sincere	effort...	 and	by	sincere	effort	 I	mean	you	have
simply	 to	watch,	not	 to	 judge.	 It	will	 take	a	 little	 longer	 time	 for	you	 than	 for
Nityanando,	 because	 he	 has	 done	 thirty	 years'	 gymnastics	 before.	 So	 on	 the
whole	it	won't	be	much	different:	he	has	done	much	exercise	before,	but	you	will
have	to	do	it	now.	His	exercise	was	with	other	women,	your	exercise	will	be	with
the	woman	inside	your	mind,	just	the	image.	In	a	way	you	will	create	less	mess
than	Nityanando.
So	all	in	all,	all	things	considered,	things	are	equal.	He	has	done	his	homework	--
you	have	to	start.	He	is	blessed	because	he	is	finished	with	it	and	he	can	take	a
quantum	leap	into	meditation.	You	are	blessed	because	you	need	not	go	through
all	the	pushups	that	he	has	done,	useless,	ugly....
Every	morning	one	feels,	"What	an	idiot	I	am"	--	but	by	the	evening	again	one
thinks,	 "At	 least	 one	 time	more!"	And	 one	 knows	 perfectly	well	 that	 this	 has
been	 going	 on	 for	 years:	 one	 time	 more.	 But	 every	 evening	 one	 becomes
helpless;	every	morning	one	becomes	wise,	a	sage,	one	can	even	teach	others.
Just	 the	other	day	I	was	telling	you	about	Vijayanand.	In	his	article	he	says	he
can	teach	me	one	or	two	things....
I	have	told	my	people	to	inform	him,	"You	are	too	poor	--	just	one	or	two?	You
come	here	and	I	will	 teach	you	one	or	 two	thousand,	or	as	many	as	you	want!
One	or	two	things?	--	just	two	bullets	in	your	gun?	Then	you	will	look	awkward
standing	there	--
what	to	do...?"
That	 reminds	me:	 I	was	 a	 student,	 and	 there	was	 in	Nagpur	University	 an	 all-
India	competition,	a	debating	competition.	And	just	as	I	spoke	and	went	back	to
my	seat,	the	second	person...	he	belonged	to	the	Sanskrit	University	of	Varanasi.
The	Sanskrit	University	 in	Varanasi	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	English;	 it	 is	 pure
teaching	of	Sanskrit,	everything	is	taught	in	Sanskrit.
He	 must	 have	 been	 feeling	 a	 little	 inferior	 to	 all	 the	 universities'	 candidates,
although	the	discussion	was	in	Hindi.	And	it	is	psychological	because	there	was
no	need	for	him	to	feel	inferior.	But	unconscious	man	is	unconscious....	Just	to
impress	he	started,	"Brothers	and	sisters..."	and	went	on.	After	just	two	minutes
he	said,	"I	will	give	you	a	quotation	of	Bertrand	Russell"	--	and	he	did	not	know
much	 English,	 so	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 sentence	 he	 stopped,	 the	 needle	 got
stuck....	 He	 looked	 all	 around,	 and	 there	 was	 no	 help	 because	 there	 was	 no
question	of	any	help....
But	 I	could	not	bear	 to	see	his	awkwardness	 --	 I	was	sitting	closest	 to	him,	he
was	next	 to	me	 --	 so	 I	 said,	 "Start	 again."	Finding	no	other	 solution	he	had	 to
follow	me.	He	 started	 again...	 but	 I	meant	 something	 else:	 I	meant,	 "Start	 the
quotation	again;	perhaps	by	repeating	again	you	may	remember...."	But	this	is	a
problem	with	memory:	 if	 you	 have	 come	with	 a	memorized	 lecture,	 then	 you
cannot	start	from	the	middle.
He	started	again:	"Brothers	and	sisters..."	and	 it	was	such	a	hilarious	scene:	he
was	saying	the	same	things	that	he	had	said!	And	Bertrand	Russell...	and	again	at
the	same	point...
because	 when	 the	 needle	 sticks	 it	 always	 sticks	 at	 the	 same	 point	 on	 the
gramophone	record.
He	looked	at	me,	and	I	said,	"Start	again!	There	is	no	way	out."	And	people	were
laughing	 hilariously	 and	 there	 were	 almost	 ten	 thousand	 students	 of	 the
university,	 all	 the	 colleges,	 professors,	 and	 it	 was	 such	 a	 tremendous	 chaos....
But	he	started	again:
"Brothers	and	sisters..."	and	came	to	the	same	point!
He	looked	at	me,	and	I	said,	"What	can	I	do?	Start	again!"	And	he	was	such	an
idiot	 that	 rather	 than	sitting	down,	dropping	 the	whole	 thing,	he	 tried	one	 time
more.	Time	was	running	out...	because	ten	minutes	only	was	the	time	allowed,
and	this	was	the	last	time.
As	the	ten	minutes	were	over	he	had	come	again	to	a	stop.	He	looked	at	me,	and
I	said,
"Now	it	is	finished!"
He	was	very	angry	at	me.	When	he	came	by	my	side	he	said,	"You	are	a	strange
person.
You	made	me	a	laughingstock."
I	said,	"You	were	looking	at	me.	You	were	asking	me	for	some	suggestion,	and
whatever	I	could	manage,	I	suggested.	It	was	still	up	to	you	to	follow	it	or	not.	I
was	not	giving	you	an	order,	`You	have	to	start...'	I	was	simply	saying	that	this	is
one	of	the	ways.	If	one	gets	stuck,	start	again.	And	it	is	not	my	experience,	so	I
don't	know	--	because	I	have	never	crammed	anything,	so	I	never	stop.	If	I	stop,
I	stop	of	my	own	accord,	not	out	of	any	compulsion.	I	can	stop	anywhere,	and	I
can	start	from	anywhere,	I	don't	go	backwards.
So	don't	be	angry	with	me,	I	was	simply	being	helpful."
He	 said,	 "What,	 helpful...?	 I	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 show	 my	 face	 tomorrow	 to
anybody.
Everybody	is	laughing."
I	said,	"Anyway,	your	face	is	not	such	that	anybody	would	like	to	see	it!"
It	will	be	a	little	difficult	for	you,	because	you	will	come	again	and	again	to	the
point,	sex,	because	that	is	your	repression.
But	always	remember:	the	responsibility	goes	to	your	forefathers,	to	SHRIMAD
BHAGAVADGITA,	 to	 the	VEDAS,	 to	 all	 your	 so-called	 great	 seers.	 I	 am	not
responsible;	 I	 am	 simply	 giving	 you	 the	 only	 possible	 way.	 I	 cannot	 tell	 the
women	of	India,	"This	poor	Manatit	Bharti	wants	to	get	rid	of	sex,	so	please	help
him"	 --	 they	will	 kill	me!	They	 are	 going	 to	 kill	me	 anyway,	 but	 I	will	 try	 to
continue	as	long	as	possible.
And	certainly	I	would	not	like	to	be	assassinated	just	for	this...	your	meditation.
That	 is	not	my	business.	Either	you	 find	some	woman	or	you	meditate	and	be
watchful	--	don't	be	involved	in	your	sexual	fantasies.	They	will	disappear,	but
they	will	take	time.	But	Nityanando	has	also	taken	time,	thirty	years....	You	may
take	not	more	than	three	years	--
that	is	the	maximum,	if	you	try.
But	 if	 you	 are	 thinking	 that	 I	 will	 suggest	 to	 some	 woman,	 "Help	 this	 poor
Indian"	--	I	am	not	going	to	do	that.	The	women	that	come	from	the	West	report
to	me	again	and	again	that	these	few	Indians	who	come	don't	seem	to	come	for
meditation.	 They	 come	 here	 just	 to	 stare	 at	 women,	 or	 just,	 if	 they	 can	 get	 a
chance,	to	touch	a	woman.	When	everybody	is	meditating	with	closed	eyes,	they
open	their	eyes.	These	people	are	not	here	for	meditation.
No	Western	woman	 likes	 this	 ugly	 repressive	mind,	 so	 you	 have	 to	 suffer	 for
your	 forefathers,	 your	 tradition,	 your	 religion.	 That	 is	 nobody	 else's
responsibility.
Just	meditate.	Women	will	be	coming...	but	don't	open	your	eyes,	because	then
real	 women	 are	 all	 around.	 Those	 real	 women	 are	 not	 for	 you;	 you	 have	 to
manage	with	your	fantasy	women.	They	are	enough:	within	 three	years,	 if	you
can	continue,	you	will	be	finished,	they	will	disappear	from	your	mind.
But	this	is	the	difference	between	the	East	and	the	West.	There	are	many	other
differences,	but	this	is	one	of	the	most	significant,	because	it	is	going	to	change
the	 whole	 consciousness	 of	 man.	 But	 ways	 can	 be	 found.	 If	 I	 can	 help
Nityanando,	I	can	also	help	you.
You	are	asking,	"Is	not	 it	possible	 to	go	beyond	sex	by	being	a	watcher	of	our
biology,	just	as	we	can	go	beyond	our	mind	by	watching	it?"
Biology	 you	 cannot	 watch;	 you	 don't	 understand	 what	 you	 are	 asking.	 Just
watching	the	mind	is	enough,	because	mind	contains	all	the	centers	--	the	seven
hundred	 centers	 which	 control	 your	 whole	 body.	 Your	 whole	 biology,
physiology,	chemistry,	hormonal	system	-
-	everything	is	controlled	by	seven	hundred	centers	in	your	small	skull.	You	just
watch	that....
You	are	carrying	a	whole	load	of	films	in	your	small	head.	Sit	down	anywhere
and	the	film	starts.	Just	don't	get	involved,	don't	get	interested,	don't	start	saying,
"Oh	my	god,	this	is	the	woman	I	have	been	looking	for!"	Don't	start	saying	such
things	inside	you;	otherwise	you	will	miss	the	whole	point,	you	will	have	to	see
the	film	again.
When	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 India	 films	 started	 --	 those	were	 the	 days	 of	 silent
movies	--	a	 touring	movie	house	came	into	a	village.	One	villager	purchased	a
ticket	for	the	first	show	--	that	was	the	matinee	show	--	and	there	comes	a	scene
when	a	beautiful	woman	is	undressing.	The	villager	stands	up,	and	many	people
shout,	"Sit	down!"	--	so	he	has	to	sit	down.
But	he	is	alerted	to	what	is	happening,	and	just	then,	when	she	is	going	to	drop
her	last	piece	of	clothing,	a	railway	train	passes	by.	He	has	been	trying	to	look
from	every	angle,	but	he	cannot	see	the	woman.	By	the	time	the	railway	train	has
passed,	the	woman	is	swimming	in	the	lake.	He	said,	"My	god,	the	real	thing	I
missed!"
The	show	was	 finished	and	everybody	was	gone,	but	he	was	still	 sitting	 there.
The	 manager	 came	 and	 asked,	 "Why	 are	 you	 sitting	 there?	 The	 show	 is
finished."
He	said,	"It	is	finished,	but	here	is	the	money	for	the	second	ticket.	I	will	see	the
second	 show,	 I	 will	 see	 the	 third	 show,	 I	 will	 not	 leave	 here	 unless	 I	 get	 the
point."
The	manager	said,	"What	point?"
He	said,	"Don't	talk	to	me;	don't	disturb	me.	You	just	bring	the	ticket.	I	cannot
leave	this	seat.	From	here	the	view	is	very	clear."
The	manager	said,	"This	seems	 to	be	strange...	but	what	 is	 the	harm?"	And	he
brought	him	another	ticket.
The	 second	 show	 he	 was	 very	 alert,	 very	 watchful;	 he	 was	 watching	 almost
holding	his	breath.	But	that	goddamn	train	again	came!
The	second	show	finished,	the	point	was	still	missed.	The	manager	came	saying,
"Now	it	is	time,	you	have	seen	the	same	film	twice."
He	said,	"I	have	seen	it	twice,	but	I	will	see	it	thrice,	I	will	see	it	four	times...	I
will	see	it	my	whole	life!"
The	manager	 said,	 "You	 can	 confide	 in	 me.	What	 is	 the	 problem?	 Don't	 you
understand	the	film?"
He	 said,	 "I	 understand	 everything.	Only	 one	 thing	 I	 don't	 understand:	will	 the
train	be	late	some	day	or	not?	In	this	country	a	train	coming	exactly	at	the	same
time	every	day	is	not	possible!"
You	will	have	a	 little	difficulty.	The	 train	may	come	at	 the	 right	 time	and	you
may	miss	the	point.	Don't	be	worried.	If	you	can	be	silently	watchful,	the	mind	is
enough	 --	 because	 the	 mind	 is	 exactly	 all	 that	 controls	 your	 whole	 body,	 the
whole	system.
I	was	sitting	by	the	side	of	the	Ganges,	near	the	Christian	college	in	Allahabad.
One	of	my	 friends	was	 studying	 there	 and	 I	was	 staying	with	 him,	 but	 by	 the
evening	 I	 had	 gone	 on	 the	 riverbank.	 And	 the	 Ganges	 at	 Allahabad	 is
tremendous,	oceanic,	very	beautiful.
Two	great	rivers	meet	there,	Ganges	and	Yamuna.
In	ancient	 times	 it	seems	a	 third	great	 river	used	 to	meet	 there	also,	Saraswati,
which	has	disappeared	in	the	meantime.	What	happened	to	it?	--	because	in	the
old	scriptures	 it	 is	mentioned,	 in	all	 the	old	maps	it	 is	mentioned....	Something
went	wrong:	it	may	have	lost	its	sources	of	water,	it	may	have	changed	its	route,
but	it	no	longer	exists.	But	still,	because	of	the	three	rivers,	Allahabad	is	called
Triveni.	Triveni	means	 trinity,	 three;	 the	English	word	 three	 is	nothing	but	 the
Sanskrit	word	tri.
I	was	sitting	there	alone,	just	watching	the	beautiful	river	flowing	so	silently,	you
could	hardly	 suspect	 the	 flow	of	 it.	At	 that	 very	 time	 a	 young	man	 also	 came
who	was	 a	 Hindu	 sadhu,	 a	monk.	 It	 may	 have	 been	 his	 place	 to	 come	 every
evening	to	meditate,	as	it	was	very	silent.	He	sat	by	my	side	in	his	lotus	posture
and	started	meditating.
I	 was	 sitting	 by	 his	 side,	 so	 I	 started	 looking	 at	 him	 to	 see	 whether	 he	 is
meditating	or	not.
You	will	 say,	 "How	 can	 you	 see	 from	outside?"	There	 is	 a	 small	 art:	 you	 can
simply	see	from	the	eyelids	whether	 the	eyes	 inside	are	moving	or	not.	 If	 they
are	moving,	 you	 can	 see	 the	movement	 from	 above,	 you	 can	 see	 the	 eyes	 are
moving	 inside.	 That	 means	 he	 is	 seeing	 scenes	 --	 maybe	 railway	 trains	 are
moving.	If	he	comes	to	meditate,	that	movement	stops,	because	there	is	nothing
to	see.
His	eyes	were	moving,	so	I	shook	him	and	I	told	him,	"Whom	do	you	think	you
are	deceiving?"
He	said,	"You	are	disturbing	my	meditation."
I	said,	"I	am	not	disturbing	your	meditation.	I	am	making	you	clear	that	 this	is
not	meditation."
He	said,	"How	can	you	say	from	the	outside?"
I	said,	"That	is	none	of	your	business.	But	I	can	say	that	you	were	seeing	things	-
-	your	eyes	were	moving."
He	became	afraid	when	I	said	that.	He	said,	"That's	true.	My	eyes	were	moving,
but	I	never	thought	that	somebody	could	see	that	from	outside."
I	said,	"I	am	in	the	same	profession.	You	can	deceive	anybody	else,	but	not	me.
Now	tell	me	what	you	were	seeing."
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 too	much.	 You	 are	 a	 stranger,	 I	 don't	 know	 anything	 about
you!"
I	said,	"And	whom	were	you	seeing?	--	they	were	all	strangers...."
He	looked	at	me	and	he	said,	"That's	true,	they	were	strangers.	But	you	seem	a
strange	man,	why	are	you	harassing	me?"
I	said,	"I	am	not	harassing	you,	I	am	simply	asking	what	you	were	seeing.	Your
being	a	Hindu	monk	I	can	predict	that	these	cannot	be	male	strangers,	these	were
female	strangers	--	because	monks	cannot	avoid	seeing	women."
He	 relaxed.	 He	 looked	 at	 me	 and	 said,	 "You	 are	 right.	 But	 how	 could	 you
manage...?"
I	said,	"There	 is	nothing	to	be	managed;	 it	 is	very	simple.	What	will	 repressed
people	do?
All	their	repressions	will	start	like	vomiting	in	their	mind."
So,	 Manatit	 Bharti,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 go	 through	 a	 vomiting	 experience.
Nityanando	has	already	gone....
It	does	not	matter	 that	you	have	become	a	sannyasin;	 it	won't	change	anything
unless	your	sannyas	triggers	a	meditativeness	in	you.
"Oy	Veh,	to	be	a	Polish	Jew,"	said	Levitz	to	Joe	Finklebaum.	"We	are	persecuted
and	harassed,	and	all	because	we	are	the	chosen	people."
"Yes,"	said	Finklebaum.	"That's	why	I	changed	my	name.	I	was	just	fed	up	with
being	harassed."
"You	changed	your	name?	What	did	you	change	it	to?"	said	Levitz.
"Well,	I	used	to	be	called	Joe	Finklebaum,	and	now	I'm	Swami	Joe	Finklebaum."
But	that	will	not	help	much!	Just	by	changing	your	name...	and	still	you	remain
Joe	Finklebaum.
You	 have	 become	 a	 sannyasin.	Now	 it	 is	 a	 responsibility	 on	 you	 to	 fulfill	 the
commitment	of	sannyas	--	and	that	is	meditation.
Without	meditation	there	is	no	sannyas.
It	 is	 only	 your	 pure	 consciousness	 rising	 upwards	 --	 slowly,	 slowly	 moving
beyond	the	gravitation	of	lower	things	--	that	will	make	you	a	sannyasin.
I	can	define	sannyas	as	a	flying	experience	to	the	stars.
You	 should	 always	 remain	mindful	 of	 one	 thing:	 that	 I	 cannot	 be	 deceived.	 I
know	 how	many	 people	 are	meditating.	 I	 know	 how	many	 people	 are	 simply
imitating.	I	know	how	a	few	people	are	simply	hanging	around.	But	don't	waste
your	time	--	because	time	is	not	money,	time	is	life!	And	if	you	have	taken	a	step
to	change,	to	transform,	then	don't	try	to	deceive,	because	you	will	be	deceiving
only	yourself,	not	me.
A	husband	complained	that	his	wife	was	a	liar.
"What	makes	you	say	that?"	asked	the	friend.
"Well,"	said	 the	husband,	"she	came	home	this	morning	and	 told	me	she	spent
the	night	with	Mary."
"Well,"	replied	the	friend,	"maybe	she	did.	How	do	you	know	she	was	lying?"
"How	do	I	know?"	cried	the	husband,	because	I	spent	the	night	with	Mary!"
It	 is	 better	 to	 be	 truthful	 than	 to	be	 caught	 lying.	Lying	 is	 so	undignified.	But
millions	 of	 people	 are	 pretending	 to	 be	what	 they	 are	 not.	At	 least	 I	 hope	my
people	will	simply	express	what	they	are.
I	told	you	about	this	Vijayanand.	In	his	article	he	says	that	I	preach	what	I	don't
practice.
I	was	amazed	--	because	I	practiced	first,	then	I	preached.	But	these	people	have
their	own	expectations,	and	they	think	their	expectations	should	be	fulfilled.	For
example,	a	man	who	 is	enlightened	should	be	poor,	as	 if	poverty	 is	 something
spiritual.	Those	who	preach	it,	they	should	be	it.	I	have	no	objection	about	it	--
but	I	have	never	preached	it,	so	why	should	I	practice	it?
I	am	preaching	just	the	opposite.	I	have	been	preaching	that	the	richer	you	are,
the	more	possibility	 there	 is	of	 transformation.	And	 I	don't	 see	 that	 comfort	 is
any	hindrance	to	your	being	meditative:	that	being	in	a	beautiful	garden	you	can
be	 less	meditative	 than	 being	 in	 the	 forest;	 that	 being	 naked	 you	 can	 become
enlightened	more	easily	than	having	comfortable	clothes.
I	think	otherwise.	I	think	when	it	is	cold	and	you	are	naked	--	rather	than	being
enlightened,	 you	 will	 suffer	 double	 pneumonia.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 have	 enough
clothes,	enlightened	or	not	enlightened,	then	at	least	double	pneumonia	will	not
happen!
But	this	has	been	my	experience	my	whole	life:	people	have	been	condemning
me	for	their	teachings.	They	are	not	my	teachings...	I	have	never	said,	"Blessed
are	 the	poor	because	 they	shall	 inherit	 the	kingdom	of	God."	They	are	enough
blessed	 if	 they	 can	 even	 inherit	 the	 kingdom	 of	 the	 devil!	 All	 religions	 have
evolved	only	when	 society	was	 comfortable	 and	 rich	 enough.	The	 twenty-four
tirthankaras	of	the	Jainas	were	all	sons	of	kings;	Gautam	Buddha	was	the	son	of
a	king;	Rama	and	Krishna	were	both	kings.	And	all	these	idiots	go	on	saying	that
I	should	live	as	a	poor	man	--	then	only	can	their	mind	be	satisfied.
I	am	not	here	to	satisfy	any	idiot's	mind	or	his	expectations;	neither	do	I	expect
anything	from	anybody,	nor	am	I	going	to	fulfill	anybody's	expectation.	Who	is
Vijayanand?	What	 does	 he	 know	 about	my	 teaching,	 and	what	 does	 he	 know
about	my	practice?	I	am	exactly	doing	what	I	am	saying.	I	say	only	afterwards...
Unless	I	have	done	it	and	experienced	it,	I	never	say	it,	because	who	knows,	it
may	not	be	right	 --	and	I	would	not	 like	my	people	 to	be	deceived.	 I	have	not
uttered	a	single	word	to	you	which	is	not	out	of	my	own	experience.
But	I	am	not	here	to	fulfill	somebody	else's	preachings.	I	am	not	here	to	fulfill
the	 preachings	 of	 Mahavira	 and	 be	 naked,	 I	 am	 not	 here	 to	 fulfill	 Krishna's
teachings	 and	 have	 a	 garage	 for	 sixteen	 thousand	 women.	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to
follow	 Rama's	 preachings	 and	 kill	 a	 poor	 young	 untouchable	 because	 he	 has
heard	the	brahmins	reciting	the	VEDAS.
Sudras	are	not	allowed	to	read,	are	not	allowed	even	to	hear	the	holy	scriptures,
because	 their	 hearing	will	 spoil	 the	 holiness	 of	 the	 scriptures.	 I	 don't	 see	 any
relationship.	Who	 is	hearing	cannot	make	any	difference	 to	 the	holy	 scripture.
Rama	poured	hot	melted	lead	into	the	ears	of	the	poor	young	fellow,	and	he	died.
This	was	the	punishment	so	that	sudras	should	not	come	near	any	temple	where
the	holy	scriptures	are	being	recited.	That	may	have	been	the	preaching	of	Rama,
and	that	may	be	Vijayanand's	God	--	God's	incarnation	--	I	don't	care.
If	 I	 see	 this	 fellow	Rama	 I'm	going	 to	 ask	him,	 "What	 right	 have	you	got,	 on
what	grounds...?	You	are	a	criminal,	you	have	committed	a	murder."
If	I	meet	Krishna,	who	is	thought	to	be	the	perfect	incarnation	of	God,	the	whole
God	come	only	for	the	first	time...	A	very	strange	idea,	as	if	God	comes	in	parts
also,	installments.	Rama	was	a	partial	incarnation,	perhaps	a	hand	or	a	head	or	a
leg	 or	 something	 else...	 you	 can	 understand,	 et	 cetera.	 Of	 what	 was	 he	 the
incarnation?	what	part?
Only	Krishna	is	a	perfect	incarnation	--	which	means	God	comes	complete.	Then
what	 happens	 in	 paradise?	 And	 this	 complete	 incarnation	 teaches	 absolutely
wrong	things:	he	teaches	violence,	he	teaches	war,	he	teaches	bloodshed.
I	am	not	going	to	fulfill	these	people's	teachings.
I	live	according	to	what	I	preach.
I	challenge	Vijayanand	to	come	here	and	tell	me	on	what	grounds	he	is	making
such	stupid	statements.	 In	fact,	he	 is	feeling	guilty.	He	was	not	an	ashramite;	I
have	 given	 him	 refuge	 here,	 because	 he	 was	 condemned	 in	 Bombay	 and	 he
would	 have	 been	 condemned	 all	 over	 India.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 ugly,	 unnatural,
unscientific,	 immoral,	 to	marry	 the	 daughter	 of	 your	 own	 sister.	 It	 is	 not	 only
against	religion,	 it	 is	against	science.	It	 is	not	only	against	 this	generation,	 it	 is
against	 future	 generations	 --	 because	 their	 children	 will	 be	 blind,	 may	 be
retarded,	may	be	born	with	AIDS...	anything	is	possible.
The	closer	the	blood,	the	uglier	the	children;	the	farther	the	blood,	the	better	the
breed.
That's	 the	 whole	 science	 of	 crossbreeding.	We	 bring	 English	 bulls	 for	 Indian
mother	cows,	and	nobody	even	bothers,	"What	are	you	doing?	English	bulls	for
your	mothers?
Have	you	gone	mad?..."
But	if	you	want	beautiful	bulls	yourself,	you	will	have	to	bring	as	faraway	males
and	females	as	possible	together.	The	crossbreed	is	always	better	than	the	father,
than	 the	 mother,	 both.	 Otherwise	 there	 was	 no	 need...	 everybody	 could	 have
married	 his	 own	 sister.	 That	 would	 have	 been	 the	 easiest	 and	 simplest	 and
cheapest	way:	no	cost,	no	problem,	no	dowry	--	just	marry	your	sister	and,	just
as	every	story	says,	they	lived	happily	ever	afterwards.
No	society	in	the	whole	world	allows	it.	Even	before	the	scientific	discovery	that
close	 blood	 breeds	 distorted	 children,	 people	 must	 have	 become	 aware	 long
before,	 thousands	 of	 years	 before....	 But	 the	 logic	 should	 be	 taken	 to	 its	 full
consequences:	no	Hindu	should	marry	another	Hindu,	no	Mohammedan	should
marry	 another	Mohammedan,	 no	Christian	 should	marry	 another	Christian,	 no
Indian	should	marry	another	Indian,	no	Russian	should	marry	another	Russian,
and	no	American	 should	marry	another	American.	 Just	by	 this	 simple	 formula
we	can	bring	about	a	tremendous	revolution	all	over	the	world.
Insist	 on	 faraway	 blood,	 and	 you	 will	 have	 a	 generation	 of	 highly	 superior
beings,	intellectually,	physically,	in	every	sense.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	whatever	I	am	teaching,	I	am	doing.	And	if	anybody
has	any	objection,	he	 is	welcome	just	before	my	people	 to	present	 the	case,	so
they	 can	 understand.	 I	 may	 not	 even	 need	 to	 answer;	 my	 people	 can	 answer,
"What	stupidity	are	you	talking	about?"
Here	 things	 are	 simple	 and	 sincere.	 Whatever	 I	 am	 saying,	 I	 am	 doing;	 my
preaching	and	my	practice	are	not	different.
Such	beautiful	silence...
This	is	what	I	preach,
And	this	is	what	I	practice.
Just	a	little	story	to	end	up	this	beautiful	peace	with	laughter.
A	salesman	is	forced	to	share	a	room	with	a	rabbi	in	a	crowded	hotel.	He	enters
the	room	and	finds	the	rabbi	kneeling	in	a	corner,	murmuring	his	prayers.
"Hi,"	says	the	salesman.	"I'm	your	new	roommate."
The	rabbi	nods	without	interrupting	his	prayers.
"Well	then,	which	bed	shall	I	take?"
The	rabbi	points	to	one	bed,	continuing	to	pray.	The	salesman	nervously	unpacks
his	bag,	then	all	of	a	sudden	says,	"Say,	rabbi,	do	you	mind	if	I	bring	up	a	girl?"
The	rabbi,	still	praying,	shouts,	"Two,	not	one!"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	I	am	the	first	world	citizen
12	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709120
ShortTitle:
PILGR12
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
110
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
COULD	YOU	PLEASE	GIVE	ME	A	FEW	SUTRAS	AND	JOKES	FOR	THE
NOURISHMENT	OF	MY	POOR	SOUL?
Devageet,	there	is	no	problem	in	giving	you	a	few	sutras	and	jokes	--	but	I	will
not	give	them	for	 the	nourishment	of	your	poor	soul	for	 the	simple	reason	that
soul	needs	no	nourishment.	The	soul	is	never	poor.
The	only	really	poor	people	in	the	world	are	those	who	are	unaware	of	their	soul
and	the	treasures	it	contains.
There	 is	 a	 poverty	 of	 the	 body,	 which	 is	 man-created.	 Science	 declares
definitively	 that	 we	 can	 produce	 enough	 food,	 enough	 nourishment	 for	 more
than	five	billion	people;	by	 the	end	of	 this	century	 the	population	of	 the	world
will	be	five	billion.	Who	is	preventing	them...?
Every	six	months	America	is	drowning	so	much	food	in	the	oceans	that	just	the
cost	 of	 taking	 it	 to	 the	 ocean	 comes	 to	 two	 billion	 dollars.	 And	 the	 same	 is
happening	in	Europe:	every	six	months	they	have	so	much	food	that	they	don't
have	customers	for	it	--
mountains	of	butter,	and	they	don't	have	any	more	warehouses.	Keeping	it	in	the
warehouses	is	costly;	they	have	to	drown	it	in	the	ocean.	The	last	installment	in
Europe	also	took	two	billion	dollars...	just	to	drown	the	butter,	cheese	and	other
nourishing	food.
At	 the	 time	 they	 drowned	 it,	 one	 thousand	 people	 in	 Ethiopia	 were	 dying	 of
starvation	every	day.	By	the	end	of	this	century	--	if	this	stupid	politics	and	these
ugly	lines	on	the	map	don't	disappear	--	then	half	the	population	of	the	world	is
going	to	die.	Of	course,	that	half	will	not	be	in	the	advanced,	scientifically	and
technically	equipped	West;	it	will	be	in	the	East.
I	am	always	surprised	at	what	the	Eastern	politicians	are	doing:	I	cannot	deny	the
simple	fact	that	they	are	trying	to	gain	more	nuclear	weapons	without	bothering
that	 their	 own	 population	 will	 die	 in	 such	 large	 numbers	 --	 one	 in	 two.	 That
means	every	house	will	be	surrounded	by	corpses;	there	will	not	be	even	people
to	bury	them	or	burn	them.	The	by-products	of	so	many	people	--	for	example,	in
India	 fifty	 million	 people	 will	 die	 --	 their	 death	 and	 their	 rotting	 bodies	 will
create	millions	of	diseases,	about	which	nobody	is	bothering	at	all.
The	Indian	prime	minister	goes	to	Russia	to	get	more	military	power;	he	goes	to
America	 to	 get	 more	 uranium	 so	 that	 he	 can	 also	 make	 nuclear	 weapons.	 It
seems	 so	 stupid	 and	 so	 mad...	 if	 we	 could	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 the	 politicians	 there
would	really	be	peace	in	the	world.
And	 the	 same	applies	 to	 the	 religious	people.	Now	 the	Vatican	pope	comes	 to
India,	 and	 goes	 to	 Mother	 Teresa's	 orphanage,	 where	 only	 seven	 hundred
orphans	are.	He	is	very	much	interested	in	saving	them,	but	he	says	not	a	single
word	 when	 the	 European	 market,	 where	 he	 lives,	 drowns	 millions	 of	 tons	 of
nourishment	which	could	have	saved	Ethiopia.
What	 is	 true	 about	 political	 leaders	 is	 also	 true	 about	 your	 so-called	 religious
leaders.
Their	 concern	 seems	 to	 be	 that	 it	will	 be	 better	 that	 the	East	 is	 finished...	 but
their	part	of	the	world	should	become	more	affluent,	more	rich.
There	 is	 also	 poverty	 of	 the	 mind.	 That	 too	 is	 man-created,	 and	 in	 that	 the
religious	 leaders	 are	 far	 ahead	 of	 the	 political	 leaders.	 They	 have	 stopped	 all
sources	of	man's	intelligence	and	its	growth.	All	the	religions,	without	exception,
have	been	trying	that	man	should	not	have	intelligence;	on	the	contrary,	they	are
teaching	that	you	should	have	belief.
Belief	is	anti-intelligence.
They	 have	 been	 teaching	 that	 you	 should	 not	 have	 doubt	 --	 and	 doubt	 is	 the
mother	 of	 all	 invention.	 Doubt	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 science,
technology.	Any	search	begins	with	doubt,	and	disbelief.	If	you	believe	and	you
don't	 doubt,	 you	 stay	 where	 you	 are,	 and	 your	 position	 goes	 on	 deteriorating
because	the	population	goes	on	growing.
You	are	becoming	every	moment	more	poor	than	you	think,	because	millions	of
children	 are	 born	 every	 day.	 But	 the	 pope	 did	 not	 condemn	 America	 for
destroying	food,	did	not	say	a	single	word	to	the	European	governments	and	the
European	 Common	 Market	 against	 destroying	 nourishment	 --	 which	 is
absolutely	 ugly	when	 people	 are	 dying.	With	 the	 same	money	 the	 food	 could
have	 reached	 to	Ethiopia.	But	 it	 reached	 into	 the	 deepest	 ocean,	where	 it	will
disappear	and	be	eaten	by	sea	animals.	It	seems	there	has	suddenly	arisen	a	great
love	for	sea	animals....
Man	has	been	kept	half	nourished	as	far	as	the	body	is	concerned,	because	a	half
nourished	man	cannot	revolt.	His	sole	concern	is	at	least	one	meal	a	day	--	and
that	meal	is	not	scientifically	nourishing:	just	to	fill	the	empty	stomach	is	not	to
have	a	nourishing	meal.	You	need	certain	amounts	of	vitamins,	you	need	certain
amounts	of	minerals,	you	need	certain	amounts	of	chemicals.	Nobody	seems	to
be	awake,	but	an	undernourished	body	 is	weak,	 in	 the	state	of	a	beggar	 --	and
beggars	don't	revolt.
A	retarded	mind	cannot	even	think	that	the	world	can	progress,	that	there	can	be
some	evolution	possible.	The	retarded	mind	has	been	told	by	all	the	religions:	Be
contented	 as	 you	 are.	 This	 contentment	 is	 not	 the	 real	 contentment;	 this
contentment	 is	 to	 repress	any	 rebellious	situation,	 to	protect	 the	 rich	and	 to	 let
the	poor	die.	Be	contented....
Marx	was	right	when	he	said,	"Religion	 is	 the	opium	of	 the	people."	 I	want	 to
add	a	few	more	compliments	to	religion:	it	is	not	only	opium,	it	is	poison,	it	is
suicide,	 it	 is	 murder,	 it	 is	 war,	 it	 is	 rape.	 It	 is	 keeping	 man	 continuously	 in
slavery,	it	does	not	allow	any	freedom	of	thought	--	and	if	there	is	no	freedom	of
thought,	consciousness	has	no	possibility	to	grow.	But	the	soul	is	beyond	these
idiots'	hands.	They	don't	know	anything	about	it;	otherwise	they	might	have	tried
to	keep	it	also	undernourished.
Devageet,	your	soul	is	as	rich	as	any	Gautam	Buddha	or	as	any	Jesus	or	as	any
Lao	Tzu.
Your	soul	does	not	need	anything	--	except	discovery.	Never	think	for	a	moment
that	the	soul	is	poor;	it	is	the	richest	exploration.	The	finding	of	it	will	make	you
far	richer	than	the	richest	man	in	the	world.	Emperors	will	look	like	beggars.
Today	in	America,	which	is	the	richest	country,	the	richest	men	have	only	four
and	a	half	billion	dollars;	in	Japan,	the	richest	man	in	the	world	has	twenty-one
billion	dollars.	But	their	souls	are	completely	forgotten.	They	are	only	counting
their	money,	knowing	perfectly	well	 that	all	 that	money	is	soaked	in	blood;	all
that	money	 is	out	of	 exploitation	of	 the	 starving,	of	 the	 retarded.	The	 retarded
and	starving	have	been	kept	retarded	and	starving;	otherwise	it	would	be	difficult
to	exploit	them.
You	cannot	exploit	an	intelligent	man.
You	cannot	exploit	a	man	of	understanding.
You	cannot	exploit	a	man	who	knows	his	own	eternal	being.
Devageet,	your	soul	needs	discovery	not	nourishment.	Soul	is	not	material,	it	is
your	eternal	energy.	It	was	before	your	death,	it	will	be	after	your	death.
But	for	your	mind,	the	first	sutra:
A	smile	is	the	shortest	distance	between	people.
But	even	smiles	have	disappeared.	People	have	 fallen	so	 far	apart	 that	nobody
truly	smiles;	all	smiles	have	become	Jimmy	Carter	smiles.	It	is	very	difficult	to
find	a	smile	which	 is	not	plastic.	Just	stretching	your	 lips	 from	ear	 to	ear	does
not	mean	you	are	smiling;	you	may	be	exercising	your	lips...!
And	 have	 you	 seen	 any	 photograph	 of	 Jimmy	 Carter	 since	 he	 was	 no	 longer
president	 of	America?	 I	 have	 seen	many.	 I	 have	been	watching:	 the	 smile	 has
simply	disappeared;	he	looks	a	sad,	defeated,	frustrated	man.	The	smile	was	not
his,	it	was	political,	diplomatic.
This	is	really	ugly,	that	people	cannot	even	smile	at	each	other.	So	I	can	certainly
say	it	is	a	significant	sutra:	a	smile	is	the	shortest	distance	between	people.
A	statesman	is	a	politician	who	did	not	get	caught.
They	are	all	 thieves,	 they	are	all	cheats,	 they	are	criminals.	But	when	 they	are
not	caught,	then	the	politician	raises	his	status:	he	becomes	a	statesman.
Life	without	wife	is	better	than	wife	without	life.
While	attending	a	baseball	match,	the	American	president,	Ronald	Reagan,	was
accidentally	 hit	 on	 the	 head	 by	 a	 baseball.	Next	 day,	 the	 newspaper	 headlines
read:
"Reagan's	head	X-rayed	--	reveals	nothing."
A	salesman	knocks	on	the	front	door	of	a	house	and	a	little	boy	opens	it,	turns	to
his	mother	and	calls,	"Hey,	Mom,	it's	a	live	commercial."
There	 is	 always	 something	 about	 your	 success	 that	 displeases	 even	 your	 best
friends.	 I	 have	 been	 asked	 again	 and	 again	 why	 America	 destroyed	 our
commune,	and	I	have	answered,	"Because	we	were	so	successful."	If	we	had	not
been	 successful	 nobody	would	have	 cared.	But	 because	we	were	 successful	 in
transforming	 a	 desert	 --	 which	 had	 never	 produced	 anything	 green	 --	 into	 a
beautiful	oasis,	even	friends	became	enemies.
Nobody	 can	 tolerate	 your	 success.	When	 you	 are	 a	 failure,	 everybody	 has	 the
upper	hand;	he	sympathizes	with	you,	he	says,	"Poor	fellow..."	But	nobody	goes
to	the	successful	man	to	congratulate	him;	it	hurts.
I	 am	 happy	 that	 the	 richest	 country	 in	 the	 world	 became	 jealous	 of	 a	 small
commune	of	five	thousand	people.	It	has	proved	indubitably	that	money	does	not
change	people,	or	their	mind.
I	 could	 have	 understood	 it	 if	 our	 commune	 in	 India	 would	 have	 been	 as
successful	as	it	was	in	America...	but	I	am	certain	in	India	we	would	have	been
destroyed	exactly	on	the	same	lines.	In	fact,	they	are	trying,	because	we	are	still
gathering,	things	are	returning...
people	are	coming	again,	and	the	fear	in	New	Delhi	is	great.	It	 is	strange:	they
have	 all	 the	 power,	 but	 still	 they	 cannot	 see	 people	 happy,	 joyous,	 creative,
loving	and	living	their	own	way,	living	their	own	style,	living	in	freedom.
Because	the	whole	world	is	 living	in	slavery,	 the	free	man	cannot	be	 tolerated.
The	whole	world	is	a	failure.	Even	the	richest	are	still	beggars	because	they	want
more.	What	is	the	difference?...	A	beggar	wants	more,	the	emperor	wants	more	--
their	minds	are	functioning	in	the	same	way.
The	 commune	 became	 the	 target	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 American	 politics,	 and
particularly	the	fundamentalist	Christians	--	because	they	were	not	so	successful
in	two	thousand	years	in	bringing	a	smile	to	people's	faces,	bringing	light	to	their
eyes,	bringing	silences	to	their	hearts.	I	had	never	thought	that	they	will	become
jealous.	I	thought	they	had	everything	--
why	should	they	be	jealous	of	our	cars	or	our	airplanes,	our	roads,	our	 turning
the	desert	into	an	oasis?	They	should	have	been	happy	and	helpful.
But	 this	 is	 not	 the	 way	 insane	 people	 function.	 They	 became	 afraid	 that	 an
authentic	communism	is	happening	--	a	communism	which	is	not	imposed	from
outside,	 which	 has	 no	 dictatorship.	 Just	 out	 of	 the	 joy	 of	 creation,	 people	 are
creating.	 This	 became	 more	 dangerous	 to	 them	 than	 the	 Soviet	 Union.	 It	 is
absolutely	out	of	all	proportion....	But	success	hurts	even	your	best	friends,	and
failure	even	brings	your	enemies	to	sympathize.
One	 hopes	 one	 day	 things	 will	 be	 totally	 different.	 Success	 will	 receive	 its
reward,	and	failure	will	receive	all	the	support	that	can	transform	it	into	success.
But	 that	 is	 not	 the	 thing:	 sympathy	 is	 empty.	 And	 destroying	 success	 is
absolutely	necessary,	because	people	start	comparing:	What	has	the	government
been	 doing?	 --	 the	 richest	 government,	 the	most	 powerful	 government,	 which
could	have	changed	the	whole	of	America	into	a	paradise.
But	 even	 in	 America,	 though	 they	 don't	 talk	 about	 it,	 there	 are	 thirty	 million
beggars.
Their	news	media	people	come	to	India	to	photograph	beggars,	to	propagate	to
the	 whole	 world	 that	 India	 is	 a	 beggar.	 But	 nobody	 knows	 that	 America	 has
thirty	million	beggars	--
and	by	a	very	strange	coincidence,	 thirty	million	people	who	have	been	eating
too	 much,	 they	 are	 hospitalized.	 Thirty	 million	 are	 dying	 on	 the	 streets,	 and
exactly	thirty	million	are	eating	their	food...	and	dying.
And	on	 those	 thirty	million	who	have	become	overfed,	millions	of	 dollars	 are
wasted	because	doctors,	nurses,	medicines...	And	nobody	is	bothering	about	the
thirty	 million	 people	 who	 don't	 have	 food,	 who	 don't	 have	 shelter,	 who	 don't
have	anything,	who	can't	think	that	tomorrow	will	be	any	different.	If	tomorrow
they	can	get	some	food	to	eat,	they	will	be	immensely	happy.
Anybody	who	has	 a	 little	 intelligence	 can	 change	 this	whole	world	within	 ten
years,	not	more	than	that.
I	provoked	Ronald	Reagan	and	his	company,	because	I	absorbed	three	hundred
beggars	 into	 the	 commune.	 And	 those	 beggars	 were	 surprised	 and	 shocked
because	 for	 the	 first	 time	 they	 were	 treated	 as	 human	 beings.	 Letters	 were
written	by	beggars	to	me:	"We	had	been	treated	almost	like	stray	dogs.	We	had
forgotten	completely	 that	we	are	human	beings.	You	have	 revived	our	 respect,
our	dignity;	you	have	made	us	again	human."
Nothing	was	different	 for	 them,	 they	were	not	 treated	 in	 a	 different	way;	 they
mixed	in	the	commune.	That	was	my	fault...	and	Ronald	Reagan	began	a	whole
strategy	 to	 destroy	 this	 commune.	 Now	 three	 hundred,	 tomorrow	 three
thousand...	 and	 these	 people	 will	 create	 a	 situation	 that	 the	 American
government	will	not	be	able	 to	cope	with,	although	they	have	all	 the	weapons.
They	can	kill,	but	they	cannot	cope.
And	 their	 democracy	 --	 I	 have	 seen	 --	 is	 such	 a	 hypocrisy,	 so	 ugly,	 that
everything	 against	 the	 commune	 and	me	has	been	done	 illegally,	 so	obviously
illegally	that	although	I	don't	know	any	law,	even	I	could	say	to	them,	"This	is
absolutely	illegal."
I	 was	 asked	 in	 the	 jail	 not	 to	 write	 my	 name,	 but	 to	 write	 instead	 the	 name,
David	Washington.	 I	 said,	 "I	 don't	 understand.	 That	 is	 not	my	 name.	You	 are
forcing	me	into	an	illegal	act.	I	will	not	write	that	name...	Do	you	think	I	am	an
idiot?	Can't	I	see	your	whole	plan?	I	write	David	Washington	and	tomorrow	you
poison	 me,	 and	 the	 world	 will	 not	 be	 even	 able	 to	 trace	 where	 I	 have
disappeared,	 because	 your	 register	 will	 not	 show	 that	 I	 ever	 entered,	 so	 the
question	does	not	arise	that	you	have	killed	me."
I	said,	"Forget	all	about	 it.	You	write	whatever	you	want	 to	write.	 If	you	want
David	Washington,	write	David	Washington."	And	 that	 law-imposing	authority
they	call	marshal	in	America	was	asking	me	to	do	such	an	illegal	act....
I	said,	"You	should	have	at	least	removed	your	coat	on	which	a	great	seal	shows:
Marshal,	Department	of	Justice.	Be	ashamed,	at	least,	of	your	coat.	You	write,	I
will	sign."
He	 thought	 that	 was	 a	 good	 compromise,	 so	 he	 wrote	 my	 name,	 David
Washington	--	and	I	signed	my	name.	He	looked	at	it...	and	my	signature	is	such
that	even	a	man	who	knows	Hindi	cannot	understand	it.	He	said,	"What	is	it?"
I	said,	"It	must	be	David	Washington.	If	my	name	is	David	Washington,	this	is
David	 Washington."	 I	 said,	 "I	 have	 made	 it	 clear.	 My	 signatures	 are	 world-
known.	Don't	try	to	be	clever	and	cunning.	If	anything	happens	to	me	you	will
be	 caught	 for	 two	 reasons:	 my	 name	 is	 written	 in	 your	 handwriting,	 and	 my
signature	is	well-known.	It	is	not	something	personal;	it	is	almost	copyrighted	in
all	 the	 countries.	 Everybody	 knows	my	 signature,	 and	 nobody	 knows	 what	 it
means."
Their	plan	failed.	Just	before	sunrise	I	was	shifted	to	another	jail,	because	what
was	 the	point?	--	now	they	could	not	kill	me	 in	 that	 jail,	and	 to	keep	me	there
was	dangerous,	because	a	young	woman	was	also	brought	on	the	airplane,	sitting
by	my	side.	She	had	seen	me	speaking	on	the	television	many	times,	so	she	said,
"I	am	immensely	glad	that	I	have	the	chance	for	a	few	hours	to	sit	by	your	side.	I
know	everything	is	being	done	to	you	illegally.	They	have	not	issued	any	arrest
warrant,	and	they	arrested	you;	they	have	not	shown	any	reason,	any	cause,	and
they	have	not	bailed	you."
For	 three	days	 the	government	attorney	continued	 to	argue,	and	finally	his	 last
statement	was,	"We	don't	have	any	proof,	any	evidence,	and	we	cannot	 legally
ask	the	magistrate	to	prevent	this	man	from	being	bailed	out.	But	the	government
wants	 that	he	should	not	be	bailed	out."	And	America	has	been	proclaiming	to
the	whole	world	 that	 their	 justice	 department	 is	 absolutely	 separate	 from	 their
administrative	bureaucracy.
And	I	was	not	given	bail,	although	they	could	not	prove	any	reason	why	I	was
arrested,	why	no	arrest	warrant	was	issued	from	the	court,	why	I	should	not	be
bailed	out.	Still,	the	government	wants	that	I	should	not	be	bailed	out....
Only	 in	 very	 few	moments	 have	 I	 felt	 my	 respect	 for	 women	 falling.	 I	 have
always	respected	women,	and	I	have	given	them	superiority.	But	once	in	a	while
women	have	done	such	ugly	acts	against	me	that	I	had	to	think	twice	whether	to
continue	to	give	them	respect	or	to	withdraw	it.
The	magistrate	was	a	woman,	and	she	did	not	allow	the	bail.	Even	the	jailer	on
the	way	 back	 to	 jail	 from	 the	 court	 told	me,	 "I	 am	 surprised...	 this	 is	 the	 first
time.	There	was	no	reason	at	all	for	anything,	they	had	nothing	against	you.	I	had
prepared	all	your	clothes	and	everything	so	that	you	can	be	released;	there	is	no
reason	to	prevent	you.	But	now	I	know	why	you	have	not	been	given	bail:	that
woman	has	been	blackmailed,	she	has	been	told	that	she	will	be	made	a	federal
judge"...	 she	 was	 an	 ordinary	 state	 judge,	 and	 becoming	 a	 federal	 judge	 is
tremendously	 prestigious.	 I	 used	 to	 think	 that	 women	 have	 heart.	 That	 day	 I
hesitated	a	little.
Now	they	have	turned	the	desert	again	into	a	desert;	they	did	not	allow	us	to	sell
the	property.	One	man	was	ready	to	purchase	it	at	forty	million	dollars	--	which
was	 nothing,	 because	 the	 property	 was	 worth	 at	 least	 three	 hundred	 million
dollars.	Even	the	government	has	appraised	it	at	one	hundred	million.	We	were
ready	 to	 give	 it	 to	 him	 for	 forty,	 but	 the	 government	 did	 not	 give	 us	 the
permission	to	sell	it.	The	man	was	suffering	from	cancer	and	doctors	had	said	he
could	not	live	more	than	one	month.	If	it	can	be	stopped	for	one	month,	it	will	be
easy...	then	the	property	cannot	be	sold.
The	man	died	within	a	month,	and	even	to	the	last	day	he	was	trying	hard.	The
moment	he	died,	immediately	the	permission	was	given,	but	the	permission	was
given	in	such	a	way	that	any	buyer	of	the	property...	The	government	has	been
preventing,	creating	a	 thousand	and	one	difficulties.	 In	one	year	 the	desert	has
settled	slowly	back.	Strange	--
they	will	be	happy	only	when	it	becomes	a	desert.
Success	is	never	forgiven.
If	 you	 see	 so	many	people	 against	me	 around	 the	world,	 that	 is	 nothing	 but	 a
measurement	of	my	success.	If	all	the	prime	ministers	and	the	presidents	and	the
popes	and	the	shankaracharyas	are	against	me,	the	reason	is	that	they	are	local,
ordinary	people.
I	am	the	first	world	citizen	--	and	that	hurts	them	very	much.	I	have	been	loved
by	all	races,	all	religious	people	from	every	nook	and	corner	of	the	world.
Just	now	there	is	an	exhibition	going	on	in	the	Soviet	Union.	I	have	sannyasins
in	the	Soviet	Union;	of	course,	they	have	to	remain	underground	--	they	cannot
declare	 that	 they	are	 sannyasins	 --	but	 there	are	 a	 large	number	of	 sannyasins.
Our	stall	of	books	is	overcrowded;	it	is	the	most	successful	stall	even	in	Russia.
But	the	people	don't	have	money,	so	they	are	stealing	books.	I	have	informed	my
people,	"Don't	pay	any	attention	-
-	let	them	steal.	At	least	those	books	will	reach	to	millions	of	people,	and	if	you
catch	somebody	red-handed,	just	tell	him,	Ì'm	not	against	stealing;	what	can	you
do	 if	you	don't	have	any	money?	Just	keep	one	 thing	 in	mind:	when	you	have
read	it,	pass	it	on.
That	is	the	price.'"
They	confiscated	first	all	our	videos,	all	our	audios	--	because	they	were	worried,
one	 never	 knows	 what	 is	 in	 them....	 Now	 they	 have	 released	 the	 audios	 and
videos.	They	must	have	seen	them	first,	the	KGB	must	have	watched	everything!
The	president	of	the	exhibition	was	so	surprised	that	an	unknown	man,	who	has
never	come	to	Russia...	and	you	cannot	send	any	book	into	Russia,	you	cannot
send	 any	 newspaper,	 you	 cannot	 even	 correspond	 with	 people;	 everything	 is
censored	 or	 confiscated.	 They	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 such	 a	 crowd	 would	 be
there	on	our	bookstall	the	whole	day.	All	the	other	bookstalls	were	empty.
The	president	came	to	Lani,	who	went	from	here,	saying,	"What	is	the	matter?"
Looking	at	my	beard	in	one	of	the	pictures	he	said,	"Is	this	man	something	like
Leo	Tolstoy?"	--
because	Leo	Tolstoy	had	a	big	beautiful	beard.	"Why	are	so	many	people	around
here	 the	whole	day?"	They	don't	know	that	most	of	 them	are	my	sannyasins!	I
am	the	only	underground	movement	in	Russia...	and	there	was	trouble.	The	KGB
thinks	that	I	am	an	American	agent,	and	America	thinks	I	am	a	Russian	agent	--
and	the	Indian	government	thinks	it	is	unfortunate	that	I	was	born	here,	because
they	cannot	deport	me.	That	is	their	trouble!
Success	brings	so	many	troubles.	If	I	had	known...
There	is	a	beautiful	song	of	Meera	which	says,	"If	I	had	known	before	that	love
brings	 so	many	 agonies,	 I	would	 have	 informed	 the	whole	world	 that	 nobody
should	fall	in	love."	I	can	say	to	the	world	that	success	is	not	a	bed	of	roses	--	not
even	mixed	with	thorns;	it	is	completely	thorns.
"I	have	got	insomnia	really	bad,"	complained	a	man	to	his	doctor.
"Insomnia,"	 said	 the	 doctor,	 "is	 insomnia.	 How	 bad	 can	 it	 be?	What	 do	 you
mean?
Insomnia	is	insomnia	--	how	can	it	be	bad?	What	do	you	mean	by	saying	`really
bad	insomnia'?"
"Well,"	said	the	man,	"I	have	got	it	really	bad.	I	can't	even	sleep	when	it	is	time
to	get	up."
The	 trouble	 arises...	 he	 cannot	 sleep	when	 it	 is	 time	 to	 get	 up!	 If	 you	 look	 in
people's	minds,	their	bodies	are	starved,	their	minds	are	retarded.
A	patient	was	making	his	 first	visit	 to	 the	doctor.	 "And	whom	did	you	consult
about	your	illness	before	you	came	to	me?"	the	doctor	enquired.
"Only	the	druggist	down	at	the	corner,"	replied	the	patient.
The	 doctor	 did	 not	 conceal	 his	 contempt	 for	 the	medical	 advice	 of	 people	 not
qualified	to	practice	medicine.	"And	what	sort	of	ridiculous	advice	did	that	fool
give	you?"	demanded	the	doctor.
"He	told	me,"	replied	the	patient	innocently,	"to	see	you."
Ronald	Reagan	was	 grooming	himself	 in	 front	 of	 the	mirror	 before	 leaving	 to
make	an	important	speech	on	television.
"I	wonder	how	many	great	men	there	are	in	the	world?"	he	mused.
Nancy	looked	up	and	said,	"One	less	than	you	think."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
TOO	MANY	TIMES	 I	 COME	ACROSS	WOMEN	WHO	HAVE	GIVEN	UP
SEX.	 I	DON'T	HAVE	THE	FEELING	THAT	THEY	HAVE	TRANSCENDED
SEX.	COULD
YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	TO	THEM?
Veetdharm,	your	question	shows	the	essential	Indian	mind.	You	may	be	Indian	or
not,	 it	doesn't	matter.	 It	 is	 a	great	question!	Why	should	you	be	worried	about
anybody	else's	sex?	Are	you	some	kind	of	sex	expert?
You	say,	"Too	many	times	I	come	across	women	who	have	given	up	sex.	I	don't
have	the	feeling	that	they	have	transcended	sex."
In	what	way	can	you	feel	whether	anybody	has	transcended	sex	or	not?	Is	there
any	kind	of	thermometer?	If	they	are	saying	they	have	given	up,	who	are	you	to
doubt	them?	and	on	what	grounds?
Your	 question	 shows	 more	 about	 you,	 not	 about	 the	 women	 you	 have	 come
across....
"Could	you	please	say	something	to	them?"	This	is	a	strange	question!	Is	it	your
question	 or	 their	 question?	 If	 they	 have	 any	 problem,	 they	 will	 ask.	 What
concern	do	you	have?
Why	are	you	worried	about	somebody's	sex?	And	you	want	me	to	tell	them,	not
to	tell	you...	and	it	is	your	question!
If	you	had	gone	to	any	shankaracharya,	he	would	have	condemned	those	women.
I	condemn	you;	 it	 is	your	repressed	sexuality.	Your	eyes	are	blinded	with	your
sexuality,	so	you	cannot	see	anybody	else	who	is	beyond	sex.
Just	watch	your	own	state.
You	have	suppressed	so	much	sex.	I	can	say	definitely	without	knowing	you	or
who	you	are,	that	your	eyes	have	a	thick	layer	of	sexual	repression.	This	colors
everything	into	sex.
A	psychotherapist	was	 treating	a	patient.	 Just	 to	check	on	his	mind,	he	drew	a
line	on	the	paper	and	asked	him,	"What	does	this	line	remind	you	of?"
The	 patient	 said,	 "It	 cannot	 remind	 me	 of	 anything	 else;	 it	 reminds	 me	 of
women.	It	is	so	clear...	what	is	the	point	of	asking?"
The	psychologist	drew	a	triangle	and	the	man	said,	"This	is	too	much.	It	reminds
me	even	more...!"
The	psychologist	drew	a	circle.	The	patient	stood	up	and	he	said,	"Are	you	some
kind	of	sex	maniac	or	what?	This	is	absolutely	woman....	I	thought	you	were	a
psychoanalyst	--
you	need	psychoanalysis."
The	psychoanalyst	was	at	a	loss	about	what	to	do.	Just	then	a	camel	passed	by,
and	he	said,	"Just	one	last	question.	What	does	that	camel	remind	you	of?"
He	said,	"Don't	provoke	me,	or	it	will	be	your	responsibility.	I	may	do	something
for	which	you	will	repent	your	whole	life.	That	is	a	pure,	beautiful	woman!"
The	psychoanalyst	said,	"Just	the	last	question,	the	very	last.	What	else	reminds
you	of	women?"
The	patient	said,	"What	a	nonsense	question!	Everything	reminds	me	of	women,
there	is	no	question	of	any	exception."
Now,	does	what	he	is	saying	reflect	the	psychoanalyst	or	his	mind?
Veetdharm,	you	are	a	sex	maniac.	Those	women	may	have	transcended;	if	they
have	not	 transcended,	 just	seeing	you	they	will	be	 immediately	 transcending	--
fast,	quick,	urgent...
emergency!	You	are	drunk	with	your	 repressed	 sex.	 It	 is	 the	most	 intoxicating
thing,	 and	 accumulating	 over	 many	 years	 --	 and	 that's	 what	 happens	 in	 this
country.
Here	everything	reminds	people	of	sex:	a	straight	line,	an	animal...	it	defeats	all
intelligence.	 One	 cannot	 conceive	 even	 in	 a	 dream	 that	 a	 camel,	 the	 ugliest
animal	in	the	world,	reminds	you	of	a	beautiful	woman.	Even	Sophia	Loren	may
never	have	thought	that	somebody	will	see	her	in	a	camel.	There	are	people	here
from	Italy,	they	can	inform	her....
A	drunk	was	standing	watching	a	man	enter	a	revolving	door.	As	the	door	swung
round,	out	stepped	a	pretty	girl.
"Unbelievable!"	he	muttered.	"Absolutely	unbelievable!"
You	don't	 see	 that	you	are	drunk.	 In	 fact,	 nobody	 looks	 at	himself.	People	 are
looking	at	others,	 judging	others,	and	 these	are	 the	real	criminals.	Without	any
doubt,	 I	 say	 that	 these	 are	 the	 sickest	 people	 in	 the	world	 --	 those	who	 judge
others.	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 it	 is	 not	 your	 business.	 In	 the	 second	 place,	 you	 are
interfering	 into	 somebody	 else's	 space;	 you	 are	 going	 against	 his	 individuality
and	freedom,	and	you	are	without	any	cause	suspecting	his	truth,	his	sincerity.
The	day	I	left	America	I	received	a	letter	from	a	bishop	of	Wasco	County,	who
had	been	for	almost	five	years	condemning	my	Rolls	Royces.	In	every	Sunday
sermon	he	was	not	preaching	Jesus	Christ,	he	was	preaching	me	and	my	Rolls
Royces.	The	day	I	was	leaving	he	wrote	a	letter	to	me,	"Now	you	are	leaving,	it
will	 be	great	 kindness	on	your	part	 if	 you	 can	donate	one	Rolls	Royce	 to	 this
church."	Now,	this	shows	the	man....
I	informed	him,	"Would	you	like	all	ninety-three,	or	only	one?"
And	a	letter	came,	"If	you	can	give	all	ninety-three,	 that	 is	 just	 the	right	 thing.
You	are	really	great.	I'm	very	sorry	that	I	condemned	you	for	five	years.	You	are
a	man	to	be	worshiped."
It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	world	 if	 you	 understand	 people:	whatever	 they	 are	 saying
shows	more	about	them	than	it	shows	about	the	person	they	are	talking	about.
"I	 have	 brought	 a	 frog,"	 said	 Professor	 Bradley,	 beaming	 at	 his	 class	 in
elementary	zoology,	"fresh	from	the	pond,	in	order	that	we	might	study	its	outer
appearance	and	later	dissect	it."
He	carefully	unwrapped	 the	package	he	was	 carrying,	 and	 inside	was	 a	neatly
prepared	ham	sandwich.	The	good	professor	looked	at	it	with	astonishment.
"Odd,"	he	said,	"I	distinctly	remember	having	eaten	my	lunch."
And	 these	 are	 the	 idiots	 who	 are	 professors,	 who	 are	 judges,	 who	 are	 police
commissioners,	 who	 are	 governors,	 who	 are	 prime	 ministers,	 who	 are
presidents....
My	own	understanding	is	that	a	man	who	does	not	know	himself...	this	should	be
the	 only	 criterion	 of	 man's	 idiocy.	 According	 to	 that	 criterion,	 only	 the	 self-
realized	people	are	saying	something	that	is	coming	from	their	very	heart.	Others
are	just	befooling	you.
They	may	be	learned,	they	may	be	clever,	they	may	be	able	to	deceive	the	whole
world,	but	they	cannot	deceive	themselves.
Just	watch	your	own	mind,	and	see	what	I	am	saying.
I	have	saved	another	question	from	this	man,	to	prove...	because	I	don't	want	to
say	 anything	 without	 proof.	 I	 don't	 know	 the	 man...	 but	 now	 I	 will	 read	 his
second	question.
That	will	prove	what	I	have	told	you.
Question	3
I	 AM	 FORTY-SEVEN	 YEARS	 OLD	 AND	MY	MIND	 IS	 STILL	 FULL	 OF
SEX.	CAN
I	 SEE	 THIS	 JUST	 AS	 RIPPLES	 OF	 THE	 MIND	 OR	 IS	 MY	 SEXUAL
ENERGY	STILL
LIFE-ENERGY?	 DO	 I	 HAVE	 TO	 LIVE	 IT	 ALL	 OUT?	 IS	 THERE	 ANY
CHANCE
FOR	 ME	 TO	 NOT	 END	 UP	 AS	 A	 DIRTY	 OLD	 MAN?	 SWAMI
VEETDHARM.
Now,	do	you	need	any	other	proof?	This	man	writes	these	two	questions	and	is
not	 able	 to	 figure	out	himself	 that	 it	 is	his	problem	he	 is	projecting	on	others.
And	he	is	forty-seven	--	it	is	time	not	to	be	foolish.	But	it	seems	as	age	grows,
foolishness	also	grows.
Old	 fools	are	 really	 fools.	Young	 fools	have	a	possibility	 to	 transcend,	but	old
fools	--
where	will	they	transcend?	What	is	the	alternative?
The	old	boss	had	managed	to	get	a	date	with	his	secretary,	but	was	worried	about
his	diminished	potency.	So	he	went	to	the	doctor	and	asked	for	something	to	pep
him	up.	The	doctor	gave	him	 two	pills	and	said,	 "Take	 these	with	your	dinner
tonight	and	you	should	not	have	any	trouble	performing	later	on."
So	 the	old	man	and	his	date	went	 to	a	beautiful	 restaurant,	and	when	 they	had
ordered	their	soup,	 the	old	man	took	the	waiter	aside	and	asked	him	to	put	 the
two	pills	into	his	soup	before	he	served	it.
They	waited	for	twenty	minutes,	and	still	the	waiter	had	not	brought	their	soup.
So	 the	 old	 man	 angrily	 called	 the	 waiter	 over	 and	 said,	 "What	 the	 hell	 has
happened	to	the	soup?"
"I'm	sorry,	sir,"	said	the	waiter,	"but	I	did	what	you	ordered	and	put	those	pills
into	your	soup,	and	now	I'm	just	waiting	for	the	noodles	to	lie	down	again."
Veetdharm,	it	is	time!	Let	the	noodles	lie	down.
But	I	know	the	repressed	sex	will	continue	in	your	mind.	Now	the	only	way	is	to
go	 deeper	 into	 silence	 and	 meditation.	 Become	 more	 watchful.	 Drop	 all	 this
idiotic	 judgment	 about	 others.	Your	 responsibility	 is	 to	 transform	you,	 not	 the
whole	world.	Don't	try	to	be	a	savior.	If	you	can	save	yourself,	that's	enough.
You	have	passed	almost	 two-thirds	of	your	life,	but	you	are	just	 in	time,	forty-
seven....
Perhaps	 thirteen	 years	 are	 available	 for	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 to	 live,	 and
thirteen	 years	 are	 also	 available	 for	 you	 to	 live	 --	 so	 you	 are	 exactly
synchronizing	with	existence.
Nobody	else	is	going	to	have	more	time,	so	don't	be	jealous.	Even	the	youngest
child	will	live	only	thirteen	years,	most	probably.	There	seems	to	be	no	reason	to
expect	otherwise,	because	the	so-called	wise	are	suggesting,	"Stop	cow	slaughter
and	 there	 will	 be	 no	world	 war"..."Learn	 yogic	 hopping	 and	 there	 will	 be	 no
world	war."
A	Jew	was	caught	in	Adolf	Hitler's	Germany	before	the	second	world	war	by	a
police	 officer,	 who	 said,	 "Listen,	 Jew,	 do	 you	 know	 the	 real	 reason	 why
Germany	is	not	as	rich	as	 it	should	be,	 is	not	 the	world's	greatest	power?	Why
did	Germany	get	defeated	in	the	first	world	war?"
The	Jew	said,	"I	think	it	is	because	of	the	bicycle	riders."	The	policeman	looked
around.
There	was	a	crowd	listening	to	what	was	happening,	what	the	Jew	says.
He	 said,	 "Bicycle	 riders?	 What	 is	 the	 connection	 between	 bicycle	 riders	 and
Germany's	defeat?"
The	Jew	said,	"What	connection	is	there	between	Jews	and	Germany's	defeat?	It
is	 the	 same.	Destroy	 bicycles	 and	 I	 promise	 you,	Germany	will	 start	 rising	 in
riches,	power,	it	will	become	a	world	power."
The	policeman	said,	"You	seem	to	be	absolutely	mad!"
He	 said,	 "If	 I	 am	 mad,	 then	 what	 is	 Adolf	 Hitler	 and	 the	 people	 who	 are
following	him?"
Adolf	 Hitler	 lied	 completely	 saying	 that	 it	 is	 the	 Jews	 --	 which	 is	 absolutely
irrelevant	--
because	of	 the	Jews,	Germany	is	not	getting	on,	 it	 is	being	defeated,	damaged.
And	in	fact,	the	Jews	were	the	only	people	in	Germany	who	were	productive	and
creative.	If	he	had	not	been	against	the	Jews,	there	is	every	possibility	that	now
Germany	would	have	been	ruling	the	whole	world.	Because	Albert	Einstein	was
also	 a	 Jew,	working	under	Adolf	Hitler,	 but	 seeing	 that	millions	 of	 Jews	were
simply	slaughtered...
Of	course,	he	would	not	have	been	killed;	he	was	their	only	hope	of	conquering
the	world,	because	he	was	going	to	produce	the	atom	bomb.	But	he	escaped	from
Germany	 and	wrote	 a	 letter	 to	 President	 Roosevelt	 of	America	 saying,	 "I	 can
create	atomic	weapons	which	can	destroy	on	such	a	large	scale	--	the	biggest	city
within	a	few	minutes
--	 that	 if	 you	want	 to	win	 the	 second	world	war,	 I'm	 the	man.	 I	 give	 you	 the
guarantee."
Roosevelt	was	immensely	happy,	because	Adolf	Hitler	was	winning	continually.
For	five	years	he	had	not	known	any	defeat,	he	went	on	winning.	Wherever	he
entered	he	was	winning.
It	was	a	Jew,	Albert	Einstein,	who	produced	the	atom	bomb.	It	might	have	been
produced	 in	 Berlin,	 but	 it	 was	 produced	 in	Washington,	 and	 that	 changed	 the
whole	of	history.	But	any	idiotic	idea...	and	people	have	been	forced	to	remain	so
retarded	that	they	go	on	following	it.
For	example,	Veetdharm,	if	you	are	a	Hindu,	then	most	probably	everything	that
you	are	doing	is	going	to	lead	you	to	an	ugly	old	age,	full	of	sexuality.	Hindus
believe	 that	cow	milk	 is	 the	purest	 thing,	 the	most	spiritual.	 In	 fact,	except	 for
man	no	animal	drinks	milk	his	whole	life.	Milk	is	only	drunk	in	the	beginning,
for	a	few	weeks,	a	few	months	at	the	most,	before	he	starts	eating	and	digesting
solid	food	--	it	is	just	a	temporary	measure.	It	is	only	man	who	goes	on	drinking
milk	his	whole	life.
You	don't	understand:	 the	milk	you	go	on	drinking	is	not	a	woman's	milk,	 it	 is
the	milk	of	a	cow,	which	has	the	chemistry	and	alchemy	for	the	bull,	not	for	the
man.	These	Hindu	monks	go	on	drinking	milk	thinking	that	this	is	a	great	thing
to	keep	them	celibate.	They	become	bulls!	--	because	that	is	the	food	for	bulls,
and	it	has	the	capacity	to	create	that	much	sexuality.	This	is	the	greatest	danger.
Strange	 things	 have	 been	 suggested	 to	 you	 by	 stupid	 people.	 They	 tell	 you,
"Take	 a	 cold	 bath	 before	 sunrise,	 and	 it	 will	 keep	 you	 celibate."	 That	 is	 pure
nonsense.	 If	you	want	 to	be	celibate,	 take	a	good	hot	bath	after	sunrise,	so	 the
noodles	can	lie	down.	In	a	cold	bath	noodles	will	stand	up.
But	 this	 is	 for	 the	first	 time	I	am	saying	 this...	 I	wanted	 to	say	 it	always,	but	 I
avoided	it.
Why	 unnecessarily	 wrestle	 with	 idiots,	 very	 ancient	 idiots?	 Cold	 water	 is
certainly	 going	 to	 make	 you	 more	 sexual.	 Ice	 cold	 water	 is	 suggested	 --	 and
before	sunrise,	so	the	water	does	not	become	even	lukewarm.	Hindu	sannyasins
go	at	three	o'clock	in	the	morning	to	take	a	cold	bath,	shivering,	but	they	don't
know	what	they	are	doing.	They	will	feel	more	sexual	--	and	then	a	good	cow's
milk...	that	will	make	them	a	bull.	And	a	bull	with	noodles	standing	up	--	you	are
finished!
Question	4
MOST	BELOVED	OSHO,
NEVER	 THE	 EARTH	 AND	 THE	 SKY	 HAVE	 BEEN	 SO	 BEAUTIFUL....
NEVER	THE
EXISTENCE	 HAS	 BEEN	 SO	 VIBRATING,	 DANCING	 ITS	MYSTERIOUS
DANCE,	 PREGNANT	 TO	 THE	 FULLEST	 WITH	 JOY,	 SILENCE,	 LOVE
AND	YOUR	DIVINE
GIGGLES....
IT	 IS	 SO	 MUCH....	 YET	 I	 CAN	 ONLY	 WHISPER	 THE	 SILENT	 JOY	 OF
BEING,	WHILE	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	CELEBRATE	YOU	TO	THE	FULLEST.
THANK	YOU
SO	 MUCH,	 OSHO,	 AGAIN	 AND	 AGAIN	 FOR	 KILLING	 ME	 SO
LOVINGLY.
Kavisho,	it	is	true:	my	work	consists	in	killing	you	lovingly,	because	that	is	the
only	possibility	of	bringing	you	back	into	a	new	light,	into	a	new	life.
I	kill	only	that	which	is	not	yours,	but	you	believe	it	is	you.	I	kill,	in	short,	your
personality,	and	leave	only	that	which	cannot	be	destroyed:	your	eternal	being.
The	 moment	 your	 personality	 drops,	 you	 will	 certainly	 feel	 like	 dancing	 and
celebrating	 and	 enjoying.	 And	 suddenly	 this	 universe	 will	 become	 totally
different,	because	now	you	have	fresh	eyes,	utterly	innocent,	uncorrupted	by	any
society,	any	religion,	any	politician,	any	kind	of	ideology.
Once	your	personality	can	be	 taken	away	from	you	--	and	 it	 is	not	you	--	 then
you	are	left	in	your	utter	nudity,	in	your	existential	being...	the	beauty	of	it,	the
luxury	of	it,	the	festivity	of	it,	will	start	functioning.	It	will	bring	great	creativity
to	you,	great	intelligence	to	you,	great	love	to	you.	You	will	forget	how	you	lived
so	long	in	misery,	so	long	in	jealousy,	so	long	in	ambitions,	all	kinds	of	desires
which	made	 you	 a	 beggar.	You	will	 not	 believe	 that	 this	 eternal	 freedom	was
always	available	for	you,	just	you	had	to	look	into	it.
I	 have	 called	 you	 all	 here.	 Perhaps	 you	may	 not	 know	 that	 I	 have	 called	 you
here.	It	is	not	that	you	have	come	on	your	own;	that	would	be	very	difficult.	On
your	 own	 you	would	 be	 doing	 something	 stupid	 somewhere	 --	 giving	 birth	 to
more	children,	worshiping	before	a	stone	statue	which	is	made	by	man,	praying
to	a	God	which	does	not	exist,	which	is	only	an	unproved	hypothesis,	afraid	of
hell,	desiring	for	heaven.	And	all	is	just	fiction....
But	the	personality	needs	many	fictions	to	support	it.	Itself,	it	is	a	by-product	of
all	these	fictions.
Your	individuality	needs	no	fiction.
It	is	your	authentic	existential	being.
I	give	you	that	which	you	already	have,	and	I	take	away	all	that	you	never	really
had,	 but	 you	 believed	 you	 had.	 I	 destroy	 your	 belief,	 and	 that	 is	 my	 way	 of
destroying	your	personality.
And	once	your	personality	is	gone,	Kavisho,	you	will	become	contagious.	Your
joy,	 your	 celebration,	 your	 song,	 your	 dance	 will	 spread	 into	 other	 people's
hearts.	 You	will	 become	 a	 catalytic	 agent.	Without	 knowing,	 people	will	 start
joining	you	in	your	dance,	in	your	laughter,	in	your	joy.
What	you	are	saying	makes	me	immensely	happy.	I	would	like	all	my	people	to
come	to	the	same	space.
The	worried	 father	 telephoned	 the	 family	 doctor	 and	 said	 that	 his	 teenage	 son
had	come	down	with	gonorrhea.	"He	says,"	continued	the	father,	"that	he	has	not
had	sex	with	anyone	but	the	maid,	so	it	has	to	be	her."
"Don't	worry	so	much,"	advised	the	kindly	doctor.	"These	things	happen."
"I	know,	doctor,"	 said	 the	 father.	 "But	 I	have	 to	admit	 that	 I	have	been	 to	bed
with	her	myself,	and	I	seem	to	have	the	same	symptoms."
"That	is	unfortunate,"	said	the	doctor.
"Not	only	that	--	I	think	I	have	passed	it	on	to	my	wife."
"Christ,"	said	the	doctor.	"That	means	we	all	have	it."
Just	go	on	passing....	Just	as	disease	can	be	contagious,	health	can	also	be.	Just
as	misery	can	be	contagious,	blissfulness	can	also	be.
One	lighted	being	is	bound	to	create	an	urgent,	instant	longing	in	others	to	have
the	same	light.	One	person	dancing	and	singing	with	abandon	is	bound	to	affect
people,	 because	 they	 are	 also	 carrying	 the	 same	 song	hidden,	 the	 same	dance.
They	 have	 been	 crippled	 by	 their	 society.	 They	 also	 have	 the	 same	 eyes	 for
beauty,	but	 they	had	been	blinded	by	the	society.	They	have	also	 the	energy	to
celebrate,	but	this	society	does	not	believe	in	celebration.
This	 society	 is	 absolutely	 insane.	 It	 believes	 in	money,	 it	 believes	 in	power,	 it
believes	in	violence,	it	believes	in	rapes,	it	believes	in	murder,	it	believes	in	all
kinds	of	crimes,	and	it	believes	in	all	kinds	of	fictions,	but	it	does	not	understand
even	a	little	bit	about	itself.
The	moment	a	small	window	opens	into	you,	you	are	a	transformed	being.	The
new	man	is	born	in	you.
Kavisho,	enjoy	this	celebration	as	much	as	possible,	because	whatever	remaining
falsities,	 personalities,	 parts	 here	 and	 there	 may	 have	 remained,	 they	 will	 be
thrown	away	by	your	dance.	Enjoy...	 this	existence	is	for	your	enjoyment.	It	 is
our	existence,	it	is	our	home.
Nobody	is	a	sinner	except	those	who	don't	celebrate.
To	me,	celebration	is	the	only	virtue.
A	man	was	 visiting	 his	 friend	George,	who	was	 in	 hospital	 dying.	 The	 friend
said,	 "Well,	 anyway	George,	 you	 have	 lived	 a	 good	 life.	 For	 sure	 you	will	 be
going	to	heaven."
George	replied,	"Yes,	I	have	lived	a	good	life,	but	there	is	something	I	never	told
you."
"What	is	that?"	asked	his	friend.
"Remember	that	time	I	went	to	Chicago	on	business	last	year?	Well,	I	made	love
with	a	beautiful	woman	there."
Shocked,	his	friend	replied,	"I	can't	believe	it.	I	mean,	your	wife,	your	kids	--	did
you	not	think	about	them?"
"Yes,	I	did,"	replied	George,	"and	then	I	thought	I	might	as	well	see	what	heaven
is	like,	since	I	already	knew	what	hell	was	like."
You	have	known	hell;	now	you	are	entering,	Kavisho,	 into	heaven.	Everybody
has	 suffered	 for	 many	 lives	 in	 hell.	 Hell	 is	 nowhere	 in	 the	 geography	 of	 the
world,	 of	 the	 universe;	 it	 is	 in	 your	 distorted	 mind.	 It	 is	 another	 name	 for	 a
distorted	mind,	and	heaven	 is	 another	name	 for	a	mind	which	has	 transcended
itself	and	reached	into	a	space	of	no-mind.	Hence	my	insistence	continuously	for
silence.	If	you	cannot	reach	to	silence	through	music...	because	music	is	next	to
silence....
To	 create	 silence	 I	 have	 been	 giving	 you	 all	 the	 meditations,	 all	 these	 small
gaps...	not	that	I	am	short	of	words,	not	that	I	have	forgotten	what	I	was	going	to
say,	but	 just	 to	allow	you	 to	have	a	 little	experience	of	 silence,	which	on	your
own	you	find	difficult.	But	 in	the	communion	of	so	many	silent	people,	and	in
the	communion	of	a	man	who	has	reached	to	the	ultimate	center	of	being,	 it	 is
possible	to	be	infected.
Blessed	are	those	who	allow	themselves	to	be	contagious	to	festivity,	to	love,	to
peace,	to	silence,	to	celebration.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Human	mind	is	a	miracle
12	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709125
ShortTitle:
PILGR13
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
122
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AM	 I	 REALLY	 GETTING	 OLD,	 BECAUSE	 EVERYONE	 IS	 GOSSIPING
ABOUT	IT?
Devageet	 again!	 Just	 two	 days	 ago	 you	 had	 become	old,	 and	 I	 had	 to	 take	 so
much	trouble	to	bring	you	back.	And	you	slip	again!	One	time	is	okay,	but	twice
is	too	much	--
it	is	becoming	really	a	serious	problem.
And	don't	listen	to	gossip;	you	are	here	to	listen	to	the	gospel!
But	I	have	also	heard	the	gossip	that	is	making	you	worried.	So	first	the	gossip:
One	day	at	the	Poona	drugstore,	Milarepa,	Sarjano	and	Devageet	come	in	to	buy
some	 condoms.	 Milarepa	 goes	 first	 and	 says	 he	 would	 like	 a	 week's	 supply,
which	is	six.	"Why	only	six?"	asks	the	druggist.
"Well,"	says	Milarepa,	"these	days	I	like	to	have	Sunday	off."
Next,	Sarjano	walks	up	and	asks	for	eight	condoms.	"Eight?"	says	the	druggist,
"why	eight?"
"Mama	mia,"	says	Sarjano,	"I-a	always	like-a	to	do	it	twice-a	on	Sundays."
And	 last	Devageet	walks	 up	 and	 asks	 for	 twelve.	The	 druggist,	 looking	 at	 his
size	and	age,	 is	astonished.	"Twelve?"	he	says.	"That	 is	pretty	impressive	for	a
man	of	your	age.
But	tell	me,	why	twelve?"
Devageet	replies,	"January,	February,	March..."
That	 is	 the	gossip	 that	 is	going	all	around.	And	I	have	 to	suffer	 from	all	 these
gossips;	now	I	have	to	bring	Devageet	back	to	his	senses.
First	thing:	feel	happy	that	you	have	friends.	The	old	saying	is:
..."The	person	who	does	not	gossip	has	no	friends	to	speak	of."
You	 have	 so	 many	 friends;	 everybody	 is	 gossiping	 about	 you.	 So	 it	 is	 not
unfortunate	--
just	 for	 the	 gossip's	 sake,	 just	 for	 the	 friends'	 sake	 --	 if	 once	 in	 a	 while	 you
become	old.
But	remember	one	thing:
...	The	only	sure	thing	about	youth	is	that	it	will	change,	and	about	old	age,	that
it	will	never	change.
Old	age	has	something	more	than	youth:	it	ends,	but	it	never	changes.	People	are
too	much	worried	about	old	age.	Anybody	can	become	old;	only	a	great	man	can
enquire	about	it.	It	needs	some	intelligence	to	enquire	about	it.
...	Old	age	is	when	you	have	learnt	to	yawn	with	your	mouth	closed.
So	let	that	be	the	criterion	for	the	future.	Don't	be	bothered	by	any	gossip.
...	 People	who	 complain	 they	 don't	 get	 all	 they	 deserve,	 don't	 realize	 how	old
they	are.
Just	remember	one	thing:	old	age	or	no	old	age,	one	should	always	be	in	love.
That	 is	 the	 reason	one	should	never	marry.	And	 it	keeps	one	always	young,	at
least	 for	 the	 appearance's	 sake.	There	 are	 so	many	ways	 to	 appear	 young;	 the
simplest	is:
...	Always	fall	in	love	with	an	older	woman,	and	you	will	be	always	young.	One
just	has	to	find	a	way	--	these	are	problems	intrinsic	to	life.
...	 Or	 become	 a	 monk:	 start	 preaching	 brahmacharya,	 celibacy,	 and	 you	 will
forget	all	about	old	age;	you	will	start	making	 the	young	feel	guilty.	These	are
well-tried	methods,	for	thousands	of	years.	Only	one	thing	is	bad	about	being	old
and	unmarried:
...	Married	men	don't	live	longer	than	the	single	men,	it	just	seems	longer.
...	One	marriage	out	of	every	three	ends	up	in	divorce	--	the	other	two	fight	it	out
to	the	bitter	end.
In	India,	a	marriage	is	arranged	by	the	parents	and	the	couple	don't	know	each
other	 until	 after	 the	marriage.	 The	 arrangements	 in	 the	West	 are	 considerably
different,	but	 the	 results	are	 identical.	Whether	 in	 the	East	or	 in	 the	West,	you
come	 to	 know	 each	 other	 only	 after	 marriage,	 but	 it	 is	 too	 late	 by	 that	 time;
nothing	can	be	done	about	it.
...	The	one	who	sleeps	does	not	commit	sins.	The	one	who	commits	sins	sleeps
better	afterwards.
...	To	find	out	a	girl's	faults,	talk	to	her	girlfriends	and	say	how	wonderful	she	is!
...	Marriage	is	a	romance	in	which	the	hero	dies	in	the	first	chapter.
...	Never	marry	a	beautiful	girl,	because	she	might	leave	you.	Of	course,	an	ugly
girl	might	leave	you	too	--	but	so	what?
...	All	marriages	are	happy.	It	is	the	living	together	afterwards	that	is	tough.*
Devageet,	 everybody	here	 is	 sooner	or	 later	bound	 to	become	old.	We	have	 to
understand	the	beauty	of	old	age,	and	we	have	to	understand	the	freedom	of	old
age.	We	have	 to	understand	 the	wisdom	of	old	 age;	we	have	 to	understand	 its
tremendous	detachment	from	all	foolish	things	that	go	on	in	the	lives	of	people
who	are	still	young.
Old	age	gives	you	a	height.	If	this	height	can	be	joined	with	meditation,	you	will
rather	feel	miserable	--	why	did	you	waste	your	youth?	why	have	your	parents
destroyed	your	childhood?	why	was	meditation	not	given	to	you	as	the	first	gift
the	day	you	were	born?
But	whenever	you	get	it,	it	is	still	not	too	late.	Even	just	a	few	moments	before
your	death,	 if	you	can	get	 the	meaning	of	your	being,	your	 life	has	not	been	a
wastage.
Old	age	in	the	East	has	been	immensely	respected	for	the	simple	reason	that	in
the	past	it	was	thought	almost	a	shameless	act	--	when	your	children	are	getting
married,	 when	 your	 children	 are	 giving	 birth	 to	 children...	 and	 you	 are	 still
infatuated,	you	are	still	in	the	bondage	of	biology?	You	should	rise;	this	is	time
to	 leave	 the	ground	 for	 other	 fools	 to	 play	 football.	At	 the	most	 you	 can	be	 a
referee,	but	not	a	player.
I	loved	one	cartoon	in	a	Dutch	magazine.	It	was	strange,	because	it	all	consists
of	world	presidents,	prime	ministers,	great	 leaders,	dictators,	kings	 --	 I	 am	 the
only	 person	 in	 that	 group	who	 is	 nobody.	 And	 I	 am	 the	 first	 --	 unfortunately
Ronald	 Reagan	 is	 the	 last.	 They	 have	 called	 it	 a	 football	 team,	 and	 I	 am	 the
referee.	I	was	happy,	very	happy.	I	would	have	sued	that	newspaper	if	I	was	part
of	the	football	team,	but	to	be	a	referee	is	a	totally	different	matter	--	let	the	fools
play!
But	 it	 is	 a	 great	 insight:	 I	 am	 nobody,	 I	 do	 not	 count	 in	 any	 way,	 I	 have	 no
power...
Whoever	made	the	cartoon	must	have	great	insight.
Devageet,	 unless	 you	 can	 accept	 everything	 that	 life	 brings	 you	 with
gratefulness,	you	are	missing	 the	point.	Childhood	was	beautiful;	youth	has	 its
own	flowers,	old	age	has	its	own	peaks	of	consciousness.	But	the	trouble	is	that
childhood	comes	on	its	own,	youth	comes	on	its	own;	for	old	age	you	have	to	be
very	creative.
Old	age	is	your	own	creation:	it	can	be	a	misery,	it	can	be	a	celebration;	it	can	be
simply	a	despair,	and	it	can	also	be	a	dance.	It	all	depends	how	deeply	ready	you
are	to	accept	existence,	whatsoever	it	brings.	One	day	it	will	bring	death	too	--
accept	it	with	gratitude.
This	 gratitude	 I	 call	 religious.	 This	 deep	 acceptance	 of	 everything	 with	 no
complaint,	with	no	desire	for	it	to	be	otherwise,	is	the	only	religion	there	is.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	HAVE	TOLD	US	THAT	THE	MIND	BECOMES	MORE	AND	MORE
QUIET	IF
WE	 MEDITATE	 REGULARLY.	 LAST	 YEAR,	 WHEN	 I	 WAS	 LIVING	 IN
EUROPE
OUTSIDE	OF	A	COMMUNE,	THOUGHTS	BECAME	STRONGER	AND
STRONGER	 DURING	MY	MEDITATIONS	 UNTIL	 I	 BEGAN	 TO	 DREAD
SITTING.
NOW	 THAT	 I	 AM	 WITH	 YOU	 AGAIN,	 THIS	 PROBLEM	 HAS	 GONE
AWAY.	BUT	I	WONDERED:	HOW	CAN	ONE	BE	A	SANNYASIN	FOR	TEN
YEARS,
MEDITATING	 EVERY	 DAY,	 AND	 HAVE	 A	 MIND	 WHICH	 BECOMES
MORE
AND	MORE	NOISY?
Sagarpriya,	the	question	you	have	asked	has	many	implications.	First,	one	has	to
understand	that	your	mind	is	very	ancient	--	twelve	years	are	nothing	compared
to	 the	 mind's	 history;	 it	 is	 the	 history	 of	 the	 whole	 universe	 from	 the	 very
beginning.
It	has	been	working	so	long,	so	efficiently	 that	scientists	say	they	have	not	yet
been	 able	 to	 create	 a	 computer	 which	 can	 compete	 with	 human	 mind.	 And
human	mind	is	placed	in	a	small	space,	in	your	skull;	their	computers	are	placed
in	big	rooms.	One	scientist	has	calculated	that	it	would	need	almost	a	one	square
mile	 space	 for	 a	 computer	 comparable	 to	 the	 human	mind.	 Human	mind	 is	 a
miracle.
Sitting	with	me,	you	are	sitting	with	a	greater	miracle.	You	are	sitting	with	no-
mind.
Naturally,	silence	becomes	easier;	meditation	comes	on	its	own,	just	like	a	cool
breeze.
When	you	are	left	alone,	your	mind	is	all	that	you	have.	Unless	your	meditation
goes	to	such	depths	that	you	have	something	more	valuable	than	the	mind,	this
problem	will	continue	to	happen.
With	me	you	can	have	a	glimpse,	 just	 for	a	moment.	And	 that	glimpse	creates
the	longing	to	have	that	moment	stretched	to	eternity.	It	is	so	peaceful,	so	cool,
so	calm,	who	would	not	like	it?
But	as	you	go	back	into	the	world,	there	are	just	computers	walking	all	around;
you	have	 to	communicate	with	computers.	One	physiologist	has	defined	man's
body	as	nothing	but	a	mechanism	to	facilitate	the	mind's	functioning.	You	think
you	are	carrying	the	mind.
The	physiologist	is	saying	just	the	opposite:	it	 is	the	mind	that	is	carrying	you;
your	whole	body	is	functioning	just	for	the	mind's	sake.
So	 the	moment	you	go	 into	 the	world	 --	 this	 is	not	part	of	 the	world;	we	have
been	 trying	 to	 create	 small	 islands	 where	 mind	 as	 a	 computer	 is	 no	 longer
required.	 But	 in	 the	 world	 you	 will	 need	 the	 mind.	 And	 the	 problem	 will
continue,	Sagarpriya,	until	you	have	 something	more	 than	mind.	 Just	having	a
glimpse	of	silence	is	not	enough.
You	need	a	centering,	you	need	a	realization,	you	need	exactly	enlightenment	--
only	 then	 can	 you	 remain	 in	 the	world,	without	 your	mind	 functioning	 unless
you	want	to	use	it.
Mind	 is	 a	 tremendously	 valuable	 mechanism,	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 miracles	 in
biology,	 in	 the	 evolution	 of	 man.	 Mind	 is	 simply	 unbelievable,	 the	 way	 it
works...	because	you	don't	know	anything	about	it,	although	it	is	your	mind.	You
don't	know	how	it	accumulates	millions	of	memories.
The	 scientists	 have	 calculated	 that	 a	 single	 man's	 mind	 can	 contain	 all	 the
libraries	of	 the	world.	He	can	memorize	everything	 that	has	been	ever	written,
down	the	ages.	That	is	the	capacity;	you	may	use	it,	you	may	not	use	it.
And	 you	 don't	 know	 about	 the	 libraries.	 Just	 the	British	Museum	Library	 has
enough	books	that	if	you	go	on	putting	one	book	by	the	side	of	the	other,	just	as
you	 put	 them	on	 the	 book	 shelf	 in	 the	 library,	 it	will	 take	 three	 rounds	 of	 the
whole	world.	And	that	is	only	one	library!	Moscow	has	perhaps	a	bigger	library,
and	all	the	big	universities	of	the	world	have	similar	libraries.	Just	India	has	one
hundred	universities	with	tremendously	big	libraries.
And	the	very	idea	that	a	single	human	mind	has	the	capacity	to	memorize	all	that
is	written	 in	 all	 the	books	 that	 are	 in	 existence	 in	 the	whole	world...	 it	 simply
baffles,	it	looks	unbelievable.
You	 don't	 know	 what	 your	 mind	 is	 doing	 for	 you.	 Your	 mind	 is	 regulating
everything	in	your	body.	Otherwise,	how	do	you	think	that	for	seventy	or	eighty
years,	 or	 even	 a	 hundred	 years	 --	 and	 there	 are	 people	who	 have	 even	 passed
that;	 they	have	 reached	 their	one	hundred	and	 fiftieth	birthday,	and	 there	are	a
few	hundred	people	in	the	Soviet	Union	who	have	passed	the	age	of	one	hundred
and	eighty.
Scientists	 say	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 for	 the	 body	 to	 die	 for	 at	 least	 three	 hundred
years.	It	is	just	an	old	hypnosis,	autohypnosis,	which	has	made	the	idea	prevalent
that	you	have	only	seventy	years	to	live.	It	goes	so	deep	in	your	consciousness
that	by	the	seventieth	year	you	start	thinking	you	are	sinking,	you	are	gone.
And	anyway	by	the	time	you	are	retired	at	the	age	of	sixty	there	is	nothing	to	do.
Death	seems	to	be	a	relief,	not	a	danger.	We	have	not	been	capable	enough	and
human	 enough	 to	 provide	 a	 situation	 where	 our	 old	 people	 can	 have	 some
dignity,	some	self-respect,	some	pride.	We	have	not	been	able	to	find	dimensions
where	they	can	contribute	to	the	world.	And	they	are	experienced	and	certainly
capable	of	contributing	enough	--	enough	for	their	self-respect,	enough	for	them
to	live	and	not	to	feel	like	a	burden.
When	George	Bernard	Shaw	became	seventy	years	old,	he	started	taking	trips	to
small	villages	around	London.	His	friends	were	surprised,	"What	are	you	doing?
For	days	you	disappear.	In	this	old	age	you	should	rest."
He	said,	"I	am	searching	for	the	place	to	rest	in	this	old	age."
They	 said,	 "What	 do	 you	 mean?	 You	 have	 a	 beautiful	 house,	 you	 have
everything	that	you	need."
He	said,	"You	don't	understand.	I	am	going	around	all	these	villages	looking	in
their	cemeteries,	at	the	gravestones,	in	search	of	a	place	where	many	people	have
lived	at	least	a	hundred	years."
And	finally	he	found	a	village	where	on	a	gravestone	was	the	inscription,	"This
man	died	at	the	untimely	age	of	one	hundred	and	twenty."	He	said,	"This	is	the
village	worth	 living	 in,	where	people	 think	 that	 at	 the	age	of	one	hundred	and
twenty	it	is	an	untimely	death."
He	lived	in	that	village,	and	he	lived	beyond	a	hundred	years.
Perhaps	 it	 has	 some	 significance...	 not	 just	 accidental.	 He	 was	 a	 man	 of
tremendous	wisdom;	and	if	the	villagers	believe	it	then	the	atmosphere	is	bound
to	change	his	own	conditioning.
In	Pakistan	there	is	a	part	of	Kashmir	which	belonged	to	to	India;	Pakistan	has
occupied	it	for	forty	years.	Perhaps	that	part,	because	of	its	secludedness,	hidden
behind	the	mountains,	has	not	come	in	contact	with	people	who	die	at	the	age	of
seventy.	They	 are	 uneducated	people;	 in	 fact	 they	 cannot	 count	when	 they	 are
seventy,	so	how	to	die	at	seventy?	They	don't	have	a	calendar.	They	don't	know
when	they	were	born;	they	don't	know	how	old	they	are.
They	 are	 the	 most	 primitive	 people	 who	 have	 been	 found	 living	 behind	 the
Himalayan	 peaks,	 in	 a	 valley	 --	 in	 a	 beautiful	 valley,	 self-sufficient,	 and	 they
have	never	gone	out.
And	 there	 have	 been	 people	 found,	 according	 to	 the	 doctors,	 who	 are	 two
hundred	 years	 old.	And	 they	 are	 young;	 they	 are	working	 in	 the	 fields,	 in	 the
gardens,	in	the	orchards,	and	when	you	ask	them	about	their	age	they	say,	"We
don't	know.	Nobody	here	knows;	there	is	no	school	here."
And	now	Pakistan	is	opening	schools	and	hospitals	and	you	can	be	certain	that
soon	people	will	start	dying	exactly	at	the	age	of	seventy.	Those	people	have	just
forgotten	 to	 die,	 because	 they	 don't	 remember	when	 they	were	 born,	 and	 they
cannot	count.
Scientists	say	that	man's	body	has	the	capacity	at	least	--	that	is	the	minimum	--
to	 live	 three	hundred	years.	But	why	does	man	not	 live	 so	 long?	Perhaps	man
does	not	know	how	 to	 live;	perhaps	man	does	not	know	how	 to	use	his	body,
how	to	use	his	mind.
Sagarpriya,	you	have	to	understand	two	things	very	clearly:	first,	mind	is	a	great
miracle.
Existence	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 create	 anything	 higher	 than	 your	 mind.	 Its
function	 is	 so	 complex	 that	 it	 baffles	 the	 greatest	 scientists.	 It	 manages	 your
whole	body,	and	it	is	such	a	complex	system.	Who	manages	that	a	certain	part	of
your	blood	should	go	to	the	brain?
Who	manages	 that	only	a	certain	amount	of	oxygen	should	reach	 to	 the	brain?
Who	 manages	 what	 part	 of	 your	 food	 should	 become	 bones,	 should	 become
blood,	should	become	skin?	Who	manages	that	part	of	your	skin	should	become
nails	 and	 part	 of	 your	 skin	 should	 become	 eyes	 and	 part	 of	 your	 skin	 should
become	ears?
Certainly	you	are	not	managing	it,	and	I	don't	see	any	other	manager	around.	So
first	you	have	to	be	grateful	to	the	mind.	That	is	a	first	step	to	go	beyond	mind,
not	as	an	enemy	but	as	a	friend.	Listening	to	me	continually	saying	that	you	have
to	 go	 beyond	mind,	 you	 can	 fall	 into	 a	 misunderstanding.	 I	 have	 tremendous
respect	for	mind.	We	are	obliged	so	much	by	the	mind,	there	is	no	way	to	return
our	gratitude.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 is:	 meditation	 is	 not	 against	 mind,	 it	 is	 beyond	 mind.	 And
beyond	is	not	equivalent	to	against.
That	 misunderstanding	 spreads	 the	 more	 people	 talk	 about	 meditation,
particularly	 people	 who	 don't	 understand	 meditation	 --	 those	 who	 have	 read
about	 it,	 those	who	have	heard	about	 it,	 those	who	know	the	techniques...	And
techniques	are	simple;	they	are	available	in	many	scriptures,	you	can	read	them.
And	now	there	are	books	on	how	to	do	anything	--
car	mechanics,	 electric	 engineering,	 anything	 --	 you	 ask,	 and	 the	 bookseller	 is
ready	to	give	you	a	book	about	how	to	do	it.
My	people	 in	Europe	have	been	 thinking	 to	make	a	book	with	 a	 cassette.	The
book	will	give	all	the	background	of	the	meditation	and	the	cassette	will	give	all
the	 instructions,	 so	 you	 need	 not	 go	 anywhere.	 Just	 sitting	 in	 your	 room	with
your	 tape	 recorder	 and	 you	 have	 a	 master!	 Gautam	 Buddha	 is	 no	 longer
needed....
A	master	will	never	become	irrelevant	for	a	simple	reason:	who	will	teach	you	to
love	the	mind	and	yet	go	beyond	it?	to	love	your	body,	to	respect	your	body?	to
have	gratitude	towards	your	mind,	its	tremendous,	miraculous	functioning?	That
will	make	a	great	friendship,	a	bridge	between	you	and	the	mind.
With	this	friendship	deepening,	whenever	you	are	meditating,	the	mind	will	not
disturb	because	your	meditation	is	not	against	it.	It	is	in	fact	its	own	fulfillment,
it	is	its	own	ultimate	flowering.	Going	beyond	it	is	not	an	antagonistic	attitude,
but	a	friendly	evolution.
So	 this	 should	be	 the	 background	of	 all	meditators:	 not	 to	 be	 a	 fighter.	 If	 you
fight	you	may	be	able	to	make	the	mind	quiet	for	some	time,	but	it	 is	not	your
victory.	The	mind	will	come	back,	you	will	need	it.	You	cannot	live	without	it;
you	cannot	exist	in	the	world	without	it.
And	 if	 you	 can	 create	 a	 friendly	 relationship	 with	 the	 mind,	 a	 loving	 bridge,
rather	than	being	a	hindrance	to	meditation	it	starts	becoming	a	help.	It	protects
your	silence	because	that	silence	is	also	its	own	treasure,	 it	 is	not	just	yours.	It
becomes	a	soil	in	which	the	roses	of	meditation	will	blossom,	and	the	soil	will	be
as	happy	as	the	roses.	When	the	roses	will	be	dancing	in	the	sun,	in	the	rain,	in
the	wind,	the	soil	will	also	rejoice.
My	 approach	 is	 totally	 different	 from	 the	 approach	 that	 has	 been	 taken	 up	 to
now.	 For	 thousands	 of	 years,	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 something
against	body,	against	mind.
And	 just	 today	 I	 came	 to	 know	 that	 there	 are	 even	 idiots	 who	 are	 teaching
against	meditation.	The	parliament	of	Israel	has	passed	a	law	that	meditation	in
private	or	in	public	is	a	criminal	act.	You	cannot	believe	it!
And	these	politicians	don't	know	even	the	ABC	of	the	mind,	what	to	say	about
meditation.	 But	 why	 are	 they	 so	 much	 worried?	 One	 of	 their	 worries	 is	 me,
because	out	of	my	sannyasins	fifty	percent	are	Jews.	Sooner	or	later	I	am	going
to	take	over	Israel,	there	is	no	problem	about	it	--	before	the	Palestinians	take	it
over,	I	am	going	to	take	over.
Why	should	the	politicians	be	concerned?	And	if	they	are	concerned	they	should
consult	 people	who	 know	what	meditation	 is.	 To	make	 it	 a	 criminal	 act	 is	 an
unbelievable	thing;	nowhere	ever...
Religions	 have	 taught	 against	 the	 body.	That	was	 so	 ridiculous	 --	 you	have	 to
live	in	the	body,	you	have	to	nourish	the	body;	you	have	to	keep	it	healthy,	it	is
your	home.	They	have	been	talking	against	mind.	Now	this	is	the	latest	thing	--
Israel	has	done	a	pioneer	work!	The	parliament	of	Israel	seems	to	be	consisting
of	really	first-class	idiots.
I	don't	think	they	know	even	anything	about	meditation,	but	the	fear....	Jews	are
afraid,	Mohammedans	are	afraid,	Hindus	are	afraid,	Jainas	are	afraid	--	they	are
all	afraid	of	meditation.	Even	though	they	talk	about	meditation	they	are	afraid
of	it.	They	talk	because	without	talking	about	meditation	their	religion	seems	to
be	 incomplete,	but	 they	are	basically	against	 it	because	a	man	who	becomes	a
meditator	simply	slips	out	of	any	organized	religion.	He	is	no	more	a	Hindu	and
he	 is	 no	 more	 a	 Jew	 and	 he	 is	 no	 more	 a	 Mohammedan.	 He	 cannot	 go	 on
believing	in	all	kinds	of	superstitions	and	stupidities	that	every	religion	is	full	of.
Jews	 think	 that	 they	 are	 the	 chosen	people	of	God.	Now,	no	meditator	 can	do
that.	To	 think	 that	 "Only	we,	 the	 Jews,	 are	 the	 chosen	people	of	God,	 and	 the
whole	humanity	 is	 in	 some	way	 inferior	 to	us"...	But	 it	was	not	only	 the	 Jews
who	have	committed	that	sin.
They	 have	 suffered	much	 for	 it;	 they	 are	 still	 suffering.	They	will	 continue	 to
suffer,	because	the	very	idea	is	so	stupid	that	it	creates	antagonism,	particularly
in	a	world	where	Nordic	Germans	think	that	they	are	the	chosen	people,	where
Hindus	think	that	they	are	the	chosen	people,	because	their	holy	book	is	the	most
ancient	and	first	God-written	holy	scripture.	They	cannot	tolerate	any	ideas	like
Moses	 telling	 his	 people	 that	 "You	 are	 the	 chosen	 people	 of	God;	 you	 have	 a
basic	right	to	be	superior	to	everybody	else."	Who	can	tolerate	it?	Hindus	think
they	are	superior	to	everybody.
Jews	and	Hindus	are	the	only	two	religions	in	the	world	which	don't	believe	in
conversion,	because	how	to	convert	 inferior	people	into	a	higher	religion?	And
because	 they	 cannot	 convert,	 they	 are	 absolutely	 against	 Christianity,
Mohammedanism,	who	are	after	converts	continuously.
Now,	because	of	the	fear	that	the	number	of	Mohammedans	and	Christians	goes
on	growing	and	Jews	and	Hindus	go	on	shrinking,	there	are	small	trends	among
Jews...	 and	 there	 is	a	 small	group	of	Hindus	called	 the	Arya	Samaj,	who	have
introduced	conversion.
But	 it	 remains	 a	very	half-hearted	 thing.	Deep	down	 they	know	what	 they	are
doing:	 they	 are	 bringing	 inferior	 people	 into	 their	 fold.	 It	 is	 just	 out	 of	 sheer
necessity;	otherwise	those	inferior	people	will	outnumber	--	they	have	already	--
the	superior	people.
Now	 Christians	 have	 the	 greatest	 numbers	 in	 the	 world;	 second	 are	 the
Mohammedans	--
and	these	two	are	the	converting	religions.
The	fear	of	meditation	has	 roots.	 In	 the	 law	passed	by	 the	 Israeli	parliament	 it
has	 become	 exposed,	 but	 it	 is	 there	 in	 every	 religious	 mind:	 if	 people	 start
meditating,	if	people	start	loving	their	bodies,	loving	their	minds,	and	out	of	love
peacefully	transcending	towards	a	state	of	no-mind,	they	will	not	belong	to	any
stupid	ideology.
And	 all	 ideologies	 are	 so	 full	 of	 stupid	 things	 that	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to
count	 how	many	 superstitions,	 and	 what	 a	 variety	 of	 superstitions.	 Some	 day
when	humanity	has	become	one,	we	will	need	great	museums	to	collect	all	 the
superstitions	 to	 remember	 our	 forefathers	 by.	 Just	 the	way	Darwin	 thought	 of
monkeys	as	his	forefathers,	 the	coming	generations	of	man	will	 remember	you
and	your	forefathers	in	the	same	category.
I	would	 like	you	to	be	reminded	of	a	few	superstitions...	 just	samples,	because
the	whole	lot	is	too	much.
Jainas	think	that	unless	your	earlobes	touch	your	shoulders	you	cannot	become
enlightened.	Now	I	cannot	see	what	the	relationship	can	be	between	the	earlobes,
which	are	almost	dead	parts	of	your	body...	have	you	ever	noticed?	Can	you	do
anything	with	your	earlobes?	Can	you	wave	them?	They	are	just	hanging	there,
not	 doing	 anything.	 You	 cannot	 do	 anything	 with	 them	 because	 there	 is	 no
nervous	 system;	 they	 are	 just	 pieces	 of	 flesh	 without	 nerves,	 pure	 flesh.	 And
without	nerves	you	cannot	turn	them	up	or	down,	here	and	there.
I	have	come	across	only	one	person	--	and	I	have	been	around	the	world	--	and
strangely	enough	he	was	my	classmate	in	first	grade	when	I	entered	school.	Now
he	is	a	doctor	in	the	same	town.	He	is	the	only	man...	some	freak!	He	can	make
his	earlobes	move	this	way,	that	way,	back,	forward.	He	was	a	miracle;	for	some
accidental	reason	his	earlobes	have	grown	nerves	inside.	Just	as	a	few	people	are
born	with	 six	 fingers,	 a	 few	people	are	born	with	 three	eyes,	a	 few	people	are
born	with	two	heads	--	just	freaks	--	he	has	really	big	earlobes.
I	 have	 been	watching	 to	 see	when	 he	 becomes	 enlightened.	He	 is	 just	 a	 poor
doctor	--	he	knows	nothing	about	meditation,	nothing	about	enlightenment.	And
because	he	is	an	ayurvedic	doctor,	patients	don't	come	to	him.	Only	his	children
go	 on	 growing,	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 growing	 poorer	 and	 poorer.	 Each	 time	 I	 have
seen	him	I	have	seen	him	reduced,	 thinner,	more	worried.	 I	 said,	 "What	 is	 the
matter?	You	are	supposed	to	be	enlightened!"
But	stupid	ideas...	and	it	is	not	one	religion	but	every	religion.	And	they	cannot
tolerate	each	other.
Mohammed	went	to	heaven	sitting	on	his	horse;	the	horse	also	went	--	without
wings.
Neither	Mohammed	had	wings	nor	the	horse,	but	they	flew	to	heaven.	This	was
happening	for	the	first	 time.	Jesus	left	his	donkey	here,	Francis	left	his	donkey
here;	only	Mohammed	was	able	 to	 take	his	horse.	Mohammedans	 think	 it	was
because	he	was	the	real	prophet....
Now	everybody	is	claiming	--	Mohammedans	claim	that	the	KORAN,	their	holy
book,	is	 the	only	authentic,	God-written	book;	all	other	books	are	man-written.
And	the	KORAN
is	 not	 even	worth	 being	 considered	 as	 literature;	 it	 is	 just	 third-class.	Because
Mohammed	was	 uneducated,	 he	 did	 not	write	 it;	 whatever	 he	was	 saying	 has
been	 collected	 by	 people,	 but	 every	 sentence	 shows	 his	 uneducatedness,	 his
unculturedness.
But	Mohammed	claims	to	be	the	last	prophet	of	God:	after	him	there	will	be	no
prophet	 because	 God	 has	 sent	 his	 final	 message	 through	 him,	 and	 that	 is	 the
KORAN.	All	 old	messages	 are	 canceled	 --	 THE	BIBLE,	 the	VEDAS,	 are	 all
canceled,	because	when	the	new	message	has	arrived	it	cancels	all	the	old.	It	is
the	most	developed,	 the	most	evolved	message;	 it	 is	so	perfect	 that	 there	 is	no
need	of	anybody	else	to	bring	a	message	to	the	world.
Now,	all	these	religions	are	claiming	such	things.	Mohammedans	say	that	when
Mohammed	 used	 to	 move	 in	 Arabia	 --	 which	 is	 a	 desert	 and	 really	 becomes
burning	hot	when	the	sun	comes	to	the	middle	of	the	sky	--	God	used	to	send	a
beautiful	white	cloud	which	used	to	move	just	over	Mohammed's	head,	keeping
him	under	shadow...	a	divine	umbrella!
If	 meditation	 becomes	 more	 prevalent,	 then	 you	 will	 get	 free	 from	 all	 these
prejudices;	hence	no	religion	wants	meditation,	although	they	may	talk	about	it.
To	me,	neither	God	is	important	nor	heaven	nor	hell	nor	angels	--	all	 those	are
just	 hypothetical.	To	me,	meditation	 is	 the	very	 soul	of	 religion.	But	 it	 can	be
attained	only	if	you	move	rightly.	Just	a	single	step	in	a	wrong	direction...	And
you	are	always	moving	on	a	razor's	edge!
Begin	 with	 love	 of	 the	 body,	 which	 is	 your	 outermost	 part.	 Start	 loving	 your
mind	--	and	if	you	love	your	mind	you	will	decorate	it,	just	the	way	you	decorate
your	 body.	You	 keep	 it	 clean,	 you	 keep	 it	 fresh;	 you	 don't	want	 your	 body	 to
smell	 horrible	 to	 people,	 you	 want	 your	 body	 to	 be	 loved	 and	 respected	 by
others.	Your	presence	should	not	be	simply	tolerated	but	welcomed.
You	 have	 to	 decorate	 your	mind	with	 poetry,	with	music,	with	 art,	with	 great
literature.
Your	trouble	is,	your	mind	is	filled	only	with	trivia.	Such	third-rate	things	go	on
through	your	mind	that	you	cannot	love	it.	You	think	of	nothing	which	is	great.
Make	 it	more	 in	 tune	with	 the	greatest	poets;	make	 it	 in	 tune	with	people	 like
Fyodor	 Dostoevsky,	 Leo	 Tolstoy,	 Anton	 Chekhov,	 Turgenev,	 Rabindranath,
Kahlil	Gibran,	Mikhail	Naimy;	make	it	filled	with	the	greatest	heights	that	mind
has	reached.
Then	you	will	not	be	unfriendly	to	the	mind.	Then	you	will	rejoice	in	the	mind;
even	if	mind	is	there	in	your	silence,	it	will	have	a	poetry	and	a	music	of	its	own,
and	to	 transcend	such	a	refined	mind	 is	very	easy.	 It	 is	a	 friendly	step	 towards
higher	 peaks:	 poetry	 turning	 into	mysticism,	 great	 literature	 turning	 into	 great
insights	into	existence,	music	turning	into	silence.
And	 as	 these	 things	 start	 turning	 into	 higher	 peaks,	 beyond	mind,	 you	will	 be
discovering	new	worlds,	new	universes	which	we	don't	 even	have	a	name	 for.
We	can	say	blissfulness,	ecstasy,	enlightenment,	but	no	word	really	describes	it.
It	 is	 simply	 outside	 the	 power	 of	 language	 to	 reduce	 it	 into	 explanations,	 into
theories,	 into	 philosophies.	 It	 is	 simply	 beyond...	 but	 mind	 rejoices	 in	 its
transcendence.
That's	what	my	unique	contribution	is	to	you.	With	absolute	humbleness	I	want
to	tell	you	that	I	am	far	ahead	of	even	Gautam	Buddha,	for	the	simple	reason	that
he	is	still	fighting	with	the	mind.	I	have	loved	my	mind,	and	through	love	I	have
transcended	it.
It	is	a	totally	new	beginning.	Naturally	I	have	to	be	condemned;	my	people	will
be	condemned.	Many	will	come	to	me	but	will	not	be	able	 to	walk	along	with
me	 even	 for	 a	 few	 steps,	 because	 soon	 they	will	 find	 that	 their	 prejudices	 are
preventing	them	from	going	with	me.
Their	 prejudices	 are	 ancient,	 and	 naturally	 --	 I	 can	 understand	 --	 they	 cannot
think	that	anybody	can	go	beyond	Gautam	Buddha,	just	as	the	contemporaries	of
Gautam	 Buddha	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 he	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the	 VEDAS	 and
beyond	the	seers	of	the	UPANISHADS,	just	as	contemporaries	of	Lao	Tzu	and
Chuang	Tzu	could	not	believe	that	they	have	gone	far	beyond	Confucius.
And	if	just	out	of	humbleness	I	don't	say	the	truth,	I	will	be	committing	a	crime
against	truth.	I	don't	care	about	such	humbleness;	I	want	exactly	what	is	the	case
to	be	explained	to	you.
My	approach	towards	meditation	is	absolutely	new,	absolutely	fresh,	because	it
depends	 on	 love	 --	 not	 on	 fight,	 not	 on	war.	Mahavira	 I	 have	 left	 twenty-five
centuries	 behind.	 His	 name	 was	 not	 Mahavira	 --	 mahavira	 means	 `the	 great
warrior'.	His	name	was	Vardhamana,	but	people	 changed	his	name	because	he
was	 a	 great	warrior.	A	warrior	 against	whom?	 --	 against	 his	 body,	 against	 his
mind.	And	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 anybody	who	 is	 against	 his	 body	 and	 against	 his
mind	is	capable	of	reaching	the	beyond.
Only	love	is	the	path.
Sagarpriya,	make	your	mind	as	beautiful	as	possible.	Decorate	it	with	flowers.	I
am	 really	 very	 sad	 when	 I	 see	 that	 people	 don't	 know	 THE	 BOOK	 OF
MIRDAD,	 that	 they	have	never	 looked	 into	 the	absurd	 stories	of	Chuang	Tzu,
that	 they	have	never	bothered	 to	understand	 the	 absolutely	 irrational	 stories	of
Zen.
I	 cannot	 conceive	 of	 how	 you	 can	 live	 beautifully	 if	 you	 don't	 know
Dostoevsky's	 books...	 BROTHERS	 KARAMAZOV	 to	 me	 is	 more	 important
than	 any	 BIBLE.	 It	 has	 such	 great	 insights,	 that	 THE	 BIBLE	 should	 not	 be
counted	at	all,	even	for	comparison.
But	THE	BIBLE	will	be	read	--	and	who	is	going	to	bother	about	BROTHERS
KARAMAZOV,	 in	 which	 Dostoevsky	 has	 poured	 his	 whole	 soul?	 or	 ANNA
KARENINA	 by	 Leo	 Tolstoy,	 or	 FATHERS	 AND	 SONS	 by	 Turgenev,	 or
OFFERING
OF	 SONGS	 by	 Rabindranath?And	 these	 are	 only	 a	 few	 names;	 there	 are
thousands	who	have	reached	the	finest	flowering	of	mind.
First	let	your	mind	be	decorated.	Only	beyond	this	perfumed	garden	of	the	mind
will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 go	 silently,	 without	 any	 fight;	mind	will	 be	 a	 help,	 not	 a
hindrance.	I	have	not	found	it	 to	be	a	hindrance;	hence	I	can	say	with	absolute
authority:	it	is	not	a	hindrance.
You	just	don't	know	how	to	use	it.
It	is	beautiful,	Sagarpriya,	that	when	you	come	here	you	feel	meditative.	At	least
these	few	gaps,	these	few	days,	will	slowly	start	becoming	stronger,	deeper.	One
day	 you	 will	 be	 gone	 and	 these	 moments	 will	 be	 with	 you	 even	 in	 the
marketplace,	and	that	will	be	a	day	of	great	rejoicing.
But	it	takes	time.	I	have	to	say	to	people	that	it	can	happen	instantly.	Not	that	it
is	untrue	-
-	 it	 can	 happen	 instantly,	 but	 where	 to	 find	 the	 genius	who	 can	 understand	 it
instantly?
When	I	say	it	can	happen	instantly,	people	simply	think,	"This	is	impossible	for
us."	If	I	say	to	them	it	can	happen	in	a	few	lives'	time,	they	feel,	"That	seems	to
be	perfect,"
because	that	gives	them	the	time	to	do	all	their	stupid	things	meanwhile.	It	is	a
question	of	a	few	lives,	so	what	is	the	hurry?	First	take	care	of	your	boyfriend,
your	girlfriend;	 first	 go	 to	 see	 all	 kinds	of	 ruins	 in	Rome,	 in	Greece,	 in	 India;
first	do	every	foolish	thing	that	is	expected	of	you	by	the	whole	crowd.	And	as
far	 as	 enlightenment	 is	 concerned	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 happen	 now,	 it	 will	 take
many	lives,	so	what	is	the	hurry?	You	can	go	on	postponing.
That's	why	 people	 love	 all	 these	 religions	which	 talk	 about	many	 lives	 --	 not
because	they	understand	the	significance	of	it,	but	because	they	want	to	use	that
as	an	excuse.
It	can	happen	this	very	moment,	but	it	will	not	happen.	The	reason	is	not	in	its
nature;	the	reason	is	you.	It	will	not	happen	because	you	don't	want	it	to	happen
right	now.
Just	 think	 for	 a	 moment:	 if	 I	 were	 going	 to	 make	 you	 enlightened	 this	 very
moment,	 you	 would	 start	 thinking,	 "But	 I	 have	 not	 asked	my	 husband.	What
about	my	children?	I	have	to	get	my	daughter	married.	And	I	have	just	met	my
girlfriend,	my	god!	and	this	is	going	to	happen	just	now?	he	cannot	wait?	--	just
let	me	 finish	my	honeymoon."	Thousands	of	 thoughts	will	 arise	 in	your	mind:
"My	god,	I	have	started	a	new	business,	invested	everything	in	it.	If	he	had	told
me	before,	I	would	not	have	got	involved	in	all	this	mess."
Everybody,	without	exception....
I	 have	 told	 you	 the	 story	 of	 a	 great	 Ceylonese	 master	 who	 had	 millions	 of
disciples,	 and	 who	 had	 been	 telling	 them	 for	 nearabout	 fifty	 years	 only	 one
thing:	Meditate.	The	day	of	his	death	came	and	he	announced,	"After	seven	days
I	am	going	to	leave	my	body,	so	let	all	my	disciples	gather	so	that	I	can	see	them
one	time	more,	because	I	will	not	be	coming	back	again."
So	all	the	disciples	gathered;	it	was	a	great	gathering.	And	before	dying,	the	old
man	said,
"I	 have	 always	 told	 you	 to	 meditate,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 listened.	 I	 give	 you
another	chance.
This	time	you	have	not	to	do	anything.	I	am	going	to	die,	I	can	take	you	with	me.
Is	anybody	ready	to	come	with	me?"
Everybody	looked	at	each	other:	"You	have	been	long	enough	with	him,	you	can
go."
People	looked	at	each	other,	whispered,	"What	are	you	doing?	All	your	children
are	 married,	 everything	 is	 finished,	 nobody	 needs	 you...."	 But	 nobody	 was
standing	up.
He	said,	"Just	stand	up,	and	I	will	take	you	with	me."
There	was	great	silence	and	people	were	looking	downwards	--	how	to	face	this
old	man?
It	 is	 so	 embarrassing.	 But	 they	 were	 all	 unmoving,	 because	 he	 may
misunderstand	even	the	movement	--	he	may	see	that	somebody	is	moving	and
say,	"Get	up!"
Finally	one	man	raised	his	hand.	He	said,	"First	please	understand	this:	I	am	not
standing,	I	am	just	raising	my	hand	to	ask	you	a	question."
The	old	man	 said,	 "Fifty	years	 I	 have	been	 answering	your	questions	 and	 still
you	are	asking	questions?	And	this	time	I	am	giving	you	the	opportunity	to	come
with	me."
He	said,	"I'm	sorry.	Some	day	I	will	come.	Just	tell	me	the	secret	of	how	to	come
and	find	you."
He	said,	"What	have	I	been	telling	you	for	fifty	years?"
The	man	said,	"Just	one	time	more..."
It	is	possible	in	this	very	moment	to	drop	all	your	prejudices,	cleanse	your	mind.
It	 simply	needs	absolute	decisiveness,	ultimate	 trust,	and	a	 love	 that	knows	no
bounds.
But	 if	 it	 cannot	happen	 this	moment,	 I	don't	want	anybody	 to	become	sad	and
fall	 into	a	 state	of	despair.	 It	 can	happen	 tomorrow.	You	can	 relax,	 there	 is	no
hurry.	But	please	understand	 the	process	clearly:	Love	your	body	--	against	all
the	religions.	Love	your	mind,	refine	your	mind	--	against	all	the	religions.
And	I	say	to	you	that	fight	is	not	the	way;	love	is	the	way.	Love	your	body,	love
your	mind,	and	that	very	love	will	create	the	energy,	the	atmosphere	to	transcend
the	mind,	to	create	what	I	call	meditation	or	the	state	of	no-mind.	It	will	come.	It
has	to	come.	Nobody	has	to	go	from	this	temple	empty-handed.
But	 you	 will	 have	 to	 understand	 one	 thing:	 that	 I	 don't	 represent	 any	 old
tradition,	I	don't	represent	any	old	religion;	I	don't	represent	any	Gautam	Buddha
or	Mahavira	or	Mohammed	or	Jesus	or	Moses	--	I	simply	represent	myself.
And	 if	you	can	 love	and	 trust	a	stranger	who	does	not	belong	 to	any	orthodox
organization,	then	with	me,	meditation	will	be	happening...	and	soon,	without	me
also	it	will	be	happening.	It	will	take	a	little	time.	It	will	take	a	little	time	because
it	needs	to	grow	roots.
So,	Sagarpriya,	whenever	you	can	find	time,	come.	And	don't	be	concerned	with
what	happens	outside;	that	is	just	rubbish.	What	happens	here,	count	only	that	as
your	real	life.
The	moments	that	you	are	with	me	will	be	with	you	even	after	your	death,	and
the	moments	you	are	wasting	in	the	world	are	simply	gone	down	the	drain.
But	 there	 is	no	need	 to	be	worried.	 If	 even	a	 few	moments	of	meditation	start
becoming	seeds	in	you,	start	growing	roots	in	you,	the	day	is	not	very	far	away
when	you	will	have	the	first	flowers	of	your	consciousness	growing	within	you.
And	 I	 understand	 you,	 Sagarpriya;	 I	 understand	 you	 and	 your	 trust	 and	 your
love.	Very	few	people	have	that	much	love	and	that	much	trust.
But	drop	all	antagonism	towards	the	mind.	There	is	some	streak	of	fighting	with
the	mind,	maybe	unconscious	--	mind	is	just	a	poor	and	beautiful	thing....
Modern	police	departments	are	beginning	to	use	computers	to	help	fight	crime.
One	night	a	man	telephoned	the	police	and	said,	"Police,	come	quick!	There	is	a
burglar	downstairs	and	he	is	putting	all	our	valuables	in	a	sack."
The	voice	on	the	other	end	said,	"Keep	calm.	Keep	calm,	sir,	hang	up	the	phone,
stay	where	you	are	and	a	police	car	will	be	right	over...	right	over...	right	over...."
A	computer	can	go	wrong	any	moment.	And	mind	is	nothing	but	a	computer,	but
created	with	such	perfection	by	nature.	But	you	have	not	valued	it	at	all.
The	enormous	computer	took	up	all	of	the	huge	room,	completely	dwarfing	the
two	tiny	mathematicians	standing	before	it.	A	sliver	of	paper	had	emerged	from
the	 computer	 and	 one	 mathematician,	 after	 studying	 it	 gravely,	 turned	 to	 the
other	 and	 said,	 "Do	 you	 realize	 that	 it	 would	 take	 four	 hundred	 ordinary
mathematicians	two	hundred	and	fifty	years	to	make	a	mistake	this	big?"
There	are	many	people	in	the	world	who	are	becoming	interested	in	meditation,
but	ninety-nine	percent	are	in	the	wrong	hands,	and	if	you	say	this	it	hurts	them.
Just	today	I	have	received	a	letter.	The	letter	says,	"The	other	night	you	spoke	of
Goenka's	 Vipassana.	 You	 blamed	 Goenka	 for	 being	 a	 businessman	 and
professionalist	 of	 Vipassana.	 Osho,	 I	 have	 experienced	 Vipassana	 here	 at	 the
Poona	 ashram,	 and	 also	 Goenka's	 Dhammpeeth	 at	 Igatpuri.	 I	 think	 your
comment	is	wrong."
And	this	is	from	a	man,	Anand	Piyoosh,	who	has	just	become	a	sannyasin	two
days	ago.
In	another	letter	before	this,	he	says,	"Due	to	uncertainty	and	indecisiveness	of
mind	I	have	taken	sannyas	after	twelve	years.	Due	to	this	inability	of	mine	I	have
suffered	much.
How	can	I	get	freed	from	it	permanently?	--	Anand	Piyoosh."
It	took	him	twelve	years	to	decide	to	take	sannyas,	and	it	took	him	only	twelve
hours	 to	 find	 that	 I	 am	 wrong	 in	 what	 I	 have	 said	 about	 Goenka	 --	 no
indecisiveness	about	this.
And	if	Goenka	was	right,	then	what	is	the	need	of	coming	here?	If	Goenka	can
teach	you	meditation,	then	why	are	you	wasting	your	time	here,	and	my	time	and
my	people's	time?
And	if	you	have	such	an	understanding	that	you	can	simply	call	me	wrong,	then
this	is	not	the	place	for	you.
What	do	you	understand	about	meditation?
The	 difference	 between	 Goenka's	 meditation	 and	 the	 meditation	 that	 is
happening	 here	 is	 immense,	 and	 for	 you	 it	 will	 take	 at	 least	 twelve	 lives	 to
understand	the	difference!
Goenka	 is	 only	 a	 technician.	 I	 am	 not	 a	 technician.	 I	 have	 never	 followed
anybody,	I	have	simply	searched	on	my	own.	It	was	difficult,	it	was	dangerous,
but	 I	went	 on	 searching	my	path	 alone,	 finding	my	own	ways	 to	 reach	 to	my
being.
Goenka	 is	 just	 a	 poor	 follower	 of	 a	 twenty-five	 hundred	 year	 old	 tradition	 of
Gautam	Buddha.	In	twenty-five	hundred	years	--	carbon	copies	of	carbon	copies
of	carbon	copies	of	carbon	copies	of	carbon	copies!	Do	you	want	to	compare	me
with	these	carbon	copies?
And	 if	 Goenka	 had	 understood	 meditation,	 he	 would	 have	 come	 here.	 His
meditation	 would	 have	 shown	 him	 that	 something	 far	 higher	 than	 Gautam
Buddha	is	in	existence.
Igatpuri	is	not	far	away	from	here...	but	the	coward	has	no	guts.
And	 if	 you	 are	 so	 clear	 about	 my	 statement	 being	 wrong,	 then	 you	 don't
understand	anything	of	what	is	happening	here.
Here,	all	the	meditations	are	just	preparing	the	ground,	just	taking	out	the	weeds,
the	grass	roots,	the	wild	growth,	the	stones	--	just	cleaning	the	garden	for	me	to
sow	the	seeds.	The	people	who	are	teaching	meditation	here,	different	kinds	of
meditation,	are	just	preparing	the	ground.	I	am	the	gardener.
Goenka	 can	 prepare	 the	 ground,	 but	 from	 where	 is	 he	 going	 to	 find	 the
rosebushes?	He	does	not	have	the	experience:	he	is	not	enlightened	or	awakened
even	in	the	ancient	sense	of	Gautam	Buddha.	Just	go	to	him	and	ask	--	has	he	the
courage	to	say	that	he	has	the	same	consciousness	as	Gautam	Buddha?	And	I	say
to	you	that	I	have	left	Gautam	Buddha	twenty-five	centuries	back.
My	therapists,	my	people	who	are	preparing	meditations	for	you,	are	just	doing
the	primary	groundwork.	They	are	 just	preparing	 the	ground.	The	ultimate	and
final	touch	I	have	to	give.
I	have	my	own	ways	 to	 sow	 the	 seeds	 in	you:	 through	my	words,	 through	my
silences,	through	my	eyes,	through	my	gestures	--	just	through	my	silence,	just
through	my	presence;	it	has	a	living	field	of	energy.
And	unless	you	have	a	 living	awakened	being	amongst	you,	all	your	 therapies
and	all	your	meditations	are	just	futile	exercises;	they	won't	help	much.
For	Piyoosh	 I	would	 like	 to	 say,	Go	back	 to	Goenka.	This	 is	not	 the	place	 for
you.	And	you	have	to	leave	right	now.	I	am	tired	of	idiots	of	all	kinds.	For	thirty
years	 I	 have	 suffered	 from	 idiots	 and	 I	 have	 tolerated	 them,	 but	 now	 I	 have
decided	no	idiot	will	be	allowed	here.
You	 took	 twelve	 years	 to	 decide	 to	 take	 sannyas;	 I	 don't	 need	 even	 twelve
seconds	 to	 take	 it	 away.	 You	 are	 no	 more	 a	 sannyasin.	 Return	 your	 sannyas
papers,	and	you	perfectly	know	the	door.	Just	get	out	this	very	night,	and	never
come	here	again.	Go	to	hell	--	with	anybody,	Goenka,	or	find	some	other	idiot.
There	are	many	in	India.
I	exist	only	for	those	who	can	understand	me	and	who	can	be	totally	with	me.	A
man	who	knows	nothing	about	me,	who	just	within	twelve	hours	of	his	sannyas
starts	finding	that	what	I	am	saying	is	wrong,	certainly	cannot	be	allowed	to	be
here.	 A	 single	 rotten	 fish	 can	 destroy	 the	 whole	 lake.	 So	 you	 will	 be	 very
compassionate	to	all	these	people	by	leaving	this	place	forever.
And	I	am	always	surprised...	if	you	have	found	Goenka	to	be	right,	then	why	are
you	 here?	 When	 somebody	 finds	 something	 that	 is	 helping	 his	 growth,	 he
remains	there.	And	if	you	have	found	Goenka	to	be	right	and	still	you	have	not
remained	with	him,	how	are	you	going	to	remain	with	me,	whom	you	find	wrong
just	within	twelve	hours?
No,	 don't	 waste	 time.	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 collecting	 crowds	 and	 retarded
people.	Just	go	to	Goenka	and	tell	him	everything	that	I	have	said.	And	if	he	has
guts,	bring	him	here,	so	I	can	show	you	that	he	knows	nothing	about	meditation
as	 far	 as	 experience	 is	 concerned,	 that	 he	 knows	 nothing	 at	 all	 of	 what
enlightenment	 is.	All	 that	 he	 knows	 is	 a	 poor	 technique.	But	 a	 technician	 is	 a
totally	different	thing.
A	technician	can	work	with	electricity,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	he	is	Edison,
that	he	has	discovered	electricity.	Don't	ask	the	poor	technician	about	electricity
--	don't	ask	any	question	about	its	intrinsic	character;	don't	ask	of	what	it	consists
--	he	is	not	an	Edison.
But	he	can	do	perfectly	well:	you	don't	need	Edison	when	one	of	your	bulbs	goes
out;	just	any	idiot	can	do	that.
The	same	is	 the	situation	about	meditation.	There	are	 technicians	and	there	are
realized	people.	Unless	you	find	a	realized	being,	all	your	efforts	are	in	vain.
Three	 French	 youngsters,	 respectively	 six,	 seven	 and	 eight	 years	 old,	 were
skipping	along	the	street.
The	six	year	old	who	was	 in	 front,	 looked	 in	 through	an	open	window	he	was
passing,	stopped,	and	waved	excitedly	to	the	others:	"Come,	come	quickly,"	he
said.	"A	man	and	a	woman	are	fighting	in	there."
The	 seven	 year	 old,	 coming	 up,	 looked	 in	 and	 said,	 "No,	 you	 fool,	 they	 are
making	love."
The	 eight	 year	 old	 came	 up,	 looked	 in	 and	 said,	 "Yes,	 and	 what	 a	 terrible
technique."
...	Feel	this	peace,	absorb	that	silence.	And	as	you	absorb	it,	it	becomes	deeper...
it	starts	touching	your	heart.
There	is	no	movement,	but	you	will	feel	a	dance.
There	is	no	word,	but	you	will	feel	a	song.
It	is	as	if	there	is	nobody,	but	a	tremendous	oneness...	all	personalities	gone	and
only	one	consciousness,	throbbing	in	synchronicity	with	each	other.
Just	 to	 end	 up	 this	 beautiful	 moment....	 I	 always	 like	 to	 leave	 you	 laughing,
singing,	dancing.	This	is	just	an	indication	that	the	day	when	I	ultimately	leave
you,	I	would	like	you	to	sing,	dance	and	celebrate.
In	fact,	no	man	in	the	whole	of	history	would	have	received	such	a	celebration
when	 he	 dies	 as	 I	 am	 going	 to	 receive.	A	 few	 have	 received	 celebration	 only
from	enemies,	because	when	one	dies,	enemies	celebrate.	The	friends	mourn.
I	am	the	only	person...	 in	my	death	my	friends	will	celebrate,	my	enemies	will
celebrate.
In	my	death	they	will	come	together	in	celebration.	There	has	never	been	such	a
man	before.
A	black	 lady	 in	New	York	received	a	phone	call	 from	the	school	 that	her	 little
boy	 Leroy	 attended.	 The	 head	 teacher	 wanted	 to	 see	 her	 as	 soon	 as	 possible
about	her	son's	behavior.
"Your	boy,	Leroy,"	began	the	teacher,	"is	a	disruptive	influence."
"Just	like	his	father,"	said	the	black	lady.
"He	steals	from	other	children,"	continued	the	teacher.
"Just	like	his	father,"	said	the	mother.
"He	is	always	getting	into	fights,"	continued	the	teacher.
"Just	like	his	father,"	replied	the	mother.
"He	chases	the	little	girls	and	makes	them	cry,"	said	the	teacher.
"Just	like	his	father,"	said	the	black	lady,	"and,	Lordy,	am	I	glad	I	never	married
the	man!"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	A	very	delicate	and	complex	affair
13	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709130
ShortTitle:
PILGR14
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
89
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	TAKING	THE	ROLE	OF	A	THERAPIST	DANGEROUS	TO	MY	OWN
SPIRITUAL	GROWTH?
IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 TO	 HELP	 PEOPLE	 AND	 STILL	 LET	 MY	 OWN	 EGO
DISSOLVE
AT	THE	SAME	TIME?	I	FEEL	THAT	A	SUBTLE	FIGHT	GOES	ON	INSIDE
ME
BETWEEN	 ONE	 PART	 THAT	 IS	 CLEAR	 AND	 ANOTHER	 PART	 THAT
WANTS
NOTHING	TO	DO	WITH	CLARITY.
UNDER	 YOUR	 GUIDANCE	 I	 HAVE	 LEARNED	 NOT	 TO	 DOMINATE
OTHERS
WHEN	 I	 USE	MY	CAPACITY	 TO	 SEE,	 BUT	AM	 I	 STILL	DOMINATING
MYSELF?
Sagarpriya,	the	role	of	a	therapist	is	a	very	delicate	and	complex	affair.
First,	 the	 therapist	 himself	 suffers	 from	 the	 same	problems	 that	he	 is	 trying	 to
help	others	with.	The	 therapist	 is	only	a	 technician.	He	can	manage	 to	pretend
and	to	deceive	himself	that	he	is	a	master	--	that	is	the	greatest	danger	in	being	a
therapist.	But	just	a	little	understanding,	and	things	won't	be	the	same.
First,	don't	 think	in	terms	of	helping	others.	That	gives	you	the	idea	of	being	a
savior,	 of	 being	 a	master	 --	 and	 from	 the	back	door	 the	 ego	 enters	 again.	You
become	important,	you	are	 the	center	of	 the	group,	everybody	is	 looking	up	 to
you.
Drop	 the	 idea	of	help.	 Instead	of	 `help'	use	 the	word	`sharing'.	You	share	your
insight,	whatsoever	you	have.	The	participant	is	not	someone	who	is	inferior	to
you.	The	therapist	and	the	therapee	are	both	in	the	same	boat;	the	therapist	is	just
a	 little	more	 knowledgeable.	 Be	 conscious	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 your	 knowledge	 is
borrowed.	Never	 for	a	moment	 forget	 that	whatever	you	know	is	still	not	your
experience,	and	this	will	help	the	people	who	are	participating	in	your	group.
Man	 is	 a	 very	 subtle	 mechanism.	 It	 works	 on	 both	 sides:	 the	 therapist	 starts
becoming	the	master,	and	rather	than	helping	he	is	destroying	something	in	the
participant,	because	the	participant	will	also	learn	only	the	technique.	There	will
not	 be	 a	 loving,	 sharing	 friendliness,	 an	 atmosphere	 of	 trust,	 but	 "You	 know
more,	I	know	less...	By	participating	in	a	few	therapy	groups	I	will	also	know	as
much	as	you	know."
The	 participants	 slowly,	 slowly	 start	 becoming	 therapists	 themselves,	 because
there	is	no	degree	required	--	at	least	in	many	countries.	In	a	few	countries	they
have	started	to	outlaw	all	kinds	of	unaccepted	therapies;	only	a	man	who	has	a
university	qualification	in	therapeutics,	in	psychoanalysis,	in	psychotherapy	will
be	able	to	help	people	in	therapy	groups.
This	 is	going	 to	happen	 in	almost	every	country	of	 the	world,	because	 therapy
has	become	a	business,	and	people	who	are	unqualified	are	dominating	it.	They
know	the	technique,	because	technique	they	can	learn;	by	participating	in	a	few
groups	 they	know	all	 the	 techniques,	 then	 they	can	make	a	concoction	of	 their
own.	But	there	is	no	way	of	controlling....
But	 remember:	 the	moment	 you	 play	 the	 role	 of	 a	 helper,	 the	 helped	 is	 never
going	to	forgive	you.	You	have	hurt	his	pride,	you	have	hurt	his	ego.	That	was
not	your	intention...
your	intention	was	just	to	inflate	your	own	ego,	but	this	can	happen	only	if	you
hurt	other	people's	ego.	You	cannot	inflate	your	ego	without	hurting	others.	Your
bigger	ego	will	need	more	space,	and	the	others	have	to	shrink	their	space	and
their	personality	to	exist	with	you.
From	 the	 very	 beginning	 an	 authentic	 loving	 person...	 and	 I	 make	 it	 an
absolutely	 necessary	 point	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 more	 therapeutic	 than	 love.
Technique	can	help,	but	the	real	miracle	happens	through	love.	Love	the	people
who	 participate	 in	 therapy	 and	 be	 one	 amongst	 them,	 with	 no	 pretensions	 of
being	higher	or	holier.
Make	it	clear	from	the	very	beginning:	"These	are	the	techniques	I	have	learned,
and	a	little	bit	is	my	experience.	I	will	give	you	the	techniques,	and	I	will	share
my	experience.
But	 you	 are	 not	 my	 disciples;	 you	 are	 just	 friends	 in	 need.	 I	 have	 some
understanding,	not	much,	but	I	can	share	it	with	you.	Perhaps	many	of	you	have
their	own	understanding	coming	from	different	areas,	different	directions.	They
can	also	share	their	experience	and	make	the	group	richer."
In	 other	 words,	 what	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 a	 totally	 new	 concept	 of	 therapy.	 The
therapist	 is	 only	 a	 coordinator.	 He	 just	 tries	 to	 make	 the	 group	 more	 silent,
serene;	 he	 keeps	 an	 eye	 that	 nothing	 goes	wrong...	more	 of	 a	 guardian	 than	 a
master.
And	 you	 have	 also	 to	make	 it	 clear:	 "I	 am	 also	 learning	while	 I	 am	 trying	 to
share	my	experience.	When	I	am	listening	to	you,	it	is	not	only	your	problems;
they	 are	 my	 problems	 too.	 And	 when	 I	 am	 saying	 something,	 I	 am	 not	 only
saying	it,	I	am	listening	also."
Emphatically	make	it	clear	that	you	are	nobody	special.	This	has	to	be	done	in
the	 beginning	 of	 the	 group,	 and	 this	 has	 to	 be	 carried	 on	 as	 the	 group	 goes
deeper,	exploring.
You	 just	 remain	an	elder,	who	has	gone	a	 few	steps	ahead;	otherwise	you	will
not	be	able	to	help	people.	They	will	learn	the	technique	and	they	will	become
therapists	on	their	own.	And	there	are	enough	fools	--	five	billion	fools	--	on	the
earth;	they	will	find	their	own	followers.
It	 is	 a	 human	 weakness	 that	 when	 people	 start	 looking	 up	 to	 you,	 you	 start
thinking,
"There	must	be	something	great	in	me	if	people	are	looking	up	to	me."	They	are
in	trouble,	they	are	suffering	from	human	frailties.	But	you	are	also	human,	and
to	 err	 is	 absolutely	 human.	Without	 any	 condemnation,	 with	 great	 love,	 help
them	to	open	themselves	--	and	this	is	possible	only	if	you	open	yourself.
I	have	come	to	know	a	strange	fact:	strangers	tell	each	other	things	that	they	can
never	say	to	people	they	know.	In	a	railway	train	you	meet	somebody;	you	don't
know	his	name,	you	don't	know	where	he	is	going,	from	where	he	is	coming,	and
people	start	sharing.	I	have	been	traveling	for	twenty	years	non-stop	in	the	whole
country,	 watching	 a	 strange	 phenomenon:	 that	 people	 give	 their	 secrets	 to
strangers,	 because	 the	 stranger	 is	 not	 going	 to	 exploit	 it.	 Just	 the	 next	 station
comes,	and	the	stranger	is	gone;	perhaps	you	may	never	see	him	again.	And	he	is
not	concerned	to	destroy	your	reputation	or	anything.
On	 the	 contrary,	 sharing	 your	 secrets,	 your	 weaknesses,	 your	 vulnerabilities
makes	 others	more	 confident	 and	more	 loving	 and	more	 trusting	 in	 you.	Your
trust	provokes	their	trust	in	you,	and	when	they	see	you	are	so	innocent	and	so
open	and	available,	they	start	opening	up:	it	is	a	chain	reaction.
But	 if	 you	 become	 a	master...	 a	 few	 idiot	 therapists	 from	 this	 commune	 have
become	masters.	They	know	nothing	about	their	own	being,	they	know	nothing
about	any	mystery	of	existence;	all	that	they	know	is	a	certain	mind	game.	That
mind	game	 can	be	 of	 help,	 if	 ultimately	 you	 are	 under	 the	 guidance	of	 a	man
who	has	arrived.	A	little	clarity,	a	little	less	confusion	a	therapy	group	certainly
can	create.
But	a	therapy	group	is	not	the	end.
It	is	only	the	beginning.
It	 is	 a	 preparation	 for	 meditation,	 just	 as	 meditation	 is	 a	 preparation	 for
enlightenment.
If	you	understand	things	in	their	simple	arithmetic,	you	will	not	find	it	difficult	--
and	you	will	enjoy	the	group	more,	because	the	group	will	be	able	to	go	deeper
with	you.	You	will	not	be	only	a	teacher	in	the	group;	you	will	be	also	a	learner.
Kahlil	Gibran's	prophet	Al-Mustafa	has	a	beautiful	statement.	When	somebody
asks,
"Tell	 us	 something	 about	 learning..."	 he	 says,	 "Because	 you	 have	 asked	 I	will
speak.	But	remember	--	I	am	speaking	and	I	am	also	listening	with	you."
I	am	here	on	the	podium	and	I	am	also	sitting	amongst	you.	I	am	not	in	any	way
special.
That	brings	people	 close.	Any	bragging	of	 speciality	 creates	distance,	 any	ego
fulfillment	 destroys	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 love.	 And	 I	 repeat	 again:	 There	 is	 no
therapy	which	is	greater	than	love.
Love	the	people	who	have	become	participants	in	your	group.	Love	them	as	they
are,	not	as	they	should	be.	They	have	suffered	their	whole	life	from	all	kinds	of
religious,	 political,	 social,	 theological,	 philosophical	 leaders	 who	 would	 love
them	if	they	follow,	who	would	love	them	if	they	become	just	images	according
to	 their	 idea.	 They	will	 love	 you	 only	when	 they	 have	 killed	 you	 completely,
demolished	you	and	put	you	together	according	to	their	idea.
All	the	religions	have	done	that	to	humanity.
Nobody	is	left	undamaged.
And	 these	 people	 have	 been	 thinking	 that	 they	 are	 helping,	 consciously.	 They
were	giving	you	 ideals,	 ideologies,	principles,	 commandments	with	 the	certain
fixed	 attitude	 that	 they	 want	 to	 help	 you;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 go	 astray.	 They
cannot	 trust	 your	 freedom	 and	 they	 cannot	 respect	 your	 dignity;	 they	 have
reduced	you	so	badly	--	and	nobody	even	objects.
When	Jesus	told	people,	"You	are	the	sheep	and	I	am	the	shepherd..."	certainly
those	people	must	have	been	sheep,	because	not	a	single	one	stood	up	and	said	to
Jesus,	"This	is	too	much!	You	are	putting	yourself	on	such	a	high	pedestal,	and
you	are	calling	us	sheep;	you	are	degrading	us	even	from	human	beings."
And	 Jesus	 said,	 "I	 am	 the	 savior,	 I	 will	 save	 the	 whole	 humanity.	 The	 only
condition	is	that	they	should	believe	in	me."	But	that	condition	destroys	all	that
is	beautiful	in	you,	all	that	is	your	right	to	grow	into	a	beautiful	unique	being.
I	have	had	suspicions	always	that	Jesus	was	not	saying	any	revolutionary	things,
neither	was	he	in	revolt	against	Judaism.	But	the	problem	has	haunted	me:	Then
why	 was	 he	 crucified?	 His	 whole	 emphasis	 without	 exception	 was,	 "I	 am	 a
Jewish	prophet,	son	of	a	Jewish	God"	--	a	prophet,	a	messiah	for	which	the	Jews
have	 been	 waiting.	 Their	 scriptures	 were	 telling	 them:	 Soon	 the	 messiah	 will
come,	the	last	messiah	who	will	save	you	all.	And	on	your	part	only	a	very	small
thing	has	to	be	done:	just	believe	in	him.
My	suspicions	why	Jesus	was	crucified	are	not	just	suspicions;	they	have	enough
evidence	and	proof	and	argument	behind	them.	Socrates	was	certainly	poisoned
for	his	revolutionary	thoughts,	for	his	lifestyle	which	the	Greeks	could	not	allow
him.	Certainly	his	 influence	over	 the	Greek	youth	was	 immense,	and	 the	older
generation	was	absolutely	afraid:	soon	they	will	be	gone	and	the	whole	country
will	 be	 under	 the	 influence	 of	 a	man	who	 is	 against	 tradition,	 who	 is	 against
God,	who	is	against	heaven	and	hell	and	all	other	nonsense,	who	insists	only	on
one	 thing:	 truth.	And	 that	 truth	 is	within	you,	not	 in	 the	 scriptures,	 not	 in	 any
savior,	not	in	any	messenger.
Socrates	 was	 certainly	 poisoned	 by	 the	 society	 because	 he	 was	 a	 tremendous
revolutionary	--	a	man	in	revolt.	Of	course,	whatever	he	was	saying	was	for	the
benefit	of	 the	whole	of	humanity,	but	 it	went	against	 the	past.	Anything	that	 is
going	 to	 enhance	your	 future,	make	 it	 richer,	more	beautiful,	more	humane,	 is
bound	to	be	against	the	past.
The	 past	 is	 barbarous,	 ugly,	 condemnable.	 But	 Jesus	 was	 not	 doing	 any	 such
thing.	Why	was	he	crucified?	He	was	 fully	 in	agreement	with	 the	old	past,	he
accepted	all	that	Judaism	proposed	as	fundamentals.
My	understanding	is:	Jesus	was	crucified	because	people	finally	became	fed	up
hearing	that	they	are	just	sheep	and	he	is	the	shepherd.	He	hurt	so	many	people's
egos,	 he	 destroyed	 so	 many	 people's	 self-respect,	 a	 certain	 dignity	 of	 being
human	 beings.	 That	 was	 the	 reason	 of	 Jesus'	 crucifixion;	 otherwise	 he	 was
utterly	innocent.	He	had	not	committed	any	visible	crime.
But	this	crime	is	far	more	murderous,	although	it	is	invisible,	it	does	not	appear
on	the	surface,	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	it.	But	you	can	understand:	you	cannot
forgive	anybody	who	pretends	to	be	higher	than	you,	holier	than	you.	He	is	the
only	begotten	son	of	God	and	you	are	all	orphans?	--	bastards?	What	are	you?	If
God	 is	 the	 father	 of	 all,	 then	 who	 is	 this	 man	 who	 pretends	 to	 be	 the	 only
begotten	 son?	 The	 emphasis	 is	 on	 only;	 he	 takes	 away	 the	 whole	 humanity's
right	to	nourish	his	own	ego.
Otherwise	whatever	he	was	saying	and	doing	would	have	been	 ignored.	There
was	nothing	special	in	it.	He	was	simply	repeating	the	old	prophets	of	the	Jews;
he	was	quoting	old	prophets	of	 the	 Jews	 --	 and	not	 even	correctly,	because	he
was	not	educated	and	he	could	not	read.	He	had	never	been	under	a	rabbi	--	and
the	Jews	had	a	long	tradition	of	thousands	of	years	of	learning.	They	had	a	great
university	 in	 Jerusalem,	 where	 people	 devoted	 their	 whole	 lives	 to	 studying.
They	were	very	rich	as	far	as	knowledgeability	is	concerned.
Jesus	was	not	a	man	of	knowledge,	and	certainly	he	was	not	a	man	of	experience
either,	 because	 a	man	 of	 experience	will	 not	 talk	 such	 nonsense	 as,	 "I	 am	 the
only	begotten	son	of	God."	God	is	simply	a	hypothesis,	and	I	have	never	heard
that	 hypotheses	 produce	 children.	 Only	 Indians	 do	 that,	 not	 hypotheses;
hypotheses	are	absolutely	barren.
The	idea	that	somebody	else	has	to	save	you,	hurts	you;	he	does	not	allow	you
even	the	freedom	to	save	yourself.	Jesus	has	to	be	understood	very	clearly:	he	is
one	of	 the	men	who	 is	against	all	 freedom	for	man.	He	 talks	sweetly,	 just	 like
any	salesman,	but	the	intention	is	to	take	away	your	basic	fundamental	birthright
of	growing	as	an	individual,	unique	--	not	a	carbon	copy	of	somebody	else,	but
just	yourself.
He	did	not	accept	people	as	they	are	and	insisted	that	they	should	be	according
to	his	teachings.	He	did	not	allow	them	even	to	doubt	or	argue;	you	cannot	argue
with	 the	 son	 of	God	 --	what	 he	 says	 is	 truth.	But	 it	 accumulated	 just	 in	 three
years....	 He	was	 not	 a	 teacher	 in	 the	world	 for	more	 than	 three	 years.	 People
could	not	tolerate	him;	it	was	becoming	too	insulting,	too	humiliating.
The	reason	for	Jesus'	crucifixion	is	not	--	as	Christians	go	on	telling	to	the	world
--	 that	he	was	a	great	 revolutionary.	The	reason	 is	 that	he	was	one	of	 the	anti-
humanitarians,	 and	 people	 crucified	 him	 as	 a	 revenge.	 It	 was	 becoming	 too
heavy	on	 their	heads.	 Just	an	uneducated	carpenter's	 son	who	has	been	cutting
wood	and	dragging	logs	to	his	father's	shop,	suddenly	becomes	the	savior...	and
savior	of	each	and	everyone	with	his	simple	cheap	condition	--	that	you	believe
in	him.
He	does	not	 give	you	 even	 the	 freedom	 to	 think,	 the	 freedom	 to	meditate,	 the
freedom	to	search,	 the	freedom	to	seek...	no	freedom	at	all.	He	has	created	the
greatest	slavery	in	the	world	--	Christianity.	Now	half	of	the	world	is	Christian,
and	the	responsibility	for	all	these	slaves	--	Catholics	or	Protestants,	it	does	not
matter...	he	is	responsible.	But	his	slavery	is	very	subtle	and	very	psychological.
Now	the	reality	is	that	he	could	not	save	himself,	and	he	pretended	to	save	the
whole	humanity.	And	when	asked	before	his	death,	 "How	 long	will	 it	 take	 for
you	to	come	back	and	save	humanity?"	he	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	I	am	coming
soon."	Two	thousand	years	have	passed.	I	don't	think...	I	can	also	stretch	`soon',
but	not	that	much!	Two	thousand	years	is	just	such	an	exaggeration.
And	still	there	is	no	sign....	We	don't	see	where	there	is	a	Virgin	Mary;	at	least
before	 he	 comes,	 a	 Virgin	 Mary	 should	 appear.	 The	 carpenter	 Joseph	 should
appear;	he	should	get	married	to	Virgin	Mary,	and	before	he	can	consummate	his
marriage,	the	Holy	Ghost	should	appear:	it	is	a	simple	case	of	the	rape	of	a	virgin
girl.	Then	with	 all	 these	difficulties	will	 come	 Jesus	Christ	 --	 and	how	can	he
save	you?
I	am	reminded	of	one	statement	of	a	great	doctor	who	is	my	friend.	I	don't	know
whether	he	is	still	alive	or	not,	I	have	not	heard	anything	about	him	for	these	last
six	years.	He	was	 the	most	prominent	doctor	 in	 the	city	where	I	 lived	before	 I
moved	to	Bombay	and	then	to	Poona.
He	said	to	me,	"My	whole	life's	experience	is	that	the	function	of	the	physician
is	 not	 the	 cure	 of	 the	 patient.	 The	 patient	 cures	 himself;	 the	 physician	 simply
gives	 a	 loving	 atmosphere,	 promising.	 The	 physician	 simply	 gives	 the
confidence	 and	 revives	 the	 longing	 to	 live	 longer.	 All	 his	 medicines	 are	 of
secondary	 help."	 But	 if	 the	 person	 has	 lost	 the	 desire	 to	 live,	 his	 whole	 life's
experience	was	that	no	medicine,	nothing,	helps.
The	same	is	the	situation	for	the	therapist.	The	therapist	is	not	the	person	who	is
going	 to	 cure	 people's	 psychological	 troubles.	 He	 can	 only	 create	 a	 loving
atmosphere,	 in	 which	 they	 can	 open	 up	 their	 repressed,	 unconscious
imaginations,	repressions,	hallucinations,	desires,	without	any	fear	that	they	will
be	laughed	at,	with	absolute	certainty	that	all	will	feel	compassion	and	love	for
them.	The	whole	group	should	function	as	a	therapeutic	situation.
The	therapist	is	only	a	coordinator.	He	brings	psychologically	sick	or	disturbed
people	together,	and	just	watches	that	nothing	goes	wrong.	And	if	he	can	support
them	with	some	idea,	some	insight,	some	observation,	he	should	always	make	it
clear	 that	 "This	 is	only	my	knowledge,	not	my	experience"	 --	unless	you	have
the	experience.
If	you	are	sincere	and	truthful	and	honest	and	authentic,	you	will	never	fall	into
the	 trap	of	becoming	a	master,	 a	 savior	 --	which	 is	very	 simple	 to	 fall	 in.	The
moment	you	become	a	master	and	a	savior...	and	you	are	not	--	you	are	not	even
helping	those	people,	you	are	simply	exploiting	those	people,	their	weaknesses,
their	troubles.
The	whole	psychoanalysis	movement	around	the	world	is	the	most	exploitative
experiment	 that	 is	 going	 on.	 Nobody	 is	 helped;	 everybody	 is	 exploited
tremendously.
And	nobody	is	helped	because	the	psychoanalyst,	psychotherapist....	Psychology
has	bifurcated	in	many	branches,	but	they	all	do	the	same	work:	they	reduce	you
into	a	patient	and	they	are	the	physicians.
And	 the	 trouble	 is	 that	 they	 themselves	 are	 suffering	 from	 the	 same	 diseases.
Each	 psychoanalyst	 goes	 to	 another	 psychoanalyst	 almost	 twice	 a	 year	 to	 be
helped.	It	is	a	great	conspiracy.	Listening	to	all	kinds	of	insanities,	unless	you	are
beyond	mind	 and	 its	 problems,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 insane	 yourself.	 You	 are
going	to	start	suffering	from	the	same	problems	your	patients	are	suffering	from.
Rather	than	making	them	cured,	they	are	making	you	sick.	But	the	responsibility
is	yours.
Bring	 love,	 openness,	 sincerity....	 Before	 they	 start	 opening	 the	 doors	 of	 their
heart	 --	 they	 are	 keeping	 them	 tightly	 closed	 so	 that	 nobody	 knows	 their
problems	--	the	first	function	of	the	psychotherapist	is	to	open	his	heart	and	let
them	 know	 that	 he	 is	 also	 as	 human	 as	 they	 are.	 He	 suffers	 from	 the	 same
weaknesses,	the	same	lust,	the	same	desire	for	power,	the	same	desire	for	money.
He	suffers	from	anguish	and	anxiety,	suffers	from	the	fear	of	death.
Open	your	heart	totally.
That	will	 help	 others	 to	 trust	 you	 --	 that	 you	 are	 not	 a	 pretender.	The	 days	 of
saviors	 and	 prophets	 and	 messengers	 and	 tirthankaras	 and	 avataras	 are
completely	gone.	None	of	them	will	be	acceptable	today.	And	this	time,	if	any	of
them	reappears,	people	are	not	even	going	to	stone	him	to	death.	People	are	just
going	to	make	fun	of	him.	People	are	simply	going	to	tell	him,	"You	are	stupid.
The	very	idea	that	you	can	save	the	whole	humanity	is	mad.	First	save	yourself,
and	we	will	see	your	light	and	we	will	see	your	grandeur	and	we	will	see	your
splendor."
And	trust	comes	on	its	own	accord.
It	is	not	to	be	asked.
It	 comes	 just	 like	 a	 fresh	 breeze	 from	 the	 mountains,	 a	 tidal	 wave	 from	 the
oceans.	You	have	to	do	nothing	for	it.	You	have	just	to	be	available	at	the	right
time,	in	the	right	place.
Nobody	can	save	you	except	yourself.
I	say	unto	you:	be	a	savior	unto	yourself.
But	help	is	possible,	with	a	condition:	that	it	comes	with	love,	that	it	comes	with
the	gratitude	that	"you	trusted	me	and	opened	your	heart."
The	function	of	a	therapist,	Sagarpriya	is	certainly	very	complex	--	and	idiots	are
doing	it!	The	situation	is	almost	as	if	butchers	are	doing	surgery;	they	know	how
to	 cut,	 but	 that	 does	 not	mean	 they	 can	 become	brain	 surgeons.	They	 can	 kill
buffaloes	and	cows	and	all	kinds	of	animals,	but	their	function	is	in	the	service
of	death.	The	therapist	is	in	the	service	of	life.	He	has	to	create	life-affirmative
values	by	living	them	himself,	by	going	to	the	silences	of	his	heart.
The	deeper	you	are	within	yourself,	 the	deeper	you	can	reach	 into	 the	heart	of
the	other.	It	is	exactly	the	same...	because	your	heart	or	the	other's	heart	are	not
very	different	things.
If	you	understand	your	being,	you	understand	everybody's	being.	And	then	you
understand	you	have	also	been	 foolish,	you	have	also	been	 ignorant,	you	have
also	 fallen	many	 times,	 you	 have	 also	 committed	 crimes	 against	 yourself	 and
against	 others,	 and	 if	 other	 people	 are	 still	 doing	 it	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of
condemnation.	They	have	to	be	made	aware	and	left	to	themselves;	you	are	not
to	mold	them	in	a	certain	framework.
Then	 it	 is	a	 joy	 to	be	a	 therapist,	because	you	come	 to	know	 the	 interiority	of
human	beings	 --	which	 is	one	of	 the	most	 secret	hiding	places	of	 life.	And	by
knowing	others	you	know	yourself	more.	It	is	a	vicious	circle;	there	is	no	other
word	--	otherwise	I	will	not	use	the	word	`vicious'.
Allow	 me	 to	 coin	 a	 word:	 it	 is	 a	 virtuous	 circle.	 You	 open	 to	 your	 patients,
participants,	and	they	open	themselves	to	you.	That	helps	you	to	open	more,	and
that	helps	them	to	open	more.	Soon	there	is	no	therapist	and	there	is	no	patient,
but	simply	a	loving	group	helping	each	other.
Unless	 the	 therapist	 is	 lost	 in	 the	group,	he	 is	not	a	successful	 therapist.	That's
my	criterion.
Sagarpriya,	you	are	saying,	"Under	your	guidance	I	have	learned	not	to	dominate
others	when	I	use	my	capacity	 to	see,	but	am	I	still	dominating	myself?"	They
are	not	 two	 things.	Domination	 is	domination,	whether	you	dominate	others	or
you	dominate	yourself.	If	you	are	dominating	yourself,	then	in	some	subtle	way
you	will	dominate	others	too.	How	can	it	be	otherwise?
The	first	domination	that	you	have	to	drop	is	not	over	others...	because	it	is	not
certain	that	they	will	accept	your	domination.	The	first	domination	you	have	to
drop	is	over	yourself.	Why	become	yourself	a	prisoner,	with	great	effort	create	a
prison	around	yourself,	and	then	carry	it	wherever	you	go?
First	learn	the	utter	joy	of	freedom,	of	a	bird	on	the	wing	in	the	vast	sky.	Your
very	freedom	will	become	a	transforming	force	for	others.
Domination	is	so	ugly.
Leave	it	to	the	politicians,	who	don't	have	any	sense	of	shame	at	all.	They	live	in
the	gutters	and	they	think	they	are	living	in	palaces.	Their	whole	life	is	a	life	in
the	gutters	--
they	will	 live	 there	and	 they	will	die	 there.	They	are	prime	ministers,	 they	are
presidents,	they	are	kings,	they	are	queens....
One	of	 the	most	significant	Egyptian	poets	was	asked	once,	"How	many	kings
are	there	in	the	world?"	At	that	time...	he	said,	"There	are	only	five	kings.	One	is
in	England,	and	four	are	in	playing	cards."	Now	it	can	be	changed:	there	are	five
queens,	one	in	England	and	four	in	playing	cards....	But	they	don't	have	anything
more.	They	are	just	trying	to	achieve	more	and	more	power	simply	to	fill	 their
inside	which	they	feel	is	empty.
Looking	from	the	outside,	the	inside	is	empty.
Looking	from	the	inside,	the	whole	world	is	empty.
Only	 your	 inside	 is	 overflowing,	 but	 the	 things	 that	 are	 overflowing	 are
invisible:	the	fragrance	of	your	being,	the	love,	the	blissfulness,	the	ecstasy,	the
silence,	the	compassion	--	nothing	can	be	seen	with	eyes.	That's	why	if	you	look
from	 the	 outside	 it	 seems	 everything	 is	 empty.	And	 then	 a	 great	 urge	 arises...
how	to	fill	it?	--	with	money,	with	power,	with	prestige,	by	becoming	a	president
or	prime	minister...	do	something	and	fill	it!	One	cannot	live	with	an	emptiness
inside,	a	hollowness	inside.
But	these	people	have	not	gone	inside;	they	have	looked	from	outside.	And	this
is	 the	 problem:	 from	 the	 outside	 you	 can	 only	 see	 objects,	 and	 love	 is	 not	 an
object,	bliss	is	not	an	object,	enlightenment	is	not	an	object,	understanding	is	not
an	object,	wisdom	is	not	an	object.	All	that	is	great	in	human	existence	and	life	is
subjective,	not	objective.	But	from	the	outside	you	can	see	only	objects.
That	 gives	 a	 tremendous	 urgency	 to	 fill	 your	 hollow	 inside	with	 any	 rubbish.
There	are	people	who	are	filling	 it	with	borrowed	knowledge;	 there	are	people
who	 are	 filling	 it	 with	 self-imposed	 torture	 --	 they	 become	 saints.	 There	 are
people	who	are	beggars	to	become	the	prime	minister,	to	become	the	president.
Everywhere	the	hollow	people	are	in	tremendous	need	to	dominate	others.	That
gives	them	the	feeling	that	they	are	not	hollow.
A	 sannyasin	 begins	 by	 enquiring	 into	 his	 subjectivity,	 from	 within,	 and	 he
becomes	 aware	 of	 tremendous	 treasures,	 inexhaustible	 treasures.	Only	 then	 do
you	stop	dominating	yourself,	and	you	stop	dominating	others.	There	is	no	need
at	all.	From	that	moment	your	whole	effort	 is	 to	make	everybody	aware	of	his
individuality,	 of	 his	 freedom,	 of	 his	 immense,	 inexhaustible	 sources	 of	 bliss,
contentment,	peace.
To	me,	 if	 therapy	 prepares	 the	 ground	 for	meditation,	 therapy	 is	 going	 right...
ground	for	the	patients	and	ground	for	the	therapist,	both.	Therapy	should	turn	at
a	 certain	 point	 into	 meditation.	 Meditation	 turns	 at	 a	 certain	 point	 into
enlightenment.	 And	 to	 have	 such	 tremendous	 potential	 and	 just	 remain	 a
beggar...
I	 feel	so	sad	sometimes	when	I	 think	of	others.	They	are	not	beggars,	but	 they
are	 behaving	 like	 beggars,	 and	 they	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 drop	 their	 begging	 --
because	 they	 are	 afraid	 that	 is	 all	 they	 have	 got.	 And	 unless	 they	 drop	 their
begging,	they	will	never	know	that	they	are	emperors	and	their	empire	is	of	the
within.
Sagarpriya,	 if	you	have	stopped	dominating	people	but	you	are	suspicious	 that
perhaps	 you	 have	 started	 dominating	 yourself,	 then	 nothing	 has	 changed.	You
misunderstood	the	whole	message.
Becky	and	Solly	Feigenbaum	are	in	bed.	"Listen,	Becky,"	says	Solly,	"do	me	a
favor	and	close	the	window,	it	is	cold	outside."
"And	if	I	close	the	window,	will	it	be	warm	outside?"	Becky	asked.
Try	to	understand	me	correctly.
Little	 David,	 who	 was	 six	 years	 old,	 was	 beginning	 to	 ask	 embarrassing
questions	 that	 his	Mom	and	Dad	 could	not	 get	 themselves	 to	 explain.	So	 they
asked	their	older	boy,	Martin,	to	explain	to	him	about	the	birds	and	the	bees.
That	night	in	bed	Martin	gave	David	his	first	lesson.	"Look,	David,	do	you	know
what	it	is	that	Mom	and	Dad	do	at	night	in	bed?"
"Sure,	I	do,"	said	David.
"Well,"	said	Martin,	"it	is	just	the	same	with	the	birds	and	the	bees."
It	is	human	to	err,	to	misunderstand.	But	Sagarpriya	is	an	intelligent	woman	and
can	manage	 the	new	 idea	of	 therapy.	She	 can	become	a	pioneer	 therapist.	But
there	are	so	many	idiots	all	around:	you	just	start	any	stupid	thing	and	you	will
find	followers	are	coming.
Just	 a	week	 before	 in	 Rajasthan	 an	 eighteen-year-old	 girl	 became	 a	widow	 --
perhaps	she	may	have	been	married	six	months	before,	or	a	year	before	--	and
she	jumped	into	the	funeral	pyre	to	perform	the	ancient	Hindu	ritual	of	being	a
sati.	 The	word	 sati	 is	 beautiful;	 it	means	 òne	who	 can	 die	 for	 truth'.	 It	 comes
from	sat,	and	sat	means	truth.	The	connotation	is	that	she	loved	the	man	so	much
that	the	man	has	become	her	god;	without	that	man	life	is	meaningless.	But	it	is
really	committing	suicide	openly.
It	 is	 against	 the	 Indian	 constitution,	 it	 is	 against	 Indian	 law.	 But	 millions	 of
people	are	going	 there,	and	already	a	big	village	has	become	established.	Tens
upon	tens	are	coming	to	worship,	because	the	woman	has	done	a	great	spiritual
act.	 And	 rather	 than	 creating	 some	 legal	 action	 against	 the	 family,	 the
government	is	making	arrangements	for	the	millions	of	people	that	are	pouring
in.	 Shops	 have	 opened,	 restaurants	 have	 opened,	 hotels	 have	 opened,
caravanserais	 have	 opened.	 Soon	 it	 will	 become	 a	 big	 city,	 a	 memorial	 city,
because	 an	 uneducated,	 highly	 conditioned	 young	 girl	 committed	 suicide,
following	ideals	which	are	simply	stupid.
There	 is	 no	 spirituality	 in	 it.	 If	 there	 was	 spirituality	 in	 it,	 then	 why	 in	 ten
thousand	years	has	not	one	single	man	jumped	into	the	funeral	pyre	of	his	wife?
And	these	men	are	writing	in	the	scriptures	that	this	ritual	is	a	great	spiritual	act	-
-	but	only	for	women?
It	 is	 not	 a	 spiritual	 act.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 cunning	 strategy	 to	 dominate.	 The	 man
watches	his	wife	continuously,	keeps	her	a	slave	while	he	is	alive.	He	is	afraid...
when	he	is	dead,	who	knows?	--	the	wife	may	fall	in	love	with	somebody	and	he
will	not	be	able	to	do	anything.	It	is	better	to	create	an	ideology	so	that	the	wife
also	jumps	in	the	funeral	pyre;	then	that	fool	feels	immensely	contented	because
now	there	is	no	fear.
And	I	am	surprised...	newspapers	report	it,	the	government	officials	are	making
arrangements,	and	nobody	is	bothered	that	it	is	illegal,	it	is	unconstitutional,	it	is
illogical.
It	 is	male	chauvinist	 ideology.	It	 is	a	domination	beyond	conception.	You	even
want	to	dominate	when	you	are	dead!	But	misunderstanding	goes	on	and	on....
A	little	girl	was	in	the	park	crying	when	an	old	gentleman	asked	her	why.
She	said,	"I	want	one	of	those	things	like	my	brother's	got,	that	sticks	out,	then
lays	down	and	then	sticks	out	again."
The	old	gentleman	began	to	cry	too.
One	night	a	man	is	stopped	on	a	dark	street	by	a	ragged	looking	figure,	clutching
something	in	his	hand.
"Please	sir,"	the	figure	mumbled,	"please	spare	a	few	dollars	for	a	poor	man	who
has	lost	his	job,	his	wife,	his	home,	everything."	Then	lifting	his	hand	he	added,
"And	all	I	have	got	left	is	this	gun."
Sagarpriya,	 try	 to	 understand	 yourself	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible.	 Therapy	 comes
second.	 And	 unless	 you	 have	 refined	 your	 being	 through	 meditation	 and
silences...	 I	 am	 not	 saying,	 stop	 the	 work;	 I	 am	 saying,	 transform	 its	 quality.
Make	it	 real	work.	Open	your	heart,	 tell	 them	your	weaknesses,	 tell	 them	your
problems,	ask	their	advice	--	can	they	help	you?
And	once	the	participants	understand	that	the	therapist	is	not	an	egoist,	they	will
come	with	absolute	humbleness,	opening	their	hearts.	Then	you	can	help	them.
But	 always	 and	 always	 remember:	 therapy	 in	 itself	 is	 incomplete.	 Even	 the
perfect	therapy	is	just	the	first	step.	Without	the	second	step	it	is	meaningless.
So	 leave	 the	 patients	 on	 the	 point	 from	 where	 they	 start	 moving	 towards
meditation.	 Your	 therapy	 is	 complete	 only	 when	 your	 patients	 start	 enquiring
about	meditation.	Create	a	great	 longing	 in	 their	hearts	 for	meditation,	and	 tell
them	that	meditation	too	is	only	a	step	--	the	second	step.	In	itself	that	too	is	not
enough,	unless	it	leads	you	to	enlightenment;	that	is	the	culmination	of	the	whole
effort.	And	I	trust	in	you,	that	you	are	capable	of	it.
A	 Jew	 from	Odessa	was	 sitting	 in	 the	 same	compartment	 as	 a	Czarist	Russian
officer	who	had	a	pig	with	him.	To	annoy	the	Jew,	the	officer	kept	calling	the	pig
Moishe.	"Moishe!
Keep	still!	Moishe!	Come	here!	Moishe!	Go	there!"
This	went	on	all	the	way	to	Kiev.	Eventually	the	Jew	got	fed	up	and	said,	"You
know,	Captain,	it	is	a	great	shame	your	pig	has	a	Jewish	name."
"Now	why	is	that,	Jew?"	smirked	the	officer.
"Well,	otherwise	it	could	have	become	an	officer	in	the	Czar's	army."
There	is	a	limit	to	everything!
Make	it	a	point	that	the	limit	of	therapy	is	where	meditation	begins,	and	the	limit
of	meditation	is	where	enlightenment	begins.	Of	course,	enlightenment	is	not	a
step	 to	 anything:	 You	 simply	 disappear	 into	 the	 universal	 consciousness,	 you
become	just	a	dewdrop	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	ocean.	But	it	is	the
greatest	experience....	It	makes	life	finally	meaningful,	significant.	It	allows	you
to	become	part	of	the	universe	from	which	your	ego	has	separated	you.	And	it	is
so	easy,	as	easy	as	this	silence....
Nobody	can	think	that	there	are	thousands	of	people	sitting	here....
You	 just	 have	 to	 move	 in	 the	 right	 direction.	 A	 sense	 of	 right	 direction,	 and
everything	can	become	a	steppingstone	towards	higher	states	of	consciousness.	I
have	 been	 using	 everything,	 but	 the	 direction	 is	 the	 same.	 I	 have	 used	 many
kinds	 of	 meditations.	 On	 the	 periphery	 they	 look	 different.	 There	 are	 one
hundred	and	twelve	methods	of	meditation.
They	look	very	different	from	each	other,	and	you	may	think,	"How	can	all	these
different	methods	lead	to	meditation?"
But	they	lead...	Just	as	a	thread	running	through	a	garland	of	flowers	is	not	seen,
you	see	only	the	flowers,	those	one	hundred	and	twelve	flowers	have	a	running
thread:	that	thread	is	witnessing,	watching,	observation,	awareness.
So	help	the	patients	as	much	as	you	can	to	understand	their	problems,	but	make
them	 clear	 that	 even	 if	 these	 problems	 are	 solved,	 you	 are	 the	 same	 person.
Tomorrow	 you	 will	 start	 creating	 the	 same	 problems	 again	 --	 perhaps	 in	 a
different	way,	with	a	different	color.
So	 your	 therapy	 should	 become	 nothing	 but	 an	 opening	 for	meditation.	 Then
your	therapy	has	a	tremendous	value.	Otherwise	it	is	just	a	mind	game.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	Man	is	born	to	celebrate
13	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709135
ShortTitle:
PILGR15
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
103
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	VERY	OUTRAGED	THAT	PEOPLE	ARE	GOSSIPING	ABOUT	ME.
Devageet,	 you	 need	 not	 be	 worried	 about	 the	 gossip.	 The	 difference	 between
gospels	and	gossip	is	whether	you	are	telling	it	or	hearing	it;	it	is	not	much...	and
whatever	is	gossip	today	will	become	gospel	tomorrow.
Just	 thinking	about	your	question,	 I	 remembered	a	 report	 that	has	come	 to	me
today	 about	 a	 man	 I	 have	 always	 respected.	 He	 is	 a	 great	 scientific	 mind,	 a
genius;	 he	 has	worked	 his	whole	 life	with	 a	 total	 energy	 and	 intelligence.	His
name	is	John	Lilly.
Just	today	in	a	press	interview	it	was	asked	of	him	--	he	is	seventy-five	years	old
--	he	was	asked	that	if	he	finds	himself	on	a	small	island,	nobody	else	is	there,
and	 for	miles	 and	miles	 there	 is	 no	 sign	of	human	 life,	what	he	would	 like	 to
have	 with	 him.	 And	 he	 said,	 "I	 would	 like	 the	 five	most	 sexy	 women	 of	 the
world."	At	the	age	of	seventy-five...!
This	man	must	be	crazy.
So	if	people	are	gossiping	about	you,	that	you	have	become	old,	don't	be	worried
about	it.
Gossip	has	a	way	of	functioning	of	its	own....
...	Where	all	men	think	alike,	no	one	thinks	very	much.
Gossip	does	not	need	thinking.	It	is	a	very	strange	fact	that	nobody	ever	doubts
gossip;	even	the	very	skeptical	minds	simply	believe	in	gossip.	People	have	to	be
forced	for	centuries	to	believe	in	the	gospel,	but	gossip...	people	are	just	waiting
to	 hear	 something,	 something	 juicy.	 And	 you	 should	 be	 proud	 that	 you	 have
become	almost	a	hero;	everybody	is	deep	down	jealous	of	you.	Your	old	age	is
going	to	go	down	in	history.	It	will	be	remembered	for	ages	to	come	that	"Once
upon	a	time,	Devageet	became	old	--
and	not	only	once,	but	twice	within	two	days!"
Here	is	a	commune	of	absolutely	free	people.	The	only	difficulty	is:
...	When	people	are	free	to	do	as	they	please,	they	usually	imitate	each	other.
Please,	Devageet,	don't	feel	in	the	gutter.	Everyone	is	in	the	gutter.	At	least	you
are	looking	at	the	stars	--	 that's	what	is	making	people	think	you	are	becoming
old,	because	only	old	people	stare	at	the	stars.	At	the	age	of	seventy-five,	John
Lilly,	a	man	of	tremendous	intelligence,	is	still	in	the	gutter	--	not	looking	at	the
stars.
Devageet,	it	is	creditable	that	you	have	become	old	earlier	than	you	should	have;
you	 have	 done	 a	 fast	 race	 from	 young	 age	 into	 old	 age.	 This	 is	what	 I	 call	 a
"quantum	leap."
And	remember:
...	Those	who	try	to	serve	both	God	and	women	soon	discover	there	is	no	God.
And	about	your	outrageousness...	I	am	also	outrageous,	because	the	principle	is:
...	Whenever	in	doubt,	be	outrageous.
What	else	can	you	do?
Perhaps	 the	 gossip	 is	 right.	 I	 hope	 it	 is	 right!	 --	 because	 to	 me,	 it	 is	 very
creditable	to	become	old	so	soon.	It	is	the	beginning	of	wisdom.	I	am	waiting	for
the	 day	 when	 people	 start	 talking	 about	 you,	 saying	 that	 you	 have	 become
ancient.	Old	age	is	nothing	compared	to	being	ancient.
...	Truth	is	stranger	than	fiction,	and	also	harder	to	make	up.
So	naturally	people	make	up	gossips;	it	is	easier	--	very	easy!
Bernard	Shaw	used	 to	 say,	 "I	don't	know	 if	 there	are	men	on	 the	moon,	but	 if
there	are	they	must	be	using	this	earth	as	their	lunatic	asylum."	And	I	agree	with
that	old	man,	George	Bernard	Shaw.	He	was,	in	this	century,	one	of	the	men	who
had	tremendous	insight	into	human	foolishness.
Once	when	 he	was	 in	America	 for	 the	 first	 and	 last	 time	 --	 because	 he	 never
went	again...
When	the	federal	judge	told	me	that	I	cannot	enter	America	for	five	years,	I	said,
"Why	bother	about	years?	I	am	not	going	back	ever!	One	time	is	enough."	And
that's	what	happened	with	George	Bernard	Shaw.
He	went	once	on	 invitation	 to	America.	 In	 the	first	meeting	he	was	addressing
the	people	who	had	invited	him	--	very	well	known	people,	respectable	people,
rich	people	--	and	he	said,	"Looking	at	you	I	can	almost	take	it	for	granted	that
fifty	percent	of	the	people	in	America	are	idiots."	Of	course	the	whole	gathering
was	outraged:	"We	are	here	to	welcome	you,	we	have	invited	you,	you	are	our
guest	--	this	is	not	the	way	to	start!"
There	was	silence,	but	great	anger	in	people's	eyes.	Bernard	Shaw	said,	"Forgive
me,	I	just	said	the	opposite	of	what	I	was	going	to	say."
People	 relaxed.	 He	 said,	 "I	 was	 going	 to	 say	 that	 fifty	 percent	 of	 people	 in
America	are	very	intelligent,	but	now	I	have	to	change	my	statement.	That	was
my	first	impression.
And	this	is	my	last	impression,	it	is	final:	one	hundred	percent	of	the	people	are
idiots."
Bernard	Shaw	had	a	certain	insight	into	our	so-called	sane	humanity.	He	was	not
right	 only	 about	 America,	 he	 was	 right	 about	 the	 whole	 earth:	 it	 is	 a	 mental
asylum.
But	still...	a	few	sutras	will	be	good,	either	for	now	or	tomorrow	when	you	will
be	getting	older	again.	Now	it	 is	very	difficult	 to	 say	when	you	will	be	young
and	when	you	will	be	old.	It	is	going	to	be	up	and	down,	up	and	down...	That's
what	some	sannyasin	was	complaining	about:	"Whoever	 I	meet	and	I	ask	how
things	are,	they	say	ùp	and	down'...
everybody	 says	 the	 same	 thing:	 up	 and	 down!"	 But	 nobody	 is	 going	 up	 and
down	so	much	as	Devageet.
...	Old	age	is	when	a	girl	gets	on	your	nerves	rather	than	on	your	lap.
Just	so	you	can	figure	out	where	you	are:
...	Middle	age	is	when	you	can	feel	bad	in	the	morning	without	having	fun	the
night	before.
...	Intuition	is	what	enables	a	woman	to	put	two	and	two	together	and	come	up
with	an	answer	that	suits	her.
So	beware	of	women's	intuition	--	particularly	in	old	age!
...	 A	 really	 old	 man	 is	 a	 man	 who	 tries	 never	 to	 stand	 between	 a	 dog	 and	 a
lamppost.
I	am	just	giving	you	some	hints.	If	you	start	behaving	like	that,	you	are	old!
...	An	old	man	is	a	man	who	knows	tomorrow	why	the	things	he	said	yesterday
did	not	happen	today.
His	wisdom	is	as	bogus,	as	hollow	as	his	old	age	is.
Just	to	encourage	you,	Devageet...	you	are	in	the	dumps:
...	The	man	with	a	new	idea	is	a	crank	until	the	idea	succeeds.
Don't	be	worried!	You	have	got	a	new	idea	that	you	are	old.	You	will	be	thought
a	 crank	 until	 you	 really	 succeed	 to	 be	 an	 old	 man.	 Then	 all	 this	 gossip	 will
disappear.
I	don't	think	you	are	that	old,	but	I	certainly	think	that	you	are	old	enough...	But
still	you	will	see	the	time,	if	pollution	continues,	when	walking	on	water	will	no
longer	 be	 a	 miracle;	 anybody	 will	 be	 able	 to	 do	 it.	 And	 if	 you	 can	 see	 this
happening,	this	miracle	of	everybody	walking	on	water,	what	more	do	you	want?
Old	age	or	young	age,	you	have	seen	the	last	miracle	on	the	earth.
But	I	hope	that	people	will	go	on	gossiping	about	you.	They	are	finding...	they
are	almost	researching	about	you!
Devageet's	old	Jewish	mama...	I	never	knew	that	he	is	a	Jew!	People	are	really
doing	an	in-depth	search....	Devageet's	old	Jewish	mama	met	an	old	friend	who
she	had	not	seen	for	years.	"And	how	is	your	son	getting	on?"	asked	the	friend.
"Oy	 veh,"	 said	 his	 mama,	 "don't	 ask.	 He	 has	 grown	 his	 hair	 down	 to	 his
shoulders,	he	never	shaves	from	one	year	to	the	next,	he	left	the	university	and
all	day	long	he	is	doing	nothing	but	transdental	medication."
"Ah	well,"	said	her	friend,	"what	is	the	use	of	worrying?	Transdental	medication
is	fine.
It	is	better	than	sitting	around	all	day	doing	nothing."
And	here	is	a	question	from	Devageet:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOUR	CHEEKS	GROW	ROUND	WITH	LAUGHTER	AND	YOUR
EYES
ARE	 BRIGHT	 WITH	 MISCHIEF,	 MY	 HEART	 TRIES	 TO	 BURST	 FREE
FROM	THIS
POOR	CHEST.	I	USED	TO	WONDER	AT	THE	AMAZING	ACCURACY	OF
YOUR
ANSWERS,	TREMBLING	LIKE	A	VIRGIN	AS	YOUR	SEEDS	FELL	 INTO
MY
WAITING	HEART.	NOW	I	TREMBLE	EVEN	MORE	AWAITING	YOUR
QUESTIONS	 TOO.	 SITTING	 SILENTLY,	 THE	 JOKE	 COMES	 AND	 MY
NOODLE
VAPORIZES	ALL	BY	ITSELF.
Devageet,	this	is	the	sign	that	you	are	passing	old	age	and	entering	into	ancient
age.	 You	 have	 even	 forgotten	 poor	 Basho's	 haiku.	 You	 are	 saying,	 "Sitting
silently,	the	joke	comes	and	my	noodle	vaporizes	all	by	itself."
If	Basho	hears	it,	he	will	hit	you	so	hard	that	neither	you	nor	the	noodle	will	be
ever	able	to	rise	again.	You	are	not	supposed,	just	in	old	age,	to	forget	the	haiku,
one	 of	 the	most	 famous	 and	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful	 things	 ever	 uttered.	 In
ancient	age	it	is	of	course	okay,	because	one	goes	senile.
Basho's	haiku...	I	have	to	remind	you	again,	because	it	is	the	very	foundation	of
all	meditation:
Sitting	silently,	doing	nothing
The	spring	comes
And	the	grass	grows	by	itself.
As	far	as	I	know,	Basho	may	have	never	heard	about	 the	word	`noodle'.	These
strange	 things	 are	 brought	 here	 by	 Sarjano.	 He	 is	 feeding	 people	 noodles,
spaghetti	and	all	kinds	of	creepy	things....	Avoid	that	fellow!	God	never	made	--
as	 far	 as	 I	know,	 in	any	description	 in	 the	whole	BIBLE	 --	noodles,	 spaghetti,
pizza.	It	is	absolutely	the	devil's	invention.
Just	come	back	down	to	where	you	really	are;	don't	believe	this	gossip.	And	if
the	gossip	continues,	I	will	manage	to	bring	you	down	again	and	again.
A	beautiful	woman	and	a	young	man	both	went	for	the	same	lion	tamer's	job	at
the	zoo.
The	manager	said	he	would	give	them	both	a	chance,	and	told	the	girl	to	go	into
the	cage	first.
The	 girl,	 wearing	 a	 long	 fur	 coat,	 did	 so.	 A	 huge	 lion	 immediately	 started	 to
charge	at	her.
Suddenly,	 she	opened	her	 fur	 coat	 and	 stood	 there	 completely	naked.	The	 lion
stopped	dead,	spun	around,	and	went	meekly	back	into	the	corner.
The	manager	was	amazed.	He	turned	to	 the	young	man	and	said,	"Well	friend,
do	you	think	you	can	do	better	than	that?"
"I	would	like	to	try,"	the	young	man	replied.	"Just	get	that	crazy	lion	out	of	there
first."
Question	3
BELOVED	MASTER,
THIS	MAY	BE	THE	MOST	IMPORTANT,	THE	MOST	FUNDAMENTAL
QUESTION	OF	MY	WHOLE	LIFE.	MY	LONGING	FOR	FREEDOM	IS	SO
DEEP,	SO
STRONG,	MORE	THAN	ANYTHING	ELSE	I	KNOW.	IN	FACT	MY	WHOLE
LIFE
ENERGY	IS	GIVEN	TO	THIS	MATTER.	BUT	SOMEHOW	I'M	NOT	CLEAR
IN	IT.
DO	I	HAVE	TO	DO	SOMETHING	FOR	FREEDOM?	IS	MY	LONGING	FOR
FREEDOM	JUST	A	MIND	GAME?
PLEASE,	BELOVED	OSHO,	TELL	ME	WHAT	FREEDOM	IS.
Antar	Dharmesh,	 it	 is	 certainly	 the	most	 important	 and	 the	most	 fundamental
question	 one	 can	 ever	 ask.	 I	 have	 been	 talking	 to	 you	 about	 freedom
continuously	--	from	every	possible	angle,	every	possible	implication....	It	seems
you	are	hearing	me	but	not	listening	to	me.
You	 are	 saying,	 "My	 longing	 for	 freedom	 is	 so	 deep,	 so	 strong,	 more	 than
anything	else	I	know..."	and	I	have	been	telling	you,	there	are	things	which	you
cannot	desire,	which	you	cannot	make	an	object	of	your	longing.
Freedom	is	your	intrinsic	nature	--	svabhav.	It	is	your	very	nature;	you	don't	have
to	 attain	 it.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	make	 any	 effort	 for	 it.	 You	 don't	 need	 even	 to
desire	or	long	for	it	--	it	is	already	there.
You	are	born	free,	but	you	are	living	in	chains.	Those	chains	you	have	accepted,
and	you	have	accepted	them	very	willingly,	very	joyously,	because	those	chains
are	made	of	gold.
Those	chains	are	made	of	power,	prestige,	respectability;	they	are	covered	with
beautiful	flowers.	So	not	only	have	you	accepted	them,	you	go	on	desiring	more
and	more	because	you	think	they	are	ornaments.	You	think	they	are	the	very	aim
of	your	life,	the	very	meaning	and	significance.
This	is	the	trouble:	freedom	is	not	a	problem	such	that	you	have	to	achieve	it;	the
problem	is	how	to	get	rid	of	the	chains.	And	the	first	thing	you	have	to	encounter
is	 to	recognize	chains	as	chains	not	as	ornaments,	a	prison	as	a	prison	not	as	a
home,	a	marriage	as	a	bondage	and	not	love.	And	there	are	a	thousand	and	one
chains	all	around	you.
You	are	dragging	them;	your	life	has	become	a	drag,	a	burden,	somehow	hoping
to	 reach	 to	 the	graveyard.	Each	moment	 seems	 to	be	 so	 long,	one	wants	 relief
and	rest.	And	it	seems	in	this	world	you	can	find	relief	and	rest	only	in	the	grave
--	anywhere	else	you	will	find	yourself	again	in	the	chains,	 in	the	prisons.	The
names	will	be	different,	the	shape	of	the	chains	may	be	different,	the	forms	may
be	different,	almost	opposite	to	what	you	used	to	have....	A	Christian	becomes	a
Hindu,	a	Hindu	becomes	a	Christian;	they	only	change	jails	--	nothing	changes,
no	transformation	in	being	and	no	freedom	of	the	soul.	They	have	only	changed
old	chains	for	new	chains.
And	remember:	new	chains	are	more	dangerous	than	the	old,	because	the	old	can
be	 broken	 more	 easily	 than	 the	 new.	 The	 new	 are	 more	 sophisticated,	 more
technologically	 perfect.	 The	 old	 were	 not	 so	 perfect,	 they	 had	 loopholes;	 you
could	have	easily	slipped	out	of	them.	But	the	new,	the	imprisoners	who	are	your
parasites,	 have	 closed	 all	 possibilities,	 all	 windows,	 all	 doors.	 Even	 the	 small
cracks	from	where	you	can	see	the	open	sky...	everything	seems	to	be	absolutely
closed.	And	you	go	on	suffering.
It	is	so	strange	to	think	that	man,	who	is	born	to	celebrate,	lives	only	to	suffer.
Even	 trees	are	more	 fortunate,	wild	animals	are	more	blissful,	birds	 in	 the	sky
are	more	ecstatic.
Only	man	goes	on	dragging	his	heavy	chains,	 and	every	day	 the	 load	goes	on
becoming	more	and	more	heavy.
Freedom	is	not	the	problem	at	all.
Don't	ask	how	to	attain	freedom;	that	will	give	you	a	wrong	direction.	You	will
start	thinking	what	efforts	to	make	for	freedom	--	you	are	asking	from	a	wrong
direction.	Ask	how	we	have	 lost	our	freedom.	You	were	born	free	--	 then	how
did	you	become	a	slave?
You	 were	 born	 just	 as	 a	 human	 being	 --	 then	 how	 did	 you	 become	 a
Mohammedan	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Christian?
One	of	the	most	important	novelists	of	America	has	asked	me	a	question:	"Osho,
what	do	you	think	about	the	Jewish	and	Arab	conflict	in	the	Middle	East?	What
is	the	solution,	and	what	are	the	implications	for	the	future?"
I	had	to	write	to	him	saying,	"Before	I	can	specifically	answer	your	question,	I
would	like	to	give	you	my	bird's-eye	view	of	the	whole	human	situation,	because
what	 is	 happening	 in	 Israel	 between	 Jews	 and	 Arabs	 is	 nothing	 new.	 It	 is
happening	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 in	 different	 names	 --	 between	 Hindus	 and
Mohammedans,	between	Christians	and	Jews...
just	 the	names	are	different,	but	 the	same	violence,	 the	same	murder,	 the	same
suffering.
And	people	are	clinging	to	their	suffering...."
So	 I	 told	 him	 a	 few	 significant	 points.	 First:	 as	 long	 as	 there	 is	 a	 God,	 man
cannot	be	at	peace.	It	is	God	who	is	dividing	man.	He	is	the	ultimate	enemy	of
humanity;	otherwise	what	is	the	difference	between	a	Hindu	and	a	Mohammedan
and	a	Christian	and	a	Jew?	--
just	 their	 idea	 of	 God.	 And	 that	 idea	 is	 nothing	 but	 an	 idea,	 just	 an	 empty
hypothesis.
There	 is	 no	God	 anywhere;	 there	 is	 no	 evidence	 anywhere,	 there	 is	 no	 proof.
And	if	somebody	says	he	has	seen	God,	he	is	simply	a	madman.	He	is	deluded;
he	has	been	hallucinating	and	he	needs	psychiatric	treatment.	If	we	had	treated
our	saints	through	psychiatry,	humanity	would	have	been	in	a	peaceful	state.
Now	God	is	your	greatest	chain.	Are	you	ready	to	throw	it	away?
Your	holy	scriptures	are	dividing	you,	because	every	scripture	demands	that	it	be
the	only	holy	scripture.	That	necessarily	creates	conflict:	Hindus	cannot	believe
that	THE	BIBLE
is	 holy...	 great	 competition.	 The	 VEDAS	 are	 holy	 because	 they	 are	 the
ancientmost	 scripture	 in	 the	world;	God	himself	wrote	 them.	 It	 is	 so	 stupid	 to
talk	this	way.
I	 have	 talked	 with	 learned	 Hindu	 scholars	 and	 asked	 them,	 "Have	 you	 ever
thought	about	your	VEDAS,	which	you	claim	that	God	has	written?	Just	look	at
the	content...	the	very	content	shows	that	it	cannot	be	written	by	God;	there	is	an
intrinsic	 impossibility."	 And	 I	 was	 surprised	 --	 great	 scholars	 like	 Omkarnath
Maharaj,	who	was	thought	to	be	the	authority	on	the	VEDAS,	were	shocked	by
my	question.	He	said,	"I	have	never	thought	about	it."
I	said,	"You	are	the	greatest	authority.	Open	the	VEDAS	anywhere,	at	any	page.
I	 don't	 insist	 on	 a	 certain	page	 --	 open	 it	 at	 random	and	 read	 the	 content.	The
content	will	give	you	the	proof	that	it	cannot	be	written	by	God."
He	had	a	copy	of	RIG	VEDA	by	his	side.	He	opened	it	at	random,	and	what	was
the	 content?	 He	 was	 so	 shocked.	 The	 content	 was:	 "A	 brahmin	 is	 praying	 to
God..."	Now,	how	can	God	write	it?	--	"A	brahmin	is	praying	to	God,	saying,	Ì
pray	so	much,	but	you	don't	listen;	there	is	a	limitation	to	patience.	This	year	you
have	proved	it:	just	let	your	clouds	rain	on	my	fields,	and	not	on	the	fields	of	my
enemies.'"	This	kind	of	rubbish	is	written	by	God?	It	is	intrinsically	an	absolute
proof	that	some	stupid	brahmin	is	writing	it.
But	even	after	that	he	continued.	After	two	years	I	saw	him	again.	I	said,	"You
have	not	stopped."
He	said,	"To	encounter	you...	I	feel	such	a	deep	fear	in	me."
I	 said,	 "Why	 should	 you	 be	 afraid?	 Just	 because	 you	 have	 been	 preaching
nonsense..."
THE	BIBLE	 is	 full	 of	 pornography,	 five	 hundred	 pages	 of	 pornography.	 And
when	 I	 said	 it,	 immediately	 ten	Christian	 associations	 forced	 the	magistrate	 of
Kanpur	 to	 issue	 an	unbailable	 arrest	warrant.	 I	 have	my	people	 everywhere	 to
fight	for	me;	they	immediately	took	a	stay	order	from	the	Allahabad	high	court.
It	is	absolute	nonsense;	the	judge	should	first	see	THE	BIBLE	--	and	I	am	ready
to	point	out	the	exact	five	hundred	pages	which	are	pornographic.
But	strangely,	Christians	and	Jews	both	go	on	calling	the	Old	Testament	a	holy
scripture,	written	by	God.	It	seems...	 is	God	just	a	pornographic	writer,	 just	on
the	board	of	editors	of	PLAYBOY?
These	 are	 the	 problems.	 Every	 prophet,	 every	 messiah,	 every	 avatara,	 every
tirthankara	 is	 claiming	 that	 only	 he	 is	 the	 right	 one.	 You	 think	 only	 ordinary
people	 are	 competing	with	 each	other?	 --	 that	 is	 not	 true.	Your	 so-called	great
men	are	so	ugly	in	their	competition,	you	cannot	believe	it.
In	 the	 times	 of	 Mahavira,	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago...	 Mahavira	 and	 Buddha
were	 both	 contemporaries,	 and	 there	 were	 six	 others;	 eight	 people	 were
contending	 that	 they	 were	 the	 twenty-fourth	 tirthankara	 of	 Jainism.	 Even
Gautam	Buddha	was	one	of	the	candidates.	And	because	Mahavira	proved	to	be
more	 orthodox,	 more	 in	 tune	 with	 the	 Jaina	 ideology	 of	 self-torture	 and
masochism,	he	won	the	battle.	Even	Buddha	lost	the	election.	Frustrated	because
he	lost	the	election	and	Mahavira	was	accepted	as	the	twenty-fourth	tirthankara,
he	started	a	new	religion.
If	 you	 look	without	prejudice,	 you	 cannot	believe	 it	 --	why	are	 there	 so	many
wars,	why	 is	 there	so	much	 lunacy,	why	 is	 there	so	much	 insanity?	Even	your
great	peaks,	your	highest	suns	behave	like	children.
Jesus	 goes	 on	 declaring	 that	 he	 is	 the	 only	 son	 of	 God.	 Naturally,	 he	 cannot
accept	Gautam	Buddha	or	Confucius	 or	Lao	Tzu	or	Basho	or	Bodhidharma	 --
not	 even	 as	 cousins.	 The	 family	 is	 very	 closed,	 and	 a	 very	 strange	 family	 at
that!There	is	no	woman	in	the	family.	And	in	fact	the	woman	is	the	very	center
of	 a	 family;	without	 a	woman	 you	 can	 have	 a	 house	 but	 not	 a	 home.	 Strange
company:	God	 the	 father,	 Jesus	Christ	 the	son,	and	a	 strange	 fellow	--	nobody
knows	who	he	is,	whether	he	is	male	or	female	--	 the	Holy	Ghost.	These	three
people	go	on	dominating	the	whole	world.	This	is	their	trinity.
For	centuries	intelligent	Christians	have	been	asking,	"At	least	give	one	place	to
a	woman,"	but	such	is	the	macho	male	mind	that	he	will	not	allow	it.	Even	the
mother	of	Jesus	is	not	allowed	in	the	holy	family.	A	woman	cannot	be	accepted
high	on	the	ladder	of	hierarchy.
Christians	 cannot	 accept	 Mahavira	 or	 Buddha	 as	 people	 of	 real	 religious
importance.
These	 are	 the	 problems	 that	 have	 been	 dominating	 humanity	 for	 centuries.	 In
particular	 in	 Israel	 the	 problem	 has	 become	 a	 very	 burning	 issue,	 because	 the
whole	 of	 the	 Middle	 East	 is	 Mohammedan.	 But	 Mohammedanism	 is	 only
fourteen	 hundred	 years	 old,	 Christianity	 is	 two	 thousand	 years	 old.	 So	 before
Mohammed	was	born,	Jews	had	already	entered	the	Arabic	world,	and	they	had
their	own	settlements.	Then	Christians	came	and	they	started	making	their	own
settlements....
The	problem	is	this	special	rock,	which	is	said	to	be	the	central	piece	of	the	great
Jewish	Temple	 of	 Solomon,	which	was	 destroyed	 by	 the	 anti-Jewish	 elements
long	 ago.	 Only	 the	 rock	which	was	 the	 central	 piece	 remains;	 it	 is	 called	 the
"Rock	of	the	Dome."
Now,	 Jews	claim	 that	 it	 is	 their	holy	place,	because	 it	 is	 the	 site	of	 their	great
temple.	And	Christians	claim	that	this	is	the	place	where	Jesus	was	crucified,	so
it	is	their	holy	place	--
not	 Jewish	 but	 Christian.	 And	 then	 comes	 another	 contender,	 and	 in	 a	 very
strange	way...
Six	hundred	years	after	Jesus,	Mohammed	established	a	new	religion	--	because
the	Arabs	had	no	religion	of	 their	own.	They	were	a	nomadic	race,	wanderers;
they	 had	 no	 organized	 religion.	 Mohammed	 collected	 those	 Arabs	 under	 the
name	 of	Mohammedanism.	 He	 himself	 was	 an	 Arab,	 and	 naturally	 had	 great
influence.	For	his	whole	life	he	was	fighting	--	war	and	war,	not	a	single	day	of
rest	--	and	on	his	sword	was	his	message:	"My	message	is	peace."	It	was	written
on	his	sword!
George	 Bernard	 Shaw	 is	 not	 wrong:	 this	 world	 seems	 to	 be	 dominated	 by
lunatics	of	 all	kinds.	 If	peace	 is	your	message...	 and	certainly	he	believed	 that
peace	was	his	message,	but	 it	had	 to	 follow	his	conditions:	 if	 the	whole	world
becomes	 Mohammedan	 there	 will	 be	 peace.	 But	 how	 is	 it	 possible?	 He	 has
named	 his	 religion...	 Mohammedanism	 is	 not	 the	 name	 given	 by	 him	 to	 his
religion;	the	name	that	he	has	given	is	Islam,	and	Islam	simply	means	peace.	A
strange	kind	of	peace!	 --	 the	prophet	of	peace	 fought	his	whole	 life,	murdered
and	butchered.
And	 he	 left	 the	 ultimate	 problem	behind	 him	 --	 the	 story	 is	 really	 hilarious	 --
when	he	died.	Many	prophets,	many	saviors,	many	avataras,	many	tirthankaras,
many	buddhas	have	died	before,	but	he	found	his	own	style.	He	died	not	in	an
ordinary	way.	In	fact,	he	never	died.	He	simply	went	to	heaven	alive	--	and	not
alone,	but	sitting	on	his	horse!	And	just	as	he	was	going	towards	heaven,	sitting
on	his	horse,	just	to	take	a	little	rest	he	descended	on	that	rock.	He	could	not	find
anywhere	else	to	rest.
So	now	that	rock	has	become	the	contention	of	three	religions.	Judaism	claims	it
as	theirs.	Jews	are	ready	to	kill	and	die	for	it;	millions	of	Jews	have	died	for	it.
Christians	have	been	sending	crusades,	having	religious	wars	continually,	to	take
possession	 of	 the	 Rock	 of	 the	 Dome.	 And	 the	 whole	 area	 is	 an	 ocean	 of
Mohammedans,	 who	 claim	 that	 this	 is	 their	 holy	 rock	 because	 Mohammed
stayed	 there	 to	 take	 some	 rest	 before	 he	 left	 finally,	 with	 his	 horse,	 towards
heaven.
For	 these	fourteen	hundred	years	 it	has	been	war	almost	every	day.	And	at	 the
end	of	the	first	world	war	Britain	and	America,	both	Christian	countries,	played
the	most	 ugly	 game	 against	 the	 Jews....	 Jews	 are	 one	 of	 the	 races	which	 have
suffered	 most.	 Of	 course,	 they	 have	 their	 part	 and	 their	 contribution	 in	 their
suffering.	They	have	suffered	most	because	they	were	the	first	to	claim,	"We	are
the	chosen	people	of	God,	and	it	is	our	basic	right	to	rule	over	the	world.	Other
human	beings	are	inferior	human	beings."
Because	 this	 idea	 irritated	 everybody,	 without	 exception,	 Jews	 have	 been
continually	murdered,	butchered.	Adolf	Hitler	alone	killed	six	million	Jews,	and
it	 goes	 on....	 But	 the	 ultimate	meanness	 has	 been	 committed	 by	America	 and
England	--	and	even	Jews	could	not	understand	the	strategy.
After	the	second	world	war,	the	American	and	British	forces	were	in	control	of
Jerusalem,	where	 the	 rock	 is,	 and	 the	 small	 country	of	 Israel	which	had	never
before	been	in	existence.	For	many	centuries	Mohammedans	had	lived	there;	it
was	part	of	the	country	of	Palestine.	But	after	the	second	world	war,	Jerusalem
and	 Palestine	 were	 under	 the	 control	 of	 American	 and	 British	 forces,	 and
America	played	 the	ugliest	politics	 that	you	can	conceive.	 It	 created,	under	 an
armed	force,	a	new	nation	for	 the	Jews.	 It	called	 the	new	nation	Israel,	 for	 the
Jews.
It	had	not	been	in	existence	for	many	centuries.	Once	it	had	been	a	land	for	the
Jews,	 in	 the	 days	 of	Moses,	 then	 it	 was	 lost	 to	Mohammedans	 for	 centuries.
Christians	had	been	trying	to	recover	it	but	they	could	not,	neither	were	the	Jews
successful	 --	 they	 could	 not	 be!	Only	 six	 percent	 of	 the	 land	 belonged	 to	 the
Jews	and	ninety-four	percent	of	 the	 land	belonged	 to	 the	Mohammedans.	How
can	 you	 make	 Israel	 a	 sovereign	 nation?	 But	 under	 pressure	 of	 arms	 they
managed	to	create	a	new	land.	It	was	great	strategy,	and	perhaps	nobody	else	has
pointed	it	out....
I	find	myself	standing	alone	in	many	situations;	sometimes	I	think	I	should	not
unnecessarily	bother	about	things	when	nobody	is	even	thinking	about	them.
My	 understanding	 is	 that	 America	 and	 Britain	 conspired	 to	 create	 the	 Jewish
state	so	that	now	Jews	will	be	in	trouble	for	eternity.	This	is	a	very	sophisticated
diplomacy.	And	 the	 Jews	were	happy;	 they	 thought	 that	America	 and	England
were	helping	them,	that	they	were	favorable	to	them,	that	they	were	giving	them
the	homeland	for	which	they	had	been	hankering	for	centuries.
And	America	had	killed	two	birds	with	one	stone.	In	America,	Jews	are	among
the	richest	people,	so	they	have	great	power	over	the	American	congress.	They
have	a	lobby	of	their	own,	and	because	politicians	depend	on	contributions	from
rich	people	for	 their	elections,	 they	cannot	avoid	 the	Jews.	They	cannot	 ignore
them;	 their	 presence	 is	 too	 important	 --	 they	 have	 cash	money.	 So	 this	was	 a
good	chance	to	have	their	money	contributed	to	American	politicians.
The	American	politicians	managed	to	create	the	state	of	Israel	for	the	Jews,	but
the	state	was	forcibly	imposed	on	the	Mohammedans.	Now,	they	cannot	tolerate
it	--
Mohammedans	are	very	fascist,	and	this	insult	they	cannot	tolerate	--	so	there	is
continuous	war.
Israel	 has	 to	 purchase	 war	 materials	 from	 America,	 and	 American	 Jews
continuously	have	 to	 send	millions	of	dollars	 for	 the	 survival	of	 Israel.	 In	 this
way,	America	has	destroyed	more	Jews	than	Adolf	Hitler	--	and	has	created	not
just	a	single-blow	slaughter,	but	a	continuous	situation	that	will	go	on	and	on	for
centuries	till	not	a	single	Jew	is	alive	in	Israel.
And	any	day	the	American	politicians	can	pull	out	their	support.	They	have	done
that	 in	 Taiwan.	 They	 were	 supporting	 Taiwan	 against	 China,	 and	 Taiwan
depended	absolutely	on	American	support	--	but	for	how	long?
Taiwan	 is	 a	 small	 island.	 It	was	 the	private	property	of	Chiang	Kai-shek,	who
was	the	dictator	before	Mao	and	the	communists	took	over	China.	The	old	name
for	 Taiwan	 was	 Formosa;	 Chiang	 Kai-shek	 had	 made	 it	 his	 holiday	 resort,	 a
private	property.	And	as	the	communists	took	over	China,	Chiang	Kai-shek,	with
his	family	and	friends,	escaped	to	Taiwan	and	changed	its	name	from	Formosa.
They	created	a	new	nation	with	the	help	of	America	--	Taiwan.	America	helped,
and	with	billions	of	dollars	and	new	factories,	it	became	a	nation.
But	how	 long	can	you	manage	against	mainland	China,	 the	biggest	 country	 in
the	world?
Finally,	 you	 have	 to	 give	 up.	America	 dropped	Taiwan	 and	 joined	 hands	with
mainland	 China	 --	 because	 that	 was	 China's	 condition:	 "Unless	 you	 stop
supporting	 Taiwan,	 China	 is	 not	 going	 to	 support	 you."	 They	 needed	 China's
support	 immensely	 --	because	China	and	Russia	 together	could	become	such	a
great	 force,	 it	 was	 a	 beautiful	 and	 necessary	 step	 for	America	 to	 bring	 China
towards	them.	But	Taiwan	was	lost,	and	Taiwan	is	very	angry.
But	what	can	you	do?	Now	China	is	making	every	effort	to	absorb	Taiwan	back
into	China,	and	Taiwan	cannot	fight,	it	has	not	the	power.	The	same	is	going	to
happen	to	Israel,	any	day.
It	has	happened	the	same	way	in	Iran:	it	was	American	support	that	kept	the	shah
of	 Iran	 in	 power.	 He	 had	 no	 hold	 on	 the	 people;	 the	 people	 are	 fanatic
Mohammedans	 under	 the	 control	 of	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini,	 but	 because	 of
American	support,	American	army	bases...
Ayatollah	Khomeini	was	living	in	France	and	directing	his	people	in	Iran	to	be
ready	any	moment,	because	how	long	can	America	support	the	shah?	Sooner	or
later	it	becomes	a	burden.
One	day	it	did	become	a	burden.	And	the	moment	America	left	Iran	to	itself,	the
shah	 of	 Iran	 had	 to	 run	 away,	 because	 he	 knew	 that	 he	 could	 not	 survive.
Ayatollah	Khomeini	 returned	 to	 Iran	with	 flags	 flying,	 and	 Iran	 is	 now	 in	 the
hands	of	Ayatollah	Khomeini	and	the	Mohammedan	priests.	They	have	created
in	Israel	a	hell	for	the	Jews,	and	with	such	beautiful	tactics	that	even	the	greatest
Jews	like	Martin	Buber	could	not	suspect	it.
I	am	the	one-person	majority	who	wants	to	say	to	the	world	that	this	is	cunning
politics.
America	and	England	are	not	favorable	to	the	Jews,	and	the	proof	for	 it	 is	 that
the	Vatican	 pope	 has	 not	 accepted	 Israel	 as	 a	 sovereign	 nation;	 they	 have	 not
given	their	recognition.
So	on	the	one	hand	Christianity	gives	no	recognition	to	the	nation;	on	the	other
hand	they	created	the	nation	in	a	place	where	they	are	surrounded	from	all	sides
by	Mohammedans,	and	they	will	be	killed	and	crushed.
Just	for	crucifying	one	man,	Jesus,	for	two	thousand	years	millions	of	innocent
Jews	 have	 been	 crucified	 --	 just	 as	 Jesus	 was	 innocent	 but	 killed	 by	 his
contemporaries.	Now	these	people,	after	two	thousand	years,	have	nothing	to	do
with	 those	 people	who	 crucified	 Jesus.	 But	 they	 are	 being	 tortured	 in	 Russia,
they	 are	 being	 tortured	 in	 Germany;	 they	 have	 been	 tortured	 everywhere,
wherever	they	have	been.	And	now	Israel	is	the	ultimate	strategy:	they	will	keep
being	tortured	for	eternity	until	Israel	disappears	again.
So	I	have	given	my	answer	to	Tom	Robbins,	because	he	is	going	to	write	a	book
and	he	wants	my	opinion.	I	know	he	must	be	surprised,	because	nobody	has	ever
said	 this,	 that	 Israel	 is	 a	 strategy	 of	 Christian	 politics	 to	 destroy	 Jews	 --	 not
directly,	 but	 by	 creating	 a	 situation	 so	 that	Mohammedans	 can	 do	 the	 job	 and
Christians	 can	 keep	 their	 mask	 that	 they	 have	 been	 so	 helpful,	 even	 to	 the
enemies.	They	have	followed	Jesus'	philosophy:	Love	your	enemies.	They	have
been	pouring	money	and	help	in	the	form	of	outdated	arms	--	armaments	which
are	of	no	use,	which	have	to	be	thrown	out,	either	into	the	ocean,	or	in	Israel.
And	 at	 the	 same	 time	 American	 Jews	 go	 on	 helping	 American	 politicians
because	they	are	helping	Israel.	So	the	American	politicians	exploit	their	money,
they	exploit	their	support.
Just	by	chance,	yesterday	when	I	dictated	my	letter	to	Tom	Robbins,	I	received
the	message...	We	were	fighting	 in	 the	Supreme	Court	of	Oregon	to	prove	 that
our	 commune	 in	 Oregon	 had	 been	 destroyed	 absolutely	 illegally,	 and	 that	 the
government	had	taken	control	of	the	land	without	any	reason	or	rhyme.	And	we
have	won	 the	 case	 in	 the	 Supreme	Court:	 the	 Supreme	Court	 has	 specifically
made	 it	 clear	 that	 the	government	has	been	 absolutely	 illegal	 in	 restricting	 the
use	of	the	commune's	land,	its	other	properties.
So	now	it	is	again	in	our	hands.
I	have	said	 to	Tom	Robbins	 that	my	suggestion	 is	 that	 if	you	want	 to	help	 the
Jews,	 Oregon	 should	 be	 given	 to	 them	 as	 a	 new	 Israel.	Move	 the	 Jews	 from
Israel	and	give	Israel	to	the	Mohammedans;	it	belongs	to	them,	it	is	ugly	to	keep
their	land.
And	as	for	me	and	my	people,	we	offer	our	commune	land	as	a	beginning.	It	is
enough	for	at	least	one	hundred	thousand	people.	We	give	all	our	assets	--	all	our
houses,	 hotels,	 roads,	 dams,	 fields	 --	 everything	 that	 we	 have	 in	 Rancho
Rajneesh	we	give	 them	as	a	 friendly	gesture,	without	 taking	any	money	 for	 it,
with	the	condition	that	Rancho	Rajneesh	should	be	the	capital	of	the	new	Israel.
And	let	America	show	its	real	face.	If	they	want	to	help	them...	half	of	the	state
of	Oregon	 is	already	owned	by	 the	 federal	government,	and	 it	 is	very	sparsely
populated	 so	 there	 is	 no	problem.	Half	 the	 land	 already	belongs	 to	 the	 federal
government;	give	that	land	to	the	Jews.
And	 Jews	 are	 in	 a	 new	 trouble	 in	 Israel.	 There	 were	 a	 few	 Jews	 who	 have
remained	in	Israel	forever,	since	the	days	of	Moses,	so	they	are	very	orthodox	--
utterly	orthodox.
They	have	not	 seen	 the	outside	world,	 they	are	 still	 four	 thousand	years	back;
their	mind	is	of	that	type.	The	second	layer	has	come	from	European	countries.
That	layer	is	a	little	different,	because	it	is	no	longer	so	orthodox.	It	has	seen	the
developed	 countries	 of	 the	 twentieth	 century;	 it	 has	 forgotten	 all	 the	 old
traditional	 ways.	 And	 the	 third	 layer,	 which	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 what
Judaism	is,	has	come	from	America.
Now	they	are	fighting	amongst	themselves.	Full-scale	riots	are	going	on	in	Israel
amongst	the	Jews	themselves.	Mohammedans	are	killing	them	from	all	around,
and	Jews	are	killing	other	Jews	because	the	orthodox	Jews	say	to	the	European
and	American	Jews,
"Go	back!	You	are	no	longer	Jews."
For	small	reasons...	for	example,	on	the	sabbath	every	week,	the	orthodox	Jews
stop	working	by	the	evening	on	Friday.	They	want	the	new	Jews	who	have	come
from	 Europe	 and	 America	 to	 close	 their	 discos,	 their	 restaurants,	 their	 movie
houses,	on	Friday	night.
They	cannot	conceive	it.	I	have	heard:
Three	rabbis	were	talking	about	whose	synagogue	was	the	most	advanced.	One
rabbi	 said,	 "Of	 course	 it	 is	 my	 synagogue.	 We	 allow	 smoking	 inside	 the
synagogue;	we	allow	drinking,	drugs,	anything,	in	the	name	of	God."
The	 second	 rabbi	 said,	 "That's	 nothing,	 forget	 all	 about	 it.	 You	 are	 still	 old-
fashioned.
These	things	we	have	been	allowing	for	centuries.	We	allow	you	even	to	bring
your	girlfriends;	we	don't	even	ask	whether	the	woman	is	your	wife	or	not.	Bring
your	girlfriends;	 the	 synagogue	 is	 just	 a	 religious	kind	of	movie	 theater	where
you	will	not	 find	people	with	 their	wives.	 If	 they	have	 to	be	with	 their	wives,
then	what	is	wrong	with	their	house?"
Those	movie	houses...	and	do	you	know	why	it	becomes	dark?	It	is	not	for	the
film,	it	is	because	so	many	stories	go	on	inside	the	movie	hall.	All	those	stories
are	possible	only	in	darkness.
So	the	second	rabbi	said,	"We	allow	girlfriends	and	dancing,	and	if	people	want
to	 make	 love,	 they	 can	 even	 make	 love.	 We	 ignore	 it,	 we	 don't	 create	 any
interference."
The	third	rabbi	said,	"You	are	both	idiots.	You	don't	know.	In	our	synagogue	we
are	living	in	the	twenty-first	century."
They	said,	"What	more	can	you	do?"
He	 said,	 "What	 more?	 On	 our	 synagogue	 there	 is	 a	 signboard:	 Òn	 Jewish
holidays	the	synagogue	is	closed.'"
This	is	the	ultimate	form	of	religiousness!
So	those	three	layers	of	Jews	are	cutting	each	other's	heads.
My	 suggestion	 is	 not	 just	 to	make	 a	 joke	 of	 American	 help;	 I	 mean	 it!	 I	 am
sending	 the	message	 to	 Israel:	 "You	 enter	 into	 the	 commune;	 let	 that	 be	 your
beginning.	And	tell	the	American	government	--	and	you	have	every	right	to	ask
because	 you	 have	 been	 giving	 all	 those	 politicians	 money,	 they	 are	 all	 paid
servants	to	you	--	that	you	want	a	New	Israel	in	the	New	World."
And	why	bother	about	a	rock?	Make	a	beautiful	Temple	of	Solomon	again!	The
new	is	always	better	than	the	old.	Why	should	you	bother?	Do	you	think	religion
is	like	wine,	that	the	old	is	better	than	the	new?	Don't	condemn	religion	that	way.
Just	fresh,	new,	with	modern	architecture	--	make	a	great	temple,	the	greatest	in
the	world.	Once	it	was	the	greatest	 temple	in	the	world,	but	why	unnecessarily
get	into	trouble	which	cannot	end?	--
there	is	no	possible	way.
And	then	you	will	know	America's	real	face.	Then	you	will	know	how	friendly
they	are	to	Israel	and	how	friendly	they	are	to	the	Jews.	They	are	fundamentalist
Christians.
Ronald	Reagan	is	a	fascist	Christian;	he	will	not	allow	it.	This	will	be	a	good	test
of	their	friendship.
I	don't	believe	in	any	religion,	but	I	certainly	believe	that	people	should	not	be
put	into	unnecessary	misery,	slaughter,	massacre,	every	day	trembling	with	fear.
And	now	it	has	become	much	more	dangerous,	because	Jews	are	fighting	with
Jews,	 and	 Mohammedans	 from	 all	 around	 have	 become	 terrorists;	 they	 are
destroying	 in	 every	possible	way	 the	very	 foundation	of	 the	 Jewish	 state.	And
just	see:	the	Vatican	has	not	even	given	formal	recognition	to	the	sovereignty	of
the	state	of	Israel;	that	shows	the	real	Christian	mind.
But	this	is	our	world.	Perhaps	my	people	are	the	only	people	who	are	free	from
chains.
God	is	your	chain,	religions	are	your	chains;	the	idea	of	sin,	the	idea	of	virtue	are
your	chains.
Freedom	 consists	 in	 a	 single	 thing,	 and	 that	 is	 your	 awareness.	 Act	 out	 of
awareness	 and	you	will	 be	 acting	out	 of	 freedom	 --	 and	without	 interfering	 in
somebody	else's	freedom.
Freedom	knows	how	to	respect	others'	freedom.
You	don't	have	to	do	anything,	Dharmesh,	to	attain	freedom.	It	 is	already	there
within	you.	Just	drop	the	chains.
And	those	chains	are	such	that	you	have	started	loving	them;	you	have	become
accustomed	 to	 them.	 It	will	 be	 a	 little	 painful	 to	 depart	 from	 your	miseries,	 a
little	painful	to	depart	from	your	old	sufferings,	familiar	friends,	and	enter	into	a
new	area	of	freedom,	awareness.	But	except	that,	there	is	no	hope	for	humanity.
All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 just	 a	 little	 intelligence.	You	have	 been	deprived	 even	of
that.
And	 the	 pope	 is	 angry	 with	 me,	 the	 shankaracharyas	 are	 angry	 with	 me,	 the
imams	are	angry	with	me,	for	the	simple	reason	that	I	want	you	to	be	intelligent.
They	want	you	to	be	absolutely	fools,	 idiots,	 retarded,	so	you	can	be	enslaved,
tortured,	harassed,	sacrificed,	and	you	will	not	revolt	against	it.
Paddy	goes	 into	a	pub	one	day	and	sees	a	very	well-dressed	man	sitting	in	 the
corner.	But	what	he	notices	most	 are	his	beautiful	 shoes.	So	he	goes	over	 and
asks	about	them	and	the	man	tells	him	they	are	crocodile	shoes.
But	Paddy	has	never	heard	of	a	crocodile,	so	he	goes	over	to	his	friends	and	asks
them.
They	tell	him	that	it	is	a	very	dangerous	animal	that	lives	in	the	swamps	of	the
Amazon	jungle.
Paddy	is	determined	to	have	a	pair	of	these	shoes,	so	he	sells	his	house,	his	car
and	his	wife,	and	sets	off	for	South	America.	Once	he	is	there	he	eventually	finds
a	man	with	a	boat,	who	is	willing	to	take	him	up	the	Amazon.
After	many	weeks	they	reach	the	heart	of	the	jungle	and	Paddy	sees	a	crocodile,
swimming	around	 in	 the	swamp.	So	he	 immediately	dives	 in	and	has	a	 terrific
fight	with	the	beast.	They	are	thrashing	about	in	the	water	for	over	an	hour	until,
tired	and	bleeding,	Paddy	manages	to	haul	the	dead	crocodile	into	the	boat.
With	 his	 last	 strength,	Paddy	 turns	 the	 crocodile	 over	 onto	 its	 back,	 takes	 one
look	at	it	and	shrieks:	"My	God!	It	has	got	no	shoes	on!"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	Innocence	regained
14	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709140
ShortTitle:
PILGR16
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
113
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MANY	TIMES	SITTING	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE	I	AM	OVERWHELMED	BY
A	VERY	CHILDLIKE	FEELING.	 IT	SEEMS	SO	FAMILIAR,	YET	FROM	A
LONG
TIME	AGO.	IN	THESE	MOMENTS	THERE	FEELS	NO	GAP	OF	YOU	AND
ME.	I	AM	LIKE	A	CHILD	PLAYING	IN	YOUR	BEAUTIFUL	GARDEN.
BELOVED	OSHO,	 IS	THIS	SIGNIFICANT	OR	AM	I	ALREADY	MOVING
INTO	MY
SECOND	CHILDHOOD	AT	THE	RIPE	OLD	AGE	OF	THIRTY-FIVE?
P.S.	YOU	CAN	SCARE	ME	ANY	TIME.
Prem	Yatra,	this	great	experiment	through	which	you	all	are	passing	is	basically
to	achieve	your	lost	childhood	again.
When	 I	 say	 "your	 lost	 childhood,"	 I	 mean	 your	 innocence,	 your	 eyes	 full	 of
wonder,	knowing	nothing,	having	nothing,	but	yet	feeling	yourself	at	the	top	of
the	 world.	 Those	 golden	 moments	 of	 wonder,	 joy,	 no	 tension,	 no	 worry,	 no
anxiety,	have	to	be	regained,	rediscovered.	The	sage	is	nothing	but	the	circle	that
started	in	your	birth	coming	full	way,	complete,	back	to	the	same	point.
Of	 course	 the	 second	 childhood	 is	 far	 more	 valuable	 and	 significant	 than	 the
first.	In	the	first	the	innocence	was	there	because	of	ignorance,	so	it	was	not	pure
and	clear	and	in	your	possession;	it	was	just	a	natural	thing	that	happens	to	every
childhood.	 The	 second	 childhood	 is	 your	 greatest	 achievement	 --	 it	 does	 not
happen	to	all.	The	second	childhood	makes	you	innocent	without	ignorance,	the
second	childhood	comes	through	all	kinds	of	experiences.	It	is	mature,	centered,
ripe.
You	should	be	blessed	that	you	are	feeling	like	that.	The	second	childhood	is	just
exactly	 the	 existential	 meaning	 of	 meditation,	 and	 from	 there	 on	 is	 the	 great
pilgrimage	of	coming	back	home	--	which	you	have	never	really	 left,	which	 is
impossible	 to	 leave,	 because	 it	 is	 you.	 Wherever	 you	 will	 go,	 you	 will	 find
yourself	there.
It	is	not	even	a	shadow	which	follows	you	because	that	will	disappear	if	you	are
sitting	 in	 the	 shade.	 It	will	 appear	only	when	you	are	 standing	 in	 the	 sunlight.
Your	 shadow	 is	not	 an	eternal	 companion,	 and	 in	 times	of	darkness	even	your
shadow	itself	leaves	you.	But	in	the	times	of	light	your	shadow	is	back.
The	same	is	the	situation	with	friends,	lovers:	in	the	days	of	darkness	they	leave
you	 just	 like	 the	shadow;	 in	 the	days	of	 success,	 richness,	 they	all	come	back.
They	are	not	really	companions.
There	 is	 only	 one	 essential	 being	 in	 you	which	will	 be	 everywhere	with	 you,
without	any	condition.	Even	 if	you	are	 in	hell	 it	doesn't	matter,	 it	will	be	with
you;	if	you	are	in	heaven	it	doesn't	matter,	it	will	be	with	you.
To	find	that	essential	core	of	your	being	is	on	the	one	hand	utter	innocence,	and
on	the	other	hand	is	the	greatest	wisdom	that	has	ever	existed	on	the	earth.
So	your	body	may	be	becoming	old,	but	if	you	are	learning	ways	of	being	silent
and	peaceful	and	meditative	and	loving,	you	will	not	grow	old.	You	will	remain
as	 young	 and	 as	 fresh	 as	 early	 morning	 dewdrops	 shining	 in	 the	 beautiful
sunrise,	looking	far	more	precious	than	any	pearls.
You	 should	be	happy	 and	 rejoice	 in	your	 childhood.	This	 is	what	 Jesus	meant
when	 he	 said	 again	 and	 again,	 "Unless	 you	 are	 born	 again..."	Even	Christians
have	not	got	the	meaning	of	his	statement.	They	think	literally	that	"unless	you
are	born	again"	means	that	first	you	will	have	to	die,	and	then	you	will	be	born,
and	 on	 the	 judgment	 day	 Jesus	 will	 take	 you	 into	 paradise.	 That	 is	 not	 the
meaning	of	the	man.
What	he	is	saying	is:	Unless	you	die	right	now	as	a	personality	and	emerge	as	an
innocent	 individuality,	unscratched,	unpolluted	by	 the	 society	and	 the	people...
This	is	your	new	birth,	this	is	resurrection.
Enjoy	your	divine	childhood,	and	when	it	is	the	right	time	I	will	scare	you!	You
are	 too	 new;	 the	 childhood	 is	 not	 yet	 absolutely	 settled,	 and	 you	 can
misunderstand	if	I	scare	you.
Just	wait...!	That	moment	will	also	come.	Right	now	your	whole	concern	should
be	getting	deeper	into	childhood.
I	don't	scare	anybody	except	Avirbhava,	because	she	has	a	quality	of	a	child.	I
don't	 know	 why.	 Perhaps	 her	 father	 is	 dead,	 her	 mother	 is	 dead...	 I	 feel	 a
tremendous	feeling	for	her	-
-	and	she	 is	utterly	 innocent.	So	once	in	a	while	--	not	once	in	a	while,	almost
every	day	--
whenever	I	have	the	chance	and	she	is	close	by,	I	try	to	do	my	best.
"I	don't	want	your	son,	Ernie,	swimming	in	our	pool	anymore"	says	Mrs.	Meyer
to	her	neighbor,	Mrs.	Jones.
"But	what	has	my	poor	little	Ernie	done?"	asks	Mrs.	Jones.
"He	is	constantly	peeing	in	the	pool,"	says	Mrs.	Meyer	angrily.
"Don't	be	so	hard	on	him,"	says	Mrs.	Jones,	"all	children	of	his	age	do	that!"
"Maybe	they	do,"	says	Mrs.	Meyer,	"but	not	from	the	diving	board."
Childhood	has	its	beauties,	because	it	does	not	know	the	etiquette,	the	manners,
and	all	kinds	of	crap.	It	is	so	simple	and	so	innocent	and	so	spontaneous.
A	man	walked	into	a	bar	and	was	amazed	to	see	a	dog	sitting	at	a	table	with	three
men	playing	poker.	The	man	went	over	and	asked,	"Can	that	dog	really	read	his
cards?"
"Sure	he	can,"	said	one	of	the	men.	"But	he's	not	much	of	a	player.	Whenever	he
draws	a	good	hand	he	wags	his	tail!"
That	is	absolutely	innocent...	the	poor	dog	cannot	contain	his	joy.
Two	cockroaches	were	munching	delicacies	on	top	of	a	garbage	pile	when	one	of
them	began	telling	of	some	new	tenants	in	the	nearby	apartments.
"I	hear,"	he	said,	"that	their	refrigerator	is	spotless,	their	floors	are	gleaming,	and
there	is	not	a	speck	of	dust	in	the	whole	place."
"Please,	please,"	said	the	other	cockroach,	"not	while	I'm	eating!"
Such	bad	news...!
It	 will	 be	 a	 tremendous	 revolution	 the	 day	we	 start	 learning	 the	 languages	 of
birds,	of	bees,	of	cockroaches.	They	all	have	their	ways	of	communicating.	But
then	the	heart	feels	a	little	sadness,	because	we	have	not	been	able	to	learn	even
to	 communicate	 with	 human	 beings,	 and	 we	 have	 been	 here	 for	 millions	 of
years.	What	kind	of	stupidity	is	this,	that	we	don't	know	the	whole	humanity	as
belonging	 to	 us	 and	 we	 belonging	 to	 it?	 All	 that	 man	 has	 done	 is	 simply
butchering,	murdering,	war.	The	same	energy,	the	same	effort	would	have	made
this	world	the	greatest	miracle	in	the	whole	universe.
But	 we	 don't	 understand	 each	 other.	 We	 may	 even	 be	 speaking	 the	 same
language,	 but	 understanding	 is	 not	 necessarily	 expected;	 what	 is	 expected	 is
misunderstanding.	 So	 people	 are	 hiding	 themselves,	 hiding	 their	 childhood,
hiding	 their	 innocence,	 protecting	 themselves	 from	 everybody	 with	 defense
measures;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 see	 children	 young	 and	 old	 all	 playing	 in	 this
garden	of	the	earth,	rejoicing,	laughing,	giggling.	Why	this	seriousness?	Man	has
not	gained	anything	out	of	this	seriousness;	he	has	simply	lost	everything	--	but
he	continues	to	be	serious.
I	am	absolutely	against	seriousness.
I	call	it	a	psychological	sickness.
Only	a	playful,	childlike,	innocent	behavior	is	the	right	behavior,	is	what	I	would
like	to	call	virtuous	behavior,	religious,	spiritual...	not	only	human	but	divine.
The	moment	you	are	as	innocent	as	a	child	you	have	transcended	humanity,	you
have	entered	into	the	world	of	godliness.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	LOVE	THE	WORDS	YOU	USE,	"ONE'S	ORIGINAL	FACE,"	BUT	I	HAVE
NO
EXISTENTIAL	GLIMPSE	OR	UNDERSTANDING	OF	WHAT	YOU	MEAN
BY
THEM.	WOULD	YOU	CARE	TO	EXPLAIN	FURTHER?
Veena,	the	original	face	is	only	a	poetic	expression	for	your	absolute	innocence,
which	 is	 not	 damaged	 by	 your	 parents,	 by	 your	 teachers,	 by	 your	 society,	 by
your	culture	and	by	yourself.
I	can	understand	why	you	love	those	words...	because	you	don't	have	the	original
face.
And	the	reason	you	don't	have	 the	original	 face	 is...	You	are	 trying	hard	for	 it,
but	 whenever	 I	 look	 at	 you	 there	 is	 a	 certain	 pretension,	 a	 certain	 hypocrisy.
There	is	no	bad	intention	in	your	being,	but	you	want	to	look	the	way	you	should
look,	and	that	is	destroying	the	whole	thing.
You	should	look	the	way	you	are.
Drop	all	nonsense	that	has	been	imposed	on	you	with	all	those	commandments
that	 religions	 have	 been	 issuing,	 without	 any	 respect	 to	 the	 uniqueness	 of
individuals.
Just	be	yourself.
That's	the	meaning	of	the	original	face.
It	 is	 just	 a	poetic	expression	 to	 say	 to	you:	Don't	 try	 in	any	way	 to	 look	more
beautiful,	 to	 look	more	meditative,	 to	 look	more	 respectful.	 Those	 are	 deadly
poisons...	the	very	desire	to	look	like	somebody	who	you	are	not.
My	whole	teaching	is:	Just	be	what	you	are	and	don't	care	a	bit	about	the	world.
Then	you	will	feel	a	tremendous	relaxation	and	a	deep	peace	within	your	heart.
That	 is	 your	 original	 face,	 relaxed,	 without	 tensions,	 without	 pretensions,
without	hypocrisies,	without	the	so-called	disciplines	of	how	you	should	behave.
But	 all	 those	 poisons	 have	 gone	 deep	 in	 your	 blood,	 in	 your	 bones,	 in	 your
marrow.	What	I	am	trying	to	do	is	to	take	out	those	poisons	and	give	you	back
your	naturalness.	And	 there	 is	nothing	more	beautiful	 than	 the	natural,	 there	 is
nothing	 more	 mysterious	 than	 the	 original;	 no	 etiquette,	 no	 mannerism	 can
improve	upon	it.
But	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 improve	 upon	 himself.	 Then	 everything	 becomes
false.	Your	smile	is	false,	your	hands	raised	together	folded	in	reverence	are	just
an	exercise	of	the	hands	--	your	heart	is	not	with	them.	And	unfortunately	I	have
such	eyes	that	I	can	see	exactly	where	the	trouble	is;	when	everybody	is	laughing
there	 are	 serious	 and	 sober	 people	 who	 are	 pretending	 to	 hold	 their	 laughter,
because	it	doesn't	look	right.
Veena,	you	have	been	a	long,	long	time	with	me,	but	I	have	never	felt	that	you
are	relaxed,	at	ease,	at	home.	Just	being	at	ease,	relaxed,	at	home,	all	these	poor
trees	know	what	is	the	original	face,	these	birds	know	what	is	the	original	face.
Only	man	has	forgotten,	because	he	has	found	masks	upon	masks;	he	is	lost	in
the	jungle	of	masks,	and	now	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	which	is	the	original.
But	 a	 simple	understanding...	whenever	you	 see	yourself	 tense,	 remember	 that
you	 are	 doing	 something	 against	 nature.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 doing	 something
more	special	than	others,	remember	that	you	are	trying	to	be	superior,	behaving
as	a	great	meditator,	behaving	as	a	 real	English	 lady.	English	 ladies	don't	have
original	faces!
Drop	all	 this	nonsense	of	being	English	and	German	and	 Indian.	 I	 see	 Indians
here	once	in	a	while,	and	even	in	the	tumultuous	laughter	of	you	all	I	can	detect
them;	either	 they	will	 laugh	 louder	 than	anybody	 to	show	that	 they	are	not	 the
Indians	I	condemn,	or	they	will	just	look	downwards	to	hide	their	face,	because
they	have	lost	the	intelligence	to	understand	even	a	simple	joke.	And	rather	than
enjoying	the	moment,	they	are	judging	continuously	whether	it	is	right	to	tell	a
joke	in	a	religious	discourse....	Who	told	you	this	is	a	religious	discourse?	I	hate
the	very	word!	I	just	enjoy	to	be	with	you.
This	very	enjoyment	is	our	religiousness.
We	don't	have	anything	except	ourselves.	And	condemned	by	the	whole	world,
which	is	a	big	world,	still	we	have	our	simplicity,	our	innocence;	we	have	got	rid
of	all	old	garbage.	Just	allow	yourself	to	come	out	of	the	cage	that	you	yourself
have	been	creating...	and	others	have	been	helping.
The	original	face	is	a	beautiful	poetic	expression,	but	it	does	not	mean	that	you
will	have	a	different	face.	This	same	face	will	lose	all	its	tensions,	this	same	face
will	 be	 relaxed,	 this	 same	 face	will	 be	 nonjudgmental,	 this	 same	 face	will	 not
think	of	others	as	inferior.
This	same	face	under	these	new	values	will	be	your	original	face.
There	is	an	ancient	proverb:	Many	a	hero	is	a	man	who	did	not	have	the	courage
to	be	a	coward.	If	you	are	a	coward	what	is	wrong	in	it?	You	are	a	coward	--	it	is
perfectly	good.
Cowards	are	also	needed,	otherwise	from	where	will	you	get	heroes?	They	are
an	absolute	necessity	to	give	the	background	to	create	heroes.
Just	be	yourself,	whatever	 it	 is.	The	problem	 is	 that	never	before	has	anybody
told	you	 just	 to	 be	yourself.	Everybody	 is	 poking	his	 nose	 in,	 saying	 that	 you
should	be	this	way,	you	should	be	that	way	--	even	in	ordinary	matters.
In	my	school...	I	was	just	a	small	boy,	but	I	hated	to	be	told	how	I	have	to	be.
Teachers	started	bribing	me	--	"If	you	behave	rightly,	you	can	become	a	genius."
I	said,	"Hell	with	the	genius	--	I	simply	want	to	be	myself."
I	 used	 to	 sit	with	my	 legs	on	 the	 table,	 and	every	 teacher	was	offended.	They
would	say,
"What	kind	of	behavior	is	this?"
I	said,	"The	table	is	not	saying	anything	to	me.	It	is	something	between	me	and
the	 table,	 so	why	are	you	 looking	so	angry?	 I	am	not	putting	my	 legs	on	your
head!	You	should	relax	just	as	I	am	relaxing.	And	this	way	I	feel	better	able	to
understand	what	nonsense	you	are	teaching."
Just	beside	the	room	was	a	beautiful	window,	and	outside	were	trees	and	birds
and	 cuckoos.	Mostly	 I	was	 looking	 out	 of	 the	window,	 and	 the	 teacher	would
come	and	say,
"Why	do	you	come	to	school	at	all?"
I	said,	"Because	in	my	house	there	is	no	window	like	this	which	opens	up	to	the
whole	sky,	and	around	my	house	there	are	no	cuckoos,	no	birds.	The	house	is	in
the	 city,	 surrounded	 by	 other	 houses,	 so	 crowded	 that	 birds	 don't	 come	 there,
cuckoos	don't	feel	that	these	are	the	people	to	be	blessed	by	their	songs.
"Forget	the	idea	that	I	come	here	to	listen	to	you!	I	am	paying	my	fee,	you	are
simply	 a	 servant	 and	 you	 should	 remember	 that.	 If	 I	 fail	 I	 will	 not	 come	 to
complain	to	you;	if	I	fail	I	will	not	feel	sad.	But	if	for	the	whole	year	I	have	to
pretend	that	I	am	listening	to	you,	and	I	am	listening	to	the	cuckoos	outside,	that
will	be	the	beginning	of	a	hypocritical	life.	And	I	don't	want	to	be	a	hypocrite."
On	every	matter	the	teachers,	the	professors	wanted	you	to	do	it	in	a	certain	way.
In	my	school	in	those	days,	and	perhaps	even	today,	using	a	cap	was	necessary.	I
have	nothing	against	 caps;	 since	 I	have	 left	 the	university	 I	have	 started	using
caps,	but	I	never	wore	one	until	I	left	the	university.	The	first	teacher	who	was
worried	about	me,	said,	"You	are	disturbing	the	discipline	of	the	school.	Where
is	your	cap?"
I	said,	"Bring	the	school	code	of	behavior.	Is	there	any	mention	that	every	boy
should	use	a	cap?	And	 if	 there	 is	not,	you	are	 imposing	something	against	 the
school	code."
He	 took	 me	 to	 the	 principal	 of	 the	 school	 and	 I	 told	 the	 principal,	 "I	 am
absolutely	ready,	just	show	me	where	it	is	written	that	a	cap	is	compulsory.	If	it
is	 compulsory,	 I	 may	 even	 leave	 the	 school,	 but	 first	 let	 me	 see	 where	 it	 is
written."
There	was	no	written	code	and	 I	 said,	 "Can	you	give	me	any	other	 reasonable
arguments	 for	using	 the	 cap?	Will	 it	 increase	my	 intelligence?	Will	 it	 increase
my	life?	Will	it	give	me	better	health,	more	understanding?"	I	said,	"As	far	as	I
know,	Bengal	is	the	only	province	in	India	where	caps	are	not	used,	and	that	is
the	most	 intelligent	part	of	 the	country.	Punjab	is	 just	 the	opposite.	There	for	a
cap,	people	use	turbans	--	such	big	turbans,	as	if	their	intelligence	is	escaping	so
they	are	keeping	it.	And	that	is	the	most	unintelligent	part	of	the	country."
The	principal	said,	"There	seems	to	be	some	sense	in	what	you	are	saying,	but	it
is	a	school	discipline.	If	you	stop	using	caps,	then	others	will	stop."
I	said,	"Then	what	is	the	fear?	Just	drop	the	whole	old	convention."
Nobody	 wants	 to	 allow	 you	 to	 be	 yourself	 on	 matters	 which	 are	 absolutely
insignificant.
I	used	to	have	long	hair	in	my	childhood.	And	I	used	to	come	in	and	out	of	my
father's	 shop,	 because	 the	 shop	 and	 the	 home	were	 connected.	 The	 home	was
behind	the	shop	and	it	was	absolutely	necessary	to	pass	through	the	shop.	People
would	ask,	"Whose	girl	is	this?"	--	because	my	hair	was	so	long,	they	could	not
think	that	a	boy	should	be	having	such	long	hair.
My	father	felt	very	ashamed	and	embarrassed	to	say,	"He	is	a	boy."
But	they	said,	"Then	why	all	this	hair?"
One	day	--	it	was	not	his	normal	nature	--	he	became	so	embarrassed	and	angry
that	 he	 came	 and	 cut	my	 hair	with	 his	 own	 hands.	Bringing	 the	 scissors	with
which	he	used	to	cut	cloth	in	his	shop,	he	cut	my	hair.	 I	didn't	say	anything	to
him	--	he	was	surprised.	He	said,
"You	don't	have	anything	to	say?"
I	said,	"I	will	say	it	in	my	own	way."
"So	what	do	you	mean?"
I	said,	"You	will	see."	And	I	went	to	the	opium-addict	barber	who	used	to	have	a
shop	just	in	front	of	our	house.	He	was	the	only	man	I	had	a	respect	for.	There
were	a	row	of	barber	shops,	but	I	loved	that	old	man.	He	was	a	rare	variety,	and
he	loved	me;	for	hours	we	used	to	talk	to	each	other.	What	he	was	saying	was	all
nonsense!	 One	 day	 he	 was	 saying	 to	 me,	 "If	 all	 the	 opium	 addicts	 can	 be
organized	into	a	political	party,	we	can	take	over	this	country!"
I	said,	"It	is	a	good	idea."
But	he	said,	"Because	we	are	all	opium	addicts,	I	myself	forget	my	own	idea."
I	said,	"You	don't	be	worried.	 I	am	here	and	I	will	 remember.	You	 just	 tell	me
what	changes	you	want	 to	have	 in	 the	country,	what	kind	of	political	 ideology
you	want,	and	I	will	manage	it."
He	said,	"That's	good."
So	 I	went	 to	 him	 and	 I	 told	 him,	 "Just	 shave	my	whole	 head	 completely."	 In
India	the	head	is	shaved	completely	only	when	your	father	dies.
For	 a	moment	 even	 that	 opium	addict	 came	 to	his	 senses.	He	 said,	 "What	has
happened?
Has	your	father	died?"
I	said,	"Don't	bother	about	these	things.	You	do	what	I	am	saying;	it	is	none	of
your	concern!	You	just	cut	my	hair	completely,	shave	it	completely."
He	said,	"Done!	That	is	the	easiest	job.	So	many	times	I	get	into	trouble.	People
say	 to	me,	 `Shave	 the	 beard,'	 and	 I	 forget	 and	 I	 shave	 their	 heads.	 They	 say,
`What	have	you	done?'	And	I	say,	Àt	the	most	I	can	say	to	you	don't	pay	for	it	--
what	is	the	problem?'"
I	 used	 to	 sit	 in	 his	 shop,	 because	 there	 was	 always	 something	 so	 ridiculous
happening.	He	would	cut	half	the	mustache	of	somebody	and	would	say,	"Wait,	I
have	remembered	some	urgent	work."	And	the	man	would	say,	"But	I	am	caught
here	in	your	chair	and	half	the	mustache	is	gone.	I	cannot	go	out	of	the	shop!"
He	would	say,	"Simply	wait	there."
And	then	hours	will	pass	and	that	man	is	sitting	there..."What	kind	of	idiot	is	this
man?"
At	one	time	I	had	to	help	by	cutting	 the	half	mustache	of	a	man.	I	said,	"Now
you	are	free.	Just	never	come	back	here	again...	because	that	man	has	not	done
much	harm	to	you,	he	just	forgets."
So	the	barber	said,	"That's	right.	It	is	none	of	my	concern.	If	he	has	died,	he	has
died."
He	shaved	my	head	completely,	and	I	went	home.	I	passed	through	the	shop.	My
father	looked	and	all	his	customers	looked.	They	said,	"What	happened?	Whose
boy	is	this?	His	father	has	died."
My	father	said,	"He	is	my	boy	and	I	am	alive!	But	I	knew	he	was	going	to	do
something.
He	has	answered	me	well."
Wherever	I	went	people	would	ask,	"What	happened?	He	was	perfectly	healthy."
I	said,	"People	die	at	any	age.	You	are	worried	about	him,	you	are	not	worried
about	my	hairs."
That	 was	 the	 last	 thing	 my	 father	 ever	 did	 to	 me,	 because	 he	 knew	 that	 the
answer	could	be	more	dangerous!	On	the	contrary,	he	brought	a	certain	oil	that	is
used	for	growing	hair.	It	is	a	very	costly	oil,	comes	from	Bengal	out	of	a	certain
flower,	javakusum.	It	is	very	costly,	rare,	used	only	by	the	richest	people	--	and
not	by	men	but	by	women	 --	 to	keep	 the	hair	 as	 long	as	possible.	 In	Bengal	 I
have	come	across	women	whose	hair	touched	the	earth	--	five	feet	long,	six	feet
long.	That	oil	simply	functions	powerfully	on	the	hairs.
I	said,	"Now	you	understand."
He	said,	"I	have	understood.	You	use	this	oil	quickly;	in	a	few	months	your	hair
will	be	back."
I	said,	"You	created	the	whole	mess.	What	was	there	to	be	embarrassed	about?
You	could	have	said,	`She	is	my	girl.'	I	don't	have	any	objection	about	that.	But
you	 should	 not	 have	 interfered	 with	 me	 the	 way	 you	 did.	 It	 was	 violent,
barbarous.	 Rather	 than	 saying	 anything	 to	 me,	 you	 simply	 started	 cutting	my
hair."
Nobody	allows	anybody	to	be	just	himself.	And	you	have	learned	all	those	ideas
so	 deeply	 that	 it	 seems	 they	 are	 your	 ideas.	 Just	 relax.	 Forget	 all	 those
conditionings,	drop	them	like	dry	leaves	falling	from	the	trees.	It	is	better	to	be	a
naked	tree	without	any	leaves	than	to	have	plastic	leaves	and	plastic	foliage	and
plastic	flowers;	that	is	ugly.
The	original	face	simply	means	that	you	are	not	being	dominated	by	any	kind	of
morality,	 religion,	 society,	 parents,	 teachers,	 priests,	 not	 being	 dominated	 by
anyone.	 Just	 living	your	 life	 according	 to	 your	 own	 inner	 sense	 --	 you	have	 a
sensibility	--	and	you	will	have	the	original	face.
The	 young	 teacher	 wrote	 on	 the	 blackboard,	 "I	 ain't	 had	 no	 fun	 all	 summer."
Then	she	asked	the	children,	"What	is	wrong	with	that	sentence	and	what	do	I	do
to	correct	it?"
Little	Ernie	shouted	from	the	back,	"Get	a	boyfriend."
The	sentence	will	be	corrected	by	itself	--	just	get	a	boyfriend!
This	 is	 the	 simple	 original	 face;	 it	 doesn't	 bother	 about	 consequences.	 But
England	is	perhaps	the	most	attached	to	false	personalities....
Elizabeth	 and	 Philip	 had	 been	married	 for	 a	 considerable	 time,	 and	 it	 became
particularly	 apparent	 to	 Philip	 that	 Elizabeth	 had	 lost	 all	 enthusiasm	 for	 their
lovemaking.
On	a	recent	occasion,	Philip	was	making	love	to	his	wife	when	he	suddenly	said,
"Is	something	the	matter?	Are	you	hurt?"
"No,	I'm	all	right,"	answered	Elizabeth.	"Why	do	you	ask?"
"Oh,"	said	Philip,	"for	a	moment	there,	I	thought	you	moved."
People	have	become	absolutely	dead.	And	Veena	comes	 from	 that	 same	 lot	of
lunatics!
Just	enjoy	and	be	at	ease	with	yourself	and	with	the	world,	and	the	original	face
starts	shining	by	itself.
When	the	doctor	had	finished	his	examination	of	the	woman,	he	looked	up	and
said	brightly,	"Mrs.	Brown,	I	have	good	news	for	you."
"I'm	glad	of	that,	doctor,"	said	the	woman,	"But	I	am	MISS	Brown."
"Miss	Brown,"	said	 the	doctor,	without	changing	expression,	"I	have	bad	news
for	you."
There	 are	many	 people	whose	 expressions	will	 not	 change.	Now	 such	 a	 great
change	--
from	Mrs.	Brown	to	Miss	Brown	--	but	the	doctor	is	keeping	his	personality,	his
face,	absolutely	without	change.
Whenever	I	look	at	Veena	I	feel	very	sad	for	her...	no	expression,	sits	just	like	a
marble	statue.	She	is	beautiful.	She	will	make	a	good	model	if	you	want	to	make
a	marble	statue.
But	 it	 seems	she	 is	holding	back	 from	 life;	 she	 is	not	allowing	 the	playfulness
and	the	joy	that	are	our	birthright.	That	is	why	the	words	òriginal	face'	strike	her.
It	looks	immensely	intriguing	--	but	she	cannot	understand	what	it	means.	It	does
not	mean	another	 face;	 it	 simply	means	no	 face	 imposed	upon	 that	which	you
have	got	from	nature	itself.
One	 needs	 a	 little	 courage,	 a	 little	 daring,	 just	 to	 be	 himself	 whatever	 the
circumstances.
And	 on	 the	whole,	 every	 circumstance	 and	 every	 consequence	 --	 even	 if	 you
have	 to	 suffer	 --	 will	 enrich	 your	 individuality,	 will	 make	 your	 intelligence
sharper,	will	 give	 you	 a	 sense	 of	 direction	which	 comes	 from	your	 own	 inner
being	and	is	not	given	by	some	guide	from	outside.
Question	3
BELOVED	MASTER,
EVERY	 TIME	 I	 MANAGE	 TO	 CLUTCH	 A	 STRAW	 YOU	 STEP	 ON	 MY
FINGERS.
MY	 BRAIN	 IS	 TOTALLY	 SCRAMBLED.	 MY	 WHOLE	 WORLD	 SEEMS
UNREAL.
YOU	GOT	ME	INTO	THIS	MESS	--	ARE	YOU	GOING	TO	GET	ME	OUT,
OR	IS
THAT	UP	TO	ME?
Prem	 Nayana,	 the	 first	 thing	 is:	 I	 am	 going	 to	 get	 you	 into	 a	 deeper	 mess,
because	unless	you	touch	the	rock	bottom	of	your	mess,	it	is	very	difficult	to	get
out	of	it.
Do	 you	 know	 how	 to	 swim?	Have	 you	 ever	 drowned	 in	 a	 river?	 --	 and	what
happens?
You	have	 to	 go	 first	 to	 the	bottom	and	 then	 at	 the	bottom	you	 are	 thrown	up.
That	is	why	dead	people	know	the	secret	but	the	living	people	don't.	You	will	not
see	 any	 dead	 person	 drowning	 --	 he	 simply	 floats,	 and	 living	 people	 get
drowned.	They	say	they	don't	know	swimming,	but	dead	people	are	swimming
perfectly	well!
So	as	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned	 I	 am	not	going	 to	get	you	out	of	 the	mess.	 I	will
manage	every	way	to	take	you	to	the	rock	bottom,	then	you	will	pop	up	on	your
own.
And	what	do	you	mean,	"Every	time	I	manage	to	clutch	a	straw	you	step	on	my
fingers"?
Just	don't	clutch	at	any	straw.	It	is	so	easy...!	And	you	know	me	perfectly	well.	I
will	not	let	you	clutch	at	any	straw,	because	those	straws	are	not	going	to	save
you;	I	will	step	on	your	fingers.	You	cannot	make	me	stop,	but	you	can	do	one
thing:	stop	clutching	at	straws.
She	is	speaking	in	a	very	poetic	way.	To	translate	it	into	pragmatic	language,	she
is	 saying	 that	 whenever	 she	 starts	 believing	 in	 some	 principle,	 I	 demolish	 it.
Whenever	she	starts	creating	a	system	of	beliefs	and	finds	a	consolation	in	that
belief	system,	I	destroy	it.
My	way	of	creating	goes	through	a	long	passage	of	destroying,	because	the	real
work	 is	 to	 destroy	 --	 and	 then	 you	will	 come	 out	 of	 it.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 be
created.	You	are	there	already,	dumped	with	so	much	garbage	that	I	have	to	take
that	garbage	away.	And	you	are	clutching...!
Never	try	to	make	a	system	of	beliefs	out	of	what	I	am	saying.	If	you	understand
me	 well,	 I	 am	 not	 a	 system	 maker	 and	 I	 don't	 want	 believers,	 I	 don't	 want
followers.	I	don't	want	anybody	to	think	that	I	am	the	savior.
I	don't	even	shave	my	own	beard!	Nirvano	goes	on	saying	to	me,	"I	can	trim	it	a
little."
I	say,	"No,	absolutely	no!	These	are	my	original	hairs.	I	have	never	shaved	my
beard.
They	are	 the	 same	original	hairs	as	when	 they	 first	had	started	growing	 in	my
youth,	and	I	am	going	to	keep	them	to	the	very	last."
She	feels	worried	that	they	will	become	thinner,	that	this	beard	will	become	too
long.	I	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	Even	if	it	starts	touching	the	ground,	I	am	always
in	favor	of	the	original."
One	very	essential	thing	which	I	have	been	telling	you,	but	I	have	to	repeat	it,	is:
Feel	me	more	than	my	words,	feel	my	presence	more	than	my	presentation.	I	am
not	a	philosopher.	I	am	incurably	a	mystic.	There	is	no	medicine	which	can	cure
me.
But	 if	 you	 go	 on...	 and	 this	 has	 happened	with	 thousands	 of	 people;	 in	 these
thirty	 years	 I	 must	 have	 come	 across	 millions	 of	 people,	 but	 they	 were	 all
seeking	 some	 savior	 --	 and	 I	 walked	 on	 their	 fingers.	 They	 were	 all	 seeking
somebody	 to	 take	 away	 their	 responsibility,	without	 knowing	 that	 the	moment
your	responsibility	is	gone,	your	freedom	is	also	gone.	They	exist	together;	they
are	inseparable.
If	 you	 want	 freedom,	 you	 have	 to	 accept	 every	 responsibility.	 If	 you	 want
freedom,	you	don't	have	to	clutch	with	your	hands	onto	any	belief,	philosophy,
religion.	You	just	be	yourself.	Why	can't	you	enjoy	yourself	consciously?	There
is	no	intrinsic	necessity	for	having	a	belief.
Thousands	 of	 people	 have	 come	 to	 me	 and	 gone.	 There	 was	 a	 time	 I	 was
surrounded	by	 Jainas.	Unfortunately	 I	was	born	 in	 a	 Jaina	 family,	 so	naturally
my	 first	 audience	 was	 of	 Jainas.	 They	 were	 immensely	 happy	 because	 I	 was
saying	 things	 which	 they	 had	 never	 thought	 about,	 I	 was	 interpreting	 their
scriptures	in	a	totally	new	way.	They	had	great	hope	in	me.	They	thought	that...
Their	religion	has	remained	very	small;	it	is	the	smallest	religion	in	India.	And	it
is	 the	 ancientmost	 religion	 --	 it	 is	 more	 ancient	 than	 Hinduism.	 But	 what
calamity	has	happened?	Even	today	there	are	not	more	than	thirty-five	lakhs	of
Jainas	in	a	country	of	nine	hundred	million	people.	What	has	happened?	Jainism
is	 at	 least	 seven	 thousand	 years	 old	 --	 that	 is	 at	 least.	 It	 can	 be	 more,	 older,
because	in	Harrappur	and	in	Mohanjodro	two	ancient	cities	have	been	excavated,
and	Jaina	statues	have	been	found	in	those	cities.
Now	 it	 is	a	 scientific	 fact	 that	 those	cities	were	destroyed	somewhere	between
seven	 thousand	 and	 ten	 thousand	 years	 ago,	 and	 that	 is	 a	 very	 conservative
estimate.	But	even	if	we	take	that	estimate,	in	ten	thousand	years	the	population
of	the	Jainas	has	remained	negligible	--	thirty-five	lakhs.	That	is	not	worth	any
consideration!	That	 is	why	 in	 the	great	 religions	of	 the	world	 Jainism	 is	never
counted	 --	 never	 counted	with	Christianity,	 Islam,	Hinduism,	Buddhism.	They
are	great	religions,	and	they	are	all	very	new	as	far	as	Jainism	is	concerned.
Because	of	my	interpretations	they	had	a	tremendous	hope	in	me,	that	perhaps	I
may	 spread	 their	 religion	 to	 the	 whole	 world,	 take	 the	 message	 to	 the	 whole
world.	But	 they	were	unaware	 --	 they	were	my	 first	 audience	 --	 they	were	not
aware	what	kind	of	man	I	am:	I	cannot	support	anything	which	my	heart	is	not
ready	to	support.
So	a	few	things	I	have	supported	in	Jainism	--	people	were	very	happy.	But	the
moment	I	started	telling	about	things	which	I	cannot	support,	they	were	shocked.
I	have	walked	on	their	fingers.	Just	a	small	thing	--	which	is	so	rational	--	and	the
Jaina	community...	their	supreme	command	decided	to	expel	me.	I	wrote	a	letter
to	them	saying,	"Don't	be	stupid.
I	expel	you	all	from	my	life.	You	don't	have	to	expel	me;	you	cannot.	I	am	no
more	part	of	you."
And	what	was	 the	reason?	I	addressed	a	Jaina	conference	and	 told	 them,	"You
are	the	oldest	vegetarians	of	the	world.	You	eat	the	purest	food,	but	you	have	not
produced	a	single	Nobel	prize	winner.	What	is	your	contribution	to	art,	to	music,
to	science,	to	mathematics,	to	painting,	to	poetry?	What	is	your	contribution	to
the	world?	There	are	the	Jews	who	get	forty	percent	of	all	the	Nobel	prizes,	and
the	rest	of	the	world	has	to	live	only	on	sixty	percent."
And	I	told	them,	"The	reason	is	--	I	have	deeply	enquired	into	the	matter	--	that
in	vegetarian	food	something	is	missing	which	is	necessary	for	intelligence.	That
is	why	you	have	remained	retarded."
Vegetarian	 food	 is	 not	 complete,	 and	 particularly	 for	 intelligence	 certain
vitamins	are	missing.	Those	vitamins	can	be	found	 in	meat.	Certainly	I	cannot
support	 non-vegetarian	 food.	 Even	 though	 it	 gives	 you	 better	 intelligence,	 it
destroys	your	very	soul;	it	makes	you	cruel,	violent,	inhuman.
So	I	suggested	to	them,	"I	have	found	something	which	should	be	immediately
accepted	if	any	intelligence	is	left	in	you,	and	that	is	eating	eggs	which	are	not
fertilized,	non-fertilized	eggs.	They	are	not	 living,	 there	 is	no	life.	If	you	leave
them	 they	will	 simply	 rot	 and	 disappear.	 There	 is	 no	 life	 in	 them	because	 the
male	sperm	has	not	entered	into	the	mother's	egg;	the	mother	has	grown	the	egg
without	 the	male	 sperm.	 It	 is	 not	 alive,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 harm	 in	 eating	 it.	 It	 is
vegetarian."
Suddenly	they	were	very	angry.	I	am	suggesting	for	them	to	eat	eggs,	and	they
are	afraid	even	to	eat	tomatoes,	because	tomatoes	look	like	meat	--	just	the	color,
poor	tomatoes...
How	 can	 they	 conceive	 of	 themselves	 eating	 non-fertilized	 eggs?	 Somebody
stood	 up	 and	 said,	 "Maybe	 that	 is	 right	 that	 they	 are	 not	 living,	 but	 they	 are
coming	from	animals."
I	said,	"So	 is	milk;	what	 is	 the	difference?	If	you	are	avoiding	anything	 that	 is
coming	from	any	living	being,	your	children	are	from	the	very	beginning	against
Jainism;	they	are	drinking	their	mother's	milk.	And	you	are	drinking	milk"	--	and
Jainas	 drink	 milk	 and	 milk-made	 products	 more	 than	 anybody.	 They	 cannot
enjoy	 meat	 and	 non-vegetarian	 foods,	 so	 to	 substitute	 they	 have	 invented
thousands	of	ways	of	delicacies	made	of	milk	products.
But	the	very	word	ègg'	was	enough	for	them	to	leave	me	completely;	the	Jainas
disappeared.	 I	was	 dangerous!	 I	was	 teaching	 something	 that	 they	 have	 never
done	in	ten	thousand	years.	No	scripture	of	theirs	suggests	anything	about	it.	But
they	were	 absolutely	 unable	 to	 answer	my	 questions	 --	 "If	 you	 are	 eating	 the
purest	 food,	 your	 intelligence	 should	 have	 been	 the	 purest	 flame,	 the	 sharpest
genius,	the	most	creative,	but	it	has	not	been	so."	And	immediately	--	they	had
come	 to	me	because	 they	 thought	 I	was	 supporting	 their	 system,	but	 I	 am	not
supporting	anybody's	system	--	they	disappeared.
Then	the	second	gang	was	of	Gandhians.	For	a	little	while	it	was	okay,	but	the
moment	 I	 criticized	Mahatma	Gandhi...	 nobody	had	 any	 answer	 for	 it,	 but	 the
Gandhians	 disappeared.	 I	 had	 stepped	 on	 their	 fingers!	And	 as	 the	Gandhians
disappeared,	 immediately	 socialists,	 communists	 gathered	 around	 me,	 not
knowing	that	the	same	is	going	to	be	their	fate.
Of	course,	from	each	group	a	few	courageous	people	have	remained.	A	few	Jains
have	 remained,	 a	 few	 Gandhians	 have	 remained,	 who	 had	 the	 intelligence	 to
understand	that	I	am	not	against	anybody,	but	I	cannot	support	anything	which	is
fundamentally	wrong,	and	is	harmful	to	human	life.
The	communists	were	very	happy,	because	they	were	in	search	of	a	man...	The
only	calamity	for	the	communists	in	India	is	that	they	don't	have	a	saintly	figure.
They	 don't	 attract	 the	 masses,	 and	 the	 masses	 will	 never	 be	 attracted	 to
communists,	because	 they	cannot	 think	 that	 someone	who	 is	 speaking	 to	 them
and	also	 smoking	a	 cigarette	 and	putting	 it	 in	 the	ashtray	 in	between	can	be	a
leader.	This	is	impossible	for	the	Indian	masses.	And	because	communists	don't
believe	 in	God,	 are	 against	 all	 religions,	 Indians	 cannot	 have	 any	 communion
with	them.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 that	 in	 the	 Russian	 revolution	 there	 was	 one	 Indian	 as
important	as	Lenin	himself.	His	name	was	Edmund	Roy;	he	was	an	international
figure	 in	 the	 communist	 movement.	 Thinking	 that	 he	 was	 so	 much	 respected
internationally	by	the	communists,	he	came	to	India,	back	to	his	home,	and	here
he	came	in	conflict	with	Mahatma	Gandhi	 immediately.	He	was	right	on	many
more	points	 than	Mahatma	Gandhi,	but	 that	 is	not	how	 the	masses	decide.	He
smoked	 cigarettes,	 he	 drank	 vodka,	 he	 has	 lived	 in	 Russia,	 he	 believed	 in
violence:	he	is	intolerable!
So	 when	 the	 communists	 saw	 that	 the	 Gandhians	 were	 angry	 with	 me,	 they
thought	 it	 was	 an	 opportunity.	 If	 I	 can	 be	 their	 representative,	 it	 will	 be	 an
immense	help	 for	 them	 to	gain	power	 in	 India,	because	 they	have	heard	 that	 I
don't	believe	 in	any	 religions;	 they	have	heard	 there	 is	no	God,	no	heaven,	no
hell.	They	felt,	"This	seems	to	be	perfectly	agreeing	with	us."
In	fact,	my	emphasis	was	far	deeper	than	their	own	philosophy.	So	when	I	said
that	there	are	no	religions,	but	there	is	something	higher	than	religion	and	that	is
religiousness;	 there	 is	 no	 God	 as	 a	 person,	 but	 as	 a	 presence,	 and	 the	 whole
universe	 is	 full	 of	 godliness...	 I	 walked	 on	 their	 fingers!	 Immediately	 all
communists	 disappeared	 from	my	 audience.	But	 a	 few	 courageous	 souls	 have
remained,	 and	 have	 become	 accustomed	 to	my	 stepping	 on	 their	 fingers.	And
they	have	learned	one	secret:	With	me	it	is	not	ideas	that	matter.
With	me	it	is	your	transformation	that	matters.
And	your	 transformation	 is	possible	only	 if	your	mind	slowly,	slowly	becomes
calm	and	quiet.
So	now	I	have	my	own	people.	But	once	in	a	while	a	stranger	accidentally	gets
caught.
Now	 I	 have	 been	 enquiring	 about	 that	 sannyasin	 Piyoosh,	 whether	 he	 has
reached	 Igatpuri	 and	Goenka	or	 not;	 otherwise	 he	 should	 be	 loaded	 in	 a	 truck
and	sent	to	Igatpuri.
This	is	not	his	place.	But	he	is	hiding.	He	has	not	approached	the	office.	He	has
not	 approached	 Swami	 Dhyan	 Yogi,	 who	 initiates	 sannyasins,	 to	 return	 his
papers.	 So	 once	 in	 a	 while	 somebody	 who	 does	 not	 understand	 my	 way	 of
working,	gets	into	unnecessary	trouble.
I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 how	 many	 people	 are	 meditating;	 it	 is	 not	 my
responsibility.	I	am	fulfilled	and	absolutely	content.	If	death	comes	this	moment
I	will	not	even	tell	death,
"Wait	 a	 few	minutes	more;	 let	me	 finish	my	 speech."	What	 is	 the	point?	 I	 am
always	 ready;	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 sentence	 I	 can	 stop.	 I	 have	 no	 desires,	 no
longings,	 no	 stupid	 superiority	 complex	 of	 being	 a	 prophet	 or	 a	messiah	 or	 a
messenger	of	God.	That	is	why	I	can	speak	to	you	now	heart	to	heart.
When	I	call	you	my	people,	it	simply	means	you	are	no	longer	Hindus,	no	longer
Christians,	no	longer	Jews,	that	you	have	dropped	all	that	rubbish	away,	that	you
have	come	to	me	as	an	individual	on	your	own	authority.	And	I	will	not	give	you
new	chains	to	console	you.
You	 are	 saying	 to	 me,	 "You	 got	 me	 into	 this	 mess."	 You	 are	 wrong,	 Prem
Nayana,	you	got	 into	 this	mess	on	your	own	accord.	 I	never	go	and	knock	on
people's	 doors	 --	 but	 it	 is	 so	 easy	 to	 throw	 away	 the	 responsibility,	 without
knowing	 you	 are	 throwing	 away	 your	 freedom	 too.	 I	 cannot	 accept	 the
responsibility	because	I	cannot	destroy	your	freedom.	I	love	you	too	much.
And	now	you	are	saying,	"You	got	me	into	this	mess	--	are	you	going	to	get	me
out,	or	is	it	up	to	me?"	It	has	been	always	up	to	you	whether	to	get	into	the	mess
or	get	out	of	it.	It	 is	none	of	my	business.	I	have	never	bothered....	Millions	of
people	have	passed	by	my	side,	people	who	were	ready	to	die	for	me,	or	were
ready	to	kill	me	just	if	I	said	something	that	went	against	their	prejudices	--	the
same	people.
It	 has	 been	 a	 tremendously	 rich	 life	 of	 experiences,	 but	 now	 I	 am	 absolutely
finished	 with	 taking	 anybody's	 responsibility,	 destroying	 anybody's	 freedom.
You	 are	 here	 on	 your	 own	 accord.	 Whatever	 happens	 to	 you,	 you	 are
responsible;	it	is	happening	out	of	your	freedom.	I	respect	your	freedom	so	much
that	I	cannot	take	the	responsibility.
Just	meditate	over	 the	whole	matter,	and	you	will	see	this	 is	not	a	place	where
one	gets	into	a	mess;	this	is	a	place	where	we	dry-clean	you!	All	the	mess	that
you	bring	with	you,	we	take	it	away...	slowly,	so	it	does	not	hurt	you	too	much.
But	one	has	to	be	very	alert	and	very	intelligent	if	he	wants	to	remain	with	me.	I
am	not	here	for	retarded	idiots.
The	worried	wife	 came	 to	 the	 doctor	 and	 said,	 "Doctor,	 I	 don't	 know	what	 is
wrong	 with	 my	 husband.	 He	 has	 sudden	 changes.	 Monday	 he	 liked	 milk-
pudding,	 Tuesday	 he	 liked	 milk-pudding,	 Wednesday	 he	 liked	 milk-pudding,
Thursday	 he	 liked	 milk-pudding,	 and	 all	 of	 a	 sudden,	 today	 he	 does	 not	 like
milk-pudding."
This	is	not	the	place	for	such	idiots,	who	can't	understand	simple	things.
Moishe	Finkelstein	met	his	old	friend	Sam	Feigenbaum	on	the	street	in	Moscow.
"Did	you	hear,"	said	Moishe,	"that	old	Yossel	Mosovith	has	died?"
"No,"	said	Sam,	"I	did	not	even	hear	that	he	had	been	arrested."
A	 man	 was	 having	 his	 fiftieth	 birthday	 and	 his	 wife	 wanted	 to	 give	 him
something	really	special.	They	had	been	married	for	 twenty-five	years	and	had
the	perfect	marriage.
"What's	something	you	have	never	had	on	your	birthday?"	she	asked.
He	looked	coy	and	she	said,	"Come	on,	it	is	okay	--	anything	you	want."
"Well,"	he	said,	"I	have	never	had	a	whore."
"Okay,"	she	said,	"I	will	get	you	the	best."
So	 she	 booked	 him	 a	 very	 classy	 whore	 for	 the	 whole	 night.	When	 he	 came
home	the	next	day	she	asked,	"Did	you	enjoy	yourself?"
"Yes,"	he	said	shyly.
"Well,	did	she	do	anything	I	don't	do?"
"Yes,"	he	said	modestly.
"Well,	what	was	it?"	she	said.
"She	moaned,"	said	the	husband.
So	 the	 next	 time	 they	were	making	 love,	 the	wife	 kept	 saying,	 "Shall	 I	moan
yet?"
"Not	yet,"	he	would	say.
Then	 finally	 he	 was	 about	 to	 climax	 and	 he	 said,	 "Okay	 start	 moaning,	 start
moaning!"
So	the	wife	said,	"Oh	my	God!	I	have	had	a	terrible	day,	your	mother	came,	the
vacuum	cleaner	broke,	my	hair	is	a	mess...."
Prem	 Nayana,	 this	 is	 a	 place	 of	 laughter	 and	 love,	 of	 joy	 and	 celebration.
According	 to	me	 it	 is	 the	 only	 holy	 place	 in	 the	world.	 Just	 be	 careful	 not	 to
clutch	any	straw,	because	then	I	cannot	resist	the	temptation	of	stepping	on	your
fingers.	The	responsibility	is	yours.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	On	the	master's	operating	table
14	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709145
ShortTitle:
PILGR17
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
83
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 WHEN	 YOU	 SAID	 THAT	 I	 WAS	 "COMING	 ALONG
FINE,	 SLOW	 BUT	 STEADY."	 FOR	 ME,	 IT	 WAS	 A	 BEAUTIFUL
STATEMENT.	BUT	IT
TOUCHED	AN	OLD	WOUND	THAT	I	WAS	HARDLY	AWARE	OF.
THE	WOUND	COMES	FROM	SCHOOL	AND	BEING	OFTEN	TOLD	THAT	I
WAS
SLOW,	 A	 BIT	 DIM,	 NOT	 VERY	 INTELLIGENT	 AND	 DEFINITELY
NEEDED	TO
TRY	HARDER.
AND	LISTENING	TO	YOU	I	HAD	THE	FEELING	THAT	MAYBE	ALL	THIS
WAS
TRUE.	IS	IT?
Vimal,	 it	 is	 of	 great	 understanding	 on	 your	 part	 that	 you	 have	 not	 blamed	me
because	I	have	touched	your	old	wound.	It	hurts.	But	unless	all	the	wounds	are
opened	 to	 the	 sun,	 to	 the	wind,	 they	will	 go	on	growing	underneath;	 they	 can
become	cancerous.
Many	 people,	 many	 more	 than	 the	 people	 who	 are	 suffering	 from	 physical
cancer,	are	suffering	from	psychological	cancer.	And	the	only	way	to	remove	a
psychological	cancer	is	to	expose	it.	If	there	is	love	and	trust,	then	you	will	not
start	getting	angry	or	hurt,	because	I	am	nothing	but	your	physician.	And	just	out
of	my	love	I	have	to	hit	you	--
sometimes	very	hard,	because	the	crust	that	is	covering	your	wound	has	become
very	thick.
Your	question	reminded	me	of	Veena.	She	had	asked	a	question	this	morning.	I
had	 looked	all	 around	 --	 she	was	not	here.	Although	 I	 knew	why	 she	was	not
here,	I	have	also	enquired.	And	the	reason	she	has	given	is	that	she	woke	up	with
a	stiff	neck.	That	need	not	prevent	you	from	coming	here.	You	have	a	stiff	neck
anyway!	Then	she	has	not	 turned	up	to	work	the	whole	day,	and	her	boyfriend
has	been	saying	that	she	is	very	upset.
First	 you	 ask	 a	 question,	without	 ever	 thinking	 that	 you	 are	 putting	me	 into	 a
situation:	either	 I	have	 to	 lie	 just	 to	console	you,	 just	 to	 inflate	your	ego...	but
that	way	I	am	not	your	friend;	that	way	I	am	your	greatest	enemy.	That	is	what
all	the	priests,	all	the	religions,	all	your	leaders	have	been	doing	for	thousands	of
years,	and	I	don't	want	to	do	it.	But	I	can	see	why	they	were	doing	it:	you	were
very	happy	with	them.	They	were	giving	you	more	and	more	doses	of	opium	to
keep	you	fast	asleep	and	consoled.
Because	I	have	to	say	the	truth,	it	is	bound	to	hurt	you,	sometimes	very	deeply.
And	I	can	understand;	the	pain	that	has	been	repressed	suddenly	uncoils	within
you.	 But	 if	 rather	 than	 bringing	 understanding	 it	 brings	 an	 upset,	 then	 it	 was
better	 you	 had	 not	 asked	 the	 question.	 You	 cannot	 expect	 from	me	 that	 I	 am
going	 to	 nourish	 your	 ego,	 protect	 your	wounds,	 console	 you	 in	 your	misery,
suffering,	insincerity,	helping	you	to	be	a	beautiful	hypocrite.
She	 is	 again	 not	 here;	 I	 have	 looked	 around....	 And	 it	 is	 not	 that	 she	 is	 not
hearing	 what	 I	 am	 saying;	 her	 room	 is	 just	 close	 by.	 She	 has	 heard	 in	 the
morning	--	the	stiff	neck	came	later	on	--	and	she	is	hearing	right	now.
But	 you	 cannot	 understand	my	difficulty.	 If	 I	 don't	 care	 about	 you,	 then	 I	 can
simply	say	things	which	console	you	but	don't	transform	you.	If	I	love	you,	then
I	have	to	be	a	surgeon	and	I	have	sometimes	to	operate	on	you.
You	 laugh	 so	beautifully	when	you	hear	of	Zen	masters	hitting	 their	disciples,
and	if	Veena	goes	on	like	this	she	will	have	unnecessarily	forced	me	to	carry	a
staff	too.	I	have	never	carried	anything	in	my	hand	in	my	whole	life,	but	a	friend
has	sent	a	beautiful	staff,	which	is	waiting.	Either	Veena	gets	okay	by	tomorrow
morning,	 or	 I	 will	 have	 to	 use	 for	 the	 first	 time	 a	 very	 gross	 and	 primitive
method.
I	hit	you	as	sophisticatedly	as	possible,	as	playfully	as	possible.	But	 if	you	are
here	not	to	be	transformed,	but	are	just	hanging	around	unconsciously,	not	even
aware	why	you	are	here,	not	being	aware	of	the	pilgrimage,	then	your	being	here
or	not	being	here	is	almost	the	same.	One	thing	you	should	remember:	by	your
being	upset	you	cannot	change	me.
You	can	simply	force	me	to	use	primitive	methods	that	Zen	masters	used.	Please
don't	force	me!	And	the	only	way	is	that	whenever	I	say	to	you...	even	if	it	hurts,
my	purpose	is	not	to	hurt	you.	When	I	hurt	you	it	is	almost	a	necessity.
Vimal	 has	 shown	 immense	 understanding.	 He	 is	 not	 complaining	 that	 I	 have
touched	his	wound.	That	should	be	the	attitude	of	everyone	who	has	come	to	be
part	of	this	caravan,	who	has	accepted	a	totally	new	way	which	has	never	existed
before,	and	a	totally	new	style	of	life,	of	utter	freedom	and	love.
But	you	have	to	be	reminded	continuously	that	even	love	is	not	just	simply	a	bed
of	roses.
And	the	more	you	love	me,	the	more	I	am	going	to	be	hard	with	you.	The	more
you	understand	me,	the	more	I	can	operate	on	you.	You	should	remember	that	all
my	 sannyasins	 are	 just	 on	 the	 operating	 table	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	 If	 you
have	a	stiff	neck,	good;	it	will	be	operated	on!
Vimal,	 whatever	 your	 teacher	 said	 to	 you	 is	 almost	 a	 universal	 problem.
Teachers	 hurt	 their	 students,	 not	 out	 of	 love,	 not	 to	 help	 them,	 but	 to	 feel	 a
certain	power.
There	 is	 a	 very	 beautiful	 historical	 incident	 in	 the	 life	 of	 one	 of	 the	 great
emperors	of	India.	He	had	captured	his	own	father,	imprisoned	him,	because	the
father	 was	 living	 too	 long.	 And	 he	 could	 not	 wait	 anymore;	 he	 himself	 was
getting	old.	By	the	time	his	father	dies	he	will	not	be	able	to	live	longer	himself
to	dominate	the	whole	kingdom.	The	father	has	to	be	removed.
Politics	knows	nothing	about	love.
The	 father	was	 imprisoned	 by	 his	 own	 son	 in	 jail.	And	 strangely	 enough,	 the
next	day	 the	 father	 simply	 sent	a	message,	 "There	 is	no	problem;	 I	have	 ruled
enough.	You	need	not	have	taken	so	much	trouble	to	arrest	me.	You	could	have
simply	said	it	to	me.	But	now	what	has	happened	has	happened.	I	would	just	like
you	to	send	thirty	students,	small	boys,	whom	I	can	teach	the	holy	KORAN"	--
their	religious	book.
When	 the	 message	 reached	 the	 court	 of	 his	 son,	 who	 had	 now	 become	 the
emperor	of	the	whole	of	India...	The	son,	despite	being	a	ruthless,	violent,	ugly
man,	still	seems	to	have	had	tremendous	insight	 into	 the	psychology	of	man	--
and	that	is	almost	fifteen	hundred	years	before	Sigmund	Freud.
He	said	to	the	court,	"Do	you	see	this	letter	from	my	father?	For	what	does	he
want	 these	 thirty	 children?	He	 cannot	 live	without	 dominating	 somebody,	 and
the	best	way	is	to	dominate	small	children	because	they	are	so	helpless."
After	 fifteen	hundred	years	Sigmund	Freud	came	 to	 the	 same	conclusion	 --	he
had	 no	 idea	 of	 this	 incident	 --	 that	 the	 people	who	 teach	 in	 the	 schools,	who
choose	 the	 profession	 of	 teaching,	 somehow	 are	 people	 who	 don't	 have	 the
courage	 to	 go	 into	 politics	 but	 still	 want	 to	 dominate.	 That	 is	 one	 thing	 to
remember	about	teachers.	In	my	vision	not	everybody	should	be	allowed	to	be	a
teacher.	It	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	things	in	life.	Only	people	who	have	a
meditative	 understanding	 and	 no	 desire	 to	 dominate	 should	 be	 allowed	 to	 be
teachers.	Then	they	will	not	hurt	others,	just	to	feel	powerful	themselves.
I	had	graduated	from	the	university,	I	had	topped	the	whole	university.	I	simply
went	directly	to	the	education	minister	and	I	told	him,	"I	need	to	be	appointed	as
a	professor	in	a	certain	university."
He	said,	"You	are	strange.	You	should	have	applied."
I	said,	"Applications	cannot	represent	me.	I	have	come	myself."
But	he	said,	"You	need	qualifications."
I	said,	"I	have	all	the	qualifications	that	you	need,	and	I	have	much	more."
He	said,	"What	is	much	more?"
I	said,	"Look	into	my	eyes.	I	have	no	desire	to	dominate	the	way	you	have	the
desire	 to	 dominate.	 I	 am	 not	 a	 politician.	 And	 just	 because	 I	 don't	 have	 any
desire	to	dominate,	I	am	qualified	to	be	a	teacher."
He	 said,	 "Strange	 argument.	 No	 application,	 no	 certificates,	 no	 moral
certificates..."
I	placed	my	certificates	before	him	and	I	said,	"These	are	the	certificates.	But	if
you	cannot	see	me,	what	will	you	be	able	to	see	in	these	certificates?	And	I	am
saying	 to	 you	 that	 I	 simply	 qualify	 on	 a	 ground	 which	 will	 be	 absolutely
necessary	in	the	future	for	every	teacher."
He	 looked	 into	 my	 certificates	 and	 he	 said	 to	 me,	 "Speak	 quietly!	 There	 are
clerks	and	typists	and	other	departments	by	the	side."
I	 said,	 "I	 don't	 care	 about	 anybody.	 You	 just	 give	 me	 the	 appointment	 in	 the
university	I	want;	otherwise	I	am	going	to	give	a	press	conference	and	you	will
be	 unnecessarily	 embarrassed,	 because	 as	 far	 as	 educational	 qualifications	 are
concerned	they	are	amply	fulfilled.	What	more	do	you	want	than	a	man	who	has
topped	 the	 whole	 university?	 What	 more	 do	 you	 want	 than	 a	 man	 who	 has
received	as	many	marks	as	nobody	else	before?
What	 do	 you	 want	 from	 a	 man	 who	 has	 this	 certificate	 from	 one	 of	 his
examiners?"	It	was	just	a	letter	written	to	me	saying,	"For	my	whole	life	I	have
been	 waiting	 just	 to	 see	 something	 like	 the	 way	 you	 have	 answered	 the
questions.	In	my	whole	life	I	have	never	given	the	first	class	award	to	anybody."
He	was	well	known	all	over	the	country,	particularly	in	this	part,	because	I	think
he	 belonged	 to	 Poona	 or	 nearby,	 Professor	 Ranade.	 He	 was	 at	 that	 time	 the
greatest	professor	of	philosophy	in	India.	In	his	letter	he	said,	"I	wanted	to	give
you	one	hundred	percent	marks,	but	I	hesitated	because	people	may	think	that	I
am	somehow	favoring	you.
So	please	forgive	me,	I	am	giving	you	only	ninety-nine	percent.	And	the	reason	I
am	 so	 impressed	 by	 your	 answers	 is	 that	 they	 are	 not	 from	 the	 textbooks.	 It
seems	you	have	never	read	your	textbooks;	it	seems	that	you	are	the	only	person
I	have	come	across"	--
and	 he	 was	 an	 old	 man,	 a	 retired	 professor	 --	 "who	 has	 responded	 to	 the
questions	spontaneously."
I	said	to	the	education	minister,	"What	more	do	you	want?"
He	 became	 so	 afraid	 when	 I	 told	 him	 about	 the	 press	 conference	 that	 he
immediately	wrote	the	order.	He	said,	"It	will	reach."
I	said,	"I	want	it	to	be	given	to	me	to	take	with	me	when	I	go	myself.	What	is	the
need	to	waste	money	in	postage?	You	give	it	to	me."
And	he	became	so	freaked	out!	He	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	bureaucratic
way.	It	has	to	go	through	the	post."
I	said,	"I	don't	want	to	support	any	bureaucracy.	You	give	me	the	order,	and	you
can	send	another	copy	of	the	order	through	your	bureaucratic	channel."
Just	out	of	 fear	he	gave	 it	 to	me	with	 trembling	hands.	 I	 laughed	saying,	"It	 is
strange.
Are	you	taking	my	interview	or	am	I	taking	your	interview?"
And	he	was	right.	I	reached	before	the	order	came	through	the	mail,	and	when	I
gave	 the	order	 to	 the	vice-chancellor	of	 the	university	he	said,	"But	 I	have	not
received	anything."
I	said,	"This	is	the	original.	You	will	receive	the	true	copy."
He	said,	"This	is	just	absolutely	absurd.	The	original	has	to	come	to	me."
I	said,	"It	has	come."
He	 became	 afraid	 that	 there	 may	 be	 some	 trouble	 later	 on	 for	 him.	 He
immediately	told	me,	"I	have	to	phone	to	the	education	minister."
I	said,	"You	can	phone."
And	he	phoned.	He	said,	"This	is	a	strange	case,	unprecedented.	The	order,	the
original	order,	has	been	brought	by	the	person	himself,	and	he	says	the	true	copy
is	 coming	 through	 the	 bureaucracy	 --	 whenever	 it	 comes	 it	 will	 come.	What
should	I	do?"
The	education	minister	said,	"Exactly	what	I	have	done!	Simply	do	what	he	says;
otherwise,	 from	the	very	first	day	you	will	be	creating	 trouble	 for	yourself.	So
just	do	whatsoever	he	says.	The	true	copy	is	coming	by	the	bureaucracy."
It	came	after	seven	days.
Teachers	 are	 psychologically	 attracted	 towards	 the	 profession	 for	 the	 simple
desire	of	dominating,	insulting,	humiliating	--	not	out	of	love,	not	out	of	respect,
not	out	of	concern	for	your	growth.
So	 it	 is	 good	 that	you	got	your	wound	opened	up.	 It	 has	been	created	 in	your
school,	 where	 they	were	 telling	 you	 that	 you	were	 "slow,	 a	 bit	 dim,	 not	 very
intelligent	 and	 definitely	 needed	 to	 try	 harder."	 Now	 you	 are	 saying,	 "And
listening	to	you	I	had	the	feeling	that	maybe	all	this	was	true.	Is	it?"
No.	Something	of	 it	was	 true	 and	 something	of	 it	was	not	 true.	 I	will	 have	 to
separate	the	truth	from	the	untruth.
You	are	not	unintelligent,	you	are	not	dim;	 these	statements	are	ugly	from	any
teacher	 towards	any	student.	These	are	 the	 statements	which	make	people	dim
and	unintelligent,	 because	 repeated	 often	 in	 every	 class,	 again	 and	 again,	 they
become	a	kind	of	hypnosis.
They	 start	 believing	 in	 them.	 And	 once	 a	 person	 starts	 believing	 that	 he	 is
unintelligent,	dim,	he	starts	acting	also	in	an	unintelligent	way,	because	he	has	to
prove	the	idea	that	he	has	been	given.
But	as	far	as	your	being	slow	is	concerned,	they	were	absolutely	right.	You	are
slow,	you	are	lazy.	And	your	laziness	is	not	bone	lazy;	otherwise	I	will	forgive	it.
You	are	just	lazy	by	habit.	Bone	lazy	is	someone	who	cannot	help	himself;	from
his	very	bones	he	is	lazy.
I	 am	bone	 lazy,	 so	 I	 know	perfectly	well	what	 bone	 lazy	means.	 I	 have	never
done	anything.	How	I	have	managed	my	life	I	sometimes	wonder.	People	have
been	doing	so	much,	and	still	they	cannot	manage	their	lives.	It	is	just	a	miracle;
I	have	simply	not	done	anything.
One	of	my	friends	came	from	the	Soviet	Union	to	see	me.	He	shook	hands	and
he	told	me,	"You	should	never	go	to	the	Soviet	Union."
I	said,	"Why?"
He	 said,	 "Your	hands!	Anybody	 shaking	hands	with	you	will	 immediately	 say
that	 you	don't	 belong	 to	 the	proletariat,	 you	 are	 a	 capitalist,	 because	you	have
never	done	anything
--	 no	 sign	 on	 your	 hands	 that	 you	 have	 even	 carried	 a	 bucket	 of	water."	And
that's	true!
You	are	in	a	far	better	position,	Vimal.	I	cannot	help	it,	so	I	have	not	tried	at	all;	I
have	simply	relaxed	in	my	laziness.	People	have	understood	that	if	somebody	is
bone	lazy	and	you	love	him,	what	to	do?	--	prepare	food	for	him,	prepare	clothes
for	him,	prepare	his	bed,	prepare	his	bathroom,	do	everything.
You	are	 just	habitually	 lazy.	You	can	drop	 it,	you	are	more	 fortunate	 than	me.
But	 that	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 you	 have	 to	 work	 harder.	 You	 have	 just	 to
understand	that	laziness	is	your	habit,	and	to	be	enslaved	by	any	habit	is	against
your	own	growth.	I	am	not	interested	that	you	should	work	more	or	less	--	what
does	it	matter?	At	least	to	me	it	matters	nothing	whether	anybody	works	or	not.
This	much	is	certain:	that	if	for	fifty-seven	years	I	could	manage	without	moving
from	my	bed,	moving	from	my	chair...	that	is	the	only	movement	I	do.	I	am	the
only	man	who	enjoys	freedom	of	movement	--	no	obstacles,	no	problem.
But	it	will	go	against	your	own	growth	if	you	don't	drop	the	habit.	And	you	have
such	a	beautiful	soul	that	it	will	be	a	great	misfortune	not	to	attain	to	the	ultimate
illumination	I	have	been	talking	about.	Your	laziness	may	become	a	hindrance;	it
is	just	against	your	own	growth.
So	you	can	 think:	 if	you	want	 to	 remain	 the	 same,	 I	have	no	objection;	 if	you
want	 to	grow,	 then	 just	 see	 that	your	 laziness	 is	not	 something	natural	 to	you.
You	have	learned	it	 just	by	your	teachers	telling	you	that	you	are	unintelligent,
you	are	dim.	You	accepted	their	ideas	--	and	the	natural	effect	of	those	ideas	is
laziness.
You	 are	 neither	 unintelligent	 nor	 dim.	 Drop	 that	 laziness	 which	 is	 hanging
around	 like	darkness.	By	dropping	 it	you	will	 find	your	 intelligence	becoming
sharper,	better,	your	understanding	more	clear,	more	deep,	your	love	gaining	new
flowers	and	new	foliage.
A	few	sutras	for	you	to	contemplate,	just	lying	down	in	your	bed	underneath	the
blanket,	in	utter	laziness.
A	small	town	is	one	where	there	is	no	place	to	go	that	you	should	not.
The	only	thing	which	cannot	be	misquoted	is	silence.
No	matter	what	goes	wrong,	there	is	always	somebody	who	knew	it	would.
An	optimist	sees	a	doughnut	--	a	pessimist	sees	a	hole.
The	best	way	to	succeed	in	the	world	is	to	find	a	crowd	that	is	going	somewhere
and	get	in	front	of	them.
After	man	came	woman,	and	she	has	been	after	him	ever	since.
Opposites	attract	--	like	sloe	gin	and	fast	women.
You	don't	get	it?	Neither	do	I!	I	will	also	think	over	it,	because	my	understanding
about	 gin	 or	 any	 other	 kind	 of	 alcoholic	 drugs	 is	 nil.	 I	 thought	 you	 may
understand	it!
There	is	a	crack	in	everything	God	has	made.
Public	opinion	exists	only	where	there	are	no	ideas.
Whenever	truth	is	injured,	defend	it.	But	if	the	truth	goes	against	you,	accept	it.
It	is	better	to	be	defeated	than	to	reject	the	truth.
A	 start	 is	 like	 a	 love	 affair...	 any	 fool	 can	 start	 it,	 but	 to	 end	 it	 requires
considerable	skill.
So	be	alert!	Before	starting	any	love	affair,	be	prepared	how	you	will	end	it.	That
is	called	homework.
An	Englishman	thinks	seated,	a	Frenchman	standing,	an	American	pacing,	and
an	Irishman	afterwards.
To	keep	an	idea	secret	is	to	tell	it	to	only	one	person	at	a	time.
Old	age	is	when	it	is	harder	to	find	temptation	than	to	resist	it.
Old	men	are	not	really	old	men,	they	are	just	twice	boys.
If	everything	is	coming	your	way,	you	are	in	the	wrong	lane.
A	fool	and	his	money	are	soon	elected.	Drop	the	old	proverb	which	used	to	say:
A	fool	and	his	money	are	soon	parted,	that	does	not	happen	anymore.	A	fool	and
his	money	are	soon	elected.
If	the	facts	are	against	you,	argue	the	law.
If	the	law	is	against	you,	argue	the	facts.
If	the	facts	and	the	law	are	against	you,	shout	like	hell.
If	worry	makes	you	so	nervous	that	your	hand	shakes,	learn	to	play	the	guitar.
The	reason	there	are	so	few	women	after	dinner	speakers	is	because	few	can	wait
that	long.
A	woman	 is	 able	 to	 forgive	 and	 forget,	 except	 she	will	 never	 forget	what	 she
forgave.
That	is	one	of	the	mysteries	of	women.
If	you	have	half	a	mind	to	watch	TV,	that's	enough.
Vimal,	just	give	it	a	try.	I	have	nothing	against	laziness.	It	is	not	a	sin,	it	is	not	a
crime;	 it	 is	 only	 a	 hindrance	 to	 your	 own	 spiritual	 growth.	 But	 if	 you	 find	 it
impossible	 and	 if	 you	 find	 that	 it	 is	 your	 very	 nature,	 then	 relax	 in	 it,	 it	 is
perfectly	good.	But	first	give	it	a	try,	because	my	understanding	is	that	bone	lazy
people	are	very	rare	in	the	world,	they	cannot	survive.
How	 have	 I	 survived?	 Later	 on	 when	 you	 start	 writing	 about	 me,	 make	 it	 a
miracle!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
NOTHING	TO	HOLD	ON	TO
NOWHERE	TO	BELONG	TO
NOWHERE	TO	GO
BELOVED	OSHO,	WHY	IS	IT	PAINFUL	TO	FEEL	MY	ALONENESS?
Dhyan	Parijato,	"Nothing	to	hold	on	to,	nowhere	to	belong	to,	nowhere	to	go	--
why	is	it	painful	to	feel	my	aloneness?"
What	am	I	here	for?	For	the	time	being	hang	around	me,	hold	on	to	me.	Go	with
me	wherever	I	am	going.	Belong	to	this	caravan	which	is	simply	enjoying,	not
going	anywhere.
It	is	not	the	Jewish	caravan	that	Moses	was	leading	continuously	for	forty	years.
And	just	now	they	have	discovered	the	reason	was	they	had	lost	a	quarter.	They
searched	the	whole	Middle	East	--	it	took	forty	years,	and	still	they	could	not	get
it!
This	caravan	is	not	searching	for	anything.
This	caravan	is	just	remaining	herenow.
And	I	am	allowing	you	to	hold	on	to	me,	belong	to	me,	just	as	a	device	because
you	are	feeling	so	alone.	Just	the	idea	that	you	belong	to	me,	that	you	can	hold
on	 to	 me,	 that	 you	 go	 with	 me,	 and	 your	 painfulness	 and	 your	 feeling	 of
aloneness	will	disappear.	Once	it	has	disappeared	you	will	see	that	what	I	have
given	 to	 you	 was	 only	 teddy	 bears	 just	 for	 the	 time	 being;	 temporary
arrangements	 to	 keep	 you	 alive	 to	 the	 point	 where	 you	 can	 live	 in	 your
aloneness,	because	aloneness	is	the	most	beautiful	space	there	is.
But	 you	 are	 in	 a	 deep	 misunderstanding.	 You	 are	 mixed	 up	 because	 of	 the
language	and	the	dictionaries	and	the	so-called	learned	people	who	use	the	word
àloneness'
synonymously	 with	 `loneliness'.	 Aloneness	 is	 experienced	 only	 at	 the	 very
height	 of	 consciousness,	 loneliness	 in	 the	 very	 dark	 ditches	 and	 valleys.
Loneliness	 is	 a	 desire	 to	 be	 with	 someone,	 and	 aloneness	 is	 the	 joy	 of	 being
oneself.	They	are	not	synonymous;	they	are	absolutely	opposite.
If	you	are	feeling	painful,	it	is	loneliness.	So	just	for	the	time	being	you	need	a
few	teddy	bears.	All	through	history	those	teddy	bears	have	been	used.	What	is
your	God?	--
nothing	but	a	big	teddy	bear.	What	are	all	your	theological	systems?	--	just	teddy
bears	made	out	of	 logical,	 rational	argumentation,	 to	help	you	and	 to	give	you
the	sense	that	you	are	not	lonely.
But	 they	have	all	proved	dangerous,	because	 if	you	go	on	carrying	your	 teddy
bear	 your	whole	 life...	 It	 is	 okay	 up	 to	 a	 certain	 age.	 On	 railway	 stations,	 on
airports	you	will	see	little	boys,	little	girls	carrying	their	teddy	bears,	which	look
absolutely	Italian,	so	greasy,	so	dirty.	But	without	them	they	cannot	live,	they	are
absolutely	 lonely.	They	 sleep	with	 them,	 they	wake	 up	with	 them,	 they	 go	 on
carrying	them	everywhere.
But	a	moment	comes	when	they	have	grown	up	and	they	see	that	what	they	have
been	carrying	is	just	stupidity.	Then	the	teddy	bear	remains	in	the	corner	of	the
room	for	a	few	days,	and	then	nobody	knows	where	it	has	gone.	The	corporation
truck	has	taken	it	away.
So	will	go	your	God:	the	corporation	truck	will	take	it	away	with	all	the	rubbish.
You	don't	know	anything,	Dhyan	Parijato,	about	what	aloneness	is.	Aloneness	is
that	beautiful	space	where	you	feel	yourself	so	contented	with	yourself	that	you
don't	need	anybody	else	--	no	God,	no	master,	no	friend,	no	lover.
That	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	relate.	You	can	relate	with	a	master,	but	for
the	first	time	the	relatedness	will	be	of	a	totally	different	quality.	You	can	relate
in	 love,	 but	 your	 relatedness	 will	 not	 become	 a	 relationship.	 You	 can	 have
friends,	but	they	will	not	be	filling	any	gap	inside	you.	You	are	so	full,	there	is
no	gap.	You	can	enjoy	their	company	-
-	and	you	will	enjoy	when	they	are	gone	even	more,	because	they	are	a	kind	of
disturbance.	Once	in	a	while	just	for	the	change	of	taste	you	can	enjoy	people.
But	mostly	you	will	enjoy	yourself.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 one	 of	 Walt	 Whitman's	 most	 beautiful	 songs:	 "I	 celebrate
myself."	 You	 should	 look	 into	 that	 song	 and	 meditate	 upon	 it.	 Unless	 the
moment	comes	when	you	start	celebrating	yourself	for	no	reason	at	all,	you	have
not	 known	 what	 religiousness	 is,	 you	 have	 not	 known	 for	 what	 this	 whole
existence	exists,	you	have	not	known	anything	of	beauty,	of	truth,	of	divineness.
Your	life	has	been	nothing	but	a	long,	dark	night	of	the	soul.
Your	meditation	will	 help	 you	 to	make	 the	 distinction	 between	 aloneness	 and
loneliness.
Your	meditation	will	make	you	absolutely	clear	about	 the	beauty	and	 the	 light
and	 the	 blissfulness	 of	 aloneness.	 Then	 what	 is	 the	 need	 to	 hold	 on	 to
something?	 You	 are	 enough	 unto	 yourself.	 What	 is	 the	 need	 to	 belong	 to
someone	or	 to	 something?	You	are	complete,	 entire:	 the	circle	has	come	 to	 its
completion.	Nothing	is	missing,	and	what	is	the	need	to	go	anywhere?
The	 most	 funny	 people	 in	 the	 world	 are	 the	 tourists,	 who	 are	 always	 going
somewhere	for	no	reason	at	all.	Whenever	I	see	tourists,	I	have	such	a	hard	time
to	keep	myself	silent.
They	are	such	a	temptation	to	laugh:	carrying	two	cameras,	telescopes,	thermos
flasks,	all	kinds	of	junk	and	strange	things;	loaded	with	all	that	and	running	from
one	place	to	another.	And	they	do	all	that	running;	they	go	on	taking	pictures!
Back	at	home,	 relaxed,	 they	will	 see	 the	album	and	will	 say,	"My	god,	what	a
beautiful	Taj	Mahal."	And	 they	 could	 have	 purchased	 that	 photograph	 in	 their
own	town	without	going	anywhere	else.
All	this	tourism	has	given	them	amoebas,	all	kinds	of	diseases.	What	they	think
is	 beautiful,	 to	 me	 has	 always	 looked	 ugly.	 It	 has	 given	 them	 a	 tan,	 it	 has
destroyed	 their	 original	 color,	 just	 burned	 their	 skin.	But	 idiots	 are	 idiots.	You
can	see	them	lying	down	-
-	suffering,	for	a	distortion	of	their	faces,	of	their	bodies	--	on	all	the	beaches	of
the	world.
If	 you	 want	 to	 know	 how	 many	 authentic	 idiots	 there	 are,	 you	 just	 go	 on
counting	the	number	of	people	who	are	getting	a	tan	on	the	sea	beaches,	and	you
will	come	almost	very	close	to	the	right	number.	Whenever	I	see	somebody	with
a	 tan	 I	 cannot	 practice	what	 I	 preach.	 I	 simply	 cannot	 like	 that	 stupid	 act	 that
they	have	done.	And	they	waste	so	much	money	on	it:	there	are	tan	oils	and	tan
creams	and	tan	powders,	and	all	 the	five-star	hotels	are	full	of	 these	people.	A
strange	kind	of	mania	--	tan	mania!
There	is	nowhere	to	go.
Just	 meditate	 silently	 here	 and	 avoid	 these	 kinds	 of	 madnesses.	 They	 go	 on
spreading	like	wildfire,	and	just	because	others	are	doing	it	you	get	caught	into
it.
Just	meditation	is	enough	for	you.
Go	in,	and	you	will	find	all	the	answers	for	all	your	questions,	and	more.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	FIRST	CAME	TO	YOU,	YOU	TOLD	ME	TO	MAKE	WORK	MY
MEDITATION	 AND	 TO	 STOP	 ALL	 FORMAL	 MEDITATIONS.	 EVER
SINCE,	I	HAVE	BEEN	GOING	FOR	IT...	AND	I	LOVE	IT!
LATELY	I'VE	BEEN	WONDERING	IF	MAYBE	I	SHOULD	SLOW	DOWN.
YOU
HAVE	 BEEN	 TALKING	 SO	 MUCH	 ABOUT	 MEDITATION.	 CAN	WORK
STILL	BE
OUR	 MEDITATION?	 I	 LOVE	 WORKING,	 BUT	 I	 GET	 TEASED	 A	 LOT
ABOUT
BEING	A	WORKAHOLIC.
Vedaprem,	condensed	to	your	very	essentials	the	question	means:	I	should	slow
down	talking	about	meditation.	You	are	doing	perfectly	well	--	and	you	love	it.
If	people	tease	you	and	call	you	a	workaholic,	it	is	a	compliment.	These	people
must	be	 lazy	people	 like	Vimal!	All	 the	people	here	are	meditating,	and	if	you
are	 enjoying	 the	 meditation	 that	 I	 have	 given	 to	 you	 --	 that	 work	 is	 your
meditation	 --	 and	 you	 are	 enjoying	 it	 and	 you	 love	 it,	 then	why	 bother	 about
others?	 Perhaps	 they	 are	 feeling	 jealous	 of	 you.	 Perhaps	 they	want	 to	 destroy
your	joy.
This	is	a	strange	world.	Here	anybody	who	succeeds	in	any	sphere	is	going	to	be
teased,	dragged	down,	bullied	by	 the	people	saying,	"You	are	doing	something
wrong."	 And	 all	 that	 they	 want	 is	 that	 you	 should	 be	 a	 part	 of	 the	 crowd	 of
failures.
As	far	as	 I	can	see	you	are	doing	perfectly	well.	Perhaps	I	may	have	done	 too
much	talking	about	meditation.	I	will	try	to	slow	down.
A	traveling	salesman	was	stuck	in	a	small	 town	and	went	 to	the	only	available
farmhouse	for	a	place	to	sleep.
"Can	you	put	me	up	for	the	night?"	he	asked	the	farmer.
"I	guess	I	can,"	he	answered,	"if	you	don't	mind	sharing	a	room	with	my	young
son."
"My	God,"	said	the	salesman,	"I'm	in	the	wrong	joke."
This	 is	 your	 situation;	 you	 are	 in	 a	 wrong	 crowd.	 But	 don't	 look	 around	 at
anybody;	just	concentrate,	contemplate,	meditate	on	your	work.	Everything	has
to	be	poured	into	work.
Yes,	be	a	workaholic.
Be	utterly	drunk	with	the	joy	of	creativity.
I	have	not	 said	 it	 in	vain,	 that	work	 is	your	meditation.	Apparently	 I	 am	bone
lazy,	but	just	apparently;	otherwise,	who	is	harassing	you	all,	day	in,	day	out?	By
the	time	somehow	you	have	got	rested	I	am	again	back	in	the	morning	to	torture
you	for	the	whole	day.	By	the	time	you	have	slowed	down	a	little	--	I	am	back!
A	young	swami	on	his	way	to	M.G.	Road	fell	out	of	his	rickshaw.	And	as	luck
would	have	it,	he	landed	in	heaven.
After	a	few	days'	rest,	he	asked	for	some	work.	Finally	he	was	given	a	position
in	the
"Religious	Statistics	Department."
Here	 they	 had	 a	 clock	 for	 every	 religious	 leader	 on	 the	 earth,	 and	 any	 sins
committed	by	them	would	be	recorded	by	a	slight	movement	forward.
The	 pope's	 clock	 had	 moved	 only	 two	 minutes	 in	 sixty-seven	 years.	 Mother
Teresa's	only	one	minute,	and	so	on.
The	swami	enquired	to	the	angel	in	charge,	"What	about	Osho's	clock?"
"Oh,"	said	the	angel,	"we	use	his	as	a	desk	fan!"
Just	to	avoid	talking	about	meditation...
There	was	a	German,	 a	Frenchman	and	an	Englishman	 staying	with	 their	new
brides	at	a	famous	honeymoon	hotel.	As	they	retired	to	bed	they	agreed	that	they
would	get	together	the	next	day	and	exchange	experiences	over	some	drinks.
The	next	day	the	German	was	asked,	"How	did	you	get	on	last	night?"
"Ach,	vunce	to	begin	wid,	 then	vunce	one	hour	later,	und	every	time	the	clock
struck,	vunce	again,	vich	vass	eight	times	in	eight	hours."
"And	what	did	your	wife	say?"
"Wunderbar,	wunderbar!!"
The	Frenchman	 told	 them,	 "I	 am	 straight	 away	on	 the	work.	Zen	 I	 am	on	 the
work	again	when	I	get	back	my	breath.	Zen	I	sleep	and	start	again,	and	sleep	and
start	again,	and	sleep	and	start	again,	twenty	times.	Then	I	am	halted,	finis."
"What	did	your	wife	say?"
"Magnifique,	encore,	magnifique!!"
The	Englishman	had	been	very	quiet.	"Come	tell	us,	how	many?"
"Once,"	he	said.
"Once!	--	what	did	your	wife	say	at	dawn?"
"Get	off,	we	need	some	sleep."
I	 am	 in	 a	 difficulty	 --	 how	 to	 avoid	meditation?	Only	 today	 I	 will	 avoid,	 not
tomorrow,	because	I	don't	want	difficult	tasks.
Just	for	your	sake...
Devageet	falls	in	love	with	an	eighteen-year-old	girl	and	they	go	off	to	Goa	for	a
honeymoon.	When	they	get	back,	a	friend	says	to	him,	"Do	tell	me,	how	was	it?"
"It	 was	 beautiful,"	 says	 Devageet.	 "The	 sun,	 the	 sea...	 we	 made	 love	 almost
every	night."
"Wait	 a	minute,"	 says	 his	 friend.	 "A	man	of	 your	 age	 --	 how	did	 you	manage
that?"
"Well,"	says	Devageet.	"We	almost	made	love	on	Monday,	almost	on	Tuesday..."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	The	alphabet	of	rejoicing
15	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709150
ShortTitle:
PILGR18
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
121
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DO	YOU	SEE	IN	MY	EYES	NOW,	AFTER	YOU	HIT	MY	HEAD	SO
HARD?
OH	BELOVED	MASTER,	THE	BLESSING	OF	YOUR	SWORD	HAS	LEFT
ONLY
ONE	WOUND,	THAT	EVEN	THE	SILENCE	BLOSSOMED	OUT	OF	THIS
MEDITATION	 HASN'T	 HEALED:	 HAVE	 I	 really	 BEEN	 DISRESPECTFUL
IN	MY
UNAWARENESS?	 FOR	 I	 WILL	 RATHER	 CUT	 MY	 TONGUE	 BEFORE
SAYING
ANYTHING	 AGAINST	 YOU,	 AND	 I	 WILL	 KILL	 MYSELF	 WITH	 JOY
RATHER
THAN	BE	UNLOVING	TO	YOU.
Sarjano,	 I	know	your	heart.	 I	know	your	 love.	 I	know	your	deep	gratitude	and
respect	--
but	 it	 is	 human,	 once	 in	 a	while	 to	 slip	 from	 the	 path.	And	 it	 happens	 from	a
necessary	psychological	principle:	you	start	taking	me	for	granted.	This	is	one	of
the	ancientmost	diseases	of	the	mind.	Once	you	start	taking	me	for	granted,	then
you	are	bound	to	behave	unconsciously.
Never	take	me	for	granted.
I	am	simply	alive	just	for	you.
My	work	 is	 finished	and	my	boat	has	been	waiting	 for	 long	 to	 take	me	 to	 the
other	shore,	but	your	 love	and	the	fear	 that	without	me,	you	may	be	lost...	and
you	are	coming	so	close,	that	if	I	can	manage	to	wait	a	little	longer	on	this	shore,
I	can	give	all	of	my	people	what	I	have	received	from	existence.	But	the	moment
you	 take	me	 for	 granted,	 immediately	 you	 forget,	 become	 unconscious,	 create
distance.
I	don't	want	to	hit	anybody,	but	except	hitting	you	I	cannot	wake	you	up	when
you	have	 fallen	asleep.	Consciously,	whatever	you	 say	 is	 absolutely	 right,	 that
you	would	 rather	cut	your	 tongue	 than	say	a	word	against	me,	 that	you	would
rather	die	than	offend	me.	These	are	not	just	poetic	assertions.	I	understand	you
perfectly,	 but	 you	 still	 have	 the	 unconscious	mind	 and	 that	 unconscious	mind
manages	to	sabotage	whatever	you	are	gaining	in	your	consciousness.
In	 mythological	 terms,	 it	 is	 a	 conflict	 between	 good	 and	 evil.	 In	 a	 more
contemporary	psychological	way,	it	is	the	conflict	between	the	conscious	and	the
unconscious.	The	unconscious	is	afraid	--	and	its	fear	is	real.	If	your	whole	being
becomes	conscious,	 it	will	be	 the	death	of	 the	unconsciousness	 in	you,	and	the
death	of	mortality	in	you,	and	the	opening	of	eternal	life.
Your	unconscious	mind	does	not	want	to	commit	suicide.	It	will	give	you	every
resistance;	hence	once	in	a	while	it	will	catch	you	unawares,	and	something	will
come	out	of	you	that	you	had	never	meant.	But	if	I	let	it	go	without	hitting	you,
then	 your	 unconscious	 will	 be	 gaining	 more	 and	 more	 power	 over	 your
conscious.	Hitting	you	is	simply	a	loving	way	to	put	the	unconscious	back	and	to
help	 your	 consciousness	 to	 be	 stronger,	 more	 powerful,	 more	 capable	 to
understand	 what	 comes	 from	 your	 unconscious	 and	 what	 comes	 from	 your
conscious.
The	unconscious	is	not	your	friend.
The	unconscious	 is	 all	 the	past	 centuries,	 it	 is	 carrying	 the	whole	 evolution	of
man.	 It	 is	barbarous,	 it	 is	animal.	Only	a	small	part	of	your	being	has	become
conscious,	but	that	small	being	can	manage	to	dispel	the	whole	unconsciousness
if	you	don't	become	a	victim	of	it	again	and	again.
Now	Veena	is	sitting	in	her	perfect	beauty,	relaxed,	but	she	does	not	know:	the
whole	night	I	have	had	to	sharpen	my	sword	for	her!	The	closer	you	come	to	me,
the	more	you	love	me,	the	more	you	should	remember	that	at	any	time	I	can	hit
you.
I	have	told	you	the	most	beautiful	story	in	Zen,	about	a	master	thief.	He	was	no
ordinary	thief,	because	in	his	whole	life	nobody	had	been	able	to	catch	him	red-
handed.	Even	the	emperor	was	amazed	at	his	craftsmanship,	his	art	in	stealing.
The	man	was	so	perfect...
but	 he	 was	 getting	 old.	 The	 situation	 had	 come	 to	 the	 point	 in	 Tokyo	 that
whosoever's	 house	was	 visited	 by	 the	master	 thief,	 bragged	 about	 it.	 It	 was	 a
great	honor,	because	it	was	not	that	he	would	go	just	to	anybody,	but	only	to	the
super-rich.	It	was	a	certificate	that	the	master	thief	had	stolen	things	from	some
family,	that	they	bragged	about	it.
But	as	he	was	getting	old,	his	son	said,	"I	don't	know	anything	of	your	art,	your
fame	--
and	 you	 have	 the	 strangest	 fame.	 Before	 you	 leave	 the	 world,	 please	 let	 me
understand	the	secret	of	your	greatness.	Your	stealing	is	not	just	for	money;	your
stealing	is	simply	to	keep	your	mastery	sharpened	so	you	don't	forget	the	art."
It	 is	 almost	 like	 a	 musician.	 Once	 Yehudi	Menuhin	 was	 asked,	 "If	 you	 don't
practice	one	day,	what	happens?"
He	said,	"Only	I	understand	that	the	thing	is	not	as	perfect	as	it	would	have	been;
nobody	else	will	 find	 any	difference.	 If	 I	 don't	 practice	 for	 two	days,	 then	 the
critics	will	become	aware	that	something	is	missing.	If	I	don't	practice	for	three
days	then	everybody	will	be	able	to	hear	that	something	is	wrong,	the	master	is
not	at	his	height."
Every	musician	 practices	 for	 hours,	 sometimes	 eight	 hours	 per	 day.	 Even	 the
most	 famous	musician	 practices	 for	 hours,	 because	 the	 art	 is	 so	 subtle	 and	 so
delicate	that	it	can	slip	out	of	your	hands	if	you	miss	just	a	few	days'	practice.
So	the	boy	said,	"Before	you	leave	the	world,	help	me	to	know	the	secret	so	that
I	can	practice	in	front	of	you,	and	you	can	correct	where	I	am	going	wrong."
The	father	said,	"Tonight	you	come	with	me."
They	went	to	a	very	rich	house,	and	the	young	man	was	trembling	with	fear	and
the	old	man	was	going	as	if	he	were	going	for	a	morning	walk	--	so	at	ease,	with
such	tremendous	confidence.	The	old	man	made	a	hole	in	a	wall	to	enter	into	the
house...	the	young	man	was	perspiring,	and	it	was	a	cold	night.	But	the	old	man
was	 doing	 his	 job	 so	 silently	 that	 although	 he	was	making	 a	 hole	 in	 the	wall,
there	 was	 no	 noise.	 When	 the	 hole	 was	 ready,	 the	 old	 man	 slipped	 in,	 and
signaled	the	boy	to	come	in.
His	 heart	 was	 throbbing,	 naturally,	 but	 he	 was	 wondering...	 his	 old	 father	 is
going	 as	 if	 it	 is	 their	 own	house!	He	had	 the	master	 key	 that	 can	open	 all	 the
doors.
He	opened	door	upon	door,	and	the	boy	became	more	and	more	afraid,	he	started
cursing	himself:	Why	have	I	asked	him	to	teach	me?	This	is	not	for	me.	If	I	can
manage	to	survive	tonight,	finished	--	I	don't	want	to	learn	this	art.	It	is	beyond
my	capacity.
The	man	was	doing	things,	so	at	home,	and	he	took	the	boy	into	the	innermost
part	 of	 the	 house,	 opened	 a	 big	 cupboard	 and	 there	 were	 very	 costly	 things
inside,	 valuable	 diamonds,	 very	 costly,	 and	 rare	 clothes.	 Everything	 was
dazzling.	The	boy	could	not	believe	his	eyes,	that	people	have	so	much	money.
The	old	man	said,	"Get	 in!"	He	got	 in	and	 the	old	man	went	out	and	--	 it	was
such	 a	 great	 surprise	 --	 closed	 the	 door,	 locked	 it	 with	 the	 boy	 inside,	 and
shouted	"Thief!	Thief!"	and	ran	out!
The	boy	said,	"Is	this	my	father,	or	my	murderer?	And	what	kind	of	teaching	is
this?	 I	 was	 wondering	 if	 I	 could	 survive	 --	 now	 there	 is	 no	 possibility."	 The
whole	house	was	awake.	The	servants	were	awake.	People	were	searching	every
nook	and	corner,	and	a	maidservant	came	into	the	room	where	he	was	inside	the
cupboard.	 He	 knew	 nothing	 of	 what	 to	 do,	 but	 spontaneously	 he	 started
scratching	on	the	cupboard...	as	if	there	are	rats	inside.
This	was	not	a	calculated	act,	it	was	absolutely	spontaneous.	Even	he	could	not
believe	 what	 he	 was	 doing.	 And	 the	 maidservant,	 just	 to	 look	 for	 the	 rats,
because	 there	were	valuable	clothes,	opened	 the	door.	She	had	a	candle	 in	her
hand,	and	the	boy	blew	out	the	candle,	and	rushed	out.	But	he	was	seen,	so	the
whole	 family	and	 the	whole	neighborhood	 followed	him.	He	had	never	 run	 so
fast	in	his	whole	life	--	he	could	have	become	an	Olympic	champion	the	way	he
was	going!	--	just	like	the	wind.
It	was	a	question	of	life	and	death,	and	he	was	praying	to	God,	"This	is	the	first
and	last	time,	just	save	me!"
Then	suddenly	he	came	across	a	well.	He	took	up	a	big	rock	and	threw	it	in	the
well	 --	 the	whole	crowd	 that	was	 following	him	stopped.	They	 thought	he	had
jumped	 in	 the	well:	 they	had	heard	 the	 sound,	 so	 they	 stopped	 there,	 and	 they
said,	"Now	there	is	no	worry.
Either	he	will	be	dead,	or	in	the	morning	we	will	pull	him	out	and	shoot	him."
And	the	young	man	reached	his	house,	and	again	a	great	surprise:	the	old	man	is
fast	asleep,	snoring!	He	could	not	believe	that	this	man	was	his	father!	He	shook
him,	and	the	father	said,	"Don't	disturb	me.	You	have	come	back,	that's	enough.	I
know	the	conclusion;	the	rest	of	the	story	you	can	tell	me	in	the	morning.	There
is	nothing	else	to	learn,	I	have	given	you	my	whole	art.
"I	am	not	acting	out	of	mind.	I	am	acting	out	of	no-mind,	 in	utter	silence.	It	 is
my	meditation.	Just	go	to	sleep."
The	boy	was	amazed	that	he	did	not	even	want	to	know	through	what	difficulties
he	had	passed.	He	had	been	almost	on	the	verge	of	being	caught!	He	could	not
sleep	the	whole	night:	his	heart	was	throbbing,	and	again	and	again	as	he	would
close	his	eyes,	he	would	see	the	nightmare	that	those	people	had	caught	him,	and
he	would	wake	up	again.	In	the	morning	the	father	did	not	say	anything,	he	was
just	sitting,	with	his	tea.	The	boy	said,
"But	at	least	ask	me	what	happened!"
He	said,	"You	have	come	home;	everything	has	gone	right.	You	could	not	have
come	back	if	you	had	acted	out	of	your	mind,	so	you	don't	need	to	learn	anything
more.	All	that	you	need	to	learn	is	how	to	act	out	of	no-mind."
"Still,"	the	boy	said,	"please	listen	to	my	story."
He	 said,	 "Okay,	 if	 you	 want	 you	 can	 tell	 it.	 But	 I	 am	 not	 interested.	 All	 my
interest	was	in	whether	you	came	back	or	not."
He	 told	his	whole	story,	and	 the	old	man	asked,	"Scratching	 like	 the	 rats	were
destroying	the	clothes	--	was	it	your	thought?"
He	said,	"I	had	never	thought	about	scratching	the	cupboard	like	rats	destroying
the	clothes...	I	don't	know	how	it	came	to	me."
His	 father	 said,	 "That's	 the	way	 --	 you	 don't	 come	 in.	 Let	 your	 no-mind	 take
possession	of	the	whole	situation.	How	did	you	figure	out	that	to	throw	the	rock
in	the	well	would	stop	them?"
He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 know...	 just	 the	 rock	 was	 there,	 the	 well	 was	 there,	 and	 the
people	were	just	on	my	heels.	Suddenly	a	flash...	and	I	took	the	rock	and	threw	it
in	the	well.	It	was	not	my	act."
The	old	man	said,	"This	is	what	the	ancient	masters	have	said	--	action	without
action.	I	am	not	a	thief,	I	have	just	chosen	stealing	as	a	way	of	enlightenment."
You	 cannot	 believe	 it;	 anything	 can	 become	 a	 way	 to	 enlightenment,	 even
stealing.	But	it	has	to	be	not	your	action,	it	has	to	come	from	your	no-mind.
So	now	there	are	three	things,	Sarjano:	the	conscious	mind,	which	you	know	and
out	of	which	whatever	you	have	written	 to	me	has	come.	Behind	and	below	is
the	unconscious	mind,	from	where	all	kinds	of	sabotage	will	come,	disruptions,
to	destroy	the	whole	possibility	of	consciousness.
Without	 your	 knowing,	 you	 have	 been	 disrespectful.	 I	 know	 that	 with	 your
knowing,	you	will	be	the	last	person	to	be	disrespectful,	and	it	does	not	matter	to
me	whether	you	are	disrespectful	 to	me	or	not.	The	point	 is,	 I	don't	want	your
unconscious	mind	to	sabotage	the	beauty	that	has	arisen	in	your	consciousness.
Below	is	unconscious,	above	is	no-mind,	or	super-conscious.	I	will	hit	you	if	I
see	that	the	unconscious	is	pulling	you	down,	and	I	will	hit	you	if	I	see	that	you
are	not	moving	fast	enough	from	the	conscious	to	the	super-conscious.	Those	are
the	two	times	when	I	will	hit	you.
It	 does	 not	 matter...	 I	 have	 not	 hit	 you	 because	 you	 were	 disrespectful.
Remember	it	--
because	I	have	been	condemned	my	whole	life:	from	my	very	childhood	I	don't
know	a	day	when	I	was	not	condemned	for	doing	things	not	in	the	way	people
wanted.	 I	 have	 become	 so	 accustomed	 and	 at	 ease	 with	 condemnation,
disrespect,	notoriousness	--
everything	 --	 so	 that	 is	 not	 the	 question.	 Just	Sarjano's	 disrespect	will	 not	 add
anything;	it	will	be	just	a	dewdrop	in	an	ocean,	so	that	is	not	the	problem.	The
problem	is	that	it	will	disrupt	your	consciousness,	your	love,	your	peace	that	is
growing,	your	meditativeness	that	is	growing,	and	I	cannot	see	that	happening.
And	this	is	to	be	understood	by	all,	because	today	it	is	Sarjano's	case;	tomorrow
it	can	be	your	case.	These	hits	are	out	of	sheer	 love.	 If	 I	don't	care	about	you,
why	should	I	bother?
The	whole	night	I	could	not	sleep...	because	I	have	not	used	the	sword	for	many
years,	but	just	to	prepare	it	for	Veena	--	and	she	is	sitting	just	here,	laughing.	If
she	had	laughed	before,	I	could	have	slept	at	ease.
I	don't	want	to	cut	your	heads,	but	if	you	insist	I	will	have	to	do	it	--	reluctantly,
but	there	is	no	other	way.	If	you	only	understand	the	language	of	the	sword,	then
I	will	have	to	speak	that	language.	I	am	not	using	it;	I	am	using	only	words.
So	 be	 careful.	Whenever	 you	 start	 getting	 angry	 at	 me,	 remember:	 it	 is	 your
unconscious	that	is	disrupting	your	love,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	me.	When	you
start	 thinking	 something	 against	 me,	 remember	 it	 is	 your	 unconscious	 that	 is
feeding	the	idea	to	you.
Otherwise,	 whatever	 you	 said	 is	 so	 beautiful,	 Sarjano,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 read	 it
again	 so	 that	 everybody	 understands	 clearly.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 a	 question,	 it	 is	 a
statement	from	the	very	deepest	core	of	his	heart.
"BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DO	YOU	SEE	IN	MY	EYES	NOW,	AFTER	YOU	HIT	MY	HEAD	SO
HARD?"
I	see	your	eyes.	I	see	you	--	the	same	as	you	were	before	the	hit,	after	the	hit.	But
if	you	were	not	hit	you	would	not	have	been	so	full	of	love,	with	tears	of	joy	in
your	eyes.
"WHAT	DO	YOU	SEE	IN	MY	EYES	NOW,	AFTER	YOU	HIT	MY	HEAD	SO
HARD?	OH	BELOVED	MASTER,	THE	BLESSING	OF	YOUR	SWORD	HAS
LEFT
ONLY	ONE	WOUND,	THAT	EVEN	THE	SILENCE	BLOSSOMED	OUT	OF
THIS
MEDITATION	 HAS	 NOT	 HEALED:	 HAVE	 I	 REALLY	 BEEN
DISRESPECTFUL...?"
No,	you	have	not	been	disrespectful.	But	you	don't	know:	there	are	so	many	dark
sides	of	you	which	you	don't	identify	with	--	they	were	disrespectful.
"...	 IN	 MY	 UNAWARENESS?	 FOR	 I	 WILL	 RATHER	 CUT	 MY	 TONGUE
BEFORE
SAYING	ANYTHING	AGAINST	YOU."
No,	 that	won't	 help.	You	 can	 cut	my	 tongue,	 your	 tongue;	we	 both	 can	 sit	 in
silence	 because	 we	 cannot	 speak	 --	 but	 I	 will	 go	 on	 doing	 what	 I	 am	 doing
without	 the	 tongue,	 and	 you	 will	 go	 on	 once	 in	 a	 while	 being	 disrespectful,
without	 the	 tongue.	The	 tongue	 is	not	needed,	 just	your	face	can	show	it,	your
eyes	can	show	it.	Just	the	smallest	gesture	can	show	it.
Don't	think	in	terms	of	cutting	your	tongue.	Think	in	terms	of	from	where	within
you	any	ugly	thing	crept	into	your	conscious...	and	destroy	that	unconscious.	The
tongue	has	nothing	to	do	with	it;	 it	 is	only	a	means,	which	the	conscious	mind
can	use,	the	unconscious	mind	can	use,	the	super-conscious	mind	can	use.	I	am
using	it;	it	is	a	perfect	mechanism	to	convey	things	which	cannot	be	conveyed.
And	finally,	you	say,	"And	I	will	kill	myself	with	joy,	rather	than	be	unloving	to
You."
That	is	easier,	to	die	for	someone.
The	real	difficulty	is	to	live	for	someone.
Many	have	died	in	 the	name	of	 love,	because	death	 is	a	single-blow	thing;	but
living	for	someone	because	of	your	love	is	a	long	time	process.	I	don't	want	you
to	make	this	commune	a	Jim	Jonestown	--	that	is	the	Christian	stupidity.	I	want
this	place	to	be	the	place	of	life	and	love	and	rejoicing.
If	you	love	me,	rejoice.	If	you	love	me,	sing.	If	you	love	me,	dance.	I	don't	ask
you	 for	 death.	 Death	 will	 not	 prove	 anything,	 it	 will	 simply	 prove	 your
incapacity	to	live	for	my	love.	But	that	has	been	taught	for	as	long	as	we	can	go
backwards,	that	dying	for	love	is	a	great	martyrdom.	It	is	sheer	stupidity.
I	am	not	here	to	teach	you	all	these	stupid	things	that	have	happened	in	the	past.
People	have	died	for	Christ,	people	have	died	for	Mohammed,	people	have	died
for	 Buddha.	 But	 that	 does	 not	 show	 their	 love,	 it	 simply	 shows	 their
unconsciousness.	 The	 unconsciousness	 was	 destroying	 their	 love,	 now	 it	 has
destroyed	even	themselves.
Here	you	have	to	learn	a	totally	new	alphabet,	the	alphabet	of	rejoicing.	If	you
love	me,	 rejoice.	 In	spite	of	everything,	 rejoice.	The	more	blissful	you	are,	 the
more	 you	 are	 laughing,	 the	more	 you	 are	 dancing,	 the	more	 I	 know	you	 have
given	me,	offered	me	your	flowers	of	love.
This	is	a	temple	of	love	and	laughter.
Never	forget	it	for	a	single	moment.
As	 the	 boat	 was	 sinking,	 the	 skipper	 called	 out,	 "Does	 anyone	 know	 how	 to
pray?"
"I	do,"	replied	pope	the	polack,	who	was	on	board	the	ship.
"Okay,	 go	 ahead	 and	 pray,"	 said	 the	 captain.	 "The	 rest	 of	 us	 will	 put	 on	 life
jackets;	we're	one	short."
An	old	English	gentleman	was	on	trial	before	the	high	court	of	Australia,	for	the
crime	of	making	sexual	advances	to	an	ostrich.
"Before	passing	sentence,"	announced	the	judge,	"do	you	have	anything	to	say?"
"Your	 honor,"	 said	 the	 Englishman,	 "if	 I	 had	 known	 you	were	 going	 to	make
such	a	fuss	about	it,	I	would	not	have	married	the	bloody	bird!"
Here	we	are	not	masochists	or	sadists.	This	is	not	a	sick	psychological	place	--	as
all	the	churches	are	--	belonging	to	any	religion.	This	is	a	pagan,	natural,	simple,
playful	place.
If	you	can	laugh	heartily,	this	is	your	prayer.	If	you	can	dance	with	abandon,	if
you	can	sway	with	the	music,	that	is	the	only	yoga	I	teach.
I	don't	believe	in	distorting	your	bodies.
I	believe	in	transforming	your	souls.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	EXPLAIN	YOUR	STATEMENT	FROM	THE	OTHER
MORNING	OF	HOW	MUSIC	CAN	BE	NEXT	TO	SILENCE?
Milarepa,	 I	 don't	 know	 what	 I	 said	 the	 other	 morning	 --	 I	 don't	 carry
unnecessarily	luggage	from	the	past.	But	I	will	explain	it	to	you	this	morning,	in
spite	of	the	fact	that	I	don't	know	whether	I	made	the	statement	or	not.
Music	is	certainly	next	to	silence.
There	 is	 a	 certain	 thing	 to	 be	 understood:	Music	 does	 not	 consist,	 in	 the	 first
place,	 of	 words,	 language.	 It	 consists	 of	 pure	 sounds,	 and	 it	 consists	 of	 pure
sounds	only	to	those	who	don't	know	anything	beyond	sound.	Those	who	know
silence	--	for	them,	the	whole	gestalt	changes.
You	 see	 my	 five	 fingers,	 but	 somebody	 can	 see	 the	 five	 gaps	 between	 my
fingers.
Ordinarily	you	will	not	see	the	gaps,	you	will	see	five	fingers.	But	the	gaps	are
more	real:	fingers	may	come	and	go,	gaps	will	remain.
Between	sounds	of	music	there	are	gaps	of	silence.	The	authentic	music	consists
not	 of	 sounds,	 but	 of	 the	 gaps.	 Sounds	 come	 and	 go;	 those	 gaps	 remain.	And
music	 can	make	you	aware	of	 those	gaps	more	beautifully	 than	 anything	 else;
hence	I	have	to	say	that	music	comes	next	to	silence.	But	it	is	possible	even	the
musician	may	not	be	aware	of	 it,	unless	his	music	 is	his	meditation	 too.	Then,
soon,	the	shift	from	sounds	to	silence.
The	 ancient	 Chinese	 story	 is	 that	 whenever	 a	 musician	 becomes	 perfect,	 he
throws	 away	 his	 instruments;	 whenever	 a	 swordsman	 becomes	 perfect,	 he
throws	away	his	sword.
It	is	a	very	strange	saying	and	goes	back	almost	five	thousand	years,	because	it
has	been	quoted	by	Lao	Tzu	as	an	ancient	saying.	What	does	it	mean?	Chuang
Tzu	was	asked,
"This	seems	to	be	a	very	strange	kind	of	proverb.	When	the	musician	becomes
perfect	we	 should	 have	 thought	 that	 he	would	 have	purchased	perfect	musical
instruments,	and	the	saying	says	he	throws	away	his	instruments."
Chuang	 Tzu	 told	 a	 very	 beautiful	 story	 to	 explain	 it.	 There	 are	 things	 which
cannot	be	explained	without	beautiful	 stories,	because	 stories	give	you	enough
space	and	freedom,	enough	gaps	for	you	to	fill	with	your	own	being.	Prose	is	too
tight	and	too	mundane,	so	either	poetry	has	to	be	used	or	a	story	has	to	be	used.
These	stories	are	such	that	even	a	small	child	may	be	able	to	understand,	or	even
an	old	man	may	not	be	able	 to	understand;	 the	question	 is	whether	he	gets	 the
undercurrent	of	the	story.
The	story	is:	A	man	reached	to	the	emperor	of	China	and	said,	"I	am	the	greatest
master	 of	 the	 art	 of	 arrows,	 targets,	 archery,	 and	 I	 have	 come	 to	 ask	 you	 to
declare	 in	 the	 whole	 empire	 that	 if	 anybody	 wants	 to	 compete	 with	 me,	 he
should	 come	 forward;	 otherwise	give	 time,	 and	 if	 nobody	 comes,	 then	declare
me	the	champion	archer	of	your	empire."
The	 king	 knew	 that	 man.	 He	 never	 missed	 a	 target.	 As	 far	 as	 human
understanding	 is	 concerned,	 he	was	 perfect.	What	more	 can	 you	 expect?	One
hundred	percent	success	--
success	cannot	be	more	than	that.	The	king	said,	"I	know	about	you.	And	I	know
that	there	is	nobody	who	can	compete	with	you."
When	he	was	saying	this,	the	servant	of	the	king,	who	had	raised	him	from	his
childhood...	he	was	not	just	a	servant	but	almost	a	father	to	him.	The	emperor's
father	had	died,	and	he	had	given	the	responsibility	to	his	servant	to	take	care	of
the	child	till	he	is	of	age,	and	see	that	no	trouble	arises	and	that	he	succeeds	to
the	 throne.	So	 the	emperor	respected	 the	servant	as	much	as	perhaps	he	would
have	respected	his	own	father.	The	servant	had	done	immense	service	to	him;	he
had	taken	care	of	the	whole	empire	till	he	was	of	age.
The	servant	said,	"Before	you	say	anything	to	this	man,	I	would	like	to	interrupt.
First	 listen	 to	me.	 I	 know	 a	man	 far	 in	 the	 hills	 who	 is	 really	 the	 champion.
Compared	to	him,	this	man	is	just	a	child.	He	is	a	giant!"
The	king	said,	"How	do	you	know	he	is	a	giant?"
And	 the	servant	said,	"He	 is	so	perfect	 in	archery	 that	he	has	 thrown	away	his
arrows,	his	bow	--	and	you	know	the	ancient	proverb....	Send	this	man	to	that	old
man	in	the	hills."
The	archer	could	not	believe	it.	What	kind	of	perfection	is	this,	when	you	throw
away	your	arrows	and	your	bow?	But	the	emperor	said,	"You	will	have	to	go.	I
cannot	deny	anything	to	the	man	you	have	seen.	Although	he	is	my	servant,	deep
down	in	my	heart	he	is	as	great	as	my	father.	So	you	will	have	to	go	to	that	man,
and	if	he	recommends	it,	you	will	be	declared	the	champion."
The	man	had	to	go,	although	feeling	a	little	weird	and	awkward:	What	kind	of	a
stupid	thing...?	The	hills	were	great	and	very	steep	and	it	was	a	long	journey,	but
he	managed.
Slowly,	 slowly	 he	 also	 became	 interested	 --	 what	 kind	 of	 perfection...?	 He
reached	finally	to	a	small	cave.	He	met	an	old	man	and	asked	him,	"Are	you	the
famous	archer?"
He	 said,	 "Archery?	 I	 remember,	 I	 have	 heard	 the	word.	 It	must	 be	 fifty	 years
ago."
The	archer	said,	"How	old	are	you?"
The	old	man	said,	"I	am	not	capable	of	saying,	because	here	there	is	no	calendar,
one	does	not	know	how	time	passes,	but	maybe	one	hundred	and	twenty,	or	one
hundred	and	thirty."
The	man	said,	"I	am	the	greatest	archer	in	the	empire	and	by	a	stupid	servant's
advice	the	emperor	has	sent	me	to	you.	Unless	you	give	me	a	certificate,	I	cannot
be	accepted	as	the	champion."
The	 old	man	 said,	 "Champion?	 --	 so	 you	 have	 been	 learning	 archery	 to	 be	 a
champion?
Then	you	don't	love	archery	--	it	is	motivated,	it	is	goal-oriented.	You	can	never
be	 perfect	 because	 you	 are	 not	 directly	 related	 to	 archery.	 Archery	 is	 only	 a
means;	 the	 end	 is	 championhood.	But	 don't	 be	worried.	You	will	 have	 to	pass
just	 a	 little	 test,	 and	 I	will	give	you	 the	certificate	 --	 although	as	 long	as	 I	 am
alive,	remember	that	you	are	just	a	so-called	champion.	But	because	I	am	not	a
competitor,	you	can	enjoy	being	the	champion.
Just	come	out	with	me."
The	old	man	was	so	old...	his	back	was	bent,	he	had	become	hunch-backed.	He
took	the	young	man,	who	was	in	the	prime	of	his	youth,	to	a	cliff.	The	rock	of
the	cliff,	a	small	rock,	hung	high	over	a	valley,	thousands	of	feet	below.	And	the
old	man	went	on	that	small	rock	--	just	a	little	missed	step	and	nobody	would	be
able	to	find	you,	not	even	your	pieces	could	be	gathered.	He	went	to	the	very	end
of	the	cliff	and	stood	with	his	feet	on	the	edge	of	the	cliff,	 just	on	his	toes.	He
was	 standing	 there	unwavering,	 as	 if	 he	was	 standing	on	 solid	ground,	 and	he
said	to	the	young	man,	"Come."
The	young	man	took	the	first	step	and	started	trembling.	"My	god,	what	kind	of
test	is	this?	and	what	has	it	to	do	with	archery?"	But	he	has	to	do	it	because	the
championship	 is	 in	 his	 hands.	 After	 the	 first	 step	 he	 fell	 down	 on	 the	 cliff,
holding	the	cliff	and	saying,
"Please	forgive	me,	I	cannot	come	that	far.	And	I	cannot	stand	with	half	my	feet
over	the	edge	and	just	my	toes	on	the	rock.	And	I	can	see	--	I	have	never	seen
such	a	deep	valley.
It	must	be	the	very	hell!	Forgive	me...."
The	old	man	said,	"Then	what	kind	of	archer	are	you?	The	real	archery	is	not	to
hit	 the	 target;	 the	 real	 archery	 is	 that	 you	 should	 be	 unwavering.	 Your
unwavering	is	the	real	qualification	of	being	an	archer.	Then	your	target	cannot
be	missed."
The	old	man	came	back,	helped	the	young	man	to	stand	up	--	he	was	perspiring,
trembling,	almost	half	dead	--	and	the	old	man	said,	"Why	are	you	carrying	this
bow	and	these	arrows?	A	perfect	archer	throws	them	away."
The	young	man	said,	 "Again	 the	 same	 thing!	 I	don't	understand	why	a	perfect
archer	should	throw	them	away."
The	old	man	said,	"Look!"	And	he	pointed	towards	the	sky,	where	seven	cranes
were	flying.	The	old	man	simply	looked	at	those	seven	cranes,	and	they	all	fell
on	the	ground.
He	said,	"If	you	are	absolutely	stable,	absolutely	unmovable,	you	become	such	a
magnet	 that	 your	 eyes	 are	 enough;	 no	 arrows	 are	 needed.	 How	 many	 cranes
could	you	have	brought	to	the	earth?"
The	young	man	said,	"Of	course	by	one	arrow,	one.	And	by	that	time	the	others
would	have	gone	far	away."
The	old	man	said,	"You	are	just	a	learner.	You	have	not	even	found	a	master	who
can	 initiate	 you.	So	my	 suggestion	 is,	 go	 back,	 and	unless	 and	until	 you	have
forgotten	what	archery	is...	I	will	send	my	son	to	check	you	and	if	he	can	certify
you,	you	can	go	to	the	emperor."
He	said,	 "Strange,	 I	have	got	 into	 such	a	mess!	With	great	effort	 I	have	 learnt
archery	--
but	 certainly	 I	 am	 not	 that	 kind	 of	 archer	 whose	 eyes	 become	 arrows,	 whose
absolute	immobility	becomes	a	magnet."	But	he	touched	the	feet	of	the	old	man.
He	was	certainly	unique.	He	knew	he	was	no	comparison	to	him.
He	went	back.	The	man	had	said,	"Try	to	remain	unmoving..."	That's	a	way	of
meditation:	no	movement	of	thoughts...	utter	stillness.
After	twelve	years	the	old	man's	son	came.	He	said,	"My	father	is	dead,	but	he
has	left	this	message	with	me.	I	waited	for	twelve	years	before	I	came,	because
to	be	perfect	in	anything	is	not	easy."	And	then	he	suddenly	said,	"What	is	that
thing	that	is	hanging	on	your	wall?"	It	was	his	bow.
He	 said,	 "I	 somehow	 remember,	 it	 was	 something	 known	 to	 me.	 But	 these
twelve	 years,	 just	meditating,	 just	 remaining	 unmoving...	 You	 have	 to	 forgive
me,	I	have	forgotten	what	it	is."
The	young	man	said,	"That's	enough!	This	is	the	certificate	the	old	man	has	left
for	you.
Now	you	can	go	to	the	emperor	and	be	the	champion."
But	he	 said,	 "Now	who	wants	 to	be	 the	 champion?"	He	 tore	up	 the	 certificate
and	threw	it	away.
Chuang	 Tzu	 has	 told	 many	 beautiful	 stories	 unparalleled	 in	 the	 whole	 world,
stories	not	without	great	spiritual	significance.
When	a	musician,	Milarepa,	starts	shifting	his	attention	from	sounds	to	silence,
his	music	 becomes	 almost	 perfect;	when	he	 starts	 listening	only	 to	 the	 silence
and	forgets	all	about	sounds,	his	music	is	perfect.	And	to	show	the	perfection	he
throws	away	his	instruments;	they	are	a	kind	of	disturbance...	the	most	beautiful
disturbance	in	silence	--	but	a	disturbance	is	a	disturbance.
Music	comes	next	to	silence,	but	the	difference	is	very	big.	And	it	is	not	that	all
music	necessarily	comes	close	to	it.	In	the	name	of	music,	contemporary	idiots
are	doing	something	which	goes	even	farther	away	from	silence	--	from	Beatles
to	jazz	to	Talking	Heads.	It	is	not	music;	it	is	simply	making	noise!	It	is	simply
disturbing	the	silence.
In	the	East,	music	has	been	always	accepted	as	a	spiritual	phenomenon.	If	your
music	 cannot	 create	 silence	 in	 the	people	who	are	 listening,	 it	 is	not	music.	 If
your	 music	 does	 not	 become	 an	 unmoving	 no-mind	 in	 the	 people	 of	 your
audience,	it	is	not	music.	It	is	just	making	noise.
It	 happened	 in	 Lucknow,	 in	 the	 time	 of	 one	 of	 the	 very	 colorful	 kings	 of
Lucknow,	 Nawab	 Vazid	 Ali	 Shah.	 He	 was	 really	 a	 very	 incomparable	 man.
When	the	British	armies	were	entering	to	capture	Lucknow,	he	was	listening	to
music.	Somebody	told	him	that	the	enemies	had	entered	Lucknow,	and	he	said,
"Welcome	 them.	They	 are	 guests,	we	 are	 the	 host.	Make	 places	 for	 them.	We
have	so	many	places...	make	arrangements	for	them."
The	servant	said,	"But	they	have	come	to	conquer."
He	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	They	can	conquer,	but	first	let	them	rest.	What	is
the	hurry?	Conquering	is	not	going	to	be	a	difficult	problem	because	we	are	not
going	 to	 fight.	 We	 are	 human	 beings,	 and	 it	 does	 not	 matter...	 if	 they	 enjoy
ruling,	they	can	rule."
And	he	told	the	musicians,	"Go	on!"
This	was	the	kind	of	man	who	was	interested	in	a	musician	in	Varanasi.	He	was
thought	 to	 be	 the	 greatest	musician	 of	 those	 days,	 but	 his	 conditions	were	 so
strange	 that	 nobody	would	 even	 invite	 him	 to	 play	 his	music.	Vajid	Ali	 Shah
invited	him.
People	tried	to	prevent	him.	Friends,	courtiers,	wives,	everybody	said,	"What	are
you	doing?	That	man	is	mad.	He	is	a	great	musician,	but	he	is	certainly	mad."
He	 said,	 "It	 does	 not	 matter.	 If	 music	 cannot	 cure	 madness,	 then	 he	 is	 not	 a
musician;	 and	 if	 music	 cannot	 create	 a	 divine	 madness,	 then	 too	 he	 is	 not	 a
musician.	Let	him	come."
The	musician	came	and	said,	"My	condition	is	 that	while	I	am	playing	nobody
should	move.	 If	 anybody	moves	 his	 head,	 or	 anything,	 his	 head	 has	 to	 be	 cut
immediately.	All	around	 the	 listeners	swordsmen	with	naked	swords	should	be
standing	watching,	and	if	anybody	moves	--	finish!"
Lucknow	was	 one	 of	 the	most	 juicy	 places	 in	 India	 in	 those	 days.	 It	 has	 still
some	remnants	of	that	juice....	Knowing	the	conditions	--	because	the	conditions
were	also	declared	to	the	whole	town	--	ten	thousand	people	came	to	listen.	Even
the	musician	could	not	believe	 that	 ten	 thousand	people	are	 ready	 to	 risk	 their
life	to	listen	to	the	music.	When	the	music	ended	in	the	middle	of	the	night	the
officers	had	noted	down	almost	two	dozen	people	who	had	moved	their	head	in
appreciation,	despite	knowing	the	condition.	Vajid	Ali	Shah	said,	"What	do	you
say,	should	we	behead	them?"
He	said,	"No!	Everybody	now	should	be	allowed	to	go,	and	I	will	sing	for	those
twenty-four	--	 they	are	the	real	 lovers.	They	moved	their	heads,	 they	could	not
help	 it.	They	started	swaying	with	 the	music,	 they	became	one	with	 it.	All	 the
others	were	cowards,	sitting	like	statues."
Those	 twenty-four	 people	 were	 retained,	 and	 everybody	 was	 allowed	 to	 go.
People	were	afraid	--	perhaps	they	would	be	murdered.	But	in	the	morning	they
found	them	coming	back	home.	They	said,	"What	happened?"
Those	people	 said,	 "That	musician	knows	how	 to	 find	 the	 right	 audience.	The
real	music	began	when	you	had	all	left.	He	is	certainly	the	greatest	musician.	We
are	feeling	so	pure	and	so	fresh	and	so	clean	as	we	have	never	felt	in	our	life.	He
has	managed	to	initiate	us	into	meditation."
Milarepa,	 music	 is	 certainly	 next	 to	 meditation.	 But	 not	 the	 modern	 music,
which	 is	 ugly,	which	 is	 sexual,	which	draws	you	 lower	 rather	 than	 taking	you
upwards.	 It	 does	 not	 give	 you	 more	 consciousness,	 higher	 skies	 to	 fly	 in;	 it
brings	you	down,	back	to	deeper	gutters.
The	 real	musicians	will	 not	 accept	 this	 nonsense	 that	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 name	 of
music.	 But	 young	 people	who	 know	 nothing	 about	music,	who	 know	 nothing
about	meditation,	who	know	nothing	 about	 silence,	 become	 fans,	 and	 they	 are
mad	 about	 these	 idiots	 who	 think	 they	 are	 playing	music.	 In	 any	 other	 wiser
generation	they	would	have	been	kept	in	psychiatric	hospitals	to	be	cured.	They
have	gone	berserk!
A	violinist	was	convinced	he	could	use	his	art	in	music	to	tame	wild	animals.	So,
violin	in	hand,	he	traveled	to	the	heart	of	the	African	jungle	to	prove	it.	He	had
no	sooner	begun	to	play	 than	 the	 jungle	clearing	was	filled	with	animals	of	all
kinds.	Birds,	lions,	hippos,	elephants	all	stood	round,	entranced	by	his	beautiful
music.
Just	then	a	crocodile	crawled	out	of	the	nearby	river	and	into	the	clearing	and	--
snap!	--
gobbled	 up	 the	 violinist.	The	 other	 animals	were	 extremely	 angry.	 "You	 idiot!
What	on	earth	did	you	do	that	for?"	they	demanded.	"We	were	enjoying	that."
The	crocodile	put	his	hand	on	his	ear	and	said,	"What?"
Music	can	be	understood	only	by	those	who	have	a	musical	ear.	And	those	who
have	a	musical	ear	should	think	themselves	fortunate	because	beyond	music,	just
one	step	more,	they	enter	the	world	of	meditation,	silence.
Silence	is	the	ultimate	music.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 SEE	 YOU	 HERE	 WITH	 US,	 MY	 HEART	 MELTS,	 AND	 YOUR
SILENCE
BECKONS	ME	FROM	OUT	ACROSS	THE	SEA.	WHEN	YOU	SPEAK,	MY
THIRSTY	BEING	DRINKS	DEEPLY	OF	YOUR	COOL	DRAUGHT,	 THEN
RESTS
ITS	DRUNKEN	HEAD	AT	YOUR	FEET.	WHEN	I	REMEMBER	YOU,	I	FLY
LIKE	A	BIRD	IN	THE	OPEN	SKY.
BUT	WHEN	YOU	DANCE	WITH	US	BELOVED	MASTER,	IT	FEELS	AS	IF
ALL
THINGS	ARE	SET	RIGHT	WITH	THE	UNIVERSE,	AND	THE	INCREDIBLE
SENSE
OF	 HARMONY	 VIBRATES	 SKYWARD	 FROM	 THIS	 TEMPLE	 OF	 LIFE.
EVEN	MY
GUITAR	CLOSES	ITS	EYES	AND	SHEDS	A	TEAR	OF	CONTENTMENT.
Milarepa,	this	is	the	moment	I	have	been	living	for:	to	share	with	you	the	miracle
that	has	happened	to	me.	I	try	in	every	possible	way	to	make	a	way	towards	your
heart.	 Slowly,	 slowly	 people	 are	 getting	 the	 clarity	 and	 the	 insight	 and	 the
heartfulness.
Temples	are	not	made	of	bricks	and	stones.
Temples	are	made	of	dancing	hearts	--	I	mean	real	temples.
I	 know	 this	 is	 not	 only	 your	 situation.	 There	 are	 many	 who	 will	 share	 your
question	as	their	own.	But	living	in	this	insane	world...	You	can	understand	my
difficulty.
I	 wanted	 it	 to	 happen	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 but	 those	 insane	 people	 are	 against
themselves;	they	are	completely	closed.	They	are	open	to	any	kind	of	stupidity,
but	they	are	not	open	to	sanity.	They	are	ready	to	do	everything	for	destruction,
but	they	are	not	ready	to	make	this	small	life	a	life	of	pure	joy	and	dance	--	and
that	was	my	whole	effort.
But	 the	 people	 for	 whom	 I	 wanted	 it	 to	 happen	 and	 for	 whom	 I	 worked	my
whole	life	are	the	people	who	would	like	to	kill	me.	Now	twenty-one	countries
are	closed	for	me.	It	has	never	happened	before.	It	is	unprecedented	that	without
any	reason...
I	have	never	been	in	those	countries,	I	have	not	even	applied	for	a	visa	to	enter	in
those	countries.	But	they	have	taken	precautions.	Their	parliaments	have	passed
laws	 that	 not	 only	 can	 I	 not	 enter	 in	 their	 countries,	 even	my	 jet-plane	 cannot
land	 on	 their	 airports,	 just	 for	 fueling,	 because	 my	 presence	 can	 create
immorality,	anti-traditional	revolution,	unorthodox	ideas.
In	short,	every	country's	parliament	has	said	that	I	can	corrupt	the	young	people
of	 their	 country;	 hence,	 as	 a	 precaution,	 the	 law	 was	 passed	 --	 unanimously.
Have	I	corrupted	you?	Have	I	destroyed	your	consciousness?	Have	I	destroyed
your	love?	Have	I	destroyed	your	gratitude	towards	existence?
But	it	seems	idiots	have	always	been	in	power.	And	those	idiots	are	almost	the
same	as	the	"deaf	crocodile":	they	can't	understand	music,	they	can't	understand
love,	 they	 can't	 understand	 beauty,	 they	 can't	 understand	 art,	 they	 can't
understand	 meditation	 --	 but	 they	 pretend	 that	 they	 are	 the	 most	 intelligent
people	in	the	world	because	they	have	the	power.
Power	does	not	make	you	 intelligent.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 absolutely	wrong	 that	 I	 can
corrupt	people.	It	is	a	well	known	fact	that	power	corrupts	people	--	and	I	don't
have	any	power.
They	 have	 all	 the	 power.	 The	 people	 in	 all	 these	 parliaments	 are	 already
corrupted,	and	they	are	going	beyond	the	limits	of	any	conceivable	intelligence.
How	 can	 I	 corrupt	 just	 in	 fifteen	 minutes	 re-fueling	 my	 airplane	 on	 their	 so-
called	international	airports?	These	are	not	international	airports...!	And	if	I	can
corrupt	 their	 country	 sitting	 in	my	 airplane,	 I	 can	 corrupt	 from	 here	 perfectly
well!	And	I	will	do	everything	I	can	to	corrupt,	because	my	corruption	is	against
all	 that	 is	ugly,	 all	 that	 is	brutal,	 all	 that	 is	violent,	 all	 that	 is	oriented	 towards
war.
I	will	corrupt	these	people,	and	their	minds.
I	would	like	them	to	be	more	loving,	to	be	more	friendly,	to	be	more	open,	to	be
more	available,	to	be	more	sharing	of	their	joy	and	song	and	dance.
It	is	a	strange	world.	German	sannyasins	had	applied	just	for	a	three-week	visa
for	me.
Germany	 has	 the	 greatest	 number	 of	 sannyasins	 in	 the	 world,	 the	 most
flourishing	 discos,	 restaurants,	 meditation	 centers	 --	 and	 the	 government	 is
simply	being	cowardly,	impotent.
And	 these	 are	 the	 descendants	 of	 Adolf	 Hitler!	 Even	 in	 his	 grave	 he	 will	 be
feeling	ashamed	of	these	idiots.
The	same	day	that	I	was	refused	and	the	parliament	passed	an	order	that	I	cannot
enter,	they	allowed	a	terrorist	conference,	an	international	conference	in	Berlin.
These	people	are	murderers.	These	people	are	doing	all	kinds	of	harassment	 --
destroying	 property,	 hijacking	 airplanes,	 throwing	 bombs	 on	 innocent	 people.
But	 their	 international	conference	 is	not	a	problem	at	all,	because	 they	fit	with
the	politicians.
I	am	a	trouble	--	a	single	individual,	with	no	weapons	--	because	I	don't	fit	with
their	insane	ideologies.	And	they	are	aware	that	if	people	try	to	understand	me,
they	are	going	to	leave	their	fold.
But	 it	 is	your	 responsibility	now.	You	are	here	 from	all	 over	 the	world.	When
you	go	back...	they	cannot	prevent	you	in	your	own	country.	You	have	to	spread
the	 silence,	 the	 music,	 the	 beautitude	 of	 meditation,	 with	 all	 your	 heart	 in	 it,
because	now	that	seems	to	be	the	only	way	for	me.
Governments	are	ordering	newspapers,	news	media,	that	even	my	name	should
not	be	mentioned.	And	I	can	see...	Just	the	last	days	the	international	exhibition
of	 books	 in	 Moscow	 ended.	 We	 received	 information	 from	 Lani	 that	 our
meditation	has	been	the	greatest	success;	no	stall	was	so	overcrowded.	We	could
not	manage:	we	had	the	biggest	stall,	but	an	average	of	one	hundred	people	were
continuously	 there	 the	whole	day,	 thousands	came	and	went	 --	and	other	 stalls
were	empty.	But	 the	newspapers	have	reported	about	all	 the	stalls	except	ours:
my	name	should	not	be	mentioned.
The	government	officials	have	come	to	visit	all	the	stalls	except	our	stall,	but	the
opinion	of	the	people	was	totally	different.	An	old	man	used	to	come	every	day
in	the	morning;	because	he	had	no	money,	he	would	sit	there	and	read	as	much
as	he	could	manage	until	closing	time.	And	he	said	to	Lani	--	obviously	asking
her	not	to	mention	his	name	--	that	Russia	needs	Rajneesh,	not	vodka!
Because	 people	 don't	 have	 private	 money	 they	 started	 stealing	 books,	 and	 I
informed	Lani	to	encourage	them	to	steal!	Three	KGB	agents	were	continuously
present	on	 the	stall,	watching	carefully	 the	people	who	are	coming,	and	by	 the
second	day,	even	the	KGB	agents	had	become	immensely	polite	and	interested.
They	 said,	 "This	 is	 a	 strange	 place.	You	 people	 are	 allowing	 anybody	 to	 take
anything."
I	 had	 told	 them,	 "Ignore	 it	 if	 you	 see	 somebody	 stealing	 because	 it	 hurts	 the
person's	dignity.	Just	don't	see	--	let	him	take!	Let	the	books	reach	to	the	people.
Just	tell	them	to	read	it	and	pass	it	on;	that	is	the	price!
They	confiscated	all	our	tapes	and	videos,	because	first	they	must	see	what	is	in
them.
After	 two	 days	 they	 released	 them	 and	 thousands	 of	 people	 had	 tears	 in	 their
eyes:	 "We	 have	 been	 living	 for	 seventy	 years	 in	 absolute	 darkness;	 we	 don't
know	what	is	happening	outside."
When	 Lani	 comes	 she	 is	 going	 to	 bring	 many	 beautiful	 stories.	 Even	 the
president	of	the	exhibition	took	her	aside	and	asked	her,	looking	at	my	beard	and
my	pictures,	"Is	 this	man	something	 like	Leo	Tolstoy	 in	 India?	We	have	never
heard	about	him."
The	whole	country	has	been	kept	under	such	concentration	camp	conditions	that
they	 don't	 know	 what	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 world	 since	 1917,	 and	 now	 it	 is
1987...	 seventy	years.	Russia	has	 lived	 in	darkness	 --	utter	darkness.	Whatever
the	government	wants	them	to	know,	they	know.
It	is	now	your	responsibility,	because	they	will	not	allow	me	anyway.	And	what
they	call	their	tradition,	their	religion,	their	ideology,	is	so	hilarious....
Just	a	few	months	before	I	had	been	thrown	out,	deported	from	Greece,	without
being	given	any	reason.	They	just	told	the	Greek	sannyasins,	"The	archbishop	of
the	Greek	 orthodox	 church	 does	 not	want	 him	 in	 the	 country,	 because	 he	 can
destroy	young	people's	minds.	We	cannot	help.	He	has	to	leave,	although	his	visa
is	still	valid	for	fifteen	days,	and	we	don't	have	any	legal	right	to	cancel	it	unless
he	has	committed	some	murder	or	some	heinous	crime.	He	has	not	even	come
out	of	the	room...."
And	 just	 a	 few	 days	 before,	 one	 archbishop	 of	 the	 same	 orthodox	 church	 of
Greece	 had	 been	 caught	 on	 the	 airport	 of	 Paris,	 hiding	 heroin	 in	 his	 religious
paraphernalia	--	a	large	amount	of	heroin.	This	is	their	religion...!
The	pope	 runs	a	bank	 in	 the	Vatican.	The	Vatican	 is	an	 independent	 sovereign
state	--
although	it	is	only	eight	square	miles	--	and	the	Italian	government	has	issued	a
warrant	 against	 the	manager	 of	 the	 bank,	 because	 the	 bank	 is	 doing	 only	 one
thing:	 it	 is	 turning	 all	 Italian	mafia	money	 into	white	money.	 That	 is	 its	 only
source	of	income.	Otherwise	from	where...?
The	pope	goes	on	getting	the	money	and	wasting	it.	Now	he	is	going	for	a	tour	to
America;	 estimated	 expenses	will	 be	 twenty	million	 dollars.	When	 he	went	 to
Australia	 his	 expenses	were	more	 than	Queen	 Elizabeth,	who	 had	 visited	 just
before	him.	All	this	money	is	heroin	money.
Now	rather	than	allowing	the	Italian	government	to	arrest	the	man...	they	cannot
enter	 into	another	country;	 they	have	 to	wait	 for	whenever	 the	manager	comes
out.	 The	 manager	 was	 only	 a	 bishop,	 but	 the	 pope	 has	 raised	 him	 into	 an
archbishop,	because	he	has	been	doing	such	good	work!
These	people	have	to	be	fought	by	you.
You	have	to	take	my	heart	with	you.
You	are	not	to	be	a	missionary.
You	have	to	be	a	message.
We	 don't	 convert	 anybody.	We	 simply	want	 everybody	 to	 be	 himself,	 and	we
want	 to	 destroy	 all	 life-negative	 attitudes	 imposed	 on	 man,	 so	 all	 chains	 fall
down	--	and	the	dance	will	come	on	its	own.
I	preach	life,	I	preach	love.	I	preach	music,	I	preach	silence.	To	me	these	are	the
constituents	 of	 an	 authentic	 religiousness.	 All	 else	 is	 simply	 bullshit,	 holy
bullshit!
Just	to	listen	to	your	laughter...!
A	magician	 performed	brilliantly	 in	 the	 saloon	 of	 an	 ocean	 liner.	On	 this	 ship
there	was	a	parrot	who	hated	the	magician.	Every	time	the	magician	did	a	trick,
the	parrot	would	scream:	"Phony,	phony,	take	him	away!"
One	day	the	ship	sank	and	both	the	parrot	and	the	magician	ended	up	on	a	life
raft	together.	The	first	day	passed;	they	said	nothing.	Two	days	passed;	still	they
said	nothing.
Finally	the	parrot	could	bear	it	no	longer.	He	glared	suspiciously	at	the	magician
and	squawked:	"Okay,	wise	guy,	you	and	your	tricks...	what	did	you	do	with	the
ship?"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	Cowards	cannot	enter	here
15	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709155
ShortTitle:
PILGR19
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	IS	NOW	BECOMING	TOO	MUCH.	THE	GOSSIPS	ARE	GOING	RIGHT
AND
LEFT.	EVEN	I	HAVE	STARTED	SUSPECTING	WHETHER	I	AM	OLD	OR
JUST	A	WOMAN.	PLEASE	SAY	SOME	WORDS	OF	COMFORT.
Devageet,	 it	 is	 true;	 now	 it	 is	 becoming	 too	much.	 I	 have	 just	 seen	 you	 five
minutes	ago:	neither	are	you	old	nor	are	you	a	woman.	But	gossips	can	affect....
If	everybody	is	talking	about	it,	even	if	it	is	a	lie,	it	starts	looking	like	a	truth.	So
obviously	you	need	some	words	of	comfort.
First:	a	gossip	is	a	gossip.	It	is	not	even	a	yawn,	because:
...	A	yawn	 is	 at	 least	 an	honest	 opinion.	And	 if	 you	 start	 listening	 to	 all	 these
gossips,	there	is	a	great	danger.
...	We	can	easily	forget	ourselves	when	no	one	knows	who	we	are	--	and	you	are
included	 in	 those	 who	 do	 not	 know.	 In	 fact,	 whatever	 you	 think	 you	 are	 is
nothing	but	a	collective	gossip	called	your	personality.	Because	everyone	agrees
upon	it,	it	becomes	a	truth.
Adolf	 Hitler	 based	 his	 whole	 philosophy	 on	 this	 simple	 maxim,	 that	 a	 lie
repeated	 often	 is	 truth,	 and	 a	 truth	 not	 repeated	 often	 is	 forgotten.	 And	 the
trouble	 is,	 the	 lie	 is	going	 to	be	 repeated	often	because	 it	 is	consoling;	 it	hurts
nobody.	 It	 is	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 others,	 it	 costs	 you	 nothing.	And	 truth	 is	 not	 even
mentioned;	it	is	one	of	the	most	unmentionable	things	in	the	world	for	the	simple
reason	that	it	will	disturb	too	many	people.
It	 is	 not	 coincidence	 that	 many	 mystics	 became	 silent	 and	 remained	 silent	 --
because	there	were	only	two	alternatives:	either	to	say	the	truth	and	be	crucified,
or	to	tell	a	lie,	which	is	consoling,	comfortable,	respectable.	Certainly	a	mystic
does	not	bother	about	respectability	--	who	cares	to	be	respected	by	people	who
are	absolutely	unconscious	and	asleep?	What	they	think	is	their	problem.
But	the	trouble	is,	if	we	are	also	asleep,	then	who	knows?	--	they	may	be	right.
Because	we	don't	know	what	we	are,	who	we	are,	we	are	nothing	but	the	public
opinion...	and	then	gossip	becomes	a	very	significant	factor.	The	only	way	to	get
rid	of	it	is	to	know	yourself	on	your	own.	Then	you	are	neither	old	nor	young,
neither	man	nor	woman.	You	are	simply	a	pure	consciousness	which	has	no	age
because	it	is	eternal.	And	it	has	no	genital	differences;	a	woman	does	not	have	a
different	consciousness	from	a	man.
At	the	height	of	consciousness	all	duality	disappears.
So	the	best	thing	that	I	can	say	to	you	is,	Discover	yourself;	otherwise	you	have
to	depend	on	other	people's	opinions	who	don't	know	themselves.
And	you	want	a	few	words	of	comfort....
In	Germany	there	is	a	proverb:	Many	a	good	tune	is	played	on	an	old	violin.	So
don't	 be	 worried;	 just	 being	 old	 is	 not	 a	 condemnation.	Many	 a	 good	 tune	 is
played	on	an	old	violin.	And	 there	 are	 things	which	become	more	precious	 as
they	become	old.	 Just	 like	wine	or	holy	scriptures,	 they	become	holier	as	 they
become	older.
You	just	wait.	These	gossipers	are	going	to	run	to	the	logical	conclusion.	Soon
they	will	 say,	 "Devageet	 is	 ancient."	 But	 it	 may	 be	 that	 not	many	 people	 are
gossiping	about	you,	 just	 the	few	--	and	mind	has	a	 tendency	 to	exaggerate,	 to
make	everything	big.
...	 Just	 because	 you	 are	 paranoid,	 it	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 you	 are	 not	 being
followed.	I	am	not	saying	that.
I	am	not	saying	that	nobody	is	gossiping,	but	 the	number	may	not	be	so	great.
Because	everybody	is	so	concerned	with	himself,	nobody	has	time	for	anybody
else	--	except	people	like	me,	who	have	nothing	to	do	in	the	world.
From	my	very	childhood	my	father	used	to	remind	me	again	and	again,	"Stop	the
way	you	are	behaving,	 stop	 the	way	you	are	growing,	 because	 in	 the	 end	you
will	 become	 good	 for	 nothing."	 And	 he	 was	 right:	 I	 have	 become	 good	 for
nothing.
I	don't	have	a	single	thing	to	do	in	the	world.	And	because	I	am	not	going	to	live
in	this	world	forever,	why	should	I	care?	Sitting	in	a	waiting	room	in	an	airport,
who	cares	what	people	think	about	you?	You	should	keep	your	ears	alert	when
your	airplane	is	leaving.
All	these	idiots	will	be	left	behind.
And	 as	 far	 as	 the	 question	 of	 being	 a	 woman	 is	 concerned,	 Socrates	 has
tremendously	 solacing	words	 for	 you	 --	 and	 Socrates	 is	 a	man	 of	 tremendous
experience	 as	 far	 as	 women	 are	 concerned.	 He	 had	 the	 worst	 woman	 in	 the
whole	history	of	man.	Her	name	was	also	as	terrible	as	she	was:	Xanthippe.
Socrates	 says,	 "Once	 made	 equal	 to	 man,	 woman	 becomes	 immediately
superior."	 Not	 to	 let	 her	 become	 superior,	 there	 is	 only	 one	way:	 to	 keep	 her
down,	inferior.	Equality	is	not	possible	at	all;	 the	moment	the	woman	becomes
equal,	she	is	already	superior.	The	reality	is	that	even	in	her	being	inferior,	she
knows	perfectly	who	is	superior.
In	 a	 small	 school	 a	 teacher	 asked	 the	 little	kids,	 "Do	you	know	of	 any	animal
who	when	he	goes	out	of	the	house	he	goes	like	a	lion,	and	when	he	comes	back
into	the	house	he	comes	like	a	mouse?"
Little	Ernie	 raised	his	hand.	He	was	 the	 last	 person	 to	do	 something	 like	 that.
The	teacher	said,	"Good,	Ernie.	Do	you	know	the	animal?"
He	said,	 "I	know	perfectly.	He	 is	my	dad.	When	he	goes	out,	 then	you	see	he
looks	like	a	lion,	and	when	he	comes	in,	then	you	see	he	looks	like	a	mouse."
Every	child	knows	it.
I	have	come	across	a	tremendous	statement:
...	Man	will	be	the	last	thing	civilized	by	a	woman.
The	woman	goes	on	civilizing	from	childhood;	she	tries	to	civilize	the	children,
then	she	tries	to	civilize	the	husband,	and	this	goes	on.	But	man	will	be	the	last
thing;	he	is	almost	impossible.	Civilization	does	not	suit	his	taste.
In	case	you	are	worried	about	what	is	going	to	become	of	you,	you	are	going	to
become	old	and	almost	a	woman.	But	I	am	saying,	almost	a	woman....	So	never
worry	about	 the	future,	 it	 is	certain.	You	are	going	to	become	old,	and	you	are
going	to	become	almost	like	a	woman:	suspicious,	jealous,	irritable,	annoyed	for
no	reason	at	all.
Even	the	most	beautiful	woman	turns	out	to	be	terrible	--	terrific!	It	is	a	miracle
of	nature.
Just	 keep	 away!	From	 the	 distance	 the	woman	 looks	 divine,	 and	 as	 you	 come
closer	and	open	your	eyes,	you	say,	"My	god,	here	is	the	devil!"
...	Women	are	dressed	but	very	few	are	clothed.
The	case	with	men	is	just	the	opposite:	men	are	clothed,	but	very	rarely	dressed.
Simple	differences,	but	of	great	psychological	importance.
Devageet,	 there	 is	nothing	 to	be	worried	about,	because	 love	 is	as	blind	 in	old
age	as	ever,	but	the	neighbors	are	never	blind	--	so	beware	of	the	neighbors.	Old
age	cannot	disturb	your	blind	love.
You	have	asked	for	some	consoling	advice...	but
...	A	good	scare	is	worth	more	to	a	man	than	good	advice.
...	Advice	is	the	only	thing	everybody	gives	and	nobody	takes.
In	old	age,	Devageet,	the	past	always	looks	better	than	it	was.	It	is	only	pleasant
because	 it	 is	not	 there	now;	 that	 is	 the	beauty	of	old	age.	Youth	 looks	golden;
childhood	looks	almost	diamond.	Everything	 that	 is	no	 longer	 there	becomes	a
long	history	of	beautiful	experiences.	When	you	were	a	child,	you	never	enjoyed
it.	Every	child	wants	to	grow	up	as	soon	and	as	quickly	as	possible,	because	he
can	 see	 that	 people	 who	 are	 grown	 up	 are	 powerful,	 are	 capable	 of	 doing
anything	 they	want	 to	 do,	 have	 all	 the	money.	Naturally	 every	 child	wants	 to
grow	up	faster.	No	child	enjoys	his	childhood.
If	a	child	can	enjoy	his	childhood,	he	will	be	able	to	enjoy	his	youth	and	he	will
be	able	to	enjoy	his	old	age,	and	he	will	be	able	finally	to	enjoy	even	his	death.
Everything	begins	from	the	beginning.
But	I	have	never	come	across	a	child	who	enjoys	it.	He	is	waiting	for	youth	to
come,	when	he	will	enjoy.	And	youth	is	a	time	of	great	turmoil:	up	and	down...	it
is	 troublesome,	 no	 rest.	 Either	 chasing	 or	 being	 chased;	 either	 fighting	 or	 just
preparing	for	fight...	you	cannot	even	sit	silently.
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	asking	me,	just	as	Devageet	is	asking,	"What	to	do?	The
moment	I	utter	any	single	word,	my	wife	just	grabs	me	and	the	fight	starts."
So	I	said,	"Why	don't	you	sit	silently?	Why	do	you	start	even	a	single	word?"
He	said,	"I	have	tried	that.	She	grabbed	that	too,	she	immediately	said,	`Why	are
you	sitting	silently?	What	is	 the	meaning	of	it?	Are	you	trying	to	ignore	me?	I
am	here	and	you	are	sitting	silent.'"
I	said,	"Then	it	is	very	difficult.	You	can	only	do	two	things:	either	you	can	be
silent	or	you	can	speak.	Then	do	one	thing:	agree	with	your	wife	--	just	to	avoid
confrontation,	whatever	she	says,	agree."
He	said,	"Osho,	you	are	unmarried,	you	don't	know.	The	moment	you	agree	with
a	 woman	 she	 changes	 the	 subject.	 And	 if	 you	 go	 on	 agreeing	 with	 her,
bankruptcy	is	not	far	away."
...	When	a	man	gets	up	to	speak,	people	listen,	 then	look.	When	a	woman	gets
up,	people	look.	Then,	if	they	like	what	they	see,	they	listen.
It	 is	 impossible	 to	 create	 an	 equality	 between	 men	 and	 women.	 The	 whole
women's	liberation	movement	is	an	utter	absurdity.	It	is	a	futile	exercise	which	is
not	going	to	lead	anywhere	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	unique,	they	are
not	 equal.	 Nobody	 is	 superior;	 nobody	 is	 inferior.	 They	 are	 just	 two	 different
species	accidentally	living	together:	they	speak	different	languages,	they	belong
to	different	kinds	of	minds.	I	have	never	seen	a	man	and	a	woman	having	a	nice
conversation	--	never!
If	 you	 want	 to	 have	 a	 nice	 conversation	 with	 a	 woman,	 there	 are	 a	 few
requirements.
First,	 she	 must	 not	 be	 your	 wife.	 Secondly,	 she	 must	 be	 the	 wife	 of	 your
neighbor.	And	thirdly,	the	conversation	cannot	be	too	long	--	just	a	few	minutes
is	perfectly	good.	The	longer	you	stay	together,	the	more	difficult	it	becomes	to
have	a	nice	conversation.
Women	know	only	nice	conflicts.	In	their	own	way	they	are	warriors.	They	fight
with	 different	 kinds	 of	weapons;	 their	 strategy	 is	 different;	 their	 diplomacy	 is
different.	And	man	is	always	at	a	loss	what	to	do,	because	he	cannot	understand
the	diplomacy.
Homosexuals	all	over	the	world	are	called	gay	people	--	not	without	any	reason,
but	 because	 they	 understand	 each	 other,	 they	 are	 both	 happy,	 have	 nice
conversations.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	nothing	else	 to	do	 than	have	nice	conversations.
They	enjoy	each	other's	company
--	same	mind,	same	species,	same	language.
It	happened	in	the	second	world	war....
For	five	years	Adolf	Hitler	went	on	winning	for	the	very	strange	reason	that	he
never	 listened	to	his	generals.	He	had	brought	astrologers	from	Tibet,	and	they
decided	 the	whole	 strategy	 of	 his	 war	 fronts.	 The	 generals	were	 beating	 their
heads,	"These	idiots	don't	know	anything	about	military	science,	and	stars	are	no
more	interested	in	who	wins	or	who	is	defeated."
But	 they	 themselves	 were	 amazed	 because	 Hitler	 went	 on	 winning.	 In	 the
beginning	 they	 were	 shaky,	 but	 soon	 they	 understood	 that	 perhaps	 they	 are
wrong,	 he	 is	 right.	 Perhaps	 stars	 have	 something	 to	 do	with	 it,	 because	 he	 is
winning,	and	nothing	is	a	greater	proof	of	being	true	than	winning.	And	you	will
be	surprised	that	all	the	generals	of	different	countries	who	were	fighting	against
Adolf	Hitler	were	at	a	loss	--	because	whatever	they	expected,	Hitler	never	did
that,	and	what	they	never	expected,	he	always	did	that.	They	were	not	aware	that
he	was	not	functioning	through	military	science.
And	all	those	generals	knew,	from	this	side	to	the	other	side,	the	same	science.
They	knew	what	any	general	 is	going	 to	do:	he	 is	going	 to	attack	 the	weakest
point	 of	 the	 enemy.	 So	 naturally	 the	 enemy	 will	 gather	 all	 his	 forces	 at	 the
weakest	point....	But	Hitler	was	not	being	directed	by	generals.	And	he	would
direct,	"Attack	where	the	enemy	is	the	strongest.	If	you	can	defeat	him	there	it	is
finished.	Then	everything	else	can	be	defeated	very	easily."	The	argument	was
correct.	He	attacked	the	strongest	points,	but	they	had	become	weakest	because
of	the	military	science.	All	the	armies	had	been	moved	to	the	weaker	points.
Finally,	 Churchill	 got	 the	 idea	 what	 was	 happening.	 And	 then	 from	 India
astrologers	 were	 taken	 to	 England	 and	 told,	 "Now	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 a	 war
amongst	the	stars.	You	decide;	it	is	whatever	you	say."	And	the	moment	Indian
astrologers	 started	 deciding,	 ordering	 the	 generals,	 that	 was	 the	 beginning	 of
Adolf	 Hitler's	 fall,	 because	 Tibetan	 astrology	 is	 only	 a	 by-product	 of	 Indian
astrology.	It	knows	much	less	than	Indian	astrology	knows.
Now	 it	 was	 a	 question	 between	 Indian	 astrology	 and	 Tibetan	 astrology,	 not	 a
question	between	Germans	and	English	and	Americans	and	French.	They	were
out	of	the	game.
The	game	was	being	played	by	 two	different	kinds	of	astrologies.	But	Tibetan
astrology	is	simply	a	by-product	of	Indian	astrology,	just	as	Tibetan	religion	is	a
by-product	 of	 Indian	 religion.	 Tibet	 has	 nothing	 original	 to	 it;	 everything	 is
borrowed	from	India.	So	the	Indian	astrologers	were	in	a	higher	position.
Man	always	finds	it	difficult	to	understand	women,	and	even	the	greatest	poets
have	 been	writing	 poetry	 and	 saying	 that	 the	woman	 is	 a	mystery.	 It	 is	 not	 a
mystery;	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 two	 different	 species	 accidentally	 falling	 together.
They	don't	understand	each	other's	diplomacy,	each	other's	 tactics,	each	other's
way	of	understanding.	The	husband	thinks	he	is	continuously	misunderstood;	the
wife	thinks	she	is	continuously	misunderstood.
It	is	a	great	chance	for	you,	Devageet:	you	have	been	a	man	for	so	many	years;
now	be	a	woman,	so	that	you	can	know	both	the	territories.	Your	experience	will
be	far	richer.	And	in	fact,	many	people	actually	are	changing	their	sex	through
plastic	surgery.
Just	 today	 I	 was	 informed	 by	 Anando	 that	 billions	 of	 dollars	 are	 spent	 in
America	on	plastic	 surgery	alone.	Almost	half	 a	million	people	 every	year	 are
going	 through	 plastic	 surgery.	 In	 the	 beginning	 the	 age	 group	 that	 used	 to	 go
through	 plastic	 surgery	 was	 when	 a	 woman...	 and	 it	 was	 confined	 only	 to
women.	 When	 a	 woman	 started	 feeling	 old,	 she	 used	 to	 go	 through	 plastic
surgery	to	remain	a	little	younger,	a	few	days	more	attractive.
But	 the	 recent	development	 is	 that	 the	majority	of	people	 in	America	who	are
going	 for	 plastic	 surgery	 are	 men,	 not	 women,	 because	 now	 they	 want	 to	 be
young	a	little	longer.
Deep	down	 they	will	become	older,	but	 their	 skin	will	 show	 the	 tightness	of	a
young	man.
And	the	most	surprising	thing	in	the	report	was	that	even	a	twenty-three	year	old
boy	has	gone	through	plastic	surgery	to	look	younger.
America	is	certainly	the	land	of	the	lunatics.	Now	if	a	twenty-three	year	old	boy
thinks	that	he	needs	to	look	younger,	what	about	Devageet?
It	is	so	ugly	to	go	against	nature.
It	is	so	beautiful	to	go	in	tune	with	nature	and	whatever	gifts	it	brings,	childhood
or	 youth	 or	 old	 age.	 If	 your	 acceptance	 and	 your	 welcoming	 heart	 is	 ready,
everything	that	nature	brings	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
And	 according	 to	my	 understanding	 --	 and	 the	whole	 of	 the	Eastern	 seers	 are
behind	me,	in	support	--	man	becomes	really	beautiful	and	graceful	at	the	highest
point	of	his	age,	when	all	foolishnesses	of	youth	are	gone;	when	all	ignorance	of
childhood	 has	 disappeared;	 when	 one	 has	 transcended	 the	 whole	 world	 of
mundane	experiences	and	has	reached	to	a	point	where	he	can	be	a	witness	on
the	hills	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the	world	 is	moving	down	 in	 the	dark	dismal	 valleys,
blindly	groping.
The	 idea	 of	 remaining	 continuously	 young	 is	 so	 ugly	 that	 the	 whole	 world
should	be	made	aware	of	it.	By	forcing	yourself	to	be	young,	you	simply	become
more	tense.	You	will	never	become	relaxed.
And	if	plastic	surgery	is	going	to	succeed	--	and	it	is	going	to	become	a	bigger
and	 bigger	 profession	 in	 the	 world	 --	 then	 you	 will	 find	 a	 strange	 thing
happening.	Everybody	starts	looking	alike:	everybody	has	the	same	size	of	nose,
which	is	decided	by	computers;	everybody	has	the	same	kind	of	face,	the	same
cut.	It	will	not	be	a	beautiful	world.	It	will	lose	all	its	variety;	it	will	lose	all	its
beautiful	differences.
People	will	become	almost	like	machines	--	all	alike,	coming	from	the	assembly
line	like	Ford	cars	one	by	one.	They	say	every	minute	one	car	comes	out	of	the
Ford	factory,	similar	to	another	following	it	--	in	one	hour,	sixty	cars...	 twenty-
four	hours	it	goes	on.
Shifts	of	workers	go	on	changing,	but	the	assembly	line	goes	on	producing	the
same	cars.
Do	 you	want	 humanity	 also	 to	 be	 streamlined,	 assembled	 in	 a	 factory	 exactly
like	 everybody	 else,	 that	wherever	 you	 go	 you	meet	 Sophia	 Loren?	 It	will	 be
very	boring.
...	The	way	to	fight	a	woman,	Devageet,	is	with	your	head:	grab	it	and	run.
...	All	would	like	to	live	long,	but	none	would	like	to	be	old.
Why?	--	because	of	the	next	stage.	Nobody	is	really	afraid	of	old	age,	but	after
old	 age	 is	 death	 and	 nothing	 else.	 So	 everybody	would	 like	 to	 live	 as	 long	 as
possible,	 but	 never	 to	 become	 old,	 because	 to	 become	 old	 means	 you	 have
entered	into	the	area	of	death.	Deep	down	the	fear	of	becoming	old	is	a	fear	of
death.	And	only	those	who	don't	know	how	to	live	are	afraid	of	death.
Devageet,	don't	be	afraid	of	anything.	You	have	been	with	me...	one	of	the	most
beautiful	persons	with	a	great	sense	of	humor.	 I	have	 loved	Devageet	so	much
that	just	to	be	with	him	I	have	allowed	him	to	drill	all	my	teeth.
I	am	rare	in	many	ways	--	I	have	told	you.	One	of	our	sannyasins	from	England
has	just	come,	because	my	arm	was	hurting	very	much,	and	he	is	an	expert.	And
his	 finding	was	 that	 something,	 not	 exactly	 in	 the	 arm	but	 somewhere	 else,	 is
causing	the	trouble.	So	he	asked	me	about	my	teeth.
I	said,	"About	my	teeth	you	meet	Devageet."	And	when	Devageet	told	him	that	I
have	gone	through	eight	root	canals,	he	freaked	out!	He	said,	"I	have	never	seen
a	man	with	more	than	three	root	canals.	Eight	root	canals?	You	have	drilled	all
the	teeth!"
I	had	to	console	him,	"It	is	not	his	fault;	it	is	my	fault.	I	love	his	company;	it	is
worth	having	one	tooth	drilled.	Anyway	one	is	going	to	lose	all	the	teeth.	These
root	canals	are	not	his	responsibility,	it	is	my	responsibility."
I	 like	his	 dental	 chair	 and	doing	nothing	 in	 comfort.	He	has	 to	 do	 everything.
And	I	must	be	the	most	difficult	patient	because	I	talk	continuously	while	he	is
drilling.	So	something	that	can	be	done	within	fifteen	minutes	takes	two	hours!
He	has	to	stop	again	and	again	to	listen	to	me,	and	then	the	work	starts	again.
"He	is	not	at	 fault,	don't	be	angry	with	him,"	I	had	 to	 tell	him.	"He	 is	also	my
sannyasin."
The	English	sannyasin	said,	"But	this	is	too	much."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried;	it	is	nothing,	because	there	are	still	a	few	teeth	left."
So	whenever	I	feel	in	a	good	mood	I	will	call	Devageet.	It	is	not	for	the	pain	in
the	teeth	that	I	call	him...	when	I	am	in	a	good	mood!	Then	I	say,	"Now,	let	him
drill."
...	Youth	is	a	malady	of	which	one	becomes	cured	a	little	every	day.	Old	age	is
the	cure.
You	have	passed	 through	 the	whole	 fire	 test	of	 life,	and	you	have	come	 to	 the
point	where	you	can	be	utterly	detached,	aloof,	indifferent.
But	the	West	has	never	understood	the	beauty	of	old	age.	I	can	understand,	but	I
cannot	agree.	In	the	West	the	idea	is:
...	The	trouble	with	life	is	that	there	are	so	many	beautiful	women,	and	so	little
time.
That's	why	nobody	wants	to	become	old,	just	to	stretch	the	time	a	little	more.
But	I	say	unto	you:	the	trouble	would	be	even	worse	if	there	was	so	much	time
and	so	few	women.	As	it	is,	it	is	the	perfect	world.
Devageet,	a	very	special	advice	for	you:
...	A	man	is	known	by	the	company	he	avoids.
So	just	you	figure	out	where	you	are.	If	you	avoid	women,	that	will	be	decisive;
if	you	avoid	men,	that	will	be	decisive.
The	old	saying	is:
A	man	is	known	by	the	company	he	keeps.	The	days	of	 that	proverb	are	gone.
Now	it	is	the	company	that	he	avoids.	This	is	a	little	more	subtle,	and	you	will
have	to	figure	it	out
--	whom	you	are	avoiding	and	why.
...	Women	have	a	 lot	of	 faults.	Men	have	only	 two	--	everything	 they	say,	and
everything	they	do.
...	A	man	who	expects	comfort	 in	 this	 life	must	be	born	deaf,	dumb	and	blind.
Then	there	is	no	discomfort	at	all.
And	the	last	gossip	that	I	have	heard	--	and	perhaps	Devageet	has	not	heard	--	is
that	Devageet's	underpants	are	now	regarded	as	a	noodle-free	zone!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 YOU	 WERE	 BEING	 SO	 BEAUTIFUL	 IN	 YOUR	 REPLY	 TO
MILAREPA	THIS	MORNING	I	LONGED	FOR	YOU	TO	SAY	THOSE	SAME
WORDS	TO	ME.	 I	FELT	THAT	I	CAN	NEVER	BE	ONE	OF	YOUR	MOST
BEAUTIFUL	PEOPLE.
SUDDENLY,	I	CAUGHT	IT	AT	WORK:	THIS	JUDGING	MIND.	I	SAW	THE
FACE
OF	 MY	 UNCONSCIOUSNESS	 IN	 ALL	 ITS	 UGLINESS,	 AND	 I	 ALSO
REALIZED
THAT	 THE	 PART	OF	ME	 THAT	WAS	WATCHING	WAS	 SHINING	WITH
ITS
OWN	UNIQUE	BEAUTY.
UNCONSCIOUS,	 I	 CAN	NEVER	BE	BEAUTIFUL;	 CONSCIOUS,	 I	 AM	A
BEAUTY
UNTO	MYSELF.
My	God,	Devageet!	Just	now	I	have	been	saying	that	you	are	the	most	beautiful
person	and	you	ask	me	again	the	same	thing.	I	will	not	say	anything,	but	will	tell
you	a	beautiful	joke.
The	teacher	of	the	six-year-olds	in	first	grade	was	annoyed	to	find	water	on	the
floor	in	front	of	her	desk,	but	chose	to	ignore	it.	When	the	same	thing	happened
the	next	day,	she	asked	the	children	about	it,	but	nobody	said	a	word.
On	 the	 third	 day	 it	 happened	 again.	 Determined	 to	 get	 to	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
mystery,	she	said,	"I	know	whoever	did	this	must	be	feeling	very	shy	about	their
little	accident.	So	I	have	an	idea!	We	will	all	close	our	eyes	while	the	child	who
did	this	comes	and	writes	his	name	on	this	piece	of	paper	on	my	desk.	Then	we
will	forget	all	about	it."
Everyone	closed	their	eyes.	After	a	couple	of	minutes	a	chair	squeaked,	footsteps
were	heard	coming	and	going,	and	the	chair	squeaked	again.
Delighted,	 the	 teacher	 told	 everyone	 to	 open	 their	 eyes.	 A	 second	 puddle	 of
water	could	be	seen	on	the	floor	and	on	the	paper	was	scrawled:	"The	phantom
pisser	strikes	again!"
Devageet,	not	only	you,	but	anybody	who	has	fallen	in	love	with	me	is	beautiful,
is	intelligent,	is	rebellious,	is	a	hope	for	the	future.	Ugly	people	cannot	be	here
with	me,	 because	 ugly	 people	 are	 always	moralists.	What	 they	 are	missing	 in
beauty	they	try	to	substitute	by	morality.
Ugly	women	cannot	come	here.	They	will	condemn	everybody,	"This	is	not	what
religion	should	be."	Your	so-called	saints	cannot	come	here	for	the	simple	reason
that	 our	 fundamental	 approach	 to	 life	 is	 of	 love,	 is	 of	understanding,	 is	 of	 not
dominating	anyone,	and	not	allowing	anyone	to	dominate	you	--	it	is	a	teaching
in	absolute	freedom	and	individuality.
Respectable	 people	 cannot	 come	 here.	 Just	 to	 be	 known	 that	 they	 have	 been
here,	they	will	lose	all	their	respect	in	the	outside	insane	asylum.
Cowards	cannot	enter	this	door.	Only	people	who	have	guts	to	stand	against	the
whole	world	can	be	here.	And	these	are	the	most	beautiful	products	of	existence.
I	told	that	one	young	man,	Piyoosh,	"You	took	twelve	years	to	decide	to	become
a	sannyasin,	and	you	took	only	twelve	hours	to	start	judging	me,	whether	I	am
right	or	wrong."	I	have	wasted	my	time	on	such	idiots	for	so	long	that	I	am	really
tired	of	them,	and	I	told	him	to	leave	the	ashram.	And	I	enquired	whether	he	has
left	or	not.	He	left,	but	two	or	three	other	Indians	approached	the	office....
There	 are	 a	 few	 Indian	 sannyasins	 here	who	 have	 become	 sannyasins	while	 I
was	not	here.	They	don't	know	me,	and	they	don't	understand	me.	They	entered
the	 ashram	 and	 became	 sannyasins	 simply	 for	 free	 lodging,	 free	 boarding	 and
they	have	done	nothing.
Now	they	are	in	a	trouble.	Now	I	am	here	and	I	must	be	saying	a	thousand	and
one	 things	 against	 their	 prejudices.	 And	 my	 people	 have	 come,	 and	 will	 be
coming	 more	 and	 more,	 and	 they	 all	 show	 their	 love	 by	 working,	 by	 being
creative,	by	doing	 something.	So	 the	 Indians	 are	 feeling	 inferior,	 because	 they
have	learned	in	these	years	while	I	was	not	here	just	to	rest	and	enjoy.
Now	it	is	work,	enjoy	and	rest	--	but	first	comes	work.	Work	in	both	the	senses:
working	in	the	outside,	being	a	creative	contributor	to	the	commune,	and	work
on	 yourself,	 because	 unless	 you	 are	 working	 on	 yourself,	 you	 are	 not	 a
sannyasin.
Two	or	three	Indians	of	 that	group	reached	the	office	saying,	"This	is	not	right
what	Osho	did,	that	he	told	that	man	to	go	away."
Now	those	three	people	have	to	leave	tomorrow	morning.	I	don't	want	any	kind
of	rotten	apples	here.	They	don't	understand	me.	But	Indians	think	they	are	born
spiritual,	they	are	all	born	enlightened,	they	know	everything.
So	tomorrow	morning,	remember:	pack	up	your	things,	not	other	people's...	and
the	gate	you	know	perfectly...	and	anybody	else	who	wants	 to	go	with	 them	is
welcome.	Here	will	be	only	people	who	are	in	absolute	tune	with	me.	And	to	be
in	 tune	with	me	will	 confer	 all	beauty	and	grace	and	blissfulness	on	you.	You
will	not	need	anything	more.
It	is	good	that	you	leave	on	your	own	accord,	because	I	have	been	enquiring	who
are	the	people	who	are	simply	trying	to	waste	their	time	and	other	people's	time,
and	you	don't	know	any	ABC	of	my	approach.	It	is	better	they	should	go	to	their
home,	 study	my	books,	meditate,	 and	 if	 they	 feel	 that	now	 they	are	 ready	and
ripe,	they	will	be	accepted	back.	But	they	cannot	be	tolerated	here.
It	is	so	ugly	that	the	people	who	are	our	guests	are	working,	and	the	people	who
belong	 to	 this	 country	 are	 the	 hosts,	 and	 they	 are	 simply	 dodging,	 trying	 to
escape	from	work.	That	Indian	habit	cannot	be	allowed	in	this	place.	That	Indian
habit	has	been	the	cause	of	two	thousand	years'	slavery.	And	this	is	not	an	Indian
commune,	it	is	an	international	commune.	So	unless	you	can	raise	yourself	to	the
standard	 of	 international	 consciousness,	 international	 creativity,	 international
intelligence,	it	is	better	simply	to	leave	this	place.
Because	of	you	the	whole	of	India	is	condemned.
Every	 day	 reports	 come	 to	me	 that	 Indians	 are	 not	working:	 somebody	 has	 a
headache;	 somebody	 has	 a	 stomach	 ache.	 Indians	 suffer	 from	headaches	 for	 a
simple	reason:	their	spiritual	halo	is	too	tight.	And	they	are	continuously	judging
everybody,	 that	 they	 are	 not	 moral,	 that	 they	 are	 not	 religious	 --	 and	 the
definitions	are	their	own.	By	religion	they	mean	you	should	go	every	day	to	the
monkey	god,	Hanuman's	temple....
My	people	are	not	such	idiots.
If	 Charles	Darwin	 had	 come	 to	 India,	 he	would	 have	 been	 immensely	 happy.
Seeing	the	monkey	god	he	would	have	included	it	as	a	proof	that	man	is	born	of
monkeys:	 they	 are	 still	 worshiping	 their	 forefathers	 in	 India!	 Fortunately	 he
never	 came;	 otherwise	we	would	 have	 been	 condemned	 forever.	But	 he	 could
have	 found	 the	 most	 coherent,	 rational	 argument.	 Everything	 that	 he	 has	 is
guesswork,	 but	 this	 monkey	 god	 would	 have	 proved	 all	 his	 guesswork.	Why
should	 people	 worship	 a	 monkey	 unless	 monkeys	 are	 their	 forefathers?
Somewhere,	 far	away	in	 the	distant	past,	 they	departed	from	their	 fathers.	And
naturally,	they	are	still	remembering	them	respectfully;	that	is	their	religion.
They	can't	understand	that	these	people	here	are	religious.	They	are	not	Hindus;
they	 are	 not	Christians;	 they	 are	 not	Mohammedans.	They	 cannot	 believe	 that
nobody	seems	to	be	praying.
These	people	are	not	here	to	pray.
These	are	not	beggars	before	a	hypothetical	God.
These	 are	 people	who	 are	 trying	 to	 raise	 their	 consciousness	 to	 a	 point	where
they	 are	 themselves	 gods.	Everybody's	 ultimate	 birthright	 is	 to	 be	 a	 god.	Less
than	that	means	you	have	failed	in	your	life.
Gautam	Buddha	 is	 right	 that	he	will	not	 allow	any	buddha	 to	worship	another
buddha.
You	are	all	potentially	the	highest	peak	that	has	ever	been	touched	by	humanity,
and	perhaps	you	may	have	a	higher	possibility	 in	future.	Perhaps	past	buddhas
may	become	pigmies	if	you	rise	to	your	full	height.
But	that	is	not	in	their	minds.
And	because	they	have	not	been	initiated	by	me,	they	have	not	lived	these	years
with	me,	they	have	to	do	some	homework.	They	have	to	try	to	understand	what
is	happening	here.
And	if	they	feel	judgmental,	if	they	feel	condemnatory,	then	I	am	not	interested
in	converting	them.	They	should	go	to	their	monkey	gods,	to	their	elephant	gods
--	they	have	thousands	of	gods.	In	India	in	all	there	are	thirty-three	million	gods.
So	they	can	go	anywhere...	and	there	are	hundreds	of	Goenkas	all	around.
Just	leave	me	alone	with	my	people.
This	is	a	Noah's	Ark.
Everybody	is	not	needed	here,	nor	have	we	the	space	for	five	billion	people.
But	 these	 people	 have	 entered	 into	 the	 ashram	 without	 exactly	 knowing	 me,
because	 I	was	not	here.	And	 they	have	not	even	 tried	 to	understand	what	 they
have	got	involved	in.
They	were	simply	interested	in	having	free	lodging,	free	boarding.
When	I	came	to	India,	the	first	thing	one	of	my	old	sannyasins	said	was,	"We	are
tired	now.	Unnecessarily	we	are	collecting	money	to	feed	people	in	the	ashram.
The	ashram	is	absolutely	unproductive.	It	needs	fifty,	sixty	thousand	rupees	per
month	just	to	keep	those	people	living	comfortably,	feeding	them	enough."
I	said,	"You	need	not	be	worried	now.	When	I	am	here	my	people	will	be	coming
from	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 Then	 fifty,	 sixty	 thousand	 rupees	 don't	 matter	 at	 all.
Then	think	in	millions	of	dollars	--	not	less	than	that."
I	am	never	interested	in	small	things.	Millions	of	dollars	will	be	coming	--	they
have	started	coming.	Millions	of	people	will	be	coming,	and	those	who	want	to
be	here	have	to	remember	it:	this	is	not	a	free	house.	In	India	that	is	the	idea,	that
in	an	ashram	people	should	be	given	food	free,	shelter	free,	and	beads,	so	they
can	sit	silently	and	repeat	the	name	of	Rama	to	save	the	whole	world.	We	don't
want	any	kind	of	nonsense	here.
Our	work	is	our	prayer.
Our	meditation	is	our	religion.
Our	 declaration	 of	 freedom	 is	 our	 fundamental	manifesto.	We	 don't	 belong	 to
any	 nation	 and	 we	 don't	 belong	 to	 any	 religion.	 We	 belong	 to	 the	 whole
existence.	That's	why	I	say	I	am	not	interested	in	small	things.
Just	 the	other	day	I	was	 informed	 that	 in	Delhi	 the	government	 is	worried	 that
we	 are	 going	 to	 take	 over	 Koregaon	 Park.	 In	 America	 they	 were	 worried	 we
were	 going	 to	 take	 over	Oregon,	Wasco	County.	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 taking
small	things...	Koregaon	Park!
--	if	I	was	interested	to	take	over	I	would	have	taken	over	the	whole	world.	I	am
not	interested	in	taking	over.	But	political	idiots	are	a	very	special	kind	of	idiots:
India	has	so	many	problems...	but	their	only	problem	is	Koregaon	Park.
The	day	I	came	here,	within	two	hours	I	was	given	a	notice	that	I	should	leave
immediately:	 I	 cannot	 stay	 here	 because	 my	 stay	 here	 is,	 "dangerous	 for	 the
peace	 of	 the	 city."	 Now	 I	 have	 been	 here	 almost	 one	 year.	 Now	 that	 police
commissioner	 should	 come	 and	 apologize.	What	 peace	 has	 been	 disturbed	 by
me?	But	they	don't	even	have	shame.
He	 should	 at	 least	 get	 transferred	 from	 here,	 seeing	 that	 what	 he	 did	 was
absolutely	under	pressure	of	the	government.
I	 have	 been	 here	 before	 --	 we	 have	 never	 disturbed	 the	 peace.	 We	 are	 not
interested	 at	 all	 what	 goes	 on	 in	 Poona.	 We	 are	 interested	 in	 a	 spiritual
experiment	on	ourselves.	And	just	because	I	refused	to	move	unless	they	show
me	 the	cause,	and	unless	 they	prove	 that	before....	 I	have	 lived	here	six,	 seven
years	--	have	there	been	any	reports	against	me	that	I	have	disturbed	the	peace?	I
don't	even	go	into	this	dirty	town!
In	 the	 seven	 years	 before,	 I	 had	 only	 gone	 into	 the	 town	 three	 times,	 because
three	sannyasins	have	been	in	the	hospital	and	dying.	And	this	time	I	have	gone
only	once,	because	my	arm	was	in	trouble.	Otherwise,	who	cares?
We	are	enough	unto	ourselves.
We	are	an	island	in	this	world.
But	the	next	day	the	corporation	passed	a	resolution	--	because	they	were	afraid
that	now	we	will	make	Buddha	Hall	again	--	that	no	building	can	be	longer	than
one	hundred	feet.
Now,	in	the	whole	of	Koregaon	Park	there	is	no	building	which	is	one	hundred
feet	 long,	 except	 this	 Buddha	 Hall.	 Anybody	 of	 a	 little	 intelligence	 can
understand	who	 they	are	preventing	by	passing	a	 law	 in	 the	corporation.	What
will	 a	 residential	 place	 like	 Koregaon	 Park	 do	 with	 a	 one-hundred-foot-long
hall?	This	ashram	needs	not	only	a	one-hundred-foot-long	hall,	we	are	going	to
make	two	halls.	This	hall	will	be	there,	and	we	are	going	to	make	another	hall	of
the	same	size	as	in	the	commune	in	America,	where	twenty	thousand	people	can
sit.	And	I	will	see	who	can	prevent	it.
We	don't	want	to	create	any	trouble	for	anybody,	but	we	don't	want	anybody	to
interfere	with	us!	There	must	be	informers	of	the	police	here	now.	They	should
take	the	information	back!
Devageet,	the	last	joke	for	your	consolation:
A	man	woke	 up	 one	morning	 and	 saw	 that	 his	male	member	was	 covered	 in
purple	 stripes.	 He	 rushed	 to	 see	 his	 doctor	 who	 told	 him	 that	 immediate
amputation	was	vital.
The	 distracted	 man	 rushed	 out	 of	 the	 door	 muttering	 that	 he	 wanted	 another
opinion.	The	second	doctor	took	one	look	at	the	candy-striped	organ	and	told	the
man	the	same	thing,	It	has	to	be	amputated."
The	poor	man,	not	knowing	what	 to	do,	went	 to	 seek	 the	 advice	of	 a	Chinese
master	 of	 healing.	 The	 wrinkled	 old	 man	 said,	 "No	 need	 for	 surgery.	 In	 two
weeks	the	problem	will	be	solved."
The	man	said,	"You	mean	I	will	be	cured?"
"No,"	said	the	Chinese	sage.	"It	will	drop	off	by	itself."
So	 don't	 be	worried	 about	 all	 these	 gossips;	 they	will	 drop	 off	 by	 themselves.
You	 just	 remain	 silent,	 watching,	 enjoying.	 If	 people	 feel	 you	 are	 getting
disturbed,	 then	 more	 and	 more	 gossips	 will	 come	 to	 your	 door.	 Don't	 be
disturbed.	On	the	contrary,	enjoy	and	ask	people,	"Have	you	any	gossip	against
me?"
Collect	 all	 the	 gossips,	 and	 it	 will	 become	 a	 beautiful	 collection	 --	 far	 more
beautiful	than	the	gospel	in	THE	BIBLE.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	A	graceful	old	age	is	your	birthright
29	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709295
ShortTitle:
PILGR20
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
100
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 HAVE	 NOT	 BEEN	 COMING	 FOR	 SO	 LONG	 THAT	 NOW	 THE
GOSSIP	HAS
CHANGED	 ABOUT	 ME:	 THAT	 I	 AM	 NO	 MORE	 OLD,	 I	 AM	 REALLY
ANCIENT.
WHAT	SHOULD	I	DO	NOW?
Devageet,	all	these	days	that	I	have	not	been	coming,	I	have	been	watching.	An
ancient	tree,	just	by	the	side	of	my	house,	has	been	dancing	in	the	rain,	and	its
old	 leaves	 are	 falling	 with	 such	 grace	 and	 such	 beauty.	 Not	 only	 is	 the	 tree
dancing	in	the	rain	and	the	wind,	the	old	leaves	leaving	the	tree	are	also	dancing;
there	is	celebration.
Except	 man,	 in	 the	 whole	 existence	 nobody	 suffers	 from	 old	 age;	 in	 fact,
existence	knows	nothing	about	old	age.	It	knows	about	ripening;	it	knows	about
maturing.	It	knows	that	there	is	a	time	to	dance,	to	live	as	intensely	and	as	totally
as	possible,	and	there	is	a	time	to	rest.
Those	old	leaves	of	the	almond	tree	by	the	side	of	my	house	are	not	dying;	they
are	 simply	going	 to	 rest,	melting	and	merging	 into	 the	 same	earth	 from	which
they	have	 arisen.	There	 is	 no	 sadness,	 no	mourning,	 but	 an	 immense	peace	 in
falling	to	rest	into	eternity.	Perhaps	another	day,	another	time	they	may	be	back
again,	in	some	other	form,	on	some	other	tree.	They	will	dance	again;	they	will
sing	again;	they	will	rejoice	the	moment.
Existence	knows	only	a	circular	change	from	birth	to	death,	from	death	to	birth,
and	 it	 is	 an	eternal	process.	Every	birth	 implies	death	and	every	death	 implies
birth.	Every	birth	is	preceded	by	a	death	and	every	death	is	succeeded	by	a	birth.
Hence	existence	is	not	afraid.	There	is	no	fear	anywhere	except	 in	the	mind	of
man.
Man	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 sick	 species	 in	 the	 whole	 cosmos.	 Where	 is	 this
sickness?	It	should	really	have	been	otherwise...	man	should	have	enjoyed	more,
loved	more,	lived	more	each	moment.	Whether	it	is	of	childhood	or	of	youth	or
of	old	age,	whether	 it	 is	of	birth	or	of	death,	 it	does	not	matter	at	all.	You	are
transcendental	to	all	these	small	episodes.
Thousands	of	births	have	happened	to	you,	and	thousands	of	deaths.	And	those
who	 can	 see	 clearly	 can	 understand	 it	 even	more	 deeply,	 as	 if	 it	 is	 happening
every	moment.
Something	in	you	dies	every	moment	and	something	in	you	is	born	anew.	Life
and	death	are	not	so	separate,	not	separated	by	seventy	years.
Life	 and	 death	 are	 just	 like	 two	 wings	 of	 a	 bird,	 simultaneously	 happening.
Neither	can	life	exist	without	death,	nor	can	death	exist	without	life.	Obviously
they	 are	 not	 opposites;	 obviously	 they	 are	 complementaries.	 They	 need	 each
other	 for	 their	 existence;	 they	are	 interdependent.	They	are	part	of	one	cosmic
whole.
But	because	man	is	so	unaware,	so	asleep,	he	is	incapable	of	seeing	a	simple	and
obvious	fact.	Just	a	little	awareness,	not	much,	and	you	can	see	you	are	changing
every	moment.
And	change	means	something	is	dying	--	something	is	being	reborn.	Then	birth
and	death	become	one;	 then	childhood	and	 its	 innocence	become	one	with	old
age	and	its	innocence.
There	is	a	difference,	yet	there	is	no	opposition.	The	child's	innocence	is	really
poor,	because	it	is	almost	synonymous	with	ignorance.	The	old	man,	ripe	in	age,
who	has	passed	 through	 all	 the	 experiences	of	 darkness	 and	 light,	 of	 love	 and
hate,	 of	 joy	 and	 misery,	 who	 has	 been	 matured	 through	 life	 in	 different
situations,	 has	 come	 to	 a	 point	 where	 he	 is	 no	 more	 a	 participant	 in	 any
experience.	Misery	comes...	he	watches.
Happiness	 comes	 and	 he	 watches.	 He	 has	 become	 a	 watcher	 on	 the	 hill.
Everything	passes	down	in	the	dark	valleys,	but	he	remains	on	the	sunlit	peak	of
the	mountain,	simply	watching	in	utter	silence.
The	 innocence	 of	 old	 age	 is	 rich.	 It	 is	 rich	 from	 experience;	 it	 is	 rich	 from
failures,	 from	successes;	 it	 is	 rich	 from	right	actions,	 from	wrong	actions;	 it	 is
rich	from	all	the	failures,	from	all	the	successes;	it	is	rich	multidimensionally.	Its
innocence	 cannot	 be	 synonymous	 with	 ignorance.	 Its	 innocence	 can	 only	 be
synonymous	with	wisdom.
Both	 are	 innocent,	 the	 child	 and	 the	 old	 man.	 But	 their	 innocences	 have	 a
qualitative	change,	a	qualitative	difference.	The	child	is	innocent	because	he	has
not	entered	yet	into	the	dark	night	of	the	soul;	the	old	man	is	innocent	--	he	has
come	out	of	the	tunnel.	One	is	entering	into	the	tunnel;	the	other	is	getting	out	of
the	tunnel.	One	is	going	to	suffer	much;	one	has	already	suffered	enough.	One
cannot	avoid	the	hell	that	is	ahead	of	him;	the	other	has	left	the	hell	behind	him.
Devageet,	 your	 question	 is	 the	 question	 of	 almost	 every	 human	 being.
Knowingly	 or	 unknowingly,	 there	 is	 a	 trembling	 in	 the	 heart	 that	 you	 are
becoming	 old,	 that	 after	 old	 age	 the	 deluge	 --	 after	 old	 age,	 death.	 And	 for
centuries	 you	 have	 been	made	 so	much	 afraid	 of	 death	 that	 the	 very	 idea	 has
become	deep-rooted	in	your	unconscious;	it	has	gone	deep	in	your	blood,	in	your
bones,	in	your	marrow.	The	very	word	frightens	you	--
not	 that	 you	 know	 what	 death	 is,	 but	 just	 because	 of	 thousands	 of	 years	 of
conditioning	that	death	is	the	end	of	your	life,	you	are	afraid.
I	want	you	to	be	absolutely	aware	that	death	is	not	the	end.	In	existence,	nothing
begins	and	nothing	ends.	Just	look	all	around...	the	evening	is	not	the	end,	nor	is
the	morning	the	beginning.	The	morning	is	moving	towards	the	evening	and	the
evening	 is	 moving	 towards	 the	 morning.	 Everything	 is	 simply	 moving	 into
different	forms.
There	is	no	beginning	and	there	is	no	end.
Why	should	it	be	otherwise	with	man?	--	man	is	not	an	exception.	In	this	idea	of
being	exceptional,	in	being	more	special	than	the	other	animals	and	the	trees	and
the	 birds,	 man	 has	 created	 his	 own	 hell,	 his	 paranoia.	 The	 idea	 that	 we	 are
exceptional	 beings,	 we	 are	 human	 beings,	 has	 created	 a	 rift	 between	 you	 and
existence.	 That	 rift	 causes	 all	 your	 fears	 and	 your	misery,	 causes	 unnecessary
anguish	and	angst	in	you.
And	 all	 your	 so-called	 leaders,	 whether	 religious	 or	 political	 or	 social,	 have
emphasized	the	rift;	they	have	widened	it.	There	has	not	been	a	single	effort	in
the	whole	history	of	man	 to	bridge	 the	 rift,	 to	bring	man	back	 to	 the	 earth,	 to
bring	man	back	with	 the	animals	and	with	 the	birds	and	with	 the	 trees,	 and	 to
declare	an	absolute	unity	with	existence.
That	 is	 the	 truth	 of	 our	 being.	Once	 it	 is	 understood,	 you	 are	 neither	worried
about	old	age	nor	worried	about	death,	because	looking	around	you,	you	can	be
absolutely	 satisfied	 that	nothing	ever	begins,	 it	has	been	always	 there;	nothing
ever	ends,	it	will	remain	always	there.
The	idea	of	being	old	fills	you	with	great	anxiety.	It	means	now	your	days	of	life,
of	love,	of	rejoicings	are	over,	that	now	you	will	exist	only	in	name.	It	will	not
be	 a	 rejoicing,	 but	 only	 a	 dragging	 towards	 the	 grave.	 Obviously	 you	 cannot
enjoy	 the	 idea	 that	you	are	 just	a	burden	 in	existence,	 just	 standing	 in	a	queue
which	is	moving	every	moment	towards	the	graveyard.
It	is	one	of	the	greatest	failures	of	all	cultures	and	all	civilizations	in	the	world
that	they	have	not	been	able	to	provide	a	meaningful	life,	a	creative	existence	for
their	old;	that	they	have	not	been	able	to	provide	a	subtle	beauty	and	grace,	not
only	to	old	age,	but	to	death	itself.
And	the	problem	becomes	more	complicated	because	the	more	you	are	afraid	of
death,	the	more	you	will	be	afraid	of	life	too.	Each	moment	lived,	death	comes
closer....	A	man	who	is	afraid	of	death	cannot	be	in	love	with	life,	because	it	is
life	finally	that	takes	you	to	the	doors	of	death.	How	can	you	love	life?	It	was	for
this	 reason	 that	 all	 the	 religions	 started	 renouncing	 life:	 renounce	 life	 because
that	is	the	only	way	to	renounce	death.	If	you	don't	live	life,	if	you	are	already
finished	with	the	job	of	living,	loving,	dancing,	singing,	then	naturally	you	need
not	be	afraid	of	death;	you	have	died	already.
We	 have	 called	 these	 dead	 people	 saints;	 we	 have	 worshiped	 them.	We	 have
worshiped	them	because	we	knew	we	would	also	like	to	be	like	them,	although
we	 don't	 have	 that	 much	 courage.	 At	 least	 we	 can	 worship	 and	 show	 our
intentions.	 If	we	had	courage	or	one	day	 if	we	gather	 courage,	we	would	also
like	 to	 live	 like	you:	utterly	dead.	The	saint	cannot	die	because	he	has	already
died.	He	has	renounced	all	 the	pleasures,	all	 the	joys;	all	 that	 life	offers	he	has
rejected.	He	has	returned	the	ticket	to	existence	saying,	"I	am	no	more	part	of	the
show."	He	has	closed	his	eyes.
It	 happened	 once	 that	 a	 so-called	 saint	 was	 visiting	 me.	 I	 took	 him	 into	 the
garden	--	there	were	so	many	beautiful	dahlias,	and	I	showed	him	those	beautiful
flowers	 in	 the	morning	 sun.	He	 looked	 very	 strangely	 at	me,	 a	 little	 annoyed,
irritated,	 and	 he	 could	 not	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to	 condemn	 me,	 saying,	 "I
thought	you	were	a	religious	person...	and	you	are	still	enjoying	the	beauty	of	the
flowers?"
On	one	point	he	is	right,	that	if	you	are	enjoying	the	beauty	of	the	flowers,	you
cannot	avoid	enjoying	 the	beauty	of	human	beings;	you	cannot	avoid	enjoying
the	beauty	of	women;	you	cannot	avoid	enjoying	the	beauty	of	music	and	dance.
If	you	are	interested	in	the	beauty	of	the	flowers,	you	have	shown	that	you	are
still	 interested	 in	 life,	 that	 you	 cannot	 yet	 renounce	 love.	 If	 you	 are	 aware	 of
beauty,	how	can	you	avoid	love?
Beauty	provokes	love;	love	imparts	beauty.
I	said,	"On	this	point	you	are	right,	but	on	the	second	point	you	are	wrong.	Who
ever	told	you	that	I	am	a	religious	person?	I	am	not	yet	dead!	--	to	be	religious
the	basic	requirement	is	to	be	dead.	If	you	are	alive	you	can	only	be	a	hypocrite,
you	cannot	be	really	religious."
When	 you	 will	 see	 a	 bird	 on	 the	 wing,	 it	 is	 impossible	 not	 to	 rejoice	 in	 its
freedom.	And	when	 you	will	 see	 the	 sunset	 with	 all	 the	 colors	 spread	 on	 the
horizon	--	even	if	you	close	your	eyes,	your	very	effort	of	closing	the	eyes	will
show	your	interest.	You	have	been	overwhelmed	by	the	beauty	of	it.
Life	is	another	name	of	love.
And	love	is	nothing	but	being	sensitive	to	beauty.
I	said	to	that	so-called	saint,	"I	can	renounce	religion	but	I	cannot	renounce	life,
because	 life	has	been	given	 to	me	by	existence	 itself,	and	religion	 is	 just	man-
made,	manufactured	by	the	priests	and	the	politicians;	manufactured	to	deprive
man	of	his	 joy,	 to	deprive	man	of	his	dignity,	 to	deprive	man	of	his	humanity
itself.
"I	am	not	a	religious	person	in	your	sense.	I	have	a	totally	different	definition	of
being	religious.	To	me	the	religious	person	is	one	who	is	totally	alive,	intensely
alive,	aflame	with	love,	aware	of	tremendous	beauty	all	around;	has	the	courage
to	rejoice	each	moment	of	life	and	death	together.	Only	a	man	who	is	so	capable
of	rejoicing	in	life	and	death	--	his	song	continues.	It	does	not	matter	whether	life
is	happening	or	death	is	happening,	his	song	is	not	disturbed,	his	dance	does	not
waver?"
Only	such	an	adventurous	soul,	only	such	a	pilgrim	of	existence	is	religious.	But
in	 the	 name	 of	 religion	 man	 has	 been	 given	 poor	 substitutes,	 false,	 phony,
meaningless,	 just	 toys	 to	 play	 with.	 Worshiping	 statues,	 chanting	 man-made
mantras,	paying	tributes	to	those	who	have	been	cowards	and	escapists	and	who
were	not	able	to	live	life	because	they	were	so	afraid	of	death,	and	calling	them
saints,	religion	has	distracted	man	from	true	and	authentic	religiousness.
Devageet,	you	need	not	be	worried	about	old	age.	And	it	is	even	more	beautiful
that	 people	 have	 starting	 thinking	 about	 you	 as	 ancient.	 That	means	 you	 have
attained	 to	 the	 real	 transcendence,	 you	 have	 lived	 everything.	 Now	 it	 is	 your
maturity.	You	have	not	renounced	anything,	but	you	have	simply	passed	through
every	experience.	You	have	grown	so	experienced	that	now	you	need	not	repeat
those	experiences	again	and	again.
This	is	transcendence.
You	should	rejoice,	and	I	would	like	the	whole	world	to	understand	the	rejoicing
that	 is	our	birthright	 in	accepting	with	deep	gratitude	 the	old	age	and	 the	 final
consummation	of	old	age	into	death.
If	you	are	not	graceful	about	it,	if	you	cannot	laugh	at	it,	if	you	cannot	disappear
into	the	eternal	leaving	a	laughter	behind,	you	have	not	lived	rightly.	You	have
been	 dominated	 and	 directed	 by	 wrong	 people.	 They	 may	 have	 been	 your
prophets,	 your	messiahs,	 your	 saviors,	 your	 tirthankaras;	 they	may	 have	 been
your	incarnations	of	gods,	but	they	have	all	been	criminals	in	the	sense	that	they
have	deprived	you	of	life	and	they	have	filled	your	hearts	with	fear.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 fill	 your	 heart	 with	 laughter.	 Your	 every	 fiber	 of	 being
should	love	to	dance	in	every	situation,	whether	it	is	day	or	night,	whether	you
are	down	or	up.
Irrespective	 of	 the	 situation,	 an	 undercurrent	 of	 cheerfulness	 should	 continue.
That	is	authentic	religiousness	to	me.
A	few	sutras	for	you,	Devageet...
An	ancient	man	is	one	who	wears	his	glasses	in	bed	so	he	can	get	a	better	look	at
the	girls	he	dreams	about.
An	ancient	man	is	one	who	only	flirts	with	young	girls	at	parties	so	his	wife	will
take	him	home.
The	beauty	of	being	ancient	is	 that	since	you	are	too	old	to	set	a	bad	example,
you	can	start	giving	good	advice.
Only	a	really	old	man,	well-versed	in	the	wisdom	of	life,	can	say,	"Puppy	love	is
lots	of	fun	but	few	men	realize	it	is	the	beginning	of	a	dog's	life."
Women	 like	 the	 simple	 things	 in	 life	 --	 for	 example,	 the	 old	 men.	 Once	 the
women	start	liking	you,	it	means	you	are	finished.	They	are	no	longer	afraid	of
you;	you	are	perfectly	acceptable.
Women	 have	 their	 own	 reasons,	 although	 women's	 reason	 is	 like	 eternity:	 it
passeth	all	understanding.
Devageet,	 if	 you	 have	 really	 become	 old,	 then	 you	 are	 in	 a	wrong	 place.	The
right	 place	 for	 you	 will	 only	 be	 a	 Catholic	 monastery,	 because	 a	 Catholic
monastery	is	a	home	for	unmarried	fathers.
Devageet,	 if	 you	 are	 really	 old,	 start	 loving	 your	 enemies;	 it	 makes	 them	 so
angry.
An	old	married	man's	best	friend	is	his	wife's	husband.
Get	it?	...	No.	I	have	to	give	you	some	explanation.
A	man	was	sitting	with	his	best	friend	and	told	him,	"My	wife	has	escaped	with
my	best	friend."
The	friend	said,	"What	are	you	talking	about?	I'M	your	best	friend."
The	man	said,	"No,	no	more."
For	ancient	ones	there	is	a	new	thing	in	the	world	to	do;	its	name	is	punk	yoga.
Punk	yoga	is	where	you	stand	on	someone	else's	head.
Inside	every	older	person	there	is	a	younger	person	wondering	what	happened.
And	remember,	Devageet,	if	you	are	not	going	all	the	way,	why	go	at	all?	And
don't	be	worried	at	 all	 about	your	old	age,	your	 ancientness.	At	 least	 as	 far	 as
enlightenment	 is	 concerned,	 it	 does	 not	 care	 how	 you	 get	 there:	 young,	 old,
ancient;	 man,	 woman,	 all	 are	 accepted	 without	 any	 exception,	 because	 the
ultimate	experience	is	welcoming	everybody	from	every	direction.	One	need	not
be	 concerned	 about	 these	 small	matters;	moreover,	 they	 are	 not	 facts.	You	 are
simply	getting	paranoid	about	gossips.
Naturally,	here	there	are	so	many	beautiful	people,	gossips	are	bound	to	happen.
And	what	else	will	meditators	do?	--	you	cannot	meditate	for	twenty-four	hours.
Just	to	relax,	just	for	a	change...	the	best	relaxation	for	a	meditator	is	gossip.	It
hurts	nobody	and	it	gives	you	free	entertainment.
The	 truckdriver	 pulled	 into	 the	 truck	 stop,	 went	 inside,	 and	 ordered	 a	 cup	 of
coffee	 and	 a	 piece	 of	 cake.	 Sitting	 next	 to	 him	 was	 a	 member	 of	 the	 Hell's
Angels	motorcycle	gang,	who	looked	at	him	and	said,	"Hey	man,	I	don't	like	you
sitting	next	to	me.	Move	over!"
The	truckdriver	did	not	say	a	word,	so	the	Hell's	Angel	reached	over	and	put	his
cigarette	 out	 in	 the	 driver's	 coffee.	 But	 still	 the	 truckdriver	 was	 silent	 and
continued	eating	his	cake.	When	he	had	finished	he	got	up,	paid	his	bill	and	left.
When	 he	 had	 gone,	 the	Hell's	Angel	 said	 to	 the	waiter,	 "Man,	 that	 guy	was	 a
pushover.
Did	you	see	what	a	coward	he	was?"
"Yes,"	said	the	waiter,	looking	out	of	the	window,	"a	real	coward.	And	a	terrible
driver	too.	He	just	drove	over	some	poor	guy's	motorcycle."
The	English	couple	had	not	made	love	for	years.	The	wife	was	very	suspicious:
What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Is	 he	 having	 an	 affair	 with	 somebody?	 The	 lady	 was
surprised	to	see	the	maid	very	happy	that	day,	wearing	a	beautiful	new	dress	and
preparing	her	bedroom	as	if	she	was	expecting	someone	to	come	in	the	night.
So	that	evening	she	sent	the	maid	to	her	mother's	for	the	night	and	then	climbed
into	 the	maid's	 bed	 herself	 and	 switched	 off	 the	 light.	 Soon	 a	 shadowy	 figure
climbed	in	through	the	window,	slipped	into	bed	and	made	passionate	love	to	the
lady.
When	 he	 had	 finished	 she	 felt	 satisfied	 like	 never	 before,	 but	 still	 wanting
revenge	 she	 snapped	 on	 the	 bedside	 light.	 "I	will	 bet	 you	 are	 surprised	 to	 see
me,"	she	said	triumphantly.
"I	sure	am,"	said	the	chauffeur.
It	is	perfectly	okay	for	meditators	--	they	are	involved	in	such	a	serious	research
--	 to	 relax	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 gossip,	 joke,	 laugh.	 It	 is	 not	 contrary	 to	 their
meditations;	it	is	immensely	helpful.	It	takes	away	your	seriousness,	it	gives	you
back	 your	 innocence,	 simplicity,	 relaxedness.	 It	 helps	 you	 to	 go	 back	 into	 the
deeper	realms	of	meditations.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	DID	YOU	KNOW	WHEN	YOU	SAID	THE	QUESTION	WAS	FROM
AN
INDIAN?
Arup	Krishna,	it	is	very	simple.	The	question	does	not	arise	out	of	the	blue;	the
question	arises	in	the	heart	of	the	questioner.
The	 question	 says	 so	 much	 about	 the	 questioner	 that	 if	 you	 don't	 start
immediately	figuring	out	the	answer...	which	is	done	all	over	the	world;	people
start	searching	in	their	memory	for	the	answer.
I	don't	have	any	ready-made	answers.	When	I	listen	to	your	question,	I	have	to
go	 deeper	 into	 the	 question	 to	 find	 you	 first,	 because	 unless	 I	 know	 the
questioner,	I	cannot	respond.
I	am	not	a	holy	book;	I	am	a	living	being.	I	am	not	a	computer	that	you	ask	the
question	and	the	answer	comes	irrespective	of	who	is	asking	the	question.
I	can	answer	you,	not	your	question.	Your	question	is	secondary.	So	when	I	hear
your	 question,	 my	 first	 search	 is	 for	 the	 person	 who	 has	 asked	 it.	 Without
knowing	the	person	who	has	asked	it	my	answer	is	going	to	be	irrelevant.	It	will
answer	 the	 question,	 but	 it	 will	 not	 answer	 the	 questioner,	 who	 is	 the	 real
problem.
I	have	to	go	to	 the	very	roots.	And	it	 is	not	very	difficult	 to	know	whether	 the
question	has	come	from	a	German	or	from	a	Jew	or	from	an	Indian	or	from	an
American;	 whether	 the	 question	 has	 come	 from	 a	 Jaina	 or	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a
Mohammedan	or	a	Christian.	It	is	very	simple	because	the	question	contains	the
questioner.	 It	 has	 come	 with	 all	 the	 colors	 and	 all	 the	 conditionings	 of	 the
questioner	contained	in	it.	It	is	absolutely	indicative	about	the	personality.
You	are	wondering,	"How	did	you	know	when	you	said	the	question	was	from
an	Indian?"	That	kind	of	question	cannot	be	asked	by	anyone	else.
I	 will	 give	 you	 a	 few	 examples.	 For	 example,	 if	 somebody	 asks,	 "What	 is
NIGOD?"	that	question	can	come	only	from	someone	who	belongs	 to	Jainism,
because	even	the	word
`nigod'	will	not	be	known	to	anybody	else.	It	is	part	of	the	Jaina	philosophy	and
it	is	not	part	of	any	other	philosophy	in	the	world.	In	fact	nothing	parallel	to	it
exists	 anywhere.	 It	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to	 translate	 the	word	 `nigod'	 into	 any
other	 language	 because	 no	 parallel	 words	 exist.	 The	 idea	 has	 never	 existed
anywhere	else;	hence,	there	cannot	be	any	word	for	it.	I	will	have	to	explain	to
you	what	nigod	is.
For	 Jainism	 it	 has	 been	 a	 problem,	 but	 for	 no	 other	 religion,	 because	 Jainism
does	 not	 believe	 in	God	 the	 creator.	 Then	 the	 problem	 arises:	 from	where	 do
souls	go	on	coming?
The	population	goes	on	increasing...	in	Mahavira's	time	the	population	of	India
was	 only	 two	 million;	 today	 it	 is	 nine	 hundred	 million.	 If	 there	 is	 nobody
manufacturing	souls,	from	where	do	these	souls	go	on	coming?	God	is	out	of	the
question.
Other	 religions	can	answer,	"God	goes	on	creating..."	Jainism	cannot	answer	 it
that	way,	because	there	is	no	God	in	its	philosophical	framework	and	there	is	no
creation;	hence,	it	has	to	create	another	hypothesis	like	God.	That	hypothesis	is
nigod.	Nigod	means	 there	 is	 an	 infinite	number	of	 souls	dormant	 in	 existence.
Out	of	that	immense,	infinite	number	of	sleeping	souls	a	few	go	on	waking	up.
That	 is	 from	 where	 people	 continuously	 go	 on	 coming,	 and	 they	 will	 go	 on
coming.	 And	 the	 source	 of	 their	 coming	 is	 inexhaustible.	 The	 name	 of	 that
source	is	nigod.
If	 somebody	 asks	 a	 question	 about	 nigod,	 I	 can	 easily	 know	 the	 question	 can
come	only	from	a	follower	of	Mahavira.	It	cannot	come	from	anybody	else	--	the
followers	of	Moses	may	not	even	have	heard	the	word.
Nigod	 does	 not	 explain	 anything;	 it	 is	 as	 stupid	 as	 the	 idea	 of	 God.	 This	 is
something	to	be	understood,	because	you	will	come	across	such	things	again	and
again.	 Jainas	 refuse	 the	 hypothesis	 of	 God	 because	 it	 does	 not	 answer	 the
question.	 The	 question	 is:	 Who	 created	 the	 existence?	 --	 because	 without
creating,	how	can	the	existence	come	into	being?
All	 the	 religions	have	agreed	on	 the	hypothesis	of	a	God	as	 the	creator	except
Jainism,	because	they	say	that	if	we	accept	God	as	the	creator,	then	the	question
again	 comes	 up:	 Who	 created	 God?	 God	 cannot	 be	 the	 answer,	 because	 the
question	still	remains	relevant:	Who	created	God?	And	if	you	say	that	God	is	not
created	 by	 anyone	 --	 he	 is	 self-sufficient,	 he	 is	 eternal,	 not	 created	 by	 anyone
else	--	then	Jainism	laughs	and	says	that	if	God	can	be	without	any	creator,	why
cannot	the	whole	existence	be	without	any	creator?
What	is	the	problem?	Why	unnecessarily	create	a	hypothesis?	And	on	that	point
they	are	right.
This	is	the	scientific	approach.	Never	accept	any	unnecessary	hypothesis	unless
it	explains	something.	Why	go	on	burdening	yourself	with	hypotheses?
So	 Jainism	 rejected	 the	 idea	 of	God	 because	 it	 does	 not	 answer	 the	 question.
Then	they	were	in	the	same	trouble.	People	started	asking,	"From	where	do	the
new	souls	go	on	coming?"	The	doors	of	God	were	closed;	they	had	to	find	a	new
hypothesis,	but	it	is	as	stupid	as	the	hypothesis	of	God.	That's	the	beauty	--	that
nobody	sees	his	own	stupidity,	but	everybody	is	capable	of	seeing	the	stupidity
of	 anybody	 else.	 Jainism	 says,	 "Souls	 go	 on	 coming	 from	 a	 dormant,	 infinite
source,	where	billions	and	billions	of	souls	are	asleep.
As	they	go	on	waking	up	they	start	moving,	finding	wombs."
But	 no	 Jaina	 thinker	 asks,	 "Who	 created	 this	 nigod?	 From	 where	 came	 this
infinite	source	of	sleeping	souls?"	It	raises	as	many	questions	as	Jainism	raises
about	God,	but	it	never	raises	questions	about	nigod...	from	where	did	it	come?
Secondly,	if	these	souls	are	asleep,	were	they	awake	before	or	have	they	always
been	asleep	from	eternity?	If	they	were	awake	before,	then	it	is	very	dangerous,
because	 those	 who	 are	 awake	 can	 fall	 asleep	 and	 get	 into	 nigod,	 for	 infinity.
Nobody	knows	whether	they	will	be	awake	again	or	not.
If	you	say	that	they	have	always	been	asleep	from	the	very	beginning,	then	what
made	them	asleep?	People	need	sleep	when	they	have	worked	hard	in	 the	day;
they	 are	 tired,	 and	 they	go	 to	 sleep.	Eternal	 sleep...	Even	 to	 sleep	 twenty-four
hours	is	very	difficult	--
after	 six,	 eight	 hours	 you	 start	 thinking	 about	 tea	 or	 coffee	 or	 some	breakfast.
These	people	have	not	taken	even	breakfast	for	infinity,	and	you	still	call	 them
alive?
Even	more	 important,	 the	 question	 arises:	Why	 have	 a	 few	 of	 them	 suddenly
become	awake?	What	happens?	Some	mosquitoes	disturb	 their	 sleep?	Because
millions	of	others	are	fast	asleep,	and	suddenly	one	becomes	awake	--	you	have
to	provide	some	reason	why	particularly	this	person	and	not	somebody	else.	You
cannot	say	that	he	was	having	a	nightmare.	He	has	never	been	awake,	he	knows
nothing,	he	cannot	dream.	For	dreaming	you	need	some	experiences	of	waking.
About	what	will	these	people	be	dreaming?
People	dream	about	things	because	those	are	the	things	they	have	missed	when
they	 were	 awake.	 People	 dream	 of	 beautiful	 women	 because	 when	 they	 are
awake	they	have	only	their	wife.	It	is	the	wife	which	is	the	cause	of	many	saints:
they	renounce	 the	world,	because	without	renouncing	the	world	 they	could	not
renounce	the	wife!	The	poor	fellows	had	to	renounce	everything,	just	to	escape
from	the	wife.
Perhaps	the	proverb	is	true,	that	every	great	man	has	a	wife	behind	him.	Because
she	 goes	 on	 nagging	 and	 harassing	 him	 and	 finding	 no	 other	way	 he	 goes	 on
succeeding,	 becoming	 richer,	 climbing	 ladders.	 The	wife	 goes	 on	 hitting:	 "Go
on!"...	she	never	allows	any	rest	for	the	poor	fellow.
What	 can	 they	 dream	 about?	 They	 have	 never	 been	 hungry,	 they	 have	 never
eaten	anything;	 they	cannot	dream	about	 ice	 cream.	And	certainly	 they	cannot
have	nightmares	which	can	awaken	them.
Aesop	has	 a	beautiful	 parable.	A	cat	 is	 sitting	on	 a	 tree,	 giggling	 and	 smiling.
And	a	dog	looks	up	and	asks,	"What	is	the	matter,	you	idiot?"
And	the	cat	says,	"I	was	just	having	a	beautiful	afternoon	nap	and	I	dreamed	that
it	is	raining,	very	fast,	strong	rain,	and	the	most	amazing	part	is,	it	is	not	water
that	is	raining,	it	is	mice."
The	dog	was	very	angry.	He	said,	"You	idiot.	You	will	never	grow	out	of	your
retardedness.	In	my	holy	scriptures	there	are	instances	when	it	has	rained,	but	it
has	rained	always	cats,	never	rats!"
Obviously,	a	cat	cannot	 think	 the	way	a	dog	can	 think,	and	 they	cannot	agree.
But	 if	 somebody	 is	seeing	rats	and	mice	 raining	you	can	know	that	 the	person
who	is	seeing	the	dream	is	a	cat.	There	is	not	much	logic	involved	in	it.
An	 Indian	went	 to	 Singapore	 to	 buy	 a	 video.	He	went	 into	 a	 shop	 and	 asked,
"What	is	the	price	of	this	video	near	the	window?"
The	seller	answered,	"Sorry	sir,	we	don't	sell	to	Indians."
The	 Indian	went	back	 to	his	hotel	 and	dressed	 in	his	best	 clothes.	Back	at	 the
shop,	again	he	asked,	"What	is	the	price	of	this	video	near	the	window?"
To	his	dismay,	the	seller	replied,	"Sorry	sir,	we	don't	sell	to	Indians."
The	Indian	went	back	to	his	hotel	and	dressed	in	Western-style	clothes	--	shorts,
T-shirt,	 sunglasses.	Returning	 again	 to	 the	 shop,	 the	 Indian	was	most	 upset	 to
receive	the	same	answer	to	his	enquiry.	In	exasperation	he	asked,	"How	do	you
know	that	I'm	an	Indian?"
"Oh,"	said	the	seller,	"that's	easy.	The	machine	near	the	window	is	not	a	video,	it
is	a	washing	machine."
Paddy	was	convinced	he	was	a	cannibal.	His	wife	finally	persuaded	him	to	visit
a	psychiatrist.
When	Paddy	returned	home	after	his	first	visit,	his	wife	asked,	"So	tell	me,	what
is	a	fancy	psychiatrist	like?"
"Delicious,"	beamed	Paddy.
If	the	man	thinks	himself	to	be	a	cannibal,	then	you	can	expect	the	answer	that
he	has	given.
You	can	expect	the	question,	you	can	expect	the	answer.	And	from	the	question
or	from	the	answer,	from	both	the	sides,	you	can	find	out	whose	is	the	mind,	of
what	kind	of	conditioning.
The	 Indian	 always	 asks	 questions	 about	 his	 repressed	 sexuality	 --	 not	 directly
that	he	is	suffering	from	repressed	sexuality,	but	in	a	very	indirect	way.	He	does
not	 even	 think	 that	 in	 his	 question	 he	 is	 showing	 himself.	 He	 asks	 questions
about	 other	 people	 who	 are	 not	 completely	 dressed;	 other	 people	 who	 are
hugging	 each	other	 in	public;	 other	 people	who	 are	holding	 the	hands	of	 their
girlfriends.	He	never	thinks	that	all	these	questions	show	only	one	thing,	that	he
is	 sexually	 repressed.	 These	 are	 not	 questions	 about	 other	 people;	 these	 are
questions	about	his	own	unconscious.
Now,	no	American	will	ask	that	question.	That	is	absolutely	out	of	the	question.
People	ask	about	things	which	they	are	missing.
Just	a	few	days	ago	a	therapist	enquired	of	me,	"I	am	at	a	loss,	because	so	many
Japanese	sannyasins	are	coming	to	the	groups,	and	it	is	absolutely	impossible	to
work	with	them.
And	the	impossibility	is	that	psychoanalysis	and	other	sister	systems	of	therapies
have	 been	 evolved	 in	 the	 West.	 They	 are	 not	 applicable	 to	 the	 Far	 Eastern
people.	These	people	have	a	different	conditioning,	centuries	old."
The	 therapist	 became	 afraid	 because	 Sigmund	 Freud,	 the	 founder	 of
psychoanalysis	says	that	every	child,	if	the	child	is	a	boy,	wants	to	make	love	to
his	mother.	And	because	the	father	goes	on	making	love	to	his	mother	and	he	is
not	allowed,	he	hates	the	father.	He	is	jealous	of	the	father;	he	thinks	and	dreams
of	 killing	 him.	 If	 the	 baby	 is	 a	 girl	 she	wants	 to	make	 love	 to	 her	 father,	 and
obviously	the	mother	is	the	enemy,	because	the	mother	goes	on	making	love	to
the	father	and	the	girl	is	never	allowed	--	not	even	allowed	to	think	about	it.
Sigmund	Freud	was	very	much	condemned	for	his	ideas,	but	there	is	some	truth
in	them.
And	after	a	struggle	of	one	century,	slowly,	slowly	Western	society	has	accepted
the	idea.
Now	there	is	no	resistance	against	it.	If	you	say	to	someone	that	you	hate	your
father,	that	you	wanted	to	make	love	to	your	mother,	he	will	accept	it.
But	if	you	say	that	to	a	Japanese,	either	he	will	kill	himself	or	he	will	kill	you	--
those	are	the	only	two	alternatives.	He	will	immediately	challenge	you	to	a	fight
because	it	 is	absolutely	inconceivable	to	a	Japanese	that	he	has	even	dreamt	of
making	 love	 to	 his	 mother	 or	 he	 was	 jealous	 of	 his	 father;	 that	 he	 was
antagonistic	and	hated	his	 father,	 that	he	wanted	 to	kill	his	 father.	Because	 the
Japanese	conditioning	is	that	the	very	idea,	even	the	idea	of	being	disrespectful
to	your	father	is	enough	to	feel	so	ashamed	that	you	don't	have	any	worth	even	to
live	a	single	moment	more.	Hara-kiri,	suicide	is	the	only	way.
In	 Japan	millions	 of	 people	 down	 the	 ages	 have	 committed	 suicide	 over	 such
small	 matters	 that	 you	 cannot	 conceive.	 Rarely,	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 somebody
commits	 suicide,	 but	 you	 can	 see	 that	 he	 has	 reasons:	 his	 business	 went
bankrupt,	his	wife	eloped,	he	was	the	richest	man	and	now	he	has	to	live	like	a
beggar	on	the	street.	It	is	so	against	his	ego	that	he	would	rather	kill	himself.
But	 hara-kiri,	 suicide	 in	 Japan	 is	 inconceivable	 to	 anybody	 else	 in	 the	 whole
world.	You	misbehaved,	you	were	disrespectful	towards	your	father;	when	it	was
expected	of	you	to	bow	down	to	your	father	you	did	not.	That's	enough.	Now	if
you	have	any	dignity,	you	should	commit	hara-kiri	--	nothing	less	than	that!
So	 the	 therapists	 are	 in	 a	 difficulty	 because	 those	 poor	 fellows	 are	 talking
whatever	 they	 have	 learned	 from	 Sigmund	 Freud	 and	 Carl	 Gustav	 Jung	 and
Alfred	Adler.	And	 they	 think	 they	 are	 talking	 very	 sensible	 things,	 but	 to	 the
Japanese...	He	immediately	stands	up	saying,	"Take	your	words	back!	What	do
you	think	of	me?...	I	wanted	to	make	love	to	my	mother?	I	will	kill	myself,	even
if	the	idea	happens	to	me.	Even	if	I	dream	it	in	the	night,	in	the	morning	I	will
finish	myself.	What	nonsense	are	you	talking?"	Now	the	therapist	does	not	know
what	to	do.
In	 the	 beginning,	 when	 Japanese	 sannyasins	 started	 to	 come,	 I	 was	 at	 a	 loss,
because	 they	 have	 a	 different	 symbology,	 different	 gestures,	 different	 from
anybody	else	in	the	world.
Everywhere	nodding	your	head	up	and	down	means	yes.	In	Japan	it	means	no.
Nodding	your	head	side	 to	side	everywhere	 in	 the	world	means	no.	In	Japan	it
means	yes.
So	when	I	used	to	ask,	I	was	at	a	loss.	The	person	has	come	to	be	initiated	into
sannyas,	 and	 when	 I	 asked	 him,	 "Have	 you	 really	 thought	 about	 it?	 Do	 you
really	 want	 to	 take	 sannyas?"	 he	 would	 say	 no.	 He	 was	 saying	 yes	 --	 I	 was
thinking	he	was	saying	no.	He	looked	amazed	--	I	looked	amazed.	Finally,	I	had
to	 make	 one	 Japanese	 sannyasin	 sit	 near	 me.	 I	 said,	 "You	 translate	 all	 these
strange	gestures	because	I	cannot	figure	them	out."
Conditions	all	over	the	world	are	different.
Your	question	comes	from	your	conditionings.
If	somebody	has	a	clarity	and	transparency	of	eyes,	he	can	see	from	where	the
question	has	arisen.	It	is	not	difficult	to	know,	Arup	Krishna,	that	the	question	is
from	an	Indian.
The	Indian	court	was	in	session	and	the	attractive	blond	took	the	stand.	As	the
prosecuting	attorney	approached	the	girl	he	coughed	nervously,	and	while	fixing
his	tie	asked,	"Where	were	you	on	the	night	before	last?"
"I	was	with	a	gentleman	friend,"	she	answered,	looking	down	shyly.
"And	where	were	you	last	night?"	continued	the	attorney.
"I	was	with	another	gentleman	friend,"	she	answered	coyly.
Then,	his	voice	very	gentle	and	low,	he	asked,	"Where	are	you	going	tonight?"
The	 defense	 attorney	 jumped	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 shouted,	 "Objection!	 I	 asked	 her
first."
It	 is	 not	 difficult	 to	 know	 that	 you	 are	 in	 an	 Indian	 court	where	 everybody	 is
sexually	starved.
Questions	 coming	 out	 of	 sexual	 starvation	 will	 indicate	 the	 religious
conditioning	 against	 life.	 And	 India	 has	 suffered	 most;	 it	 has	 the	 deepest
conditioning	against	life,	that's	why	it	also	has	the	biggest	ego	of	being	spiritual.
And	it	is	sheer	nonsense,	because	having	such	a	deeply	repressed	sexuality	and
then	the	claim	for	being	spiritual	is	just	a	contradiction.
You	 can	 be	 spiritual	 only	 when	 all	 sex	 is	 transformed,	 not	 repressed	 --
understood,	transmuted.	When	there	is	no	sex	lurking	in	your	mind	somewhere,
when	the	whole	energy	involved	in	sex	has	become	luminous,	only	then	can	you
be	spiritual,	because	sex	at	the	lowest	point	when	it	becomes	aflame	is	the	same
energy	as	enlightenment	at	the	ultimate	point.	At	the	alpha	point	it	is	sex;	at	the
omega	point	it	is	samadhi,	it	is	superconsciousness.
So	whatever	 you	 ask,	 you	 show	without	 knowing	your	 unconscious.	 I	 have	 to
look	into	your	unconscious	and	only	then	I	can	answer	you	relevantly.	Then	my
answer	is	no	more	academic,	then	my	answer	becomes	intimate:	the	answer	out
of	love	and	compassion,	not	out	of	knowledge	and	ready-made	wisdom.
A	pair	of	good	friends,	Frenchmen...	Now	even	if	the	mention	of	Frenchmen	is
not	made,	looking	at	the	whole	episode	you	can	conclude	it	is	about	Frenchmen.
A	pair	of	good	friends	were	strolling	down	the	street	in	Paris	one	day	when	they
spied	two	women	approaching.
"Sacre	 bleu,	 Pierre,"	 cried	 one.	 "There	 comes	 my	 wife	 and	 mistress	 walking
towards	us	arm	in	arm!"
"Mon	Dieu,	Henri,"	cried	the	second,	"I	was	about	to	say	the	same	thing!"
But	 that	 can	 happen	 only	 in	 Paris,	 and	 that	 can	 happen	 only	 about	 the
Frenchman.	You	cannot	expect	this	happening	in	Poona.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	Philosia...	the	path	of	the	mystic
30	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709300
ShortTitle:
PILGR21
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
95
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AM	I	A	PHILOSOPHER?
Milarepa,	philosophy	is	not	the	real	thing,	and	to	be	a	philosopher	is	just	to	go
astray.
Philosophy	only	thinks	but	never	experiences,	and	there	are	things	which	cannot
be	thought	about:	either	you	experience	them	or	you	don't.	How	can	you	think
about	truth,	of	which	you	have	no	experience?	How	can	a	blind	man	think	about
light	and	colors	and	rainbows	and	flowers	and	butterflies?	Whatever	he	is	going
to	think	is	going	to	be	wrong.
To	 know	 the	 colors,	 to	 know	 the	 light,	 to	 know	 the	 stars	 one	 needs	 eyes;	 not
thinking.
And	to	have	eyes	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon	than	thinking.	In	fact,	only
blind	people	think.	Those	who	have	eyes	see,	experience.
Philosophy	 is	 a	non-existential	 approach	 to	 existence;	hence	 it	 never	 comes	 to
any	conclusion.	It	goes	round	and	round	but	remains	stuck	in	the	same	groove.
One	of	 the	oldest	professions	of	man	 is	 to	be	a	philosopher,	 and	 it	has	always
been	praised	very	highly.	But	the	reason	for	the	praise	was	that	the	philosopher	is
thinking	 about	 ultimate	 values,	 while	 the	 whole	 world	 is	 concerned	 with	 the
mundane.	 It	 is	 a	 world	 of	 blind	 people.	 And	 if	 one	 blind	man	 starts	 thinking
about	light,	other	blind	people	are	going	to	worship	him.	But	there	is	no	way	to
think	about	light.
There	is	no	way	to	think	about	truth.
There	is	no	way	to	think	about	love.
There	is	no	way	to	think	about	beauty.
In	 fact,	 the	 moment	 you	 pinpoint	 some	 ultimate	 value	 for	 thinking,	 you
immediately	 feel	 uneasy.	 For	 example,	 if	 somebody	 asks	 you,	 pointing	 to	 a
beautiful	sunset,	"What	do	you	think	about	it?"	or	to	a	beautiful	rainbow,	"What
do	you	think	about	it?"	obviously	you	are	going	to	say,	"It	is	beautiful,"	because
you	have	never	thought	about	whether	you	know	beauty	or	not.
You	 have	 simply	 accepted	 others'	 opinions,	 and	 that	 accumulation	 of	 others'
opinions	is	all	that	you	have	--	nothing	of	your	own,	everything	borrowed.	If	it	is
insisted	upon,
"What	do	you	mean	when	you	say	a	sunset	is	beautiful?	What	is	beauty?",	you
will	 immediately	 feel	 caught	 in	 a	 difficulty.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 define	 what
beauty	 is.	 There	 is	 no	way	 to	 define	what	 good	 is.	 There	 is	 no	way	 to	 define
what	love	is.
You	can	love	but	you	cannot	define	it.
You	can	be	overwhelmed	by	love,	you	can	be	transformed	by	love,	but	still	you
will	never	be	able	to	think	about	it.	Thinking	is	a	very	low	category,	in	fact	the
very	bottom;	you	cannot	go	lower	than	that.
Being	 a	 philosopher	 is	 not	 something	 great,	 Milarepa.	 I	 hate	 the	 very	 word
because	 it	 helps	 people	 to	 hide	 their	 ignorance.	 It	 never	 gives	 them	 a
breakthrough	into	light,	into	life,	into	love,	into	existence.	It	blocks	their	path.	It
becomes	a	China	Wall.
Thoughts	 can	 create	 such	 a	 barrier	 that	 even	 if	 you	 are	 standing	 before	 a
beautiful	flower,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	it.	Your	eyes	are	covered	with	layers
of	 thought.	To	experience	the	beauty	of	 the	flower	you	have	to	be	in	a	state	of
meditation,	not	in	a	state	of	mentation.	You	have	to	be	silent,	utterly	silent	--	not
even	 a	 flicker	 of	 thought	 --	 and	 the	 beauty	 explodes,	 reaches	 to	 you	 from	 all
directions.	 You	 are	 drowned	 in	 the	 beauty	 of	 a	 sunrise,	 of	 a	 starry	 night,	 of
beautiful	trees.
Last	night	it	rained	again	very	hard.	It	was	so	silent	--	everybody	must	have	been
fast	asleep.	It	was	past	midnight,	but	in	the	darkness	of	the	night,	in	the	serenity
of	the	night,	the	dance	of	the	rain	was	immensely	beautiful.	But	you	have	to	be
receptive	to	it.
Philosophy	is	an	aggression,	and	through	an	aggressive	attitude	you	may	become
a	scientist,	but	you	will	never	go	beyond	matter.	You	can	dissect	matter,	you	can
think	about	its	constituents,	you	can	put	it	together,	you	can	even	produce	it,	but
matter	is	something	outside	you.
Beauty	is	something	within	you.
To	see	the	beauty	of	a	rose	you	need	a	beautiful	heart.
Light	is	not	just	outside.	To	see	the	light	you	need	receptive	eyes.	You	may	never
have	wondered	that	 if	 the	whole	world	suddenly	goes	blind	would	the	sun	still
shine	with	its	light?	Ordinary	logic	will	say	yes,	it	does	not	matter;	whether	you
are	 blind	 or	 whether	 you	 have	 eyes,	 the	 sun	 will	 rise.	 But	 those	 who	 have
penetrated	 deeply	 into	 all	 these	 problems	 have	 come	 across	 very	 different
conclusions.	 If	everybody	on	 the	earth	goes	blind,	 there	will	be	no	 light	at	all.
The	sun	is	only	half	of	the	phenomenon.	Unless	you	have	receiving	eyes,	there
cannot	be	any	light,	nor	can	there	be	any	darkness.
The	moment	you	leave	your	room,	lock	the	room,	you	are	performing	a	miracle
of	which	you	are	not	aware.	All	the	photographs	in	the	room,	all	the	clothes	in
the	room,	all	the	paintings,	everything	disappears.	No	color	can	exist	without	an
eye	to	see	it.	The	color	is	a	response	of	an	eye,	so	the	moment	you	have	locked
your	room,	your	room	becomes	colorless	--	everything.	The	green	is	no	longer
green;	the	red	is	no	longer	red.	But	if	you	just	look	through	the	keyhole	all	the
colors	simply	jump	back	in	their	place.	Once	the	eye	is	there	the	missing	link	is
no	longer	missing.
One	cannot	think	about	anything	which	is	valuable.
This	 is	 the	basic	 difference	between	 the	whole	heritage	of	 philosophy	 and	my
approach.
With	great	humbleness	 I	want	 to	say	 that	all	great	philosophers	are	great	blind
men	--
certainly	great,	because	what	they	cannot	see	they	manage	to	think	about,	what
they	cannot	touch	they	manage	to	figure	things	about.
In	 the	fables	of	Aesop	you	must	have	heard	 the	most	 famous	fable.	Five	blind
men	 go	 to	 see	 an	 elephant.	 All	 five	 are	 philosophers,	Milarepa,	 and	 naturally
they	start	touching	the	elephant.	Somebody	touches	the	legs	of	the	elephant	and
he	says,	"My	god,	the	elephant	is	just	like	the	pillars	in	a	temple."
The	other	one	who	is	touching	the	big	ears	of	the	elephant...	Certainly	the	story
must	 have	 been	 born	 in	 India	 because	 the	African	 elephant	 does	 not	 have	 big
ears.	That's	how	you	can	find	from	where	a	story	is	coming.	The	Indian	elephant
has	really	big	ears.	The	blind	man	who	was	touching	the	ears	said,	"You	idiot!
Stop	all	that	nonsense	about	pillars	in	a	temple.	The	elephant	is	like	a	big	fan."
Before	electricity	came	into	being,	 rich	people	used	 to	have	very	big	fans,	and
two	 servants	 standing	 by	 their	 sides	 were	 continuously	 moving	 the	 fans	 over
them.	Those	fans	are	almost	like	the	big	ears	of	the	elephant.
And	so	on	and	so	forth;	all	the	five	blind	philosophers	argued	and	argued.	One
man	was	watching.	Just	a	simple	and	ordinary	man,	not	a	philosopher	but	a	man
with	 eyes.	 He	 could	 not	 believe	 how	 these	 people	 are	 going	 to	 come	 to	 a
conclusion.	They	are	fighting,	quarreling,	arguing.	He	said	to	them,	"You	are	all
in	a	tremendously	great	difficulty.
Your	arguments	are	not	going	to	help.	What	you	need	are	eyes,	not	arguments.
Once	you	see	the	elephant,	there	is	no	question	of	thinking	about	it."
The	word	`philosophy'	comes	from	two	words:	`philo'	and	`sophia'.	Philo	means
love,	and	sophia	means	wisdom	or	knowledge	--	love	of	knowledge.	In	the	East
we	have	nothing	parallel	 to	philosophy.	 In	 the	East	we	have	a	 totally	different
approach.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 approach	 of	 the	 philosopher;	 it	 is	 the	 approach	 of	 the
mystic.
We	don't	have	any	system	parallel	 to	philosophy	 in	 the	East.	What	we	have	 is
totally	 different.	 But	 continuously	 there	 has	 been	 a	misunderstanding	 between
the	scholars	from	the	West,	from	the	East.	They	have	all	started	calling	it	Eastern
philosophy.	There	is	no	such	thing	in	existence.
In	the	East	we	have	a	word	`darshan',	which	means	seeing	not	thinking;	it	means
simply	seeing.	Darshan	cannot	be	translated	as	philosophy.	I	have	coined	a	word
for	 it.	 I	don't	care	about	 languages	and	I	don't	care	about	grammar,	and	I	don't
care	 about	 dictionaries	 and	 encyclopedias.	 My	 concern	 is	 existential	 not
linguistic.	 I	have	coined	my	own	word	and	 that	 is	philosia:	 love	of	seeing,	not
love	of	knowledge.
Milarepa,	if	you	have	decided	to	be	something,	be	a	lover	of	seeing	the	truth.	Be
a	lover	of	experiencing	the	truth.	Become	part	of	the	vast	experience	I	am	calling
philosia.
Trust	more	in	your	eyes	than	in	your	mind.
Trust	more	in	your	heart	than	your	thoughts.	Trust	more	in	your	being,	because	it
is	the	being	which	is	going	to	experience	the	very	center	of	the	cosmos.
Avoid	 philosophy;	 it	 is	 a	 sickness	 of	 the	 soul.	 The	 moment	 you	 see	 the
distinction	between	philosophy	and	philosia,	you	will	be	amazed	that	that	small
difference	 between	 two	words	 takes	 you	 on	 different	 routes.	 Philosophy	 takes
you	 deeper	 into	 the	mind;	 it	 refines	 your	mind.	 It	 gives	 you	more	 systematic
arguments.	 It	 can	 help	 you	 to	make	 a	 perfect	 system	of	 thought	 but	 it	will	 be
only	hot	air;	it	will	not	correspond	to	the	reality.
Philosia	will	 take	you	on	a	different	path,	 the	path	of	 the	mystic,	whose	whole
search	 is	 to	 find	 a	 new	way	 of	 looking	 at	 things.	 His	 search	 is	 for	 eyes.	 His
search	is	for	an	open	heart
--	to	be	receptive.	His	ultimate	search	is	to	come	in	tune	with	his	being,	with	the
existential	 heartbeat.	 When	 your	 heart	 is	 beating	 in	 synchronicity	 with	 the
universal	 heart,	 you	 know	without	 knowledge,	 you	 are	 wise	 without	 wisdom,
because	you	experience	without	any	explanation.
If	 you	 want	 to	 understand	 me,	 then	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 the	 distinction
between	 these	 two	 words.	 Philosophy	 leads	 deeper	 into	 mind	 and	 that	 means
deeper	 into	 mess.	 Philosia	 leads	 you	 beyond	 mind	 into	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.
Philosia	is	basically	meditation.	It	is	an	opening	of	a	third	eye	within	you,	as	if...
The	third	eye	is	only	a	new	way	of	receiving	the	gifts	of	existence.	I	am	using
only	a	parable.	Don't	take	it	literally.
Philosophy	is	bound	to	be	aggressive.	One	of	the	books	of	the	great	philosopher
of	 the	 modern	 age,	 Bertrand	 Russell,	 is	 entitled,	 CONQUEST	 OF	 NATURE.
That	indicates	the	hidden	aggressiveness	of	philosophy.
Philosia	 is	not	 a	 conquest	of	nature,	but	on	 the	contrary	 is	 a	willingness	 to	be
conquered	 by	 nature.	 It	 is	 a	 deep	 trustfulness,	 openness,	 receptivity.	 The
philosopher	is	bound	to	become	serious.	The	deeper	he	moves	into	the	paths	of
philosophy,	 the	 more	 serious	 he	 will	 become,	 because	 the	 farther	 away	 he	 is
going	from	life,	love,	the	farther	away	he	is	going	from	beauty,	from	celebration,
from	festivity,	from	laughter.
Just	 the	 opposite	 happens	 to	 the	 mystic.	 He	 comes	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 a
childlike	innocence.	He	is	full	of	smiles,	bursting	out	into	laughter	looking	at	the
miracle	of	existence	all	 around.	We	are	 so	blind	 that	we	never	 see	 the	wonder
anywhere.	You	sow	a	seed	and	the	rains	come,	 the	seed	disappears	and	dies	 in
the	soil,	and	two	green	leaves	start	sprouting	--	and	you	don't	see	any	wonder?
You	don't	see	the	magic?	Out	of	that	small	seed	will	grow	a	big	huge	tree	with
thousands	of	flowers	and	thousands	of	fruits.
Out	of	one	seed	the	tree	will	give	millions	of	seeds	every	year.
It	is	said	by	a	scientist	that	just	a	single	seed	can	make	the	whole	earth	green	in
time.	So	much	miracle	in	a	small	seed!	But	we	live	in	an	attitude	of	"taking	for
granted."	That	 is	 our	 blindness.	Don't	 take	 anything	 for	 granted,	 and	 then	 you
will	be	encountering	on	every	step,	every	moment,	miracles	upon	miracles.
The	mystic	becomes	so	overwhelmed	by	the	majesty	and	the	miraculousness	of
existence	that	he	knows,	but	he	does	not	reduce	his	knowing	into	knowledge.	He
never	becomes	a	philosopher.	He	always	remains	a	seer.
Milarepa,	 you	 are	 a	 musician.	 That	 is	 far	 better	 and	 far	 higher	 than	 being	 a
philosopher.
Perhaps	you	have	not	thought	about	it....
Music	 consists	 of	 sound	 and	 silences.	 Philosophy	 is	 only	 so	much	 prose,	 just
words	and	words	and	words.	The	word	is	a	secondary	phenomenon.	Sound	is	a
primary	phenomenon.	You	can	listen	to	the	music	of	a	waterfall,	you	can	listen
to	the	music	of	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees...	nothing	is	said,	but	much	is
understood.	The	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	has	no	words,	but	it	has	a
sound.
In	the	fall	when	all	the	paths	become	full	of	falling	leaves...	have	you	walked	in
a	forest?
Just	by	your	walking	you	create	sound,	because	the	paths	are	full	of	old	leaves.
Just	 a	 little	 breeze	 comes	 and	 those	 old	 leaves	 start	 dancing	 and	 moving.
Existence	 is	 full	 of	 sounds,	 but	 it	 never	 speaks	 a	 single	 word.	 The	 birds	 are
singing	but	they	are	only	making	sounds.	They	are	not	saying	anything,	but	their
songs	are	immensely	beautiful.	They	touch	the	very	core	of	your	heart.
Music	 is	 a	 higher	 system	 than	 philosophy,	 because	 music	 is	 something	 in
between	philosophy	and	philosia;	in	other	words	it	is	something	between	words
and	 silence,	 perhaps	 just	 a	 midway	 overnight	 stay.	 If	 you	 fall	 back,	 you	 can
become	a	philosopher.	If	you	go	ahead,	you	can	become	a	mystic.	Falling	back
means	 losing	sounds	and	catching	hold	of	words.	Going	 forward	means	 losing
even	 sounds	 and	 just	 entering	 into	 silence	 because	music	 consists	 of	 both	 the
sound	 and	 silence.	 It	 is	 a	 rhythm,	 a	 dance,	 hand	 in	 hand	 between	 sound	 and
silence.
A	musician	 can	 easily	 become	 a	meditator,	 he	 is	 very	 close.	 There	 is	 nothing
closer	 to	 meditation	 than	 music	 --	 wordless,	 meaningless,	 but	 tremendously
significant.	It	says	nothing	but	shows	much,	expresses	nothing	but	brings	to	you
a	great	splendor.	From	musician	move	towards	the	mystic.	The	day	your	music
consists	only	of	silence,	you	have	arrived	home.
This	will	not	make	you	sad.	Music	is	not	serious;	it	is	playfulness,	it	is	song,	it	is
dance.	 It	 has	 an	 immense	 beauty.	 It	 can	 move	 peoples'	 hearts.	 Entering	 into
music,	don't	remain	stuck	there.	That's	where	modern	music	has	got	stuck.	It	has
become	too	much	sound	and	it	has	forgotten	the	silences	in	between.	You	have
to	change	the	gestalt.
If	 you	 know	 about	 gestalt	 psychology...	 it	 is	 a	 very	 specialized	 approach.	The
word
`gestalt'	is	worth	understanding.	In	any	book	on	gestalt	psychology	you	will	find
a	picture	inside,	just	a	sketch,	a	line	sketch	of	a	woman.	If	you	look	at	it	and	go
on	 staring,	 a	moment	 comes...	 the	woman	 becomes	 old.	 If	 you	 go	 on	 staring,
again	a	moment	comes...
the	woman	becomes	young,	very	beautiful.
In	those	lines	both	are	hidden;	just	your	gestalt	changes,	your	emphasis	changes.
You	are	looking	at	the	lines	in	one	way;	it	looks	like	an	old	woman.	But	because
your	mind	cannot	stay	long	with	any	experience	--	it	is	continuously	moving	--
soon	it	changes	its	gestalt,	and	the	same	lines	which	were	making	an	old	woman
suddenly	create	a	beautiful	young	woman.
The	strangest	part	is	that	you	cannot	see	both	together.	You	cannot	see	because
obviously	the	same	lines	have	to	be	used.	Either	you	can	see	the	old	woman	or
you	 can	 see	 the	 young	 woman,	 but	 you	 cannot	 see	 them	 simultaneously,
together,	because	there	are	not	two.
The	word	`gestalt'	means	change	of	emphasis.
There	is	a	great	Sufi	book	--	I	would	like	to	call	it	the	greatest	book	in	the	world
because	 nothing	 is	 written	 in	 it;	 it	 is	 absolutely	 empty.	 It	 is	 almost	 twelve
hundred	years	old,	and	the	first	man	who	purchased	it	was	Mevlana	Jalaluddin
Rumi.
His	disciples	were	very	intrigued,	very	curious,	because	he	never	read	that	book
in	front	of	anybody.	When	all	are	gone	he	would	close	the	door	and	pull	out	the
book,	 which	 he	 used	 to	 keep	 under	 his	 pillow,	 and	 then	 he	 would	 read	 it.
Naturally	it	was	creating	much	curiosity,	"What	kind	of	mysterious	book	is	it?"
People	tried	in	every	possible	way.
Sometimes	a	 few	disciples	were	found	on	 the	roof,	 removing	 tiles	and	 looking
underneath	to	see	what	Jalaluddin	Rumi	is	reading,	but	they	could	not	figure	it
out.
The	 day	 Jalaluddin	Rumi	 died,	 they	were	more	 concerned	with	 the	 book	 than
Jalaluddin	Rumi...	and	they	loved	the	man.	They	loved	him	as	Sufis	have	never
loved	any	other	master.	Mevlana	means	beloved	master.	That	word	is	used	only
for	Jalaluddin	Rumi	and	for	nobody	else.	In	twelve	hundred	years	in	the	world	of
the	Sufis	 there	 has	 never	 been	 a	more	 charming,	more	beautiful,	more	 loving,
more	human	being	than	Jalaluddin	Rumi.
But	even	the	disciples	forgot	that	their	master	had	died.	They	rushed	and	pulled
out	the	book	from	underneath	the	pillow	and	they	looked,	and	they	were	amazed
--	 the	 book	was	 absolutely	 empty!	 There	was	 nothing	 to	 read.	 But	 those	who
were	very	close	and	intimate	devotees,	they	understood	the	meaning.
Words	have	to	be	dropped.
Only	then	can	you	have	silence.
The	 whole	 teaching	 of	 the	 book	 is	 be	 silent.	 First	 let	 the	 words	 go,	 then	 the
sounds,	 and	 there	 remains	 an	 emptiness,	 nothingness,	 just	 a	 pure	 space.	 That
purity	is	what	meditation	is	all	about.	For	twelve	hundred	years	the	book	has	not
been	 published	 because	 no	 publisher	 was	 ready	 to	 publish	 it.	 Obviously	 the
publisher	 asked...	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 publish	 in	 it.	 Finally	 one	 Sufi	 master
published	it	himself.	Now	it	is	available	--	but	it	is	just	empty	pages.	It	is	called
THE	BOOK	OF	BOOKS.
Move	from	sound	to	silence.
This	way	you	will	not	become	serious	and	dead	 like	your	saints.	 I	have	heard,
Milarepa:	A	man	once	said	 to	Doctor	Johnson,	"You	are	a	philosopher,	Doctor
Johnson.	I	have	tried	too,	in	my	time,	to	be	a	philosopher,	but	I	don't	know	how
to	be	one.	You	see,	cheerfulness	was	always	breaking	in."
You	cannot	be	a	philosopher	and	retain	your	cheerfulness.	It	is	better	to	drop	all
philosophizing	 and	 open	 all	 the	 buds	 of	 your	 cheerfulness.	 Sing	 just	 like	 the
birds.	Play	on	your	guitars,	but	remember	the	gestalt	should	be	on	the	silences.
Dance	 to	 abandon,	 and	 you	 may	 be	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 the	 reality
because	the	reality	is	so	festive.	It	is	a	festival	of	lights,	day	in,	day	out.
Just	watch	existence	and	you	will	be	surprised.	What	do	these	poor	trees	have?	--
no	bank	account,	no	houses	to	live	in,	no	clothes	to	hide	their	nakedness.	But	just
watch	 their	 cheerfulness;	 just	 watch	 their	 flowers,	 their	 fragrance.	 They	 don't
have	 anything	 as	 possessions,	 but	 they	 have	 themselves.	You	may	 have	many
possessions,	but	you	don't	have	yourself.
You	are	a	house	full	of	things,	but	the	master	is	missing.	Awaken	the	master.	Be
more	 alert,	 aware,	 receptive,	 and	 you	 will	 come	 to	 know	 immense	 mysteries
surrounding	you.
When	one	feels	surrounded	by	mysteries,	a	deep	gratefulness	arises	in	the	heart.
That	 gratefulness	 is	 the	 only	 authentic	 prayer.	 All	 other	 prayers	 are	 false,
manufactured	 by	 man.	 Only	 gratefulness	 that	 arises	 spontaneously	 is	 not
manufactured	by	you.	It	is	a	happening	just	like	love.
And	 once	 it	 starts	 happening,	 it	 starts	 growing	 wider,	 bigger.	 Soon	 it	 starts
reaching	 to	 the	 faraway	 stars.	 Your	 whole	 life	 becomes	 nothing	 but	 a	 prayer.
Your	 actions	 become	 prayer,	 your	 rest	 becomes	 prayer,	 your	 work	 becomes
prayer,	your	sleep	becomes	prayer,	you	become	a	prayer.	It	is	not	something	to
do	in	a	church	or	in	a	temple.	It	is	something	to	be,	wherever	you	are.
Milarepa,	no	one	has	ever	heard	of	any	philosopher	coming	to	a	conclusion.	No
one	has	ever	heard	about	any	philosopher	becoming	enlightened,	becoming	self-
realized.	 It	 is	 as	 unheard	 of	 as	 anyone	 ever	 complaining	 of	 a	 parachute	 not
opening.	Philosophers	are	the	most	misguided	people	on	the	earth,	and	to	follow
them	is	to	follow	blind	people.
Find	 someone	who	sees,	who	 is	 a	 seer,	who	experiences...	whose	heart	dances
with	 the	 wind,	 the	 rain,	 the	 sun,	 whose	 innermost	 being	 has	 achieved	 a
synchronicity	 with	 all	 that	 surrounds	 you,	 from	 the	 lowest	 grass	 leaf	 to	 the
biggest	 star	 in	 the	 world.	 He	 is	 in	 tune	 with	 everything.	 He	 is	 no	 longer	 an
outsider;	 he	 is	 an	 insider.	 The	 philosopher	 is	 an	 outsider.	He	 stands	 away	 and
thinks	about	things.	The	mystic	takes	a	jump	into	existence,	becomes	an	insider,
has	no	need	to	think.	He	tastes,	he	smells,	he	sees,	he	loves,	he	lives.
Truth	has	to	be	lived,	not	known.
Life	 has	 to	 be	 squeezed	 to	 the	 last	 drop	 of	 juice.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be
contemplated	upon	--	drink	it.
The	last	words	of	Jesus	to	his	disciples	are	significant.	The	last	supper,	the	last
time	when	Jesus	ate	and	drank	with	his	disciples	before	being	caught	and	taken
to	prison...	He	was	aware	that	he	is	going	to	be	caught;	the	rumor	was	all	around.
He	was	aware	that	it	is	possible	he	may	be	crucified.	So	after	supper	he	spoke	a
few	words	to	the	disciples:
"Perhaps	I	may	not	be	able	to	see	you	again.	Just	remember	one	thing:	You	have
not	been	with	me	to	 listen	 to	what	I	say;	you	have	been	with	me	to	eat	me,	 to
drink	me,	to	live	me.
I	may	be	gone,	but	you	can	continue	to	drink	me."
Once	you	have	known	the	secret	of	drinking	and	eating	and	absorbing,	then	the
whole	existence	is	available.
The	master	is	only	a	small	window	into	the	universe.	Once	you	have	come	to	the
master,	 the	 window	 disappears	 and	 you	 are	 facing	 the	 whole	 existence.	 The
frame	of	the	window	should	not	become	important.	That's	what	has	happened	to
millions	 of	 people:	 the	 frame	 of	 the	 window	 is	 being	 worshiped;	 nobody	 is
looking	through	the	window	to	the	beyond.
The	window	is	only	an	invitation	to	see	to	the	beyond,	but	people	are	worshiping
the	 windows:	 somebody	 worshiping	 Buddha,	 somebody	 worshiping	 Jesus,
somebody	worshiping	Ramakrishna.	These	are	all	windows,	but	they	are	not	for
worshiping;	 they	are	 to	be	 transcended.	They	give	you	 the	vision,	 the	philosia.
Then	leave	them	behind	and	go	on	moving	into	existence	as	deeply	as	possible.
And	that	is	possible	only	in	silence.
Let	your	music	slowly	become	more	and	more	close	to	meditation.	Philosophy	is
a	kind	of	disease	--	very	dangerous,	almost	incurable.	I	would	like	you	not	to	be
a	 philosopher	 but	 just	 a	 dancer,	 a	 singer,	 a	 flute	 player,	 because	 they	 are	 very
close	to	my	world	of	meditation.
My	emphasis	is	to	increase	your	cheerfulness,	your	laughter,	because	this	world
is	not	for	the	miserable.	This	world	is	not	for	the	people	who	have	become	too
accustomed	to	anxiety,	anguish.	This	world	belongs	to	those	who	live	moment	to
moment	in	utter	ecstasy.	Cheerfulness,	nonseriousness,	a	sense	of	humor	to	me
are	very	fundamental	qualities	of	a	religious	being.
Solomon	Rabinowitz	went	to	his	doctor	to	have	a	checkup.	The	doctor	said,	"For
a	man	of	eighty-seven	you	are	doing	well.	Why	a	checkup?"
Solly	 explained	 that	 he	was	going	 to	marry	 a	 girl	 of	 twenty.	He	would	not	 be
dissuaded,	 so	 the	 doctor's	 final	 advice	 was,	 "Then	 if	 you	 hope	 for	 a	 fruitful
marriage,	take	a	lodger	as	well."
When	 they	met	 again	 after	 eight	months	 the	 old	man	 said,	 "Congratulate	me,
Doctor,	my	wife	is	pregnant."
The	doctor	paused	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	"Ah	yes,	so	you	took	my	advice
and	had	a	lodger	as	well?"
"Of	course,"	grinned	Solly	through	his	toothless	gums.	"She	is	pregnant	too."
Just	remain	cheerful.
Existence	loves	nothing	more	than	cheerfulness.
Gorbachev	 and	Ronald	Reagan	 are	 traveling	 in	 a	 plane	 together	when	Reagan
says,	"If	I	throw	a	one	dollar	bill	out	of	the	plane,	I	will	make	someone	happy."
"Okay,"	says	Gorbachev,	"but	if	I	throw	out	a	one	hundred	ruble	note	I	will	make
one	hundred	people	happy."
"In	 that	 case,"	 says	 Reagan,	 "I	 will	 throw	 out	 a	 million	 dollars	 and	 make	 a
million	people	happy."
"Go	ahead,"	says	Gorbachev,	"and	then	I	will	throw	you	out	and	make	the	whole
world	happy."
It	was	 in	 the	divorce	court	and	the	 judge	asked	the	husband,	"So	you	have	not
spoken	to	your	wife	for	three	years	--	why?"
The	husband	replied,	"I	did	not	want	to	interrupt	her."
The	priest	was	visiting	the	young	widow	who	had	just	moved	to	his	parish.	After
talking	with	her	for	a	while	he	raised	a	questioning	eyebrow	and	said,	"Now	let
me	get	this	straight.	You	say	you	have	a	child	of	two	and	another	three	years	old,
and	yet	you	say	that	your	husband	has	been	dead	for	seven	years."
"Yes,"	said	the	woman,	"but	I'm	not."
A	philosopher	becomes	enclosed	within	himself.	He	loses	contact	with	the	birds.
Do	 you	 hear	 them?	 --	 for	 no	 purpose,	 just	 out	 of	 sheer	 joy,	 just	 for	 being	 in
existence....	Nobody	has	asked	them	to	sing.	The	song	is	coming	from	an	inner
source	of	cheerfulness.
Nobody	has	asked	the	trees	to	give	flowers	so	colorful	and	so	fragrant.	But	the
tree,	just	out	of	gratitude	towards	existence,	brings	all	those	beautiful	flowers	--
a	silent	prayer	and	a	beautiful	offering.
A	man	remains	miserable	if	he	becomes	closed	within	his	own	mind	and	goes	on
and	on	just	making	sand	castles	--	words,	theories,	hypotheses.	He	loses	contact
with	existence.
And	to	lose	contact	with	existence	is	to	be	almost	dead	before	death	comes.
It	is	almost	the	average	case	that	people	die	at	the	age	of	thirty	and	are	buried	at
the	 age	 of	 seventy.	 For	 forty	 years	 what	 have	 they	 been	 doing	 here?	 --	 just
dragging	 themselves,	 and	dragging	 towards	 the	graveyard.	These	people	 go	 to
the	churches,	go	 to	 the	 temples,	go	 to	 the	mosques,	go	 to	 the	synagogues,	and
because	of	these	corpses,	all	synagogues,	all	churches,	all	temples	have	become
utterly	sad,	serious.
In	Israel	just	now	there	are	riots	among	Jews	themselves.	They	had	to	fight	with
the	Mohammedans,	who	 are	 surrounding	 them	 like	 a	 vast	 ocean,	 and	 Israel	 is
just	 a	 small	 island	 surrounded	 by	 millions	 of	 Mohammedans;	 that	 fight
continues.	 But	 a	 new	 fight	 has	 started	which	 is	more	 dangerous;	 it	 is	 coming
from	inside.	Now	Jews	are	divided	into	three	sections	in	Israel.
The	people	who	have	been	living	there	for	centuries	think	they	are	the	real	Jews.
They	follow	everything	as	traditionally	as	it	has	been	followed	since	Moses,	four
thousand	years	ago.	The	second	group	has	come	from	European	countries.	They
are	a	little	more	progressive;	they	cannot	follow	dead	routines.	They	have	lived
in	a	different	atmosphere,	in	different	cultures.
The	worst	problem	is	with	the	Jews	who	have	come	from	America.	And	you	will
be	surprised	to	know	that	on	the	Sabbath,	on	Friday	evening,	the	orthodox	Jews
stop	working	--	everything.	The	American	Jews	have	never	thought	that	driving
their	 car	 home	 from	 the	 office	 is	work.	The	American	 Jews	 are	 being	 stoned;
their	cars	are	being	damaged.	They	are	beaten	because	they	are	driving	cars.	No
work	is	allowed.
Now	Israel	 is	really	in	a	terrible	mess.	Orthodox	Jews	are	telling	the	European
and	the	American	Jews	to	go	back,	"You	are	destroying	our	religion,	our	culture,
our	tradition."
And	naturally,	the	American	Jew	is	a	totally	different	species;	just	in	name	is	he
a	Jew.
I	have	told	you	one	story	befor....
Three	American	rabbis	were	bragging	about	 their	synagogue's	progressiveness.
The	first	rabbi	said,	"Nobody	can	beat	me.	In	my	synagogue	people	are	allowed
to	smoke."
The	 second	 rabbi	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "That's	 nothing.	 In	my	 synagogue	we	 are
really	progressive.	People	are	allowed	to	drink,	bring	their	girlfriends,	dance,	are
even	allowed	to	make	love."
The	 third	 rabbi	 said,	 "Drop	 all	 this	 crap.	We	 are	 the	 most	 avant	 garde,	 most
progressive	people	 in	 the	world.	 In	my	synagogue	 there	 is	a	board	hanging	on
the	door	saying	that	on	Jewish	holidays	the	synagogue	will	remain	closed."
This	 is	 real	 progress!	 Naturally	 the	 orthodox	 Jews	 in	 Israel	 who	 have	 always
lived	 there	 and	 have	 not	 known	 anything	 about	 the	world,	 are	 still	 with	 their
conditionings	from	the	past.	They	are	serious	people.	They	cannot	conceive	that
in	a	synagogue	you	should	 laugh.	 In	a	synagogue	even	a	smile	 is	not	allowed.
You	have	to	be	serious;	it	is	serious	business.
But	the	whole	existence	is	nonserious.
To	me	the	only	authentic	temple	is	existence.
Learn	 from	 it.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 become	 a	 philosopher,	 you	 don't	 have	 to
become	a	saint,	you	don't	have	to	become	a	wise	man.	Milarepa,	it	 is	perfectly
good	 to	 remain	 OTHERwise.	 The	 so-called	 wise	 have	 tortured	 humanity	 so
much	that	now	my	preference	is	for	the	OTHERwise.
Be	more	human.	Don't	betray	the	earth.	Be	more	in	love	with	the	earth	and	with
all	the	treasures	that	that	the	earth	provides	you	with.	It	is	our	home.	We	are	not
renouncers,	we	are	rejoicers.	We	want	to	participate	in	the	dance	of	existence.
My	people	are	not	anti-life.
My	people	are	life	affirmative.
Except	life	there	is	no	God.
And	life	is	not	something	to	be	thought	about,	it	is	something	to	be	danced,	to	be
loved,	to	be	celebrated.
A	Frenchman	staying	at	an	English	country	house	for	the	weekend	was	attracted
to	 a	 beautiful	 society	 girl,	 and	 without	 much	 difficulty	 seduced	 her.	 Several
months	later	they	met	by	chance	at	a	very	select	society	ball.	He	stepped	forward
with	 outstretched	 hand,	 but	 she	 walked	 straight	 past	 him	 without
acknowledgment.	As	 soon	 as	 he	 could,	 the	 Frenchman	 cornered	 her	 and	 said,
"Surely	you	remember	me?"
"Of	course	I	do,	young	man,	but	you	are	not	 to	assume	that	 in	England	a	one-
night	frolic	means	that	we	have	been	introduced."
Life	is	so	hilarious	that	to	be	serious	is	to	be	sick	unnecessarily.	A	psychological
health,	 a	 spiritual	 sanity,	 a	possibility	 to	 remember	 that	here	you	are	not	 to	be
dead,	that	you	have	to	live	life	in	its	totality,	with	intensity,	to	burn	your	torch	of
life	from	both	ends	together.
That	is	the	only	authentic	philosia.
But	 don't	 be	 a	 philosopher;	 that	 is	 the	 original	 sin	 of	man.	 I	 stand	 against	 all
philosophies	 because	 all	 philosophies	 are	 poisonous.	 They	 poison	 your
possibilities	of	humor,	of	playfulness,	of	cheerfulness.	They	destroy	your	songs.
They	make	you	crippled	and	stop	you	from	dancing.	All	these	philosophers	with
long	faces	have	dominated	humanity	too	long.	It	is	time	that	their	domination	be
completely	eradicated.
A	new	era	of	 the	mystics	 is	knocking	on	your	door.	Listen	carefully	 and	open
your	doors.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	The	sweetness	of	silence	on	your	tongue
30	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709305
ShortTitle:
PILGR22
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
68
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 OVERCOME	 THE	 GOSSIPS,	 PLEASE	 JUST	 GIVE	 ME	 SOME
SUTRAS	TO
MEDITATE	UPON.
Devageet,	 it	 is	 next	 to	 impossible	 to	 overcome	 gossips,	 particularly	 in	 such	 a
juicy,	holy	place!	Gossips	are	so	intrinsic	to	a	cheerful	life	that	they	need	not	be
overcome.	 They	 should	 be	 enjoyed.	 They	 also	 contain	 a	 certain	 fragment	 of
truth.	 That	 should	 be	 discovered.	 No	 gossip	 is	 just	 a	 lie.	 It	 is	 a	 strange
phenomenon	that	all	gospels	are	simply	lies;	and	no	gossip	is	just	a	lie,	there	is
some	element,	some	fragment	of	truth	in	it.
The	 serious	 people	 are	 addicted	 to	 gospels.	 And	 if	 nonserious	 people	 start
overcoming	 gossips,	 what	 will	 be	 left	 for	 you?	 Gospels	 you	 have	 overcome
already;	now	all	 that	 remains	 for	you	 is	gossiping.	Life	has	always	been	 taken
seriously,	 and	 that	has	produced	a	miserable	mankind.	Life	 should	be	 taken	as
fun!	Only	then	can	we	create	a	paradise	on	the	earth.
Life	 is	neither	profane	nor	sacred;	 those	are	words	used	by	 the	serious	people.
Either	 they	 condemn	 it,	 or	 they	 make	 it	 divine;	 either	 this	 extreme	 or	 that
extreme	 --	 but	 the	 truth	 is	 always	 in	 the	middle,	 in	 the	 exact	middle	 you	 are
standing	 on	 the	 truth.	 Life	 is	 neither	 profane	 nor	 divine.	 It	 is	 simply	 a
tremendous	 opportunity	 to	 rejoice.	 The	moment	 you	 call	 it	 profane,	 you	 start
feeling	guilty.	You	become	crippled	on	your	own,	you	cannot	dance	-
-	 dance	 becomes	 profane	 and	 condemned	 --	 you	 cannot	 sing,	 you	 cannot
celebrate.
One	Zen	master,	Ta-Kuan,	was	on	his	deathbed.	He	asked	for	some	paper	and	his
calligraphic	brush.	It	has	been	a	longstanding	tradition	in	the	world	of	Zen	that
masters	 when	 departing	 from	 life	 give	 their	 last	 statement,	 written.	 Ta-Kuan
wrote	on	the	paper	a	Japanese	word	which	means	dream.	He	laughed,	closed	his
eyes,	the	brush	dropped	from	his	hand.
But	before	writing	this	last	statement	he	had	instructed	his	disciples,	"Bury	me
just	in	the	mud	behind	the	temple,	because	I	am	part	of	the	earth	and	the	earth
wants	to	reclaim	me,	to	rejuvenate,	to	create	me	anew.	I	am	tired	and	it	wants	to
take	 me	 to	 rest.	 And	 don't	 mourn	 when	 I	 die,	 but	 celebrate.	 Don't	 make	 a
monument	on	my	grave,	because	I	am	going	home.	It	is	not	a	grave	to	me,	it	is
only	 entering	 into	 eternal	 rest.	 So	 rejoice,	 sing,	 dance,	 celebrate	 and	 carry	 on
your	daily	work	as	if	nothing	has	happened."
People	like	Ta-Kuan	understand	that	life,	although	it	is	a	dream,	does	not	need	to
be	condemned.	It	is	a	beautiful	dream.	You	can	sing	it,	you	can	dance	it,	you	can
make	it	more	beautiful,	you	can	decorate	it.
To	 call	 it	 a	 dream	 is	 not	 a	 condemnation.	 He	 has	 instructed	 that	 they	 should
celebrate	and	they	should	continue	their	daily	work	as	if	nothing	has	happened.
The	people	who	know	never	feel	guilty	about	 life	and	never	put	 life	on	a	high
pedestal	beyond	their	reach,	so	that	they	can	only	kneel	down,	lose	their	dignity,
their	 pride	 and	 their	 self-respect	 and	 pray	 to	 a	 hypothetical	 divine	 life	 --	 to
someone	who	does	not	exist,	far	away	in	the	stars.
All	 the	 religions	 have	 done	 both	 these	 things.	 On	 the	 one	 hand	 they	 have
condemned	your	ordinary	 life,	and	 they	have	created	a	 tremendous	sickness	of
guilt	all	over	 the	world.	For	centuries	man	has	been	drowning	 in	guilt.	All	his
pleasures	 are	 poisoned.	 The	 condemnation	 goes	 so	 long	 and	 so	 deep	 that	 you
cannot	 enjoy	 your	 food,	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 your	 love,	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 your
clothes,	you	cannot	enjoy	at	all.	Something	inside	you	goes	on	condemning:	you
are	doing	something	wrong.
A	small	boy	 in	 the	 school	was	 saying,	 "It	 took	me	 twelve	years	 to	understand
that	`don't'
is	 not	my	name!	Whatever	 I	was	 doing	 --	 `Don't	 do	 it!'	Everything	 that	 I	was
doing	was	wrong,	and	everything	that	I	had	no	interest	in	was	right."
The	 impossible	 is	 made	 right	 and	 the	 possible	 and	 the	 real	 is	 made	 a	 sin.
Between	these	two	--	the	sin	and	the	virtue	--	every	man	is	crushed,	sandwiched
between	two	rocks.	You	don't	see	the	naturalness,	acceptability	of	whatever	you
are,	without	any	ideals.
Devageet,	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 gossiping;	 just	 gossip	 in	 an	 enlightened	 way.
Beautify	 your	 gossips;	 let	 your	 gossips	 also	 be	 part	 of	 your	 understanding,	 of
your	love,	of	your	compassion.	Even	your	gossips	will	show	who	you	are.	They
are	your	signatures.
Gossiping	becomes	evil	when	it	is	out	of	jealousy,	meanness,	violence,	when	it	is
just	to	pull	somebody	down,	when	it	comes	out	of	a	revengeful	mind	--	but	it	is
not	 the	 fault	 of	 gossiping.	 Gossiping	 can	 come	 out	 of	 a	 meditative	 mind.
Gossiping	 can	 come	 out	 of	 love,	 out	 of	 peace.	 Gossiping	 is	 an	 art	 in	 itself.
Everybody	is	not	capable	of	gossiping.	There	are	born	gossipers!
Devageet,	you	cannot	overcome	it;	it	is	intrinsic	to	your	nature.	You	are	a	born
gossiper.
You	gossip	against	yourself.
You	 are	 asking	me	 for	 some	 sutras	 to	meditate	 upon.	Before	 I	 give	 you	 some
sutras,	it	has	to	be	understood	that	you	can	contemplate	on	them,	but	you	cannot
meditate	on	them.
That	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 contemplation	 and	 meditation.	 That	 is	 the
difference	 between	 mind	 and	 no-mind.	 That	 is	 the	 difference	 between
philosophy	and	philosia.
Contemplation	needs	an	object.	Without	an	object	to	contemplate	on,	you	cannot
contemplate	 --	contemplate	on	what?	Some	content,	 some	object	 is	needed	 for
your	mind	to	focus	upon	it;	hence,	contemplation	never	goes	beyond	mind.
Philosophy	is	contemplation.
Science	is	concentration.
Religion	is	meditation.
But	meditation	means	you	don't	have	anything,	any	object	 to	 think	about.	You
are	just	in	a	state	of	absolute	aloneness.	You	don't	have	anything	on	which	you
can	focus	yourself	--
not	a	sutra,	not	a	mantra,	not	any	great	value	of	life,	just	pure	space	all	around
you.	Then	you	are	in	meditation.
Meditation	is	never	about	something.
Meditation	is	a	state.
You	can	be	in	it;	it	is	not	something	that	you	have	to	do	--	not	even	thinking,	not
even	contemplating.
There	 are	 beautiful	 ways	 of	 contemplation,	 and	 I	 will	 give	 you	 sutras	 to
contemplate.	But	 it	has	 to	be	made	absolutely	clear	 that	 there	 is	nothing	 in	 the
world	that	you	can	meditate	upon.
Meditation	 is	 simply	going	beyond	mind,	beyond	 the	 functioning	of	 the	mind,
beyond	all	the	fetters	of	the	mind,	and	just	entering	into	this	silence,	unmoving,
unwavering	--	just	a	pure	awareness,	a	silent	flame,	a	great	joy...	but	nothing	to
see.	 A	 great	 clarity	 of	 seeing,	 a	 vast	 openness...	 the	 whole	 sky	 is	 yours,	 but
nothing	objects	to	you,	nothing	prevents	you.
For	the	first	 time	the	nothingness	has	opened	its	doors	to	you.	You	simply	are,
utterly	 centered,	without	 even	 a	 single	 thought	 flying	 across	 your	mind.	 Then
you	are	in	meditation.
There	are	many	moments	here	when	you	are	in	meditation	in	spite	of	yourself.	I
am	 not	 an	 orator,	 I	 speak	 only	 to	 create	 silence	 for	 you.	 I	 speak	 only	 so	 that
between	two	words	you	can	feel	the	gap...	that	between	two	words	you	can	fall
into	 the	 silence.	 The	 speaker,	 the	 orator,	 the	 philosopher,	 the	 teacher,	 they
emphasize	 the	 words;	 I	 emphasize	 the	 silences	 between	 the	 words.	 They
emphasize	 the	 lines;	 I	 emphasize	 between	 the	 gap	 between	 two	 lines.	 It	 is	 a
change	of	gestalt	from	word	to	wordlessness.
If	you	make	an	effort,	you	miss	the	whole	point,	because	making	an	effort	your
mind	comes	in.	Perhaps	nobody	has	ever	spoken	the	way	I	am	speaking	to	you.
They	had	a	message	to	give	 to	you;	I	have	an	experience	to	share.	They	had	a
certain	philosophy	to	convince	you,	to	convert	you;	I	don't	have	any	philosophy,
any	nonsense.	I	have	simply	a	device:	I	am	not	saying	anything	to	you,	I	am	just
giving	you	chances	of	being	in	silence	without	any	effort	on	your	part.	Once	you
have	 learned	 these	 moments	 and	 their	 beauty,	 and	 their	 benediction	 and	 their
blessing,	it	will	not	be	difficult	to	find	the	same	spaces	anywhere.	Just	the	first
experience	is	the	most	difficult.
An	ancient	Chinese	proverb	says,	The	first	step	is	the	only	problem,	because	the
whole	journey	is	complete	in	the	first	step.	You	don't	have	to	take	another	step.
For	thousands	of	years	there	have	been	masters	telling	people	to	be	silent,	to	go
beyond	mind.	People	have	listened	to	them	and	they	have	tried	also	--	but	they
go	on	failing	again	and	again,	because	effort	will	not	lead	you	to	it.	The	master's
function	is	not	to	give	you	a	certain	technique.	The	master's	function	is	to	give
you	a	glimpse,	just	a	little	taste:	the	sweetness	of	silence	on	your	tongue.	Then
you	will	be	able	to	find	it	on	your	own.
Meditation	cannot	be	taught,	it	can	only	be	caught.
I	am	meditation.
If	you	are	available	you	can	catch	it.
It	 is	 just	 as	 contagious	 as	 any	 disease	 --	 it	 is	 not	 a	 disease,	 it	 is	 a	 cure	 of	 all
diseases;	it	is	the	ultimate	health.	But	nobody	has	thought	that	health	can	also	be
contagious.	 The	 whole	 of	 medical	 science	 goes	 on	 thinking	 about	 infections,
about	 diseases.	 Nobody	 bothers	 to	 make	 health	 infectious,	 to	 create	 healthy
people	 who	 move	 anywhere	 and	 make	 other	 people	 healthy,	 just	 by	 their
presence.
My	own	experience	is	--	I	am	not	a	physician,	the	body	is	not	my	world	--	that
spirituality,	religiousness,	is	certainly	contagious.	I	give	you	moments	to	feel	the
presence,	to	feel	the	nothingness	surrounding	you.	This	is	meditation;	it	does	not
need	any	object.
But	for	your	contemplation	I	can	give	you	a	few	sutras....
...	An	atomic	war	will	not	determine	who	is	right,	but	who	is	left.
...	A	pessimist	is	someone	who	is	afraid	that	the	optimist	is	right.
...	Take	care	to	get	what	you	like,	or	you	will	be	forced	to	like	what	you	get.
...	Say	it	with	flowers,	say	it	with	sweets.	Say	it	with	kisses,	say	it	with	eats.	Say
it	with	jewelry,	say	it	with	drink.	But	always	be	careful	not	to	say	it	with	ink.
...	Philosophy	is	the	discovery	that	you	might	be	worse	off	than	you	are.
...	If	you	can	keep	your	head	when	all	about	you	are	losing	theirs...	maybe	you
have	not	heard	the	gossip!
...	Keep	quiet	and	people	will	think	you	to	be	a	great	philosopher.
...	A	reformed	politician	is	one	who	did	not	get	enough	votes.
...	A	neurotic	 is	 a	 person	who	worries	 about	 things	 that	 did	 not	 happen	 in	 the
past,	 instead	of	worrying	about	something	 that	won't	happen	 in	 the	future,	 like
normal	people.
...	 The	 difference	 between	 capitalism	 and	 communism:	 in	 capitalism,	 man
exploits	man;	in	communism	it	is	vice-versa.
...	Women	are	the	kind	of	problem	most	men	like	to	wrestle	with.
...	To	have	the	last	word	with	a	woman	--	apologize.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 YOU	 ARE	 TALKING	 EVERYTHING	 FEELS	 FINE,	 BUT	 WHEN
YOU	 STOP,	 IT	 FEELS	 LIKE	 THE	 CARPET	 HAS	 BEEN	 PULLED	 FROM
UNDER	MY	FEET.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Dhyan	Anekant,	that's	the	very	purpose	of	my	stopping:	to	pull	the	carpet	from
under	your	feet,	to	give	you	a	chance	to	become	aware	what	you	are	without	me.
So	once	in	a	while,	I	pretend	to	be	sick.	I	have	to;	otherwise	you	start	forgetting
your	 reality.	 You	 start	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 my	 music,	 my	 poetry,	 my
painting,	and	I	don't	want	that.	You	have	to	be	your	own	music	and	you	have	to
be	your	own	poetry.
You	have	to	be	just	yourself.
What	 happens	 when	 I	 stop	 speaking?	 You	 are	 saying,	 "Everything	 feels	 fine
when	you	are	talking,	but	when	you	stop	it	feels	like	the	carpet	has	been	pulled
from	under	my	 feet."	Suddenly	you	become	aware	of	 all	 the	garbage	 that	 you
had	forgotten	you	are	carrying	within	you.	All	that	crap	--	centuries	old	--	starts
rising	within	your	mind;	it	 is	really	stinking.	You	forget	all	the	fragrance	I	was
talking	about;	you	don't	 see	any	flowers	anywhere.	You	don't	 see	 the	beautiful
sunrises,	 the	 beautiful	 sunsets;	 you	 don't	 hear	 anymore	 the	 songs	 of	 the	 birds.
You	 are	 so	 full	 of	 your	 own	 garbage,	 you	 become	 completely	 closed	 to	 the
world.
I	open	you,	your	windows,	your	doors,	your	eyes,	your	ears.	I	give	you	a	chance
to	be	unafraid,	fearless,	and	open	your	doors.
The	unknown	is	not	your	enemy.
The	unknown	is	your	friend.
The	stranger	is	your	guest.
Allow	the	strange,	allow	the	unfamiliar.
With	me	you	gather	courage,	you	open	up;	you	start	listening	to	the	silences,	you
start	 seeing	 the	 beauties	 of	 existence.	 But	 left	 alone	 you	 immediately	 rush	 to
close	 your	 doors	 and	windows,	 and	 start	 hiding	 in	 your	 dark	 hole	 which	 you
think	is	your	security	and	safety.
It	 is	 not	 safety,	 it	 is	 not	 security,	 it	 is	 your	 grave	 --	 although	 the	 grave	 has	 a
certain	kind	of	security.	For	example,	you	cannot	die	again.	You	can	rest	at	ease,
no	death	 is	ever	going	to	disturb	you	--	but	do	you	want	 that	kind	of	security?
The	dead	are	so	safe,	they	will	not	even	fall	sick,	not	even	the	common	cold	--
no	problems,	no	anxieties,	no	responsibilities.
While	you	are	alive,	don't	create	a	grave	for	yourself.	As	I	see	it,	everybody	is	a
gravedigger;	 he	 digs	 his	 own	 grave	 continuously,	 in	 search	 of	 security,	 safety,
protecting	himself	from	the	unknown,	the	unfamiliar,	the	strange	--	who	knows
what	it	is.	It	is	better	to	live	with	your	known	sadness,	misery,	darkness	--	but	at
least	you	know	them,	you	have	been	with	them	long	enough,	you	are	acquainted.
So	the	moment	you	are	not	listening	to	me,	you	start	listening	to	yourself.	That	is
the	problem.	You	have	to	come	to	a	point	when	you	don't	have	anything	to	say.
Then	without	me	you	will	have	even	greater	experiences,	even	greater	ecstasies,
even	greater	moments	of	splendor.
I	am	simply	showing	you	the	path.
It	leads	to	faraway	stars.
But	when	I	am	not	with	you,	you	have	to	understand	that	what	starts	surfacing	in
you	is	your	reality	--	and	you	have	to	get	beyond	it.
Two	martians	crash	land	their	flying	saucer	in	a	piano	shop.	Dusting	themselves
off	they	approach	a	grand	piano.	Says	one,	"Take	me	to	your	dentist."
The	other	commands,	"Wipe	that	grin	off	your	face."
Now	the	Martians	have	their	own	understanding	of	things.	They	don't	belong	to
your	 world.	 They	 are	 coming	 from	 a	 different	 world,	 different	 language,
different	ways	of	seeing	things.
The	little	boy	comes	back	from	his	first	day	at	school.
His	mother	greets	him	and	says,	"Well,	Tommy,	did	you	learn	much	on	your	first
day?"
"Not	enough	I	guess,"	said	Tommy	sadly,	"I	have	to	go	back	again	tomorrow."
Children	 have	 their	 own	 understanding.	When	 you	 are	 alone,	 you	 speak	 your
language;	you	speak	from	the	space	where	you	are,	and	you	become	frightened	-
-	what	happened	to	great	ecstasies?	Only	agonies	are	arising	in	you,	miserable,
tidal	waves.	What	happened	to	all	that	was	so	beautiful?	What	happened	to	that
music?	You	hear	only	noises	--
maddening.
It	was	 the	 first	day	of	 the	 factory	 football	match	and	 the	polacks	were	playing
the	Italians.
Nobody	 managed	 to	 score,	 and	 at	 five	 o'clock	 the	 factory	 siren	 blew,	 so	 the
Italians	 left	 the	 field	 and	went	 home.	Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 the	 polacks	 scored	 a
goal.
Now,	nothing	can	be	done	about	it!	You	have	to	face	your	reality.	Only	by	facing
it	 and	 remembering	 those	glimpses	 that	you	had	with	me,	 in	 communion,	 in	a
deep	 harmony	with	me,	 you	 have	 now	 a	 certainty	 that	 your	 reality	 is	 not	 the
whole	reality,	that	there	is	much	more,	that	the	real	richness	is	missing.	You	are
living	 at	 the	minimum	 --	 a	 poor	 life,	 spiritually.	 I	 drag	 you	 to	 the	 very	 sunlit
peaks.	But	when	I	leave	you,	you	immediately	start	rolling	down,	back	into	the
valley	in	search	of	your	security,	because	on	the	hilltop	you	feel	so	alone.	In	the
valley	is	the	whole	crowd,	all	your	friends,	all	your	enemies....
After	 two	years	 in	a	salt	mine	 in	Siberia,	 Ivan	was	unburdening	himself	 to	his
sweetheart.
"Oh,	darling,	how	I	have	suffered	without	you	these	past	two	years!"	he	babbled.
"Nothing	to	do	all	day	except	dig	salt...	salt...	salt.	In	all	that	time	what	do	you
think	was	on	my	mind?"
"Tell	me,	dearest,"	she	breathed	as	she	snuggled	closer.
"Pepper!"	he	answered.
Salt	and	salt	and	salt	--	naturally,	only	one	thing	was	in	his	mind,	pepper.
You	have	to	face	your	mind.
You	cannot	just	avoid	it	and	escape	from	it.	Wherever	you	go,	you	will	find	it;	it
is	within	you.	It	is	you.
So	this	is	my	way	of	working.	I	will	be	with	you	and	I	will	take	you	to	unknown
spaces.
But	once	in	a	while	I	will	disappear,	 just	 to	give	you	a	sense	of	where	you	are
and	where	you	ought	to	be,	and	to	know	the	distance.
And	 it	 is	 not	 difficult	 to	 bridge	 the	 gap,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 be	 aware.	Once	 you
know	the	gap,	 the	bridge	 is	not	difficult.	But	people	are	not	even	aware	of	 the
gap;	they	think	this	is	all	that	life	is	meant	to	be.	It	is	not	all.
Life	is	infinite.
Life	is	beyond	your	wildest	dreams.
It	is	an	eternal	romance,	a	great	love	affair	which	begins	but	never	ends.
A	suave	executive	seemed	disappointed	after	lunching	with	a	gorgeous	blonde.
When	his	friend	asked	what	went	wrong,	he	replied,	"She	said	yes."
"Yes	sounds	good	to	me!"
"Not,"	the	other	said,	"when	the	question	is,	Àre	you	married?'"
When	you	are	alone,	watch	what	kind	of	questions	are	arising	in	you,	and	what
kind	of	 answers	you	are	capable	of	giving	 to	 those	questions	 --	because	every
question	 that	 arises	 in	 you	 has	 an	 answer	 somewhere	within	 you.	Without	 an
answer	no	question	arises.	So	just	watch.	Dig	deeper	into	every	question	and	you
will	 find	 your	 answer.	 It	 will	 be	 ordinary,	 mundane	 and	 you	 will	 feel	 hurt,
wounded.	But	 I	want	 you	 to	 know	where	 you	 are,	 because	 the	 journey	begins
from	where	you	are.
I	can	give	you	glimpses	of	the	faraway	experiences,	but	you	have	to	move	from
the	space	where	you	are.	You	have	to	go	on	a	pilgrimage.	Being	with	me	you	can
either	 use	 this	 opportunity	 for	 your	 growth,	 or	 you	 can	 misuse	 it.	 If	 you	 are
simply	 being	 entertained,	 you	 are	 misusing	 the	 opportunity.	 Unless	 you	 are
becoming	enlightened	--	even	if	slowly	and	gradually	but	steadily	--	then	you	are
not	using	the	opportunity	to	its	fullest.
I	am	not	here	to	entertain	you.	Other	than	your	enlightenment,	nothing	will	make
me	 celebrate	 you.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 celebrate	 for	 all	 of	 you,	 but	 you	 have	 to
blossom	to	your	uttermost	potentiality.
One	 evening	 in	 a	 bar	 in	 New	 York,	 a	 woman	 with	 a	 nasal,	 raspy	 voice	 was
singing,	"My	Old	Virginia	Home."
An	old	man	in	the	corner	bowed	his	head	and	wept	quietly.	A	lady	leaned	over	to
him	and	whispered,	"Excuse	me,	but	are	you	a	Virginian?"
"No,	lady,"	said	the	man,	"I	am	a	musician."
Jake	Lavinsky	decided	 to	 return	 to	Russia,	 the	 land	of	his	birth,	after	 living	 in
America	 for	 thirty-five	 years.	 "I	want	 to	 help	make	 a	 success	 of	 the	workers'
paradise,"	he	gave	as	his	excuse.
But	he	was	back	in	the	States	three	months	later.	"In	the	Soviet	Union	it	is	just
impossible	 to	 do	 anything	 right,"	 he	 complained.	 "If	 you	 arrive	 for	work	 five
minutes	 early,	 you	 are	 betraying	 your	 fellow	workers.	 If	 you	 are	 five	minutes
late,	you	are	betraying	socialism.
And	if	you	arrive	on	time	--	God	forbid	--	the	commissar	calls	you	into	his	office
and	shouts,	"So	where	did	you	get	the	watch?"
Here,	 it	 is	a	 totally	different	situation:	everything	 is	right.	Five	minutes	earlier,
five	minutes	late,	or	at	the	right	time	--	nothing	is	wrong	if	you	are	just	alert.
If	you	are	going	deeper	in	your	alertness,	if	you	are	aware,	and	your	awareness	is
becoming	more	and	more	crystallized,	everything	will	go	on	becoming	more	and
more	 right.	 A	 moment	 comes	 when	 you	 cannot	 conceive	 how	 to	 commit	 a
mistake;	 you	 cannot	 conceive	 how	 to	 be	 cruel,	 how	 to	 be	 unkind,	 how	 to	 be
violent,	how	to	be	inhuman.
The	day	you	cannot	conceive	all	that	is	animal	in	you...	then	from	your	very	mud
the	 lotus	 has	 grown,	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the	waters,	 has	 reached	 and	 opened	 its
petals	to	the	sun.	The	day	of	dance	has	arrived	--	the	moment	of	celebration.
We	are	all	born	in	the	mud,	but	there	is	no	need	to	remain	there.	This	place	is	not
to	condemn	you	for	being	born	in	the	mud,	but	to	provoke	you,	to	challenge	you,
to	invite	you,	to	welcome	you.Although	you	were	born	in	the	mud	--	all	lotuses
are	 born	 in	 the	 mud	 --	 you	 have	 the	 potential	 of	 becoming	 a	 lotus,	 the	 most
beautiful	flower	in	existence.
With	me,	drink	your	future	as	deeply	as	possible.	I	am	your	future.	When	you	are
alone,	 watch	 quietly	 and	 silently	 your	 present.	 From	 your	 present,	 from	 your
muddy	 mess,	 will	 arise	 a	 flower.	 Where	 you	 are	 today,	 I	 was	 exactly	 there
yesterday,	so	I	know	what	a	great	 future	you	have.	Where	I	am	today,	you	are
going	to	be	there	tomorrow	--	or	at	the	most	the	day	after	tomorrow.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	Knowledge	is	the	corpse	of	knowing
1	October	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8710010
ShortTitle:
PILGR23
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
93
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	FALLEN	SO	MUCH	IN	LOVE	WITH	THIS	GESTURE	OF	YOURS
OF
SHAKING	YOUR	HEAD	AT	PEOPLE'S	FOOLISH	QUESTIONS	THAT	I	AM
TRYING	HARD	TO	WRITE	ONE	TO	PROVOKE	YOU	TO	DO	SO	AGAIN.
BUT
THE	 PROBLEM	 IS	 THAT	 THIS	DOES	NOT	 SUIT	A	 SERIOUS	GERMAN
DISCIPLE
LIKE	ME.
ANYWAY,	DID	YOU	KNOW	THAT	YOU	ARE	NOT	ONLY	THE	MOST
BEAUTIFUL	 AND	 GORGEOUS	 MASTER,	 BUT	 ALSO	 THE	 MOST
IRRESISTIBLY
CHARMING	BEING	MY	EYES	HAVE	EVER	SEEN?
Haridevi,	 it	 seemed	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 ask	 a	 foolish	 question	 but	 you	 have
managed.	One	need	not	make	much	effort	 to	 ask	 foolish	questions;	 in	 fact,	 all
questions	are	foolish!	A	mind	that	questions	does	not	know	how	to	live,	does	not
know	how	to	love;	otherwise	life	itself	brings	all	the	answers,	love	fulfills	all	the
questions.
The	 people	 who	 have	 been	 talking	 about	 God,	 about	 heaven	 and	 hell,	 about
faraway	 things,	are	 the	people	who	cannot	 live	herenow.	Their	questions	show
that	their	present	is	empty.	They	want	to	have	contentment	and	fulfillment,	but	in
the	 present	 they	 are	 almost	 incapable	 --	 and	 the	 present	 is	 the	 only	 time	 that
exists.	There	is	no	other	time.
These	 are	 ways	 of	 postponing.	 Talking	 about	 God,	 nobody	 will	 think	 it	 is	 a
foolish	question;	but	it	is,	it	is	a	way	of	avoiding	life.	It	is	a	way	to	take	yourself
away	 from	 the	 present	 moment.	 All	 questions	 take	 you	 away	 from	 yourself.
There	is	not	a	single	question	that	brings	you	home.	To	be	at	home	you	will	find
no	questions,	no	answers,	but	an	eternal	peace.	In	that	peace	you	don't	become
knowledgeable,	but	in	that	peace	your	ignorance	is	transmuted	into	innocence.	In
that	 peace	 your	 questions	 go	 through	 a	 metamorphosis.	 They	 become	 your
wonders.	Your	questions	become	your	mysteries.
I	say	all	questions	are	foolish	because	 their	basic	root	 is...	perhaps	you	are	not
aware	of	it,	the	basic	root	of	all	questions	is	that	we	want	to	demystify	life.	What
are	 all	 questions	 for?	 You	 want	 to	 become	 knowledgeable,	 and	 the	 more
knowledgeable	you	become,	the	less	mysterious	life	becomes.	You	start	thinking
as	 if	 you	 know.	 And	 even	 your	 greatest	 knowledgeable	 learned	 people	 know
nothing.	What	do	you	know	about	even	yourself?	--
which	 is	 the	 closest	 thing	 to	 begin	with.	What	 do	 you	 know	 about	 your	 own
consciousness?
You	are	 it,	but	absolutely	unaware	of	 it.	And	 if	you	cannot	know	such	a	close
phenomenon,	how	do	you	think	you	can	know	the	farthest	star?	But	the	farthest
star	 serves	 a	 particular	 purpose.	Your	 eyes	 become	 focused	 on	 faraway	 things
and	you	can	avoid	the	present	moment.	And	to	avoid	the	present	moment	is	 to
avoid	life	itself.
Great	 philosophies	 have	 arisen,	 great	 theologies	 based	 on	 faraway	 questions,
without	your	being	aware	 that	every	question	 is	a	 strategy	of	 the	mind	 to	 take
away	from	this	small	moment...	from	this	silence,	from	this	heartbeat.	The	next
moment	is	not	certain,	and	all	questions	are	postponement.	Looked	at	exactly,	all
questions	are	escapist.	And	there	have	been	people	who	are	giving	you	answers
and	 making	 you	 feel	 great	 because	 you	 have	 so	 much	 rubbish,	 you	 know	 so
much.	 And	 you	 start	 thinking	 that	 just	 knowing	 so	 much,	 being	 so	 much
informed,	is	a	revolution.
Remember,	 information	 is	 never	 a	 transformation.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 all
information	that	you	collect	becomes	a	barrier	for	your	transformation.	And	all
our	universities	and	colleges	and	educational	systems	are	simply	doing	the	most
harmful	thing	to	you:	they	are	giving	you	a	false	notion	of	knowing.
Knowing	 comes	 through	 living,	 not	 through	 books,	 not	 through	 teachers,	 not
through	 saviors.	 It	 comes	 through	 your	 own	 intensity,	 aliveness	 --	 and	 you
cannot	 be	 alive	 tomorrow,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 alive	 this	moment.	 You	 don't	 need
questions	and	you	don't	need	any	answer,	because	no	answer	is	going	to	satisfy
your	quest.	You	are	thirsty...	you	need	water,	living	water,	to	quench	your	thirst.
You	 don't	 need	 the	 answer	 that	 water	 consists	 of	 hydrogen	 and	 oxygen.	 The
formula	H2O*	is	not	going	to	quench	your	thirst.
This	is	my	existential	approach.
Man	 has	 lived	 too	 long	 under	 the	 shadow	 of	 intellectual	 efforts	 to	 demystify
existence.
Fortunately,	 he	 has	 not	 been	 able.	 The	 existence	 is	 as	mysterious	 as	 ever,	 but
unfortunately	he	has	become	burdened	with	great	knowledge	and	a	false	feeling
that	he	knows.	This	is	the	greatest	danger	--	to	be	addicted	with	a	false	notion	of
knowing.
Socrates,	in	his	last	days	of	life	made	one	of	the	most	significant	statements	ever
made.
He	said,	"When	I	was	a	child	I	used	to	think	I	know	everything.	When	I	became
a	young	man	I	became	aware	that	 the	more	I	know,	the	more	there	is	 to	know.
My	 knowledge	 is	 not	 dispelling	 ignorance,	 but	 only	making	me	 aware	 of	my
ignorance,	how	little	I	know,	and	the	immense	and	infinite	that	is	waiting	to	be
known.
"And	now	at	a	 ripe	age	I	can	gather	courage	 to	say	 that	which	I	could	not	say
when	I	was	young,	that	I	know	nothing.	And	this	experience	that	I	know	nothing
has	unburdened	me	completely	of	all	the	knowledge	that	I	have	accumulated;	it
has	 fallen	 away.	 I	 am	 standing	 utterly	 naked,	 just	 as	 I	 was	 born.	 The	 same
innocence	has	come	with	tremendous	beauty,	with	great	rejoicing."
There	are	only	 two	men	 in	 the	whole	history	of	man	--	Socrates	 is	one	--	who
said,	"I	know	nothing."	The	second	man	is	Bodhidharma,	who	said	it	in	a	more
dramatic	way.	He	had	a	unique	personality	of	his	own.	He	was	born	in	India,	but
was	sent	by	his	master	to	China	to	inform	the	people	about	Gautam	Buddha.	He
went	 there,	 and	 nine	 years	 he	 lived	 there;	 and	 before	 leaving	 China	 he	 had
thousands	 of	 disciples.	 But	 he	 chose	 four	 disciples	 and	 told	 them,	 "Before	 I
leave,	I	want	somebody	to	be	my	successor.	Amongst	you	four	 is	 the	one	who
will	succeed	me.	I	will	ask	you	a	simple	thing,	and	whoever	answers	rightly	will
be	the	successor."
Naturally,	 it	was	a	great	moment	of	 suspicion.	Time	suspended...	 thousands	of
disciples	waiting...	those	four	disciples	standing...	and	Bodhidharma	asked,	"In	a
very	simple	statement,	telegraphic,	don't	use	a	single	word	that	is	not	necessary,
state	what	was	my	purpose	in	coming	to	China	from	India."
The	first	one	said,	"You	had	come	here	to	spread	the	transcendental	wisdom	of
Gautam	Buddha."
Bodhidharma	looked	with	compassion	and	said,	"You	are	right,	but	not	enough.
You	have	my	skin."
And	 he	 moved	 towards	 the	 next,	 who	 said,	 "You	 have	 come	 here	 to	 give	 an
experience	of	silence,	of	truth,	of	beauty,	of	blissfulness."
Bodhidharma	again	looked	with	deep	compassion	and	said,	"A	little	better	--	you
have	my	bones."
And	he	turned	to	the	third	disciple	who	said,	"Your	coming	has	been	the	greatest
phenomenon	in	the	history	of	China.	Your	purpose	was	to	impart	meditation."
Bodhidharma	said,	"You	are	not	wrong,	but	not	right	either."
He	 turned	 towards	 the	 fourth.	And	 the	 fourth	 started	crying	with	 tears	 flowing
down,	not	out	of	any	misery	but	out	of	tremendous	joy.	And	he	collapsed	at	the
feet	of	Bodhidharma	without	saying	a	single	word.	Bodhidharma	 took	him	up,
hugged	him,	and	said	 to	him,	"You	have	said	 it.	 I	don't	know;	you	don't	know
either.	You	are	going	to	be	my	successor.	Spread	this	luminous	ignorance	as	far
and	as	wide	as	possible."
Luminous	ignorance	--	yes,	that	is	the	ultimate	state	of	silence.	That	is	the	only
living	water	which	can	quench	your	thirst.	Questions	won't	do	it.	I	allow	you	to
ask	questions	--
it	is	just	an	indirect	way	of	taking	away	all	your	foolishness.	I	don't	answer	your
questions,	 I	 simply	 destroy	 them.	 If	 I	 can	 succeed	 in	 taking	 away	 all	 your
questions	my	purpose	is	fulfilled	and	your	destiny	too.	It	is	not	that	my	answers
are	 needed,	 it	 is	 that	 your	 questions	 have	 to	 be	 utterly,	mercilessly	 destroyed.
You	are	to	be	left	without	questions,	and	that	is	the	answer.
Haridevi,	you	are	saying,	"Anyway,	did	you	know	that	you	are	not	only	the	most
beautiful	and	gorgeous	master...?"	I	don't	even	know	that	I	am	a	master.
Just	 yesterday	 I	 saw	 your	 question,	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 my	 whole	 life	 I
looked	seriously	 into	 the	mirror.	Because	 if	Haridevi	 thinks	 that	 I	am	the	most
beautiful	 and	 gorgeous	master,	 there	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 something	 wrong.	 I	 tried
hard	 but	 I	 could	 not	 find	 anyone	 there	 in	 the	 mirror.	 I	 have	 been	 absent	 for
almost	thirty-five	years.
Once	 I	 used	 to	 be...	 but	 for	 thirty-five	 years	 I	 have	been	 just	 empty,	 a	 hollow
bamboo.	 In	 the	 right	 hands	 that	 hollow	 bamboo	 can	 become	 a	 flute.	 I	 have
allowed	my	hollow	bamboo	 to	 bring	 to	 you	 any	music,	 any	 song,	 any	 ecstasy
that	existence	wants	to	share	with	you.	But	on	your	part,	perhaps	listening	to	a
beautiful	flute	player,	you	start	looking	at	the	flute,	thinking	perhaps	the	music	is
of	the	flute.	The	music	is	not	of	the	flute.	I	am	singing	songs	of	existence.	My
gestures	are	not	my	gestures.
I	am	no	longer	a	person,	but	only	a	presence.	But	perhaps	that	presence	is	giving
you	the	idea	of	beauty.	In	fact	you	yourself	have	said,	"I	have	fallen	so	much	in
love	with	you."
Love	 imparts	beauty	 to	 anything.	 It	 is	not	my	 fault.	 If	you	have	 fallen	 in	 love
with	me,	to	you	I	will	look	as	gorgeous	as	your	love	is	deep.	But	that	shows	the
heart	of	a	disciple.
That	 shows	 the	 eyes	 of	 a	 devotee;	 that	 shows	 the	 feeling	 of	 a	 lover.	 It	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	me;	 it	 is	 all	 your	 experience.	 It	 is	 your	 own	 inner	 beauty
projected	on	me.	It	is	your	own	feeling	projected	on	the	screen	which	is	empty.
You	are	also	saying,	"Not	only	you	are	the	most	beautiful	and	gorgeous	master,
but	also	the	most	irresistibly	charming	being	my	eyes	have	ever	seen."	Your	eyes
have	remained	closed	 to	 the	whole	existence.	You	have	not	 fallen	 in	 love	with
trees	and	birds	and	animals.	You	have	not	fallen	in	love	with	the	ocean	and	the
mountains;	otherwise	you	would	have	seen	the	same	beauty	millionfold.	Let	this
be	the	beginning	of	a	long	pilgrimage.	Don't	stop	at	me.
The	master	has	 to	be	only	a	beginning,	 just	a	push	on	 the	way.	But	 remember
that	these	are	your	eyes	full	of	love	which	are	projecting.	These	eyes	can	make
this	whole	existence	beautiful.	And	the	moment	you	can	start	seeing	into	rocks
and	into	flowers	and	into	stars,	you	will	be	amazed,	overwhelmed	what	a	great
existence	you	have	been	missing.	If	the	master	can	give	you	just	a	glimpse,	that's
enough;	then	you	can	go	on	your	way.
Gautam	Buddha	is	reported	to	have	said,	"If	you	meet	me	on	the	way	again,	cut
my	head	immediately.	"No	authentic	master	would	like	you	to	become	addicted
to	him.	He	would	like	you	to	move	on.	If	you	have	seen	the	beauty	in	me,	you
are	capable	of	seeing	beauty.
Just	here,	you	have	opened	your	eyes	 in	 trust,	 in	 love.	To	 the	whole	existence
you	remain	closed	in	distrust,	in	doubt,	in	uncertainty;	otherwise,	this	is	the	most
perfect	existence	possible.	And	anyway,	there	is	no	other	existence.
If	the	master	can	become	your	window	and	you	can	see	through	the	window	to
the	open	sky,	to	the	vast	spaces,	you	will	remain	grateful	to	the	master,	but	not
addicted	to	him.
The	 fear	 of	 addiction	 is	 not	 unfounded:	 there	 are	 millions	 of	 people	 who	 are
addicted	to	Gautam	Buddha,	millions	of	others	who	are	addicted	to	Jesus	Christ,
millions	of	others	addicted	to	Mohammed.	They	have	forgotten	that	a	master	is
only	 a	window	 frame,	 and	 if	 you	 start	 becoming	 addicted	 to	 the	 frame	 of	 the
window,	you	will	never	look	through	it.
Then	the	window	becomes	your	worship,	the	object	of	your	worship.	Windows
are	not	to	be	worshiped;	windows	are	to	be	opened	so	that	you	can	see	beyond.
You	are	on	the	right	track,	Haridevi	--	just	don't	go	astray.
Once	there	were	three	men	traveling	in	an	airplane.	Unfortunately,	one	fell	out;
but	 fortunately	 there	 was	 a	 haystack	 below	 him.	 Unfortunately	 there	 was	 a
pitchfork	in	the	haystack;	fortunately	he	missed	the	pitchfork.	Unfortunately	he
missed	the	haystack	too!
So	there	will	come	moments	when	you	are	fortunate,	when	you	are	unfortunate.
Life	is	not	a	straight	line;	it	is	very	zigzag.	The	path	goes	in	a	zigzag	way.	It	is	a
mountainous	path	and	to	go	astray	is	very	simple,	because	your	mind	is	all	for
going	 astray.	You	 have	 to	 be	 very	 alert	 that	 your	mind	 cannot	 take	 you	 away
from	the	reality,	that	your	mind	does	not	succeed	in	taking	you	astray.
Your	mind	is	your	most	unfortunate	thing.
"My	 wife	 is	 always	 asking	 for	 money,	 money,	 money,"	 complained	 Hymie
Goldberg	 to	 a	 friend.	 "Last	 week	 she	 wanted	 two	 hundred	 dollars.	 The	 day
before	yesterday	she	asked	me	for	one	hundred	and	fifty.	And	this	morning	she
wanted	one	hundred	dollars."
"That's	crazy,"	said	his	friend.	"What	does	she	do	with	all	that	money?"
"I	don't	know,"	said	Hymie,	"I	never	give	her	any."
Your	mind	will	demand	continuously:	Do	this,	go	this	way.	Don't	listen	to	it.	The
moment	 a	 person	 stops	 listening	 to	 his	 own	 mind,	 he	 starts	 listening	 to	 the
universal	mind.	He	has	come	in	the	open.	Your	mind	is	an	enclosure,	very	tiny,
and	 mind	 cannot	 help	 you	 on	 the	 way.	 It	 is	 your	 greatest	 enemy.	 All	 your
questions	come	from	the	mind,	and	all	 the	answers	 that	have	been	given	down
the	ages	go	into	the	mind.
I	repeat	again,	I	am	not	answering	your	questions.	I	love	you	enough...	I	am	not
your	 enemy	 and	 I	 cannot	 give	 you	 answers.	 I	 simply	want	 to	 take	 away	 your
questions.
Slowly,	slowly	you	forget	asking	questions,	you	start	 just	being	here,	enjoying.
Nothing	is	to	be	asked.	Nothing	has	to	be	enquired,	but	one	has	just	to	be.	To	be
or	not	to	be	is	the	only	significant	decision.	Be	here	and	you	will	find	that	you
are	the	answer.
Mind	 is	 full	 of	 questions	 and	 full	 of	 borrowed	 answers.	You	 are	 the	 authentic
answer,	but	then	there	is	no	question	--	it	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon.	When
you	have	questions,	you	don't	have	the	answer.	And	when	you	come	across	the
answer	you	don't	have	the	questions.
Gertrude	Stein	was	dying.	She	was	a	great	poetess,	perhaps	the	greatest	woman
poet	who	has	existed	on	this	planet.	Her	friends	had	gathered,	and	just	before	she
died,	 she	opened	her	 eyes	 and	 asked,	 "What	 is	 the	 answer?"	The	 friends	were
stunned.	Has	she	gone	mad?
--	nobody	asks	what	is	the	answer.	First	you	have	to	ask	the	question;	otherwise
how	 can	 it	 be	 answered?	 But	 they	 were	 in	 deep	 love	 and	 gratefulness	 to	 the
woman	who	has	ignited	the	flame	in	many	of	those	who	were	present.
One	friend	asked	her,	"This	is	absurd.	You	are	asking,	`What	is	the	answer?'	but
we	don't	know	what	the	question	is."
Gertrude	Stein	opened	her	eyes	again	and	said,	"Okay,	then	tell	me,	what	is	the
question?"	And	she	died.
There	 is	 no	question	 and	 then	 suddenly	you	 are	 the	 answer.	Not	 that	 it	 comes
from	anywhere	else...	your	answer	is	covered	with	your	questions.	Take	away	all
the	 questions,	 and	 in	 that	 state	 when	 all	 questions	 have	 fallen	 down	 like	 dry
leaves	falling	from	the	tree,	and	you	are	standing	like	naked	branches	against	the
evening	sky,	you	will	know.	But	it	will	be	more	a	knowing	than	knowledge.
Knowledge	is	the	corpse	of	knowing.
Knowing	is	alive;	knowledge	is	dead.
In	 that	 moment	 when	 there	 is	 no	 question	 around	 you,	 there	 is	 an	 innocent
opening	to	all	the	mystery	of	existence.	Here,	my	effort	is	to	make	you	somehow
ignorant.
Socrates	has	divided	man	into	two	categories.	The	first	category	is	of	those	who
can	be	called	"knowledgeable	ignorant,"	and	the	second	is	of	those	who	can	be
called	"ignorant	knowers."	Certainly	ignorance	is	being	used	by	Socrates	in	the
second	 category,	 and	 by	 me,	 as	 synonymous	 with	 innocence.	 Just	 don't	 be
concerned	 with	 questions.	 Let	 them	 by	 and	 by	 disappear...	 and	 a	 moment
certainly	comes	when	you	don't	have	any	question.
At	 that	 moment	 is	 the	 explosion.	 You	 become	 luminous.	 Suddenly	 you	 don't
know,	 and	 you	 know	 for	 the	 first	 time	 as	 an	 experience,	 the	 ultimate	 that
quenches	all	your	thirst.
The	quest	is	over.	You	have	come	full	circle	back	to	your	innocent	childhood.	It
is	going	 to	happen	 to	you,	because	 there	 is	no	other	way	 for	man	 to	know	 the
ecstasies	which	are	his	birthright.
You	are	not	born	here	to	be	miserable.
You	are	not	born	here	to	fulfill	 the	requirements	of	 the	so-called	contemporary
existentialists	 --	 meaninglessness,	 boredom,	 misery,	 anguish,	 anxiety,	 angst,
agony.	The	whole	existentialist	philosophy	of	the	contemporaries	is	so	sick.	And
even	 those	 philosophers	 don't	 believe	 in	 it;	 otherwise	 they	 should	 have
committed	suicide.	What	 is	 the	point	of	 living	a	meaningless	 life?	What	 is	 the
point	of	 living	an	accidental	 life?	What	 is	 the	point	of	 living	 in	anguish	which
leads	nowhere?	What	is	the	point...	if	death	is	going	to	be	the	end,	then	why	go
on	unnecessarily	torturing	yourself?
I	have	asked	this	to	many	professors	of	philosophy	in	the	universities	who	have
become	influenced	with	existentialism.	I	said,	"Then	you	have	to	give	a	proof."
They	said,	"What	proof?"
I	said,	"You	have	to	commit	suicide,	because	there	seems	to	be	no	reason....	You
should	return	the	ticket	and	get	down	from	the	train."
But	these	existentialists	go	on	living	to	the	very	ripe	age	of	eighty,	ninety	--	and
this	is	not	new.
In	Greece,	Zeno	lived	ninety	years,	and	his	whole	life	he	was	preaching	exactly
in	different	terms	what	existentialism	is	preaching	now.	It	is	said	that	thousands
of	 his	 disciples	 committed	 suicide.	 He	 was	 a	 very	 convincing	 man,	 but	 he
himself	 lived	 for	 ninety	 years.	When	 he	was	 dying	 one	 follower	 asked,	 "This
seems	 to	 be	 very	 unbelievable.	 Thousands	 of	 people	 have	 committed	 suicide,
convinced	by	your	philosophy.	Why	did	you	go	on	living?"
He	said,	"I	had	just	to	convince	people."	He	was	saying	that	he	is	a	martyr.	He
has	sacrificed	himself	for	ninety	years	--	continuously	he	has	lived	in	misery,	just
to	teach	people	and	to	help	them	to	commit	suicide.
I	am	not	here	to	help	you	to	commit	suicide.	I	am	here	to	help	you	to	know	the
great	splendor	of	life,	the	benediction	of	existence.	Each	moment	is	so	full	of	joy
and	 blessings	 that	 if	 you	 start	 living	 moment-to-moment,	 your	 life	 will	 be	 a
constant	dance.
I	am	really	an	authentic	existentialist.	I	don't	think	that	Jean-Paul	Sartre,	Jaspers,
Soren*
Kierkegaard,	 Martin	 Heidegger,	 Marshall	 and	 their	 whole	 company	 is	 truly
existentialist.
They	 have	 not	 known	 even	 a	 single	moment	with	 their	 totality;	 otherwise,	 all
boredom	disappears,	all	meaninglessness	disappears.
Life	is	so	juicy,	so	full	of	flowers	with	so	much	fragrance.
Just	don't	miss	the	moment.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	NO-MIND	AND	MY-MIND?
Milarepa,	 the	 difference	 between	 no-mind	 and	 my-mind	 is	 the	 difference
between	your	mind	and	my	mind.
Just	drop	the	"my"	and	there	is	no	difference	between	no-mind	and	mind.	"My"
mind	 creates	 the	 boundary.	 Take	 the	 boundary	 away,	 and	 mind	 becomes	 no-
mind,	infinite,	unbounded.	You	are	an	imprisoned	splendor.	Just	take	the	prison
away...	And	 the	prison	 is	not	much;	 it	 is	of	 I,	my,	mine.	 Just	be	without	 these
words	 surrounding	 you,	 and	 no-mind	will	 give	 you	 the	whole	 existence	 as	 an
inheritance.	Mind	has	poisoned	you,	but	it	has	been	able	to	poison	you	because
you	have	become	identified	with	 it.	You	start	calling	 it	my-mind.	Drop	the	my
and	you	are	separate	from	the	mind	--	that	was	the	bridge.
Separate	who	 you	 are	 from	 the	mind	 --	 just	 a	 pure	 presence,	 an	 utter	 silence,
unmoving	 stillness...	 and	 in	 this	 space	 happens	 all	 that	 deep	 down	you	 are	 all
looking	for,	knowingly	or	unknowingly.
Three	mice	walked	 into	 a	bar,	 sat	 down	and	began	 some	 serious	drinking.	All
three	 became	 thoroughly	 drunk	 and	 in	 due	 course,	 each	 began	 to	 boast	 about
how	brave	he	was.
"I'm	going	to	tell	that	dumb	Ronald	Reagan	in	the	White	House	about	some	of
his	policies,"	said	the	first	mouse.
"That's	nothing,"	sneered	the	second	mouse.	"I'm	going	over	to	the	Kremlin	and
tell	them	just	what	I	think	about	them."
They	both	turned	to	the	third	mouse	who	was	sitting	there	dreaming.
"Well,	what	are	you	going	to	do?"	they	demanded.
"Me,	I'm	going	to	screw	the	cat."
This	is	your	mind.	Just	drop	the	identity	with	the	mind	and	you	will	be	surprised
beyond	 your	 wildest	 expectations	 what	 a	 tremendous	 treasure	 you	 have,
inexhaustible.	And	when	 I	 am	saying	 this,	 I	 am	not	 saying	 it	within	quotation
marks.	When	I	am	saying	this,	I	am	saying	this	on	my	own	authority.
I	 am	 not	 authoritative,	 remember	 --	 one	 can	 get	 confused.	 The	 authoritative
person	 is	 a	person	who	wants	 to	dominate.	 I	 am	not	 an	authoritative	person,	 I
have	no	desire	to	dominate;	but	what	I	am	saying	is	with	absolute	authority.	I	am
not	 quoting	 any	 scriptures;	 I	 am	 saying	 only	 what	 I	 have	 encountered	 within
myself.	The	day	I	dropped	the	identity	with	the	mind	I	became	the	no-mind.	No-
mind	is	the	highest	state	of	your	consciousness.
Paddy	 and	Sean	were	 sitting	 in	 the	 bar	when	Paddy	 said,	 "You	 know,	 Sean,	 I
have	 read	 so	much	 lately	 about	how	smoking	can	 ruin	your	health	 that	 I	have
finally	decided	to	do	something	about	it."
"So,	you	are	going	to	give	up	smoking?"	asked	Sean.
"Heavens	no,"	cried	Paddy,	"I	am	going	to	give	up	reading."
So	just	be	very	alert.	I	am	saying	to	drop	the	idea	of	my,	mine	--	the	identity.	But
you	 can	 misunderstand	 me,	 because	 misunderstanding	 does	 not	 need	 much
intelligence.	You	can	go	on	being	identified	with	the	mind.	Your	mind	is	capable
of	giving	you	the	sense	that	you	have	arrived,	that	this	is	no-mind.	It	is	so	easy	to
deceive	 yourself	 that	 you	 have	 to	 be	 alerted	 again	 and	 again	 not	 to	 deceive
yourself.
Just	the	other	day	I	have	received	again	a	letter	from	a	German	sannyasin.	Now
he	is	asking	for	my	blessings	because	he	has	become	enlightened.	Germans	are
very	strong	people,	and	once	they	get	an	idea,	it	is	very	difficult	to	change	them.
And	this	is	not	the	first	case!
It	has	happened	before	with	another	German	sannyasin,	Gunakar.	He	became	at
least	six	times	enlightened	and	finally	he	dropped	it.	Whenever	he	would	go	to
Germany	he	would	become	enlightened	and	 from	 there	 --	 and	he	was	 rich,	he
had	 a	 beautiful	 castle	 in	 the	 mountains	 --	 he	 would	 write	 letters	 to	 all	 the
presidents,	 to	 all	 the	 prime	ministers	 of	 the	 world,	 to	 all	 the	 members	 of	 the
U.N.,	"I	have	become	enlightened.	If	you	need	any	advice	I	am	available."
His	 letter	 would	 come	 to	 me	 also,	 "Osho,	 I	 thank	 you,	 you	 were	 right	 that
enlightenment	is	our	nature.	I	have	become	enlightened.	I	just	need	a	recognition
from	you	because	nobody	else	believes	in	me."
So	I	had	to	call	him	again	and	again.	And	when	he	would	come	and	sit	in	front
of	me,	 and	 I	would	 say,	 "Gunakar,	 are	you	 really	 enlightened?"	he	would	 say,
"No."	He	would	say,
"It	is	strange.	When	I	come	to	you	I	become	unenlightened,	and	when	I	go	back
to	Germany	I	become	enlightened	again!"
This	happened	six	times.	Gautam	Buddha	became	enlightened	only	once.	In	fact,
people	have	never	become	enlightened	even	twice	--	once	is	more	than	enough.
But	mind	is	very	cunning,	it	can	give	you	all	kinds	of	ideas.
Beware	of	your	own	mind.
If	 you	 can	 remain	 alert	 and	 not	 allow	 the	 mind	 to	 disturb	 your	 silence,	 your
peace,	slowly,	slowly	the	mind	stops	bothering	you.	And	the	day	the	mind	feels
completely	frustrated	that	you	are	no	more	listening	to	it,	it	evaporates.	Its	whole
life	is	the	life	of	a	parasite.	If	you	get	identified	with	it,	you	are	giving	life	to	it,
you	are	giving	nourishment	to	it.
Just	get	unidentified.	Let	 the	mind	be	 there,	but	 remember,	you	are	not	 it.	 Just
this	 simple	 remembrance:	 I	 am	not	 the	mind.	Not	 that	you	have	 to	 repeat	 it	 --
because	repetition	will	be	done	by	the	mind,	that	is	the	problem.	Just	a	wordless
awareness,	I	am	not	the	mind...
and	no-mind	will	start	opening	its	doors	to	you.	And	that	is	the	beginning	of	the
transformation.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	MOST	IMPORTANT	WORD	IN	OUR	LANGUAGE?
TENNIS,	 MEDITATION,	 CHI-CHI,	 MANGOES,	 SUNTAN,	 WOMEN,
PHILOSOPHY,	 EXOTIC	 BEACHES,	 CRICKET,	 INSTANT	 COFFEE,	 JAZZ
MUSIC	AND
SKINHEADS.
Milarepa,	 I	know	you	are	crazy,	but	 if	 I	answer	your	question	 truthfully	 it	will
also	drive	the	police	commissioner	of	Pune	crazy,	because	none	of	these	words
you	are	mentioning	have	any	importance.
In	 the	 past,	 before	 that	 German	 guy	 Friedrich	Nietzsche	 declared	 that	 God	 is
dead,	 God	 used	 to	 be	 the	 most	 important	 word	 in	 our	 language.	 But	 when	 a
German	 says	 something,	 you	 have	 to	 listen	 to	 it;	 otherwise	 there	 is	 trouble.
Germans	 are	 like	 your	 wives:	 you	 have	 to	 listen	 to	 them,	 otherwise	 there	 is
trouble.	Nobody	has	 ever	heard	 such	a	 thing,	 that	God	 is	dead,	but	by	 and	by
people	started	believing	it.	If	it	comes	from	a	German	guy	it	cannot	be	wrong	--
at	 least	 you	 cannot	 dare	 to	 say	 it	 is	wrong,	 otherwise	 you	 are	 bound	 for	 great
trouble.
In	his	statement	there	was	something	more.	When	Nietzsche	said,	"God	is	dead,"
he	also	said,	"Now	man	is	absolutely	free."	God	has	certainly	disappeared.	It	has
become	a	phony	word	without	any	content,	but	the	other	thing	has	not	appeared,
the	 other	 part	 of	 the	 statement	 that	 man	 has	 become	 free.	 Freedom	 has	 not
arrived.
On	the	contrary,	a	kind	of	licentiousness	which	looks	like	freedom	has	possessed
the	whole	humanity.	Perhaps	Friedrich	Nietzsche	was	not	alive	 to	what	he	was
doing,	 not	 aware.	 Perhaps	 he	was	 talking	 in	 his	 dreams	 and	 finally	 he	 had	 to
enter	into	a	madhouse.
He	himself	 could	not	 live	without	God.	God	was	 the	hope,	 ancient	hope.	God
was	the	opium,	the	consolation	of	all	those	who	are	in	despair.
When	 Friedrich	Nietzsche	 declared,	 "God	 is	 dead,"	 he	 himself	 became	 utterly
helpless	--
no	 consolation,	 no	hope,	 no	meaning.	He	had	 to	go	 through	a	 long	process	of
insanity.
Nietzsche	seems	 to	me	 to	be	 the	most	 important	 figure	 that	has	dominated	 the
world	 in	 this	 century.	Without	 any	 argument	 his	 statement	 has	 infiltrated	 into
every	mind.	But	he	was	not	aware	of	the	implications.	I	have	no	problem	if	God
is	dead.	There	is	no	need	to	mourn	his	death.	The	problem	is	that	if	God	is	dead,
then	 you	 lose	 the	most	 important	word	 in	 your	 language	 and	 you	will	 need	 a
substitute.	 God	 was	 one	 end,	 one	 extreme,	 and	 when	 one	 extreme	 disappears
from	your	mental	vision,	the	necessary	and	inevitable	is	that	you	will	fall	to	the
other	extreme.
And	that's	what	has	happened,	Milarepa.	Instead	of	God,	`fuck'	has	become	the
most	important	word	in	our	language.	Even	if	Friedrich	Nietzsche	comes	back,
he	will	be	surprised	and	he	will	try	to	resurrect	somehow	the	dead	God,	because
this	is	stupid.	But	you	will	need	a	whole	report	on	it,	a	whole	research.
One	 of	 the	most	 interesting	words	 in	 the	 English	 language	 today	 is	 the	 word
`fuck'.	It	is	a	magical	word.	Just	by	its	sound	it	can	describe	pain,	pleasure,	hate
and	love.	In	language	it	falls	into	many	grammatical	categories.	It	can	be	used	as
a	verb,	both	transitive,	"John	fucked	Mary,"	and	intransitive,	"Mary	was	fucked
by	John",	and	as	a	noun,	"Mary	 is	a	 fine	fuck."	It	can	be	used	as	an	adjective,
"Mary	is	fucking	beautiful."
As	you	can	see,	 there	are	not	many	words	with	 the	versatility	of	fuck.	Besides
the	sexual	meaning,	there	are	also	the	following	uses:
Ignorance:	Fucked	if	I	know.
Trouble:	I	guess	I	am	fucked	now!
Fraud:	I	got	fucked	at	the	used	car	lot.
Aggression:	Fuck	you!
Displeasure:	What	the	fuck	is	going	on	here?
Difficulty:	I	can't	understand	this	fucking	job.
Incompetence:	He	is	a	fuck-off.
Suspicion:	What	the	fuck	are	you	doing?
Enjoyment:	I	had	a	fucking	good	time.
Request:	Get	the	fuck	out	of	here.
Hostility:	I'm	going	to	knock	your	fucking	head	off.
Greeting:	How	the	fuck	are	you?
Apathy:	Who	gives	a	fuck?
Innovation:	Get	a	bigger	fucking	hammer.
Surprise:	Fuck!	You	scared	the	shit	out	of	me!
Anxiety:	Today	is	really	fucked.
And	it	is	very	healthy	if	every	morning	you	do	it	as	a	transcendental	meditation	-
-	 just	when	you	get	up,	 first	 thing,	 repeat	 the	mantra	 "fuck	you"	 five	 times;	 it
clears	your	throat	too!
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	The	only	way	to	be	is	not	to	be
1	October	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8710015
ShortTitle:
PILGR24
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	HAMLET'S	FAMOUS	SOLILOQUY	HIS	ULTIMATE	QUESTION	IS:	TO
BE	OR
NOT	TO	BE?
BELOVED	MASTER,	MY	ULTIMATE	QUESTION	IS:	TO	BE	AND	NOT	TO
BE?
Milarepa,	Shakespeare	is	a	great	poet,	but	not	a	mystic.	He	has	an	intuition	into
the	reality	of	things,	but	that	is	only	a	glimpse,	very	vague	as	if	seen	in	a	dream,
not	clear.
His	question	in	Hamlet	shows	that	unclarity.	"To	be	or	not	to	be?"	can	never	be
asked	by	a	man	who	knows,	because	there	is	no	question	of	choice.	You	cannot
choose	between
"to	be"	or	"not	to	be."
In	existential	terms,	not	to	be	is	the	only	way	to	be.	Unless	you	disappear	you	are
not	 really	 there.	 It	 looks	 a	 little	 difficult	 to	 understand,	 because	 basically	 it	 is
irrational.	But	reason	is	not	the	way	of	existence;	existence	is	as	irrational	as	you
can	conceive.
Here	those	who	think	they	are,	are	not.	And	those	who	think	and	realize	they	are
not	--
they	are.
The	idea	that	"I	am"	is	just	an	idea,	a	projection	of	the	mind.	But	the	realization
that	"I	am	not"	comes	only	as	a	 flowering	of	meditation.	When	you	realize,	"I
am	 not,"	 only	 the	 I	 disappears	 and	 there	 remains	 behind	 a	 pure	 existence,
undefined,	unbounded,	unfettered,	just	a	pure	space.
I	is	a	great	prison.
It	is	your	slavery	and	bondage	to	the	mind.
The	 moment	 you	 enter	 beyond	 the	 mind,	 you	 are	 --	 but	 you	 don't	 have	 any
notion	of	being	an	ego,	of	being	an	I.	In	other	words:	the	more	you	think	you	are,
the	less	you	are;	the	more	you	experience	that	you	are	not...	the	more	you	are.
The	moment	 the	 soap	 bubble	 of	 your	 ego	 pops,	 you	 have	 become	 the	 whole
existence.
Yes,	something	has	disappeared...	before	you	were	just	a	dewdrop,	now	you	are
the	whole	ocean!	You	are	not	a	loser.	You	were	encaged	in	a	very	small,	limited
space,	and	 that	 imprisonment	 is	our	misery,	our	pain,	our	anguish.	From	every
side	we	are	enclosed,	from	every	side	we	are	encountered	by	a	thick	wall	--	we
cannot	move.
Have	you	ever	experienced	in	a	nightmare,	in	a	dream...	you	know	perfectly	well
that	your	eyes	are	open,	but	you	want	to	move	your	hands	and	you	cannot;	you
want	 to	 get	 up,	 but	 you	 cannot.	 A	 tremendous	 fear	 grips	 you	 as	 if	 you	 are
paralyzed	for	the	moment.	That	experience	will	explain	to	you	our	whole	life	as
a	 dewdrop.	Our	 intrinsic	 nature	 is	 to	 be	 oceanic	 and	 to	 force	 an	 ocean	 into	 a
dewdrop	is	certainly	to	create	anxiety,	anguish,	misery,	agony.
Shakespeare's	question,	To	be	or	not	to	be?	is	only	intellectual	--	and	it	is	bound
to	be	intellectual,	because	he	was	not	a	man	of	realization.	He	was	very	talented,
perhaps	there	have	been	only	a	few	poets	of	his	caliber.	But	to	be	a	poet	is	one
thing	--	and	to	know	existence	from	inside,	not	from	outside,	is	another.
The	 poet	 looks	 at	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 flower,	 at	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 sunset,	 at	 the
beauty	 of	 the	 starry	 night,	 but	 he	 is	 always	 on	 the	 outside,	 an	 observer,	 a
spectator;	 he	 is	 never	 an	 insider.	 That	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 poet	 and	 a
mystic.	When	the	poet	sees	 the	rose,	 the	rose	 is	 there	outside	 the	poet,	and	the
poet	is	there	outside	the	rose.
When	the	mystic	sees	the	rose,	he	is	the	rose.
All	differences,	all	distinctions,	all	distances	have	disappeared.
In	 such	 moments	 the	 seers	 of	 the	 UPANISHADS	 have	 declared:	 Aham
brahmasmi	--	I	am	God.	It	is	not	a	declaration	of	ego;	it	is	simply	a	declaration
of	the	mystical	experience	of	being	one	with	the	ultimate	reality.	But	it	is	true	on
smaller	scales	too.
The	mystic	can	say:
I	am	the	rose,	I	am	the	stars,	I	am	the	ocean.
The	poet	cannot	say	that.	He	can	say	that	the	rose	is	beautiful,	he	can	make	an
observation	and	a	 judgment	about	 the	 rose,	but	he	cannot	melt	and	merge	 into
the	 reality	 of	 the	 rose.	 He	 cannot	 get	 lost	 into	 it,	 he	 cannot	 become	 one,	 he
cannot	drop	the	duality.
Howsoever	 great	 his	 insight	 as	 a	 poet	may	be,	 it	will	 remain	based	 in	 duality.
Certainly	the	poet	sees	more	beauty	than	you	see.	He	has	clearer	eyes,	he	has	a
more	loving	heart	and	he	has	a	different	approach	than	the	scientist.
The	scientist	 looks	at	 the	roseflower	from	intellect,	 from	mind.	The	poet	 looks
from	 the	 heart,	 from	 intuition.	 He	 is	 certainly	 deeper	 than	 the	 scientist.	 The
scientist	in	fact	cannot	see	the	beauty	of	the	rose;	all	that	he	can	do	is	dissect	the
rose	 to	find	out	where	 the	beauty	 is.	And	the	moment	 the	rose	 is	dissected,	all
beauty	disappears...	hence	for	the	scientist	there	is	no	beauty,	because	the	beauty
cannot	survive	the	dissection;	hence	for	the	scientist	there	is	no	life,	because	the
moment	you	dissect	a	living	being	what	you	find	are	dead	parts,	you	never	find
life.
The	mystic	is	just	the	very	opposite	of	the	scientist.	The	scientist	tries	to	know
things	by	dissecting	them,	and	the	mystic	 tries	 to	know	things	by	dropping	the
distance,	 the	 gap	 between	 himself	 and	 reality.	 His	 approach	 is	 of	 the	 being.
These	are	the	three	approaches.
The	approach	of	the	mind	--	that	is	what	the	scientist	is	doing.	The	approach	of
the	heart	-
-	 that	 is	what	 the	poet,	 the	painter,	 the	artist	 is	doing.	And	the	approach	of	 the
being	--
that	is	the	world	of	the	mystic.
Shakespeare	 is	great	 in	his	poetic	compositions,	his	 intuition	is	deep.	But	he	is
not	a	mystic;	otherwise	he	could	not	have	made	 the	statement:	To	be	or	not	 to
be?
There	is	no	choice;	they	are	not	two.
The	only	way	to	be	is	not	to	be.
Disappear	 if	 you	 want	 real	 existence,	 authentic	 existence;	 merge	 into	 reality,
dissolve	your	ice-cube	in	the	ocean	and	become	one	with	it.	Of	course	you	will
get	lost	as	a	separate	entity,	but	you	will	become	the	whole.	It	is	not	a	loss;	it	is	a
tremendous	gain.
Milarepa,	you	are	asking,	"My	ultimate	question	is:	To	be	and	not	to	be?"	That	is
not	a	question.	That	is	the	only	way	you	can	find	yourself.	But	first	comes	"not
to	be,"	and	second	comes	"to	be."	That	is	the	only	change	I	would	like	to	make
in	your	question.	You	say,	"To	be	and	not	to	be?"	--	"not	to	be"	has	to	be	first,
then	"to	be"	follows.	You	have	just	to	give	space.	Throw	out	all	the	furniture	that
is	filling	your	space.	And	the	greatest	block	is	the	ego	--	throw	it	out!
Let	the	temple	of	your	being	be	utterly	empty.
That	is	the	state	of	"not	to	be."
And	you	will	be	surprised...	here	you	are	trying	"not	to	be,"	and	from	the	back
door	comes	a	new	realization	of	being,	of	"to	be."	But	your	effort	should	not	be
based	 in	 this	order	 --	 first	 to	be	and	 then	not	 to	be.	That	 is	 against	 the	natural
process	of	enlightenment.
You	have	to	attain	nothingness	first,	nobodiness	first.
This	 is	 the	 price	 you	 have	 to	 pay	 for	 attaining	 to	 the	 experience	 of	 authentic
being.	This	is	the	sacrifice	you	have	to	make.	This	is	what	Jesus	means	when	he
says,	"Unless	you	are	born	again,	you	will	not	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God."
What	does	he	mean	when	he	says,	"Unless	you	are	born	again"?	He	means,	first
you	have	to	die,	and	after	death	is	resurrection.
As	the	ego	dies	it	allows	space	for	your	authentic	being	to	blossom.	On	the	grave
of	your	ego	blossoms	the	lotus	of	your	being.	But	remember,	you	have	to	change
your	statement	because	in	 this	statement	your	ego	lingers.	"To	be"	is	your	first
desire.	 But	 if	 that	 is	 your	 first	 desire,	 then	 it	 will	 be	 very	 difficult,	 almost
impossible,	to	allow	"not	to	be."	You	will	cling	to	your	ego.
You	are	saying,	"To	be	and	not	to	be."	One	thing	is	certainly	right,	that	both	have
to	exist	together...	but	which	is	to	be	the	first?	You	cannot	start	from	the	wrong
end.	 You	 have	 to	 start	 by	 being	 nobody,	 by	 simply	 being	 spacious.	 In	 that
spaciousness	the	guest	arrives.
But	it	is	natural...	the	way	you	have	put	your	question	is	natural	to	the	mind.	It
happened...	A	man	came	to	Gautam	Buddha	with	almost	the	same	question	that
you	have	raised	here.	Gautam	Buddha	said	to	him,	"First	you	have	to	drop	your
ego	 and	 then	 you	 need	 not	 worry;	 everything	 happens	 on	 its	 own	 accord,
spontaneously."
The	man	said,	"If	that	is	the	way	to	realize	myself,	then	I	will	make	every	effort
to	drop	the	ego."
Buddha	 said,	 "You	 have	 not	 understood	 me.	 You	 are	 still	 trying	 to	 realize
yourself.	You	are	even	ready	to	drop	the	ego,	but	the	desire	deep	down	is	to	find
a	truer	ego,	a	more	eternal	ego;	that's	what	you	are	calling	the	self.	Forget	about
the	self.	There	is	nothing	to	be	achieved!	You	have	simply	to	drop	your	ego	and
wait."
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 effort	 to	 be	made;	 no	 achievement	 is	 going	 to	 be
there.	What	happens,	happens	on	its	own	accord.	You	cannot	claim	that	it	is	your
realization.	That's	why	Gautam	Buddha	is	the	first	person	in	the	history	of	man
who	has	not	used	the	word
`self-realization'.	He	came	to	know...	so	many	people,	under	the	disguise	of	the
word
`self',	 are	 simply	 protecting	 their	 ego.	 They	 are	 calling	 it	 self-realization,	 but
they	really	mean	ego-realization.	They	have	a	disguised	desire	to	make	their	ego
permanent	and	eternal.
Seeing	this	cunningness	of	the	human	mind,	Buddha	simply	dropped	the	words
`self',
`self-realization'.	He	stopped	 talking	about	what	will	happen	when	your	ego	 is
dropped.
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 my	 business	 and	 that	 is	 not	 your	 business	 either.	 You
simply	drop	the	ego	and	wait	and	see	what	happens,	but	don't	conceive	it	from
the	very	beginning.
Don't	make	it	a	goal,	an	ambition.	The	moment	you	make	it	an	ambition,	the	ego
has	come	back	from	the	hidden,	secret	door	of	your	being."
Buddha	was	very	much	misunderstood.	It	was	obvious,	particularly	in	this	land
where	for	thousands	of	years	before	him	the	religious	people	have	been	talking
about	self-realization.	But	Gautam	Buddha	had	a	far	deeper	and	clearer	 insight
than	anyone	who	has	preceded	him.	He	saw	behind	this	self-realization	nothing
but	a	deep	ego.
He	changed	the	whole	language	of	spirituality.	In	the	language	he	used	to	speak	-
-	Pali	is	its	name	--	the	self	is	called	atta.	Buddha	dropped	the	word	completely
and	he	started	using	a	negative	word,	anatta.	Atta	means	self;	anatta	means	no-
self.	 It	was	 against	 the	whole	 tradition,	 not	 only	 of	 this	 country	 but	 of	 all	 the
countries.	Nobody	had	ever	heard	about	no-self,	no-mind,	no-realization.
Then	people	started	asking	him,	"What	is	the	point	of	all	this	effort,	meditation,
disciplines,	fastings,	austerities...?	What	is	the	point	if	finally	we	are	going	to	be
nobody?
--	it	 is	a	strange	effort!	Such	a	long	journey,	so	arduous,	just	to	find	in	the	end
that	you	are	not."
They	were	logical.	But	whenever	you	encounter	a	man	like	Gautam	Buddha,	his
love	is	far	stronger	than	your	logic	can	ever	be.	His	presence	is	far	stronger	than
your	reason,	your	mind,	your	personality,	your	ambitions,	your	desires.	His	very
presence	 is	so	powerful,	so	magnetic	 that	people	start	 --	against	 themselves,	 in
spite	of	themselves	--	on	a	journey	which	ends	in	no-self.
Just	 the	other	day	 I	came	 to	know	about	a	child	who	was	born	 in	France.	The
mother	had	been	working	in	an	atomic	research	center.	While	she	was	pregnant
she	 continued	 to	work,	 so	 the	 radiation	 of	 atomic	 energy	was	 surrounding	 her
continually	while	she	was	pregnant.	Just	three	or	four	days	ago	she	gave	birth	to
a	child.	The	doctors	were	very	interested	to	see	what	had	happened	to	the	child,
because	he	had	been	exposed	to	radiation	for	nine	months	continually	--	he	may
be	blind,	he	may	be	crippled...	is	there	going	to	be	something	strange?
The	whole	medical	staff,	all	the	surgeons	and	doctors	were	watching	breathlessly
as	the	child	came	out	of	the	womb	and	the	doctor	put	the	child	on	the	table.	He
was	perfectly	healthy	--	not	blind,	not	crippled.	All	their	fears	were	negated.	But
something	they	never	expected	happened.	On	the	table	all	the	instruments	of	the
surgeon	and	the	doctor	started	moving	towards	the	child.	The	child	had	become
magnetic!	The	child	will	have	 to	 live	a	very	 strange	 life.	Wherever	he	will	go
things	will	start	moving	towards	him.
Now	they	are	trying	hard	to	de-electrify	the	child.	They	cannot	even	bring	their
instruments	 close	 to	 him;	 those	 instruments	 slip	 from	 their	 hands,	 because	 the
child	 is	 such	 a	magnetic	 force.	 The	 child	 is	 very	 healthy,	 very	 radiant	 --	 they
have	 never	 seen	 such	 a	 child	 --	 but	 to	 touch	 the	 child	 is	 to	 get	 a	 shock.	 The
nurses	who	are	taking	care	of	the	child	have	to	wear	shockproof	dresses	because
they	are	playing	with	a	danger.
A	 man	 like	 Gautam	 Buddha	 has	 a	 certain	 magnetic	 attraction,	 very	 subtle.
Things	 don't	 move	 toward	 him	 but	 souls	 move,	 consciousnesses	 move,	 life
forces	 move.	 It	 is	 his	 presence	 that	 gives	 you	 the	 proof	 that	 not-being	 is	 not
death,	not-being	is	the	ultimate	in	life.
But	remember,	Milarepa,	not-being	is	the	first	thing;	that	is	your	meditation,	that
is	your	death.	Out	of	 this	meditation,	out	of	 this	death,	out	of	 this	nothingness
will	arise	your	original	face,	your	original	being.	So	you	will	have	to	change	just
a	 little	 bit.	 Put	 not-being	 first.	 That	 has	 to	 be	 the	 priority.	 You	 need	 not	 be
concerned	about	being,	it	comes.
It	comes	absolutely	without	any	exception.
I	am	saying	it	on	my	own	experience	too.	I	had	to	disappear	into	nothingness	--
and	out	of	that	nothingness	a	totally	new,	an	utterly	fresh,	an	eternal	presence	has
arisen.	It	is	not	my	doing.	I	cannot	take	any	credit	for	it.	At	the	most	I	allowed	it
to	happen,	because	I	was	not	there	to	disturb.	Your	not-being	is	necessary	first	so
that	you	don't	disturb	when	your	being	starts	arising...	just	a	little	change.
Old	 Hymie	 Goldberg	 returned	 to	 the	 doctor	 to	 express	 his	 delight	 over	 the
invisible	hearing	aid	that	his	doctor	had	fitted	for	him.
"I	bet	your	family	likes	it,	too,"	said	the	doctor.
"Ah	no,"	said	old	Hymie,	"they	don't	know	about	it	yet	and	I	am	having	a	great
time.	In	the	past	two	days,	I	have	changed	my	will	twice!"
Everybody	thinks	he	cannot	hear...	and	he	can	hear,	so	he	is	having	a	great	time
changing	his	will.
You	also	have	 to	change	your	will.	What	you	have	put	as	 secondary	has	 to	be
primary,	and	what	you	have	put	as	primary	is	not	your	concern.	It	will	come,	just
as	when	spring	comes,	flowers	come	on	their	own	accord.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
RECENTLY	 RUDOLPH	 HESS,	 ONE	 TO	 THE	 LAST	 NAZI	 BIG	 SHOTS,
DIED.	HE
COMMITTED	 SUICIDE	 IN	 JAIL	 IN	 BERLIN,	 WHERE	 HE	 WAS
IMPRISONED	FOR
FORTY-SIX	 YEARS.	 HE	 WAS	 THE	 RIGHT	 HAND	 MAN	 OF	 ADOLF
HITLER.
"I	DON'T	REPENT	ANYTHING,"	HE	SAID	BEFORE	THE	COURT	IN
NUREMBURG,	"AND	IF	I	COULD	START	FROM	THE	VERY	BEGINNING,
I	WOULD	DO	THE	SAME	THING	AGAIN."
BELOVED	 MASTER,	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT
FORGIVENESS,	EVEN	FOR	PEOPLE	WHO	SEEM	TO	BE	UNWORTHY	OF
IT.
Deva	 Shanta,	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fundamental	 things	 to	 understand.	 People
ordinarily	think	that	forgiveness	is	for	those	who	are	worthy	of	it,	who	deserve
it.	 But	 if	 somebody	 deserves,	 is	 worthy	 of	 forgiveness,	 it	 is	 not	 much	 of	 a
forgiveness.	You	are	not	doing	anything	on	your	part;	he	deserves	it.	You	are	not
really	being	love	and	compassion.
Your	 forgiveness	will	 be	 authentic	 only	when	 even	 those	who	don't	 deserve	 it
receive	it.
It	is	not	a	question	of	whether	a	person	is	worthy	or	not.	The	question	is	whether
your	heart	is	ready	or	not.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 woman	 mystics,	 Rabiya	 al-
Adabiya,	a	Sufi	woman	who	was	known	for	her	very	eccentric	behavior.	But	in
all	 her	 eccentric	behavior	 there	was	 a	great	 insight.	Once,	 another	Sufi	mystic
Hasan	was	staying	with	Rabiya.
Because	 he	was	 going	 to	 stay	with	 Rabiya,	 he	 had	 not	 brought	 his	 own	 holy
KORAN,	 which	 he	 used	 to	 read	 every	 morning	 as	 part	 of	 his	 discipline.	 He
thought	he	could	borrow	Rabiya's	holy	KORAN,	so	he	had	not	brought	his	own
copy	with	him.
In	 the	 morning	 he	 asked	 Rabiya,	 and	 she	 gave	 him	 her	 copy.	 He	 could	 not
believe	 his	 eyes.	 When	 he	 opened	 the	 KORAN	 he	 saw	 something	 which	 no
Mohammedan	 could	believe:	 in	many	places	Rabiya	had	 corrected	 it.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	sin	as	far	as	Mohammedans	are	concerned;	the	KORAN	is	the	word	of
God	according	 to	 them.	How	can	you	change	 it?	How	can	you	even	 think	 that
you	can	make	something	better?	Not	only	has	she	changed	it,	she	has	simply	cut
out	a	few	words,	a	few	lines	--	removed	them.
Hasan	said	to	her,	"Rabiya,	somebody	has	destroyed	your	KORAN!"
Rabiya	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 stupid,	 nobody	 can	 touch	my	 KORAN.	What	 you	 are
looking	at	is	my	doing."
Hasan	said,	"But	how	could	you	do	such	a	thing?"
She	 said,	 "I	 had	 to	 do	 it,	 there	 was	 no	 way	 out.	 For	 example,	 look	 here:	 the
KORAN	says,
`When	you	see	the	devil,	hate	him.'	Since	I	have	become	awakened	I	cannot	find
any	hate	within	me.	Even	if	the	devil	stands	in	front	of	me	I	can	only	shower	him
with	my	love,	because	I	don't	have	anything	else	left.	It	does	not	matter	whether
God	stands	in	front	of	me,	or	the	devil;	both	will	receive	the	same	love.	All	that	I
have	is	love;	hate	has	disappeared.	The	moment	hate	disappeared	from	me	I	had
to	make	changes	 in	my	book	of	 the	holy	KORAN.	If	you	have	not	changed	it,
that	simply	means	you	have	not	arrived	to	the	space	where	only	love	remains."
I	will	say	to	you,	Deva	Shanta,	the	people	who	don't	deserve,	the	people	who	are
unworthy,	don't	make	any	difference	 to	 the	man	who	has	come	to	 the	space	of
forgiveness.	 He	will	 forgive,	 irrespective	 of	who	 receives	 it.	 He	 cannot	 be	 so
miserly	 that	only	 the	worthy	should	 receive	 it.	And	 from	where	 is	he	going	 to
find	UNforgiveness?
This	 is	 a	 totally	different	perspective.	 It	does	not	concern	 itself	with	 the	other.
Who	are	you	 to	make	 the	 judgment	whether	 the	other	 is	worthy	or	unworthy?
The	very	judgment	is	ugly	and	mean.
I	know	Rudolph	Hess	 is	certainly	one	of	 the	greatest	criminals.	And	his	crime
becomes	 even	 a	 millionfold	 bigger,	 because	 in	 the	 Nuremburg	 trial	 with	 the
remaining	companions	of	Adolf	Hitler	--	who	killed	almost	eight	million	people
in	the	second	world	war	--	he	said	in	front	of	the	court,	"I	don't	repent	anything!"
Not	only	that,	he	also	said,	"And	if	I	could	start	from	the	very	beginning,	I	would
do	 the	 same	 thing	again."	 It	 is	 very	natural	 to	 think	 this	man	 is	not	worthy	of
forgiveness;	that	will	be	the	common	understanding.
Everybody	will	agree	with	you.
But	I	cannot	agree	with	you.	It	does	not	matter	what	Rudolf	Hess	has	done,	what
he	 is	saying.	What	matters	 is	 that	you	are	capable	of	 forgiving	even	him.	That
will	 raise	 your	 consciousness	 to	 the	 ultimate	 heights.	 If	 you	 cannot	 forgive
Rudolf	Hess	 you	will	 remain	 just	 an	 ordinary	 human	 being,	with	 all	 kinds	 of
judgments	of	worthiness,	of	unworthiness.
But	 basically	 you	 cannot	 forgive	 him	 because	 your	 forgiveness	 is	 not	 big
enough.
I	 can	 forgive	 the	 whole	 world	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 my	 forgiveness	 is
absolute;	 it	 is	 nonjudgmental.	 I	will	 tell	 you	 a	 small	 Tibetan	 story	which	will
make	the	point	absolutely	clear	to	you.
A	great	old	master,	worshiped	by	millions	of	people,	refused	to	 initiate	anyone
into	disciplehood.	His	whole	 life,	 consistently,	 he	was	 asked	by	kings,	 he	was
asked	by	very	rich	people,	he	was	asked	by	great	ascetics,	saints,	to	be	initiated
as	his	disciples,	and	he	went	on	refusing.	He	would	always	say,	"Unless	I	find	a
man	who	deserves	it,	unless	I	find	a	man	who	is	worthy	of	it...	I	am	not	going	to
initiate	any	Tom,	Dick,	Harry."
He	 had	 a	 small	 young	 boy	who	 used	 to	 cook	 food	 for	 him,	wash	 his	 clothes,
fetch	vegetables	 from	 the	market.	The	boy	himself	had	become	slowly,	 slowly
old	and	for	his	whole	 life	he	had	been	listening	to	 the	old	man,	who	had	lived
almost	one	hundred	years,	and	without	exception	the	denial:	nobody	is	worthy!
"I	will	 die,"	 he	 said,	 "without	 initiating	 anyone,	 but	 I	will	 not	 initiate	 anyone
who	is	nondeserving."
People	 became	 tired,	 frustrated.	 They	 loved	 the	 man,	 the	 man	 had	 immense
qualities,	but	they	could	not	understand	his	very	stubborn	attitude	--	no	kindness,
no	compassion.
But	one	morning	the	old	man	woke	up	his	companion,	who	himself	had	become
old,	and	said	to	him,	"Run	immediately	down	the	hills	to	the	marketplace	and	tell
everybody	 that	 whoever	 wants	 to	 be	 initiated	 must	 come	 soon,	 because	 this
evening	as	the	sun	sets	I	am	going	to	die."
His	companion	said,	"But	what	about	worthiness?...	I	don't	know	who	is	worthy
and	who	is	not	worthy.	Who	have	I	to	bring?"
The	old	man	said,	"Don't	worry	at	all.	It	was	only	a	device,	because	I	myself	was
not	worthy	to	initiate	anyone,	but	it	was	against	my	dignity	to	say	so.	So	I	chose
the	 other	 way	 round.	 I	 was	 saying,	 Ùnless	 I	 find	 somebody	 worthy	 enough,
deserving	enough,	I	am	not	going	to	initiate.'	The	truth	is,	I	was	not	worthy	to	be
a	master.	Now	I	am,	but	the	time	is	very	short.	Only	this	morning	as	the	sun	was
rising,	 my	 own	 consciousness	 has	 also	 risen	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak.	 Now	 I	 am
ready.	Now	it	does	not	matter	who	is	worthy	and	who	is	unworthy.	What	matters
now	is	that	I	am	worthy.	Just	go	and	fetch	anybody!
Just	go	and	make	the	whole	village	aware	that	this	is	the	last	day	of	my	life,	and
anybody	 who	 wants	 to	 be	 initiated	 should	 come	 immediately.	 Bring	 as	 many
people	as	you	can."
The	companion	of	the	old	man	was	at	a	loss,	but	there	was	no	time	to	argue.	He
ran	 down	 the	 hill,	 reached	 the	 marketplace	 and	 shouted	 all	 over	 the	 village,
"Anybody	who	wants	to	become	a	disciple,	the	old	man	is	ready	now."
People	could	not	believe	it.	But	out	of	curiosity	a	few	thought,	"There	is	no	harm
at	least	to	see	what	is	going	on."	The	man	had	refused	his	whole	life,	and	on	the
last	day	of	his	life	suddenly	such	a	great	change.	Somebody's	wife	had	died	and
he	was	feeling	very	 lonely,	so	he	 thought,	"It	 is	good.	 If	he	 is	going	 to	 initiate
everybody,	no	question	of	worthiness..."	Somebody	was	 released	 from	 jail	 just
the	night	before;	he	thought,
"Nobody	 is	 going	 to	 give	me	 employment;	 this	 is	 a	 good	 chance	 to	 become	a
saint."
All	kinds	of	strange	people	went	to	the	cave	of	the	old	man,	and	his	companion
was	 feeling	 so	 embarrassed	 at	 the	 kind	 of	 people	 he	 had	 brought:	 one	 is	 a
criminal,	one's	wife	is	dead,	that's	why	he	thinks,	"It	is	better...	now,	what	else	to
do?"	Somebody	has	gone	bankrupt	and	was	thinking	to	commit	suicide;	now	he
thinks	that	this	is	better	than	suicide.
A	few	had	come	just	out	of	curiosity.	They	had	no	other	work;	they	were	playing
jazz	and	they	thought,	"We	can	play	jazz	tomorrow,	but	today	there	is	no	harm,
let	us	see	what	this	initiation	is.	Anyway,	that	man	is	going	to	die	by	the	evening
so	we	will	be	free	to	remain	disciples	or	not.	We	can	play	jazz	tomorrow	--	there
is	no	harm."
The	 companion	 of	 the	 old	 man	 was	 feeling	 very	 embarrassed,	 "How	 will	 I
present	this	strange	lot	when	that	old	man	has	refused	kings,	saints,	sages,	who
have	come	with	deep	earnestness	to	be	initiated?	And	now	he	is	going	to	initiate
this	gang!"	He	was	even	feeling	ashamed,	but	he	entered	and	asked,	"Should	I
call	the	people?	--	eleven	have	come."
The	old	man	said,	"Call	them	quickly,	because	it	is	already	afternoon.	You	took
so	much	time	and	you	could	fetch	just	eleven	people?"
His	companion	said,	"What	can	I	do?	It	 is	a	working	day;	 it	 is	not	a	holiday.	I
could	only	get	 these.	All	are	absolutely	useless;	even	I	could	not	 initiate	 them.
Not	 only	 that	 they	 are	 not	 worthy	 --	 they	 are	 absolutely	 UNworthy.	 But	 you
insisted	to	bring	somebody;	nobody	else	was	available."
The	old	man	said,	 "There	 is	no	problem.	 Just	bring	 them	 in."	And	he	 initiated
them	all.
Even	they	were	shocked.	And	they	said	to	the	old	man,	"This	is	strange	behavior.
All	 your	 life	 you	 have	 insisted	 that	 one	 has	 to	 deserve	 to	 be	 a	 disciple.	What
happened	to	your	principle?"
The	old	man	laughed.	He	said,	"That	was	not	a	principle,	that	was	only	to	hide
my	own	unworthiness.	I	was	not	yet	in	the	position	to	be	a	master.	And	I	cannot
cheat	 anyone,	 I	 cannot	 deceive	 anyone;	 hence	 I	 have	 taken	 shelter	 behind	 a
judgmental	attitude,	that	unless	you	are	worthy,	you	will	not	get	initiation."
Obviously	nobody	is	worthy.
Everybody	has	 his	 own	 flaws,	weaknesses;	 everybody	has	 done	 things	 that	 he
never	 wanted	 to	 do.	 Everybody	 has	 gone	 astray.	 Nobody	 can	 say	 that	 he	 is
absolutely	pure;	 everybody	 is	polluted.	So	when	 the	old	man	 insisted,	 "Unless
you	are	worthy	don't	come	back	to	me,"	nobody	argued	with	him;	he	was	right.
First	they	have	to	be	worthy!
On	the	last	day,	he	said	to	those	eleven	disciples,	"I	bless	you	and	initiate	you.	It
doesn't	matter	whether	you	are	worthy	or	not,	but	for	the	first	time	I	am	worthy.
And	 if	 I	 am	 really	 worthy,	 just	 my	 presence	 is	 going	 to	 purify	 you.	 My
worthiness	of	being	a	master	is	going	to	make	you	a	worthy	disciple.	Now	I	don't
have	to	depend	on	your	worthiness.
My	worthiness	is	enough.
"I	am	just	like	a	rain	cloud;	I	will	shower	all	over	the	place	--	on	the	mountains,
on	 the	 streets,	 on	 the	 houses,	 in	 the	 farms,	 in	 the	 gardens.	 I	 will	 shower
everywhere,	 because	 I	 am	 too	 burdened	with	my	 rainwater.	 It	 does	 not	matter
whether	 the	 garden	 deserves...	 I	 don't	 even	make	 any	 distinction	 between	 the
garden	and	the	rocks.	I	will	simply	shower	out	of	my	abundance."
If	 your	 meditations	 bring	 you	 to	 the	 state	 of	 a	 rain	 cloud,	 you	 will	 forgive
without	 any	 judgment	 out	 of	 your	 abundance,	 out	 of	 your	 love,	 out	 of	 your
compassion.
In	 fact	 I	 would	 like	 to	 make	 the	 statement	 that	 the	 man	 who	 is	 unworthy
deserves	 more	 than	 the	 man	 who	 is	 worthy.	 The	 man	 who	 does	 not	 deserve,
deserves	more,	because	he	is	so	poor;	don't	be	hard	upon	him.	Life	has	been	hard
upon	 him.	 He	 has	 gone	 astray;	 he	 has	 suffered	 because	 of	 his	 wrong	 doings.
Now	 don't	 you	 be	 hard	 on	 him.	 He	 needs	 more	 love	 than	 those	 who	 are
deserving;	he	needs	more	forgiveness	than	those	who	are	worthy.
This	should	be	the	only	approach	of	a	religious	heart.
Your	 question	 was	 raised	 before	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 because	 he	 was	 going	 to
initiate	a	murderer	 into	sannyas	--	and	the	murderer	was	no	ordinary	murderer.
Rudolf	Hess	is	nothing	compared	to	him.	His	name	was	Angulimal.	Angulimal
means	a	man	who	wears	a	garland	of	human	fingers.
He	had	 taken	a	vow	 that	he	would	kill	one	 thousand	people;	 from	each	 single
person	he	would	 take	one	 finger	so	 that	he	could	 remember	how	many	he	had
killed	and	he	will	make	a	garland	of	all	those	fingers.	In	his	garland	of	fingers	he
had	nine	hundred	and	ninety-nine	fingers	--	only	one	was	missing.	And	that	one
was	missing	 because	 his	 road	 was	 closed;	 nobody	was	 coming	 that	 way.	 But
Gautam	Buddha	entered	that	closed	road.
The	 king	 had	 put	 guards	 on	 the	 road	 to	 prevent	 people,	 particularly	 strangers
who	didn't	 know	 that	 a	 dangerous	man	 lived	behind	 the	hills.	The	guards	 told
Gautam	Buddha,	"That	is	not	the	road	to	be	used.	You	will	have	to	take	a	little
longer	 route,	 but	 it	 is	 better	 to	 go	 a	 little	 longer	 than	 to	 go	 into	 the	mouth	 of
death	itself.	This	is	the	place	where	Angulimal	lives.	Even	the	king	has	not	the
guts	to	go	on	this	road.	That	man	is	simply	mad.
"His	mother	used	to	go	to	him.	She	was	the	only	person	who	used	to	go,	once	in
a	while,	to	see	him,	but	even	she	stopped.	The	last	time	she	went	there	he	told
her,	 `Now	 only	 one	 finger	 is	missing,	 and	 just	 because	 you	 happen	 to	 be	my
mother...	I	want	to	warn	you	that	if	you	come	another	time	you	will	not	go	back.
I	 need	 one	 finger	 desperately.	Up	 to	 now	 I	 have	 not	 killed	 you	 because	 other
people	were	available,	but	now	nobody	passes	on	this	road	except	you.	So	I	want
to	make	you	aware	that	next	time	if	you	come	it	will	be	your	responsibility,	not
mine.'	Since	that	time	his	mother	has	not	come."
The	guards	said	to	Buddha,	"Don't	unnecessarily	take	the	risk."
And	do	you	know	what	Buddha	said	to	them?	Buddha	said,	"If	I	don't	go	then
who	will	go?	Only	two	things	are	possible:	either	I	will	change	him,	and	I	cannot
miss	 this	 challenge;	or	 I	will	 provide	him	with	one	 finger	 so	 that	his	desire	 is
fulfilled.	Anyway	I	am	going	to	die	one	day.	Giving	my	head	to	Angulimal	will
be	at	least	of	some	use;	otherwise	one	day	I	will	die	and	you	will	put	me	on	the
funeral	 pyre.	 I	 think	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 fulfill	 somebody's	 desire	 and	 give	 him
peace	 of	mind.	 Either	 he	will	 kill	me	 or	 I	will	 kill	 him,	 but	 this	 encounter	 is
going	to	happen;	you	just	lead	the	way."
The	people	who	used	to	follow	Gautam	Buddha,	his	close	companions	who	were
always	 in	 competition	 to	 be	 closer	 to	 him,	 started	 slowing	 down.	 Soon	 there
were	miles	between	Gautam	Buddha	and	his	disciples.	They	all	wanted	 to	 see
what	happened,	but	they	didn't	want	to	be	too	close.
Angulimal	was	 sitting	on	his	 rock	watching.	He	 could	not	 believe	his	 eyes.	A
very	beautiful	man	of	 such	 immense	 charisma	was	 coming	 towards	him.	Who
could	 this	man	be?	He	had	never	heard	of	Gautam	Buddha,	but	even	 this	hard
heart	 of	Angulimal	 started	 feeling	 a	 certain	 softness	 towards	 the	man.	He	was
looking	so	beautiful,	coming	towards	him.	It	was	early	morning...	a	cool	breeze,
and	the	sun	was	rising...	and	the	birds	were	singing	and	the	flowers	had	opened;
and	Buddha	was	coming	closer	and	closer.
Finally	Angulimal,	with	his	naked	sword	in	his	hand,	shouted,	"Stop!"	Gautam
Buddha	was	just	a	few	feet	away,	and	Angulimal	said,	"Don't	take	another	step
because	then	the	responsibility	will	not	be	mine.	Perhaps	you	don't	know	who	I
am!"
Buddha	said,	"Do	you	know	who	you	are?"
Angulimal	 said,	 "This	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 Neither	 is	 it	 the	 place	 nor	 the	 time	 to
discuss	such	things.	Your	life	is	in	danger!"
Buddha	said,	"I	think	otherwise	--	your	life	is	in	danger."
That	man	said,	"I	used	to	think	I	was	mad	--	you	are	simply	mad.	And	you	go	on
moving	 closer.	 Then	 don't	 say	 that	 I	 killed	 an	 innocent	 man.	 You	 look	 so
innocent	and	so	beautiful	that	I	want	you	to	go	back.	I	will	find	somebody	else.	I
can	wait;	there	is	no	hurry.	If	I	can	manage	nine	hundred	and	ninety-nine...	it	is
only	a	question	of	one	more,	but	don't	force	me	to	kill	YOU."
Buddha	said,	"You	are	absolutely	blind.	You	can't	see	a	simple	 thing:	 I	am	not
moving	towards	you,	you	are	moving	towards	me."
Angulimal	said,	"This	is	sheer	craziness!	Anybody	can	see	that	you	are	moving
and	I	am	standing	on	my	rock.	I	have	not	moved	a	single	inch."
Buddha	said,	"Nonsense!	The	truth	is,	since	the	day	I	became	enlightened	I	have
not	 moved	 a	 single	 inch.	 I	 am	 centered,	 utterly	 centered,	 no	 movement.	 And
your	mind	is	continuously	moving	round	and	round	in	circles...	and	you	have	the
guts	to	tell	to	me	to	stop.	You	stop!	I	have	stopped	long	ago."
Angulimal	said,	"It	seems	you	are	impossible,	you	are	incurable.	You	are	bound
to	be	killed.	I	will	feel	sorry,	but	what	can	I	do?	I	have	never	seen	such	a	mad
man."
Buddha	came	very	close,	and	Angulimal's	hands	were	trembling.	The	man	was
so	 beautiful,	 so	 innocent,	 so	 childlike.	 He	 had	 already	 fallen	 in	 love.	 He	 had
killed	so	many	people...	He	had	never	 felt	 this	weakness;	he	had	never	known
what	love	is.	For	the	first	time	he	was	full	of	love.	So	there	was	a	contradiction:
the	hand	was	holding	the	sword	to	kill	the	person,	and	his	heart	was	saying,	"Put
the	sword	back	in	the	sheath."
Buddha	said,	"I	am	ready,	but	why	is	your	hand	shaking?	--	you	are	such	a	great
warrior,	 even	kings	are	 afraid	of	you,	 and	 I	 am	 just	 a	poor	beggar.	Except	 the
begging	bowl,	I	don't	have	anything.	You	can	kill	me,	and	I	will	feel	immensely
satisfied	 that	 at	 least	 my	 death	 fulfills	 somebody's	 desire;	 my	 life	 has	 been
useful,	my	death	has	also	been	useful.
But	before	you	cut	my	head	I	have	a	small	desire,	and	I	think	you	will	grant	me	a
small	desire	before	killing	me."
Before	death	even	the	hardest	enemy	is	willing	to	fulfill	any	desire.
Angulimal	said,	"What	do	you	want?"
Buddha	 said,	 "I	 want	 you	 just	 to	 cut	 from	 the	 tree	 a	 branch	 which	 is	 full	 of
flowers.	I	will	never	see	these	flowers	again;	I	want	to	see	those	flowers	closely,
feel	their	fragrance	and	their	beauty	in	this	morning	sun,	their	glory."
So	Angulimal	cut	with	his	sword	a	whole	branch	full	of	flowers.	And	before	he
could	give	it	to	Buddha,	Buddha	said,	"This	was	only	half	the	desire;	the	other
half	is,	please	put	the	branch	back	on	the	tree."
Angulimal	said,	"I	was	thinking	from	the	very	beginning	that	you	are	crazy.	Now
this	is	the	craziest	desire.	How	can	I	put	this	branch	back?"
Buddha	said,	"If	you	cannot	create,	you	have	no	right	to	destroy.	If	you	cannot
give	life,	you	don't	have	the	right	to	give	death	to	any	living	thing."
A	moment	 of	 silence	 and	 a	 moment	 of	 transformation...	 the	 sword	 fell	 down
from	his	hands.	Angulimal	fell	down	at	the	feet	of	Gautam	Buddha,	and	he	said,
"I	don't	know	who	you	are,	but	whoever	you	are,	take	me	to	the	same	space	in
which	you	are;	initiate	me."
By	 that	 time	 the	 followers	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha	 had	 come	 closer	 and	 closer.
Seeing	that	now	Gautam	Buddha	was	standing	in	front	of	Angulimal,	there	was
no	problem,	no	fear,	although	he	needed	only	one	finger.	They	were	all	around
and	 when	 he	 fell	 at	 Buddha's	 feet	 they	 immediately	 came	 close.	 Somebody
raised	the	question,	"Don't	initiate	this	man,	he	is	a	murderer.	And	he	is	not	an
ordinary	murderer;	 he	 has	murdered	 nine	 hundred	 and	 ninety-nine	 people,	 all
innocent,	all	strangers.	They	have	not	done	any	wrong	to	him.	He	had	not	even
seen	them	before!"
Buddha	said	again,	"If	I	don't	initiate	him,	who	will	initiate	him?	And	I	love	the
man,	 I	 love	his	courage.	And	I	can	see	 tremendous	possibility	 in	him:	a	single
man	fighting	against	the	whole	world.	I	want	this	kind	of	people,	who	can	stand
against	 the	whole	world.	Up	 to	now	he	was	 standing	 against	 the	world	with	 a
sword;	 now	he	will	 stand	 against	 the	world	with	 a	 consciousness	which	 is	 far
sharper	than	any	sword.	I	told	you	that	murder	was	going	to	happen,	but	it	was
not	certain	who	was	going	to	be	murdered	--
either	I	was	going	to	be	murdered,	or	Angulimal.	Now	you	can	see	Angulimal	is
murdered.	And	who	I	am	to	judge?"
He	initiated	Angulimal.
The	question	is	not	whether	anybody	is	worthy	or	not.	The	question	is	whether
you	have	the	consciousness,	the	abundance	of	love	--	then	forgiveness	will	come
out	of	it	spontaneously.	It	is	not	a	calculation,	it	is	not	arithmetic.
Life	 is	 love,	 and	 living	a	 life	of	 love	 is	 the	only	 religious	 life,	 the	only	 life	of
prayer,	peace,	the	only	life	of	gratitude,	grandeur,	splendor.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	Don't	renounce	the	world,	renounce	the	rubbish!
2	October	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8710020
ShortTitle:
PILGR25
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
AS	 I	 LOOK	 AROUND	ME,	 AT	 THE	 PEOPLE	 THAT	 HAVE	 ANSWERED
YOUR
CALL,	 MY	 SPIRIT	 FLIES	 WITH	 JOY	 WITH	 THE	 KNOWLEDGE	 THAT
THESE,	MY
BROTHERS	 AND	 SISTERS,	 ARE	 SOME	 OF	 THE	 MOST
EXTRAORDINARY
PEOPLE	 ON	 THE	 PLANET.	 SEEING	 THEM	 WITH	 THIS	 AWARENESS
MAKES	ME
DROP	FROM	MY	HEAD	TO	MY	HEART.	FOR	IN	THE	HEAT	OF	DEALING
WITH
MY	OWN	 STUFF	 I	 FORGET	 TO	 SEE	 THEM	AS	 THEY	ARE,	 AND	NOT
HOW	I	PERCEIVE	THEM.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Michael	Scott,	it	is	one	of	the	basics	of	human	understanding	that	if	you	want	to
see	the	others	as	they	are	you	have	to	be	utterly	empty,	without	any	prejudices,
without	any	preconceived	ideas,	without	any	judgmental	attitudes.
Nobody	ordinarily	sees	people	as	they	are.	They	see	them	as	they	can.	They	see
them	 through	 a	 thick	 barrier	 of	 their	 own	 mind,	 of	 their	 own	 conditionings.
Unless	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 seeing...	 In	 pure	 seeing,	 philosia,	 you	 don't	 have
anything	to	project	from	your	side,	you	don't	have	any	color	to	give	to	the	object
of	your	observation.	Then	only	are	you	capable	of	seeing	things,	people,	as	they
are	in	themselves.
One	of	 the	great	German	philosophers,	 Immanuel	Kant,	even	dropped	 the	 idea
that	 you	 can	 see	 things	 as	 they	 are	 in	 themselves,	 because	 he	 had	 no	way	 of
knowing	meditatively.
He	was	 a	 great	mind	 --	 but	 the	 greater	 the	mind,	 the	 greater	 the	 difficulty	 of
seeing	clearly.	Your	mind	grabs	every	information	that	reaches	to	you,	screens	it,
sorts	 out	 whatever	 is	 adjustable	 with	 your	 existing	 knowledge,	 allows	 it,	 and
whatever	is	going	to	disturb	your	mind	--	anything	new,	unfamiliar,	a	stranger	--
it	rejects.
Science	has	discovered	a	surprising	fact.	Our	mind	used	to	be	thought	of	in	the
past	 as	 a	 receiver	 of	 information	 from	 the	 world,	 and	 our	 eyes,	 our	 ears,	 our
noses,	all	our	senses	as	doors	 from	where	 the	existence	can	enter	 into	us.	This
has	 been	 an	 ancient	 understanding	 prevailing	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 But	 just
within	these	five	years,	science	has	become	aware	of	a	totally	different	situation.
Your	 senses	 are	 not	 simple	 windows;	 your	 mind	 allows	 only	 two	 percent	 of
information	and	discards	ninety-eight	percent	of	information.	It	 is	continuously
on	 guard	 for	 what	 enters	 you.	 It	 should	 be	 in	 tune	 with	 your	 concepts,
superstitions,	ideologies,	and	if	it	is	not,	the	mind	is	not	going	to	get	disturbed,	to
get	in	a	chaos,	by	allowing	a	new	idea	which	will	not	be	fitting	with	you.
This	 makes	 things	 very	 different.	 It	 means	 your	 mind	 is	 not	 a	 vehicle	 of
knowing,	but	a	vehicle	for	preventing	ninety-eight	percent	of	the	knowledge	that
was	available	to	you.
And	 the	 two	 percent	 that	 is	 allowed	 in	 is	worth	 nothing,	 because	 it	 adjusts	 to
you;	it	means	it	is	the	same	stuff	of	which	you	already	have	enough.
Only	a	meditator	can	know	people,	can	know	things,	can	experience	beauty	as	it
is	in	itself,	because	he	does	not	interfere,	he	does	not	censor,	he	is	not	on	guard,
he	has	nothing	to	lose.	He	has	already	dropped	all	that	could	have	been	the	cause
of	fear.	It	is	utterly	empty.
Once	in	a	while	you	are	empty.	In	this	moment	you	can	see	things	with	a	clarity,
with	transparency.	But	when	your	mind	starts,	covered	with	your	own	thoughts,
they	protect	you:	they	protect	the	dead	against	the	living,	they	protect	the	static
against	 the	 dynamic,	 they	 protect	 what	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 as	 knowledge
against	existential	experience.
You	 are	 right	 when	 you	 say,	 "As	 I	 look	 around	 me,	 at	 the	 people	 that	 have
answered	your	call,	my	spirit	 flies	with	 joy	with	 the	knowledge	 that	 these,	my
brothers	and	sisters,	are	some	of	the	most	extraordinary	people	on	the	planet."
If	you	are	silent	and	your	eyes	are	without	any	dust	and	your	heart	is	just	a	pure
mirror,	 this	 will	 be	 the	 experience	 of	 everyone.	 These	 people	 are	 certainly
extraordinary!	I	am	against	the	whole	past,	I	am	against	all	conditionings,	I	am
against	all	ideologies,	all	organized	religions.	So	only	very	few	people,	who	have
the	courage	to	drop	the	whole	past	in	its	entirety,	can	have	the	opportunity	to	be
with	me.
To	be	with	me	is	risky.	It	is	dangerous	--	dangerous	to	your	mind.	To	be	with	me
finally	means	you	will	have	 to	 lose	your	mind.	Of	course	 it	will	not	be	a	 loss
because	 you	 will	 be	 attaining	 something	 greater,	 something	 vaster,	 something
unbounded.	You	will	be	attaining	a	state	of	no-mind.
Only	a	state	of	no-mind	is	an	open	door;	without	any	judgment	it	allows	you	to
see	things	as	they	are,	not	as	they	should	be,	not	as	you	would	like	them	to	be,
not	to	fit	with	you.
Existence	has	no	obligation	to	fit	with	your	mind.	But	every	mind	is	struggling
somehow	to	make	the	existence	fit	with	it.	It	is	impossible;	hence	the	misery,	the
frustration,	the	deep	despair,	the	feeling	of	failure.
The	great	philosophers	of	 the	contemporary	world,	 the	existentialists,	have	lost
all	courage.	They	have	lost	 their	very	nerve	for	 the	simple	reason	that	 they	are
the	 most	 refined,	 cultured,	 educated,	 rational	 minds.	 From	 their	 minds	 they
cannot	see	any	beauty	anywhere,	they	cannot	see	any	joy	anywhere,	they	cannot
see	any	hope	anywhere.	They	are	utterly	in	deep	anguish.
But	existence	is	celebrating.	It	goes	on	bringing	new	flowers,	it	goes	on	bringing
new	stars,	it	goes	on	bringing	every	moment	something	new.	It	 is	continuously
renewing	itself,	and	there	is	a	song	that	surrounds	the	whole	existence	and	there
is	 a	 dance	 that	 you	 can	 see	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	 birds,	 in	 the	 animals,	 in	 the
children,	in	the	sages.	But	to	see	this	you	have	to	put	your	mind	aside.
Sometimes	it	happens	on	its	own.	Listening	to	me,	if	you	become	too	attentive,
you	slip	out	of	your	mind.	Those	few	moments	when	you	slip	out	of	your	mind,
you	will	become	aware	of	this	extraordinary	gathering	of	brothers	and	sisters.
These	people	have	taken	a	tremendous	step.	They	have	risked	their	established
mind	 to	 enquire	 into	 the	 unfamiliar	 and	 the	 unknown	 --	 and	 ultimately,	 the
unknowable.	They	have	put	aside	all	 their	explanations	 in	 favor	of	 the	miracle
and	the	mystery	of	existence.
They	 have	 dropped	 their	 ambitions,	 their	 desires	 for	 money,	 power,	 prestige,
respectability.	Now	their	whole	concern	is	simple	and	single:	how	to	know,	Who
am	I?
Without	knowing	yourself,	all	knowledge	is	futile;	and	if	you	know	yourself,	you
need	 not	 know	 anything	 that	 is	 unnecessary.	 Knowing	 oneself,	 one	 comes	 to
know	 the	 very	 innermost	 core	 of	 existence,	 the	 very	 center.	 Experiencing	 that
center	 is	 so	 blissful,	 so	 ecstatic	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need....	 You	 are	 no	 longer	 a
beggar;	suddenly	you	have	become	an	emperor.	The	whole	kingdom	of	God	has
become	yours.
These	people	have	 taken	a	courageous	stand	against	 the	whole	world.	 It	 is	not
ordinary,	it	is	absolutely	extraordinary.	To	stand	alone	like	a	lion,	and	not	to	be	a
sheep	in	the	crowd,	is	the	greatest	courage	in	existence.	Very	few	people	are	able
to	get	out	of	 the	mass	psychology,	of	 the	collective	mind.	The	collective	mind
gives	 a	 certain	 sense	 of	 false	 security.	 Naturally	 it	 gives	 you	 the	 idea	 that	 so
many	people	 --	 there	 are	 five	billion	people	on	 the	planet	 --	 cannot	be	wrong.
Naturally	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	search	for	the	truth	individually.	All	these
people	have	discovered	it;	it	is	easier	and	cheaper	just	to	follow	them...	just	to	be
a	Christian,	or	a	Hindu,	or	a	Mohammedan,	or	a	communist.	It	is	very	easy	when
a	crowd	surrounds	you	to	feel	warm	and	cozy.
Standing	alone	like	a	tall	Lebanon	cedar,	utterly	alone	in	the	sky,	far	away	from
the	earth,	almost	reaching	to	the	stars...	But	the	beauty	of	the	cedars	of	Lebanon
--	their	courage	to	go	beyond	the	crowd,	their	courage	to	be	alone...
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	call	sannyas	a	lion's	roar.	So	whenever	I	am	in	a	gap,	if
you	are	in	tune	with	me,	you	are	in	a	gap.	Then	you	will	become	aware	that	you
are	 surrounded	 by	 a	 strange	 crowd.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 ordinary	 crowd	 of	 the
marketplace	--	these	are	seekers,	these	are	enquirers.	These	are	people	who	are
ready	to	sacrifice	everything	for	the	truth.
These	 are	 the	 people	who	have	 renounced	 all	 borrowed	knowledge	 and	 are	 in
search	of	something	of	their	own,	because	that	which	is	not	yours,	is	not	right.	It
may	have	been	right	for	Gautam	Buddha,	it	may	have	been	right	for	Jesus	Christ,
but	it	is	not	right	for	you.
You	are	a	unique	individual	in	your	own	right.
You	have	to	find	the	truth	alone,	not	by	following	somebody	else's	footsteps.	The
world	 of	 truth	 is	 something	 like	 the	 sky	 where	 birds	 fly	 but	 don't	 leave	 any
footprints.	The	world	of	truth	also	has	no	footprints	of	Jesus	or	Gautam	Buddha
or	Lao	Tzu.	It	is	the	world	of	consciousness:	where	can	you	leave	the	footprints?
All	 followers,	 without	 exception,	 are	 wrong.	 They	 are	 following	 someone
because	they	are	not	courageous	enough	to	seek	and	search	on	their	own.	They
are	afraid	that	alone,	"I	may	not	be	able	to	find	anything.	And	what	is	the	need
when	Gautam	Buddha	has	found?"
But	you	never	think	that	when	Gautam	Buddha	drinks,	his	thirst	is	quenched	--
but	that	will	not	help	your	thirst.	Jesus	eats,	his	hunger	is	gone,	but	that	will	not
make	 you	 nourished.	 You	 have	 to	 eat,	 you	 have	 to	 drink;	 you	 cannot	 simply
depend.	So	many	great	people	have	loved,	what	is	 the	need	for	you	to	love?	--
you	can	simply	follow	them.	But	that	will	not	be	love;	that	will	be	only	a	carbon
copy.	And	to	be	a	carbon	copy	in	this	world	is	the	ugliest	way	of	being.
The	only	authentic	man	is	always	original.
He	 is	 not	 a	 replica,	 not	 a	 repetition.	 He	 is	 a	 new	 song,	 a	 new	 dance,	 a	 new
beginning,	always	and	always.
But	you	are	right,	Michael	Scott,	that	"seeing	these	extraordinary	people	on	the
planet,	 seeing	 them	with	 this	 awareness	makes	me	 drop	 from	my	 head	 to	my
heart."
That's	a	beautiful	symbol.	That	 is	a	great	 indication.	If	you	can	move	from	the
head	 to	 the	 heart,	 you	 have	 attained	 something	 which	 society	 has	 been
preventing.	Society	does	not	want	you	to	be	a	man	of	heart.	Society	needs	heads,
not	hearts.
I	have	never	been	anywhere...	and	I	have	been	through	many	universities.	I	was
visiting	 India's	 greatest	 university,	 in	 Varanasi,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 most	 famous
scholars,	 Doctor	 Hajari	 Prasad	 Dwivedi,	 was	 presiding	 at	 the	 meeting	 I	 was
going	 to	address.	He	was	 the	head	and	 the	dean	of	 the	 faculty	of	 arts.	 I	 asked
him,	"Have	you	ever	wondered	why	you	are	called	the	head,	and	not	the	heart?"
He	said,	"You	always	ask	strange	questions"	--	he	was	an	old	man,	and	now	he	is
dead.
He	said,	"In	my	whole	life	nobody	ever	asked,	`Why	are	you	called	the	head	and
not	 the	 heart?'"	 But	 he	 considered	 that	 although	 the	 question	 is	 very	 strange,
"you	 have	 something	 significant	 in	 your	 question.	 You	make	me	 also	wonder
why	people	are	not	called	the	heart	of	the	philosophy	department	--	that	will	be
more	authentic,	more	essential	--	but	they	are	called	the	head	of	the	department
of	philosophy."
Society	is	divided	between	head	and	hands.	Have	you	noticed	that	 laborers	are
called	hands?	Poor	people	working	with	their	hands,	manual	workers,	are	called
hands...	and	there	are	people	above	them	who	are	called	heads.	But	the	heart	is
completely	missing;	nobody	is	called	the	heart.
It	is	immensely	significant	that	you	start	feeling	a	stirring	in	your	heart,	because
your	heart	is	far	more	valuable	than	your	head.	Your	head	is	all	borrowed...	it	has
nothing	of	its	own.	But	your	heart	is	still	yours.	Your	heart	is	not	Christian,	your
heart	 is	not	Hindu,	your	heart	 is	 still	 existential.	 It	has	not	been	corrupted	and
polluted.	Your	heart	is	still	original,	and	it	is	a	tremendously	great	quantum	leap
from	the	head	to	the	heart.
Now	one	step	more	--	from	the	heart	to	being	--	and	you	have	arrived	home,	the
pilgrimage	is	over.	Nobody	can	come	directly	from	the	head	to	the	being.	They
are	 strangers;	 they	are	not	 at	 all	 connected	with	each	other.	They	are	not	 even
introduced.
Neither	 your	 being	 knows	 anything	 about	 the	 head,	 nor	 your	 head	 knows
anything	 about	 the	 being.	 They	 live	 in	 the	 same	 house	 but	 they	 are	 absolute
strangers.	Because	their	functioning	is	so	different	they	never	come	across	each
other,	they	never	encounter	each	other.
Heart	is	the	bridge.	Part	of	the	heart	knows	the	head,	and	part	of	the	heart	knows
the	being.	The	heart	 is	 a	midway	 station.	When	you	 are	moving	 towards	your
being,	the	heart	is	going	to	be	an	overnight	stay.	From	the	heart	you	will	be	able
to	see	something	of	the	being,	but	not	from	the	head;	hence,	philosophers	never
turn	into	mystics.	Poets	turn,	transform...	painters,	sculptors,	dancers,	musicians,
singers	are	closer	to	the	being.
But	our	whole	society	is	dominated	by	the	head,	because	the	head	is	capable	of
earning	money.	It	is	very	efficient	--	machines	are	always	more	efficient	--	it	is
capable	 of	 fulfilling	 all	 your	 ambitions.	 The	 head	 is	 being	 created	 by	 your
educational	systems,	and	your	whole	energy	starts	moving...	bypassing	the	heart.
The	heart	is	the	most	significant	thing	because	it	is	the	gateway	to	your	being,	to
your	 eternal	 life	 source.	 I	would	 like	 all	 the	 universities	 of	 the	world	 to	make
people	aware	of	the	heart,	to	make	them	more	esthetic,	more	sensitive...	sensitive
of	all	that	surrounds	us,	the	immense	beauty,	the	immense	joy.
But	 the	heart	cannot	 fulfill	your	egoist	desires,	 that	 is	 the	problem.	 It	can	give
you	a	tremendous	experience	of	love,	an	alchemical	change.	It	can	bring	the	best
in	 you	 to	 its	 clearest	 and	 purest	 form,	 but	 it	 will	 not	 create	 money,	 power,
prestige.	And	they	have	become	the	goals.
It	 is	very	 significant	 that	you	go	on	 slipping	 from	your	head	 to	 the	heart.	 Just
take	a	little	more	risk:	slip	from	the	heart	to	the	being.	That	is	the	rock	bottom	of
your	life.	But	what	happens	to	you?	You	are	saying,	"For	in	the	heat	of	dealing
with	 my	 own	 stuff,	 I	 forget	 to	 see	 them	 as	 they	 are,	 and	 not	 how	 I	 perceive
them."
What	is	your	own	stuff?	In	the	first	place	it	is	not	yours.	Just	look	at	the	stuff:	it
is	all	kinds	of	 junk	fed	 in	by	people,	your	parents,	your	society,	your	 teachers,
your	leaders,	your	saints;	nothing	of	it	belongs	to	you.	Your	head	has	been	used
almost	like	a	wastepaper	basket	--	anybody	goes	on	dropping	anything	in.	Your
stuff	is	not	yours:	that	is	the	first	thing	to	be	remembered,	because	it	will	change
your	vision.	And	the	stuff	is	just	an	unnecessary	burden,	a	luggage	that	you	are
carrying	and	are	being	crushed	under	it.
One	 sannyasin	 from	Africa,	Bhavani	Dayal,	 had	 come	 for	 a	 pilgrimage	of	 the
Himalayas.
As	 he	 was	 climbing	 in	 the	 hot	 sun	 --	 he	 was	 perspiring,	 his	 breathing	 was
becoming	difficult	and	he	was	carrying	a	bag	on	his	shoulder	--	just	ahead	of	him
he	saw	a	girl	not	more	than	ten	years	old	carrying	perhaps	her	brother,	a	small
boy,	 but	 very	 fat,	 on	 her	 shoulders.	 She	 was	 also	 perspiring,	 and	 as	 Bhavani
Dayal	came	close	to	the	girl,	just	out	of	compassion	he	said,	"My	daughter,	your
burden	must	be	killing	you."
The	 young	 girl	 was	 furious	 at	 the	 sannyasin.	 She	 said,	 "You	 are	 carrying	 the
burden	--
this	is	my	brother,	it	is	not	a	burden."	On	the	weighing	scale	both	will	prove	to
be	burdens,	both	will	have	weight,	but	on	 the	scales	of	 the	heart	 the	small	girl
was	 right,	 and	 the	 old	 sannyasin	 was	 wrong.	 He	 himself	 has	 written	 in	 his
autobiography,	"I	have	never	come	across	such	a	situation	in	which	a	small	girl
pointed	to	a	fact	which	I	had	never	thought	about."
The	head	can	think	only	of	burden,	responsibility,	duty.	The	heart	knows	nothing
of	 responsibility,	 although	 it	 responds	 spontaneously.	The	heart	knows	nothing
of	burden	because	it	knows	love.	Love	makes	everything	weightless.	Love	is	the
only	 force	 which	 is	 not	 under	 the	 control	 of	 gravitation.	 It	 does	 not	 pull	 you
down.	It	gives	you	wings	and	takes	you	to	the	beyond.
Your	 stuff,	 Michael	 Scott,	 is	 nothing	 special;	 everybody	 is	 full	 of	 the	 same
bullshit.	 We	 have	 to	 cleanse	 this	 whole	 stuff.	 Make	 your	 mind	 without	 any
stuff...	 and	with	 the	 stuff	 disappearing,	 the	mind	 also	 disappears.	 The	mind	 is
nothing	but	a	collective	name	for	your	stuff.
The	 teacher	 asked	 her	 little	 pupils	 to	 tell	 about	 their	 acts	 of	 kindness	 to	 poor
animals.
After	 several	 of	 the	 children	 had	 told	 heart-stirring	 stories	 of	 kindness,	 the
teacher	asked	little	Ernie	if	he	had	anything	to	tell.
"Well,"	said	Ernie	proudly,	"I	once	kicked	a	boy	for	kicking	his	dog."
What	is	your	stuff?	Just	observe....	We	get	lost	into	the	jungle	of	it.	Stand	aside
and	see.
The	 local	 ladies	 group	had	 invited	 their	 new	neighbor	 to	 lunch.	After	 she	 had
left,	the	other	ladies	sat	around	discussing	her.
"Well,"	 said	Mrs.	Finkelstein,	 "she	 seems	very	 sweet,	 but,	my	god!	 --	 yakkety
yakkety	yak	--	I	thought	she	would	never	stop."
"Do	you	suppose,"	asked	Mrs.	Rosenbaum,	"that	everything	she	says	is	true?"
"I	should	say	not,"	snorted	Becky	Goldberg,	"there	just	is	not	that	much	truth."
Just	watch	your	stuff.	It	is	our	unawareness	that	goes	on	collecting	all	kinds	of
rubbish.
This	 rubbish	becomes	so	 thick	 that	 it	does	not	allow	you	 to	 see	 things	as	 they
are;	neither	does	it	allow	you	to	enter	into	your	own	innermost	subjectivity.
The	religions	of	the	world	have	been	telling	people	to	renounce	the	world.	I	say,
Don't	renounce	the	world.	The	world	has	not	done	any	wrong	to	you.	Renounce
this	rubbish,	this	stuff	that	you	are	are	carrying	within	you.
But	 people	 have,	 for	 centuries,	 renounced	 the	 world	 but	 carried	 the	 stuff.
Wherever	you	will	be	--	in	the	Himalayas,	in	the	monasteries	--	your	stuff	will	be
there.	 You	 can	 renounce	 the	 world	 because	 the	 world	 is	 not	 in	 any	 way
preventing	you,	but	how	are	you	going	to	renounce	your	mind?	And	if	the	mind
has	to	be	renounced,	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	a	monastery,	there	is	no	need	to	go
to	the	Himalayas;	then	wherever	you	are,	you	can	renounce	it.	There	is	no	need
for	all	kinds	of	austerities	that	people	have	to	force	upon	themselves.
I	have	heard	about	a	Trappist	monastery.	The	rule	of	the	monastery	was	that	you
can	speak	only	once	in	seven	years.	A	young	man	entered,	and	the	abbot	of	the
monastery	 asked	 him,	 "Are	 you	 aware	 that	 it	 is	 a	 very	 austere	 life,	 and
particularly	 that	 you	 cannot	 speak	 for	 seven	 years?	 In	 seven	 years	 only	 one
chance	is	given	to	speak;	then	again	for	seven	years	you	have	to	be	silent.	So	are
you	ready?	--	because	that	is	the	most	difficult	part."
But	the	young	man	was	determined,	fanatically	determined.	He	accepted	the	rule
and	was	 initiated	 into	 the	monastery.	He	got	 a	 cell	 and	he	 saw	 the	 situation....
The	bed,	 the	mattress,	was	so	dirty	--	 it	may	have	been	used	for	centuries	--	 it
was	stinking.	And	for	seven	years	he	cannot	even	say	to	the	abbot	or	anybody,
"Please	remove	this	mattress.	It	will	kill	me...."	But	there	was	no	way	to	say,	so
he	had	to	suffer	that	stinking	stuff	for	seven	years.
As	 the	seven	years	were	complete,	he	rushed	 to	 the	abbot	and	said,	"You	have
almost	killed	me.	Remove	that	mattress	immediately.	It	is	so	dirty	it	seems	Adam
and	Eve	have	used	it!"
The	abbot	ordered	a	new	mattress.	The	new	mattress	came,	but	it	was	a	little	big
for	the	small	cell.	So	the	workers	somehow	forced	it	in,	and	by	forcing	it	in	they
broke	one	of	 the	glasses	of	 the	window.	But	 he	 could	not	 say	 anything	 --	 and
now	from	that	broken	glass	water	started	coming,	rain	would	come,	and	on	cold
nights,	ice	would	come	in	the	cell.
He	was	in	a	more	dangerous	situation	than	he	had	been	before.	He	had	already
become	 accustomed	 to	 that	 stinking	 mattress,	 but	 this	 was	 a	 more	 difficult
situation.	So	much	cold...	 he	was	 shivering	 and	 it	was	 always	wet	 and	no	 sun
was	reaching	in	the	cell.	He	said,	"My	God,	seven	years...	I	hope	that	somehow
things	will	become	right.	They	have	become	even	worse."
After	 seven	 years	 he	 again	 went	 to	 the	 abbot,	 and	 he	 said,	 "What	 kind	 of
mattress	 have	 you	 sent?	 Those	 idiots	 have	 broken	 the	window,	 and	 for	 seven
years	I	have	been	suffering	from	cold,	shivering	day	in	day	out,	waiting	just	for
when	these	seven	years	will	end.	It	looked	almost	like	eternity."
The	 abbot	 said,	 "Okay,	 the	 window	 should	 be	 mended."	 The	 window	 was
mended,	but	 in	seven	years	of	 rain,	 snow,	 the	mattress	had	become	so	 rotten...
but	now	there	were	again	seven	years	to	wait.	That	young	man	thought,	"Now	I
cannot	survive.	Fourteen	years	have	passed.	I	have	come	here	to	find	truth,	and
what	have	I	found?	I	had	never	dreamt	about	it.	It	is	a	nightmare."	But	finally	all
those	seven	years	also	passed.	Now	it	was	twenty-one	years	that	he	had	suffered.
He	went	to	the	abbot	and	said,	"This	is	a	strange	place.	Twenty-one	years	and	I
am	suffering	the	same	thing	in	different	forms."
The	 abbot	 was	 very	 angry.	 He	 said,	 "Since	 you	 have	 come,	 complaints,
complaints,	 complaints...	 never	 a	 single	 word	 of	 appreciation!	 You	 are	 not
worthy	to	be	a	monk.	Get	out	of	the	monastery."
He	said,	"My	God,	 twenty-one	years	unnecessarily	suffering,	and	now	you	are
throwing	me	out."
The	abbot	said,	"We	cannot	allow	such	negative	characters."
Just	look	at	your	stuff.	It	is	absolutely	unnecessary	to	suffer	it,	it	can	be	thrown
out.	You	should	cleanse	your	mind.	Why	go	on	piling	up	garbage	upon	garbage?
But	 because	you	 call	 it	 "my"	 stuff,	 there	 has	 arisen	 an	 identity;	 it	 has	 become
your	treasure.	So	the	first	 thing	is:	don't	call	 it	"my"	stuff.	It	 is	stuff	which	has
been	forced	into	you	by	all	kinds	of	stupid	people	around	you.
My	father	had	a	friend	who	was	thought	to	be	the	wisest	man	around	that	area,
and	he	used	to	take	me	to	him	just	so	that	I	could	also	learn	some	wisdom.	I	used
to	sit	 there	with	my	fingers	in	my	ears.	My	father	said,	"I	have	brought	you	to
understand	something	and	you	are	sitting	with	your	fingers	in	your	ears.	Are	you
mad?"
I	said,	"I	am	not	mad,	you	are	mad.	This	guy	 is	 throwing	all	kinds	of	 rubbish,
and	I	am	not	ready	to	allow	it	 in	my	head.	It	will	be	unnecessary	 trouble:	first
gather	it,	then	clean	it	--	what	is	the	point?	I	am	perfectly	clean."
That	old	wise	man	was	very	angry.	He	said,	"You	have	to	take	care	of	this	boy.
He	has	 to	be	controlled	and	disciplined.	This	 is	very	disrespectful	 towards	me.
Never	in	my	life	has	anybody	done	such	a	thing."
I	 said,	 "Never	 in	 your	 life	 have	 you	 come	 across	 anybody	 who	 had	 guts;
otherwise,	what	you	are	doing	 is	 collecting	garbage	 from	 the	 scriptures"	 --	his
house	was	full	of	ancient	scriptures	--	"and	then	throwing	all	that	stuff	into	other
peoples'	heads.	You	should	be	 taken	 to	 the	court.	You	need	 to	be	put	 in	a	 jail,
because	you	are	the	greatest	criminal	in	this	area.	You	have	destroyed	so	many
people's	minds,	and	their	whole	lives	they	will	suffer	and	they	will	think	this	is
their	stuff."
If	 you	 can	 keep	 a	 clear	 distinction	 what	 is	 your	 own	 experience	 and	 what	 is
enforced	on	you,	then	whatever	is	enforced,	borrowed,	has	to	be	discarded.	That
is	the	only	thing	to	be	renounced.
The	world	 is	perfectly	beautiful.	 Just	your	mind	has	 to	be	 silent,	 empty,	open,
and	you	will	have	the	clarity	to	see	people	as	they	are...	not	only	to	see	people,
but	 to	 see	 yourself	 as	 you	 are.	 This	 understanding	 brings	 a	 transformation	 in
your	being.	The	world	becomes	a	totally	different	place	--	from	despair	to	dance,
from	darkness	to	light,	from	death	to	eternal	life.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	SEXUAL	POWER	AND	SEXUAL
ENERGY?
Deva	Agni,	sexual	energy	is	another	name	for	your	life	force.	The	word	sex	has
become	condemned	by	the	religions;	otherwise	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.	It	is
your	very	life.
Sexual	 energy	 is	 a	 natural	 energy:	 you	 are	 born	 out	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 your	 creative
energy.	When	the	painter	paints	or	 the	poet	composes	or	 the	musician	plays	or
the	dancer	dances,	these	are	all	expressions	of	your	life	force.
Not	only	are	children	born	out	of	your	 sexual	energy,	but	everything	 that	man
has	created	on	the	earth	has	come	out	of	sexual	energy.	Sexual	energy	can	have
many	transformations:	at	the	lowest	it	is	biological;	at	the	highest	it	is	spiritual.
It	has	to	be	understood	that	all	creative	people	are	highly	sexual.	You	can	see	the
poets,	you	can	see	the	painters,	you	can	see	the	dancers.	All	creative	people	are
highly	 sexual,	 and	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 the	people	whom	 I	 call	 the	mystics.
Perhaps	they	are	the	most	sexual	people	on	the	earth,	because	they	are	so	full	of
life	energy,	abundant,	overflowing....
But	sexual	power	is	a	totally	different	thing.	Sexual	power	is	politics.	It	is	using
your	sex	to	dominate	people.	Domination	can	be	done	in	many	ways:	somebody
dominates	 because	 he	 has	 money,	 somebody	 dominates	 because	 he	 has	 more
physical	 strength,	 somebody	 dominates	 because	 he	 has	 more	 knowledge,
somebody	dominates	because	he	 is	 clever	enough	 to	befool	people	and	collect
their	votes,	somebody	can	dominate	through	her	or	his	sexual	power.	More	often
it	is	the	woman's	way	to	dominate.
The	woman	can	dominate	because	of	her	sexual	appeal,	but	it	is	ugly	and	mean.
It	is	selling	your	body	just	to	dominate.
One	of	the	most	beautiful	women	in	the	world	was	Cleopatra.	She	was	a	queen
in	Egypt.
Her	 country	 never	 went	 into	 war;	 whenever	 there	 was	 an	 attack,	 she	 herself
would	go	and	offer	her	body	to	the	invader,	to	the	leader	of	the	armies	--	and	she
had	such	beauty	that	she	easily	persuaded	the	general	of	the	army.	She	seduced
the	general	by	giving	her	body.
She	was	using	her	power	--	her	sex,	her	beauty,	her	charm	--	and	she	remained
the	queen	of	Egypt	without	ever	taking	her	armies	to	fight	with	anybody.	A	very
strange	woman...
But	all	women	in	different	degrees	dominate	through	their	sex.	They	use	it	as	a
power.	To	use	sex	as	a	power	is	to	degrade	oneself,	is	to	lose	one's	dignity	and
self-respect.	It	is	pure	prostitution.
The	 difference	 between	British	 and	 French	 girls	 is	 this:	 they	 both	 know	what
men	like,	but	the	French	girl	does	not	mind.
Business	was	brisk	for	the	pretty	young	prostitute	in	the	bar.
"Bill,"	 she	 said,	 "you	can	come	over	about	 seven-ish,	 and	you,	George	around
eight-ish,	and	Frank,	I	will	have	time	for	you	about	nine-ish."	She	then	looked
around	the	crowded	bar	and	called	out,	"Anyone	for	tennish?"
Using	your	 sexual	 energy	as	 a	profession,	 selling	 it	 as	 a	 commodity	may	give
you	 a	 certain	 feeling	 of	 power,	 but	 you	 are	 destroying	 yourself	 by	 your	 own
hands.	 Sexual	 energy	 is	 not	 to	 be	 used	 as	 a	 political	means.	 Sexual	 energy	 is
your	potentiality	for	spiritual	growth.	You	can	become	enlightened	only	because
of	your	sexual	energy.
I	have	been	searching	for	almost	thirty-five	years,	in	all	kinds	of	books,	strange
scriptures	from	Tibet	and	Ladakh	and	China	and	Japan	--	India	has	the	greatest
number	of	scriptures	in	the	world	--	and	I	have	been	looking	for	one	thing:	has
there	ever	been	an	enlightened	impotent	person?	There	is	no	incidence	recorded
anywhere.	 An	 impotent	 person	 has	 never	 been	 a	 great	 poet	 either,	 or	 a	 great
singer,	or	a	great	sculptor,	or	a	great	scientist.
What	 is	 the	 problem	 with	 the	 impotent	 person?	 He	 has	 no	 life	 force;	 he	 is
hollow.	 He	 cannot	 create	 anything	 --	 and	 to	 create	 oneself	 as	 an	 enlightened
being	needs	tremendous	energy.
Never	use	your	sex	as	a	commodity,	as	a	strategy	to	dominate,	because	you	are
committing	 suicide.	 You	 are	 destroying	 the	 power	 that	 can	 take	 you	 to	 the
highest	peak	of	consciousness.
Robert,	an	American,	had	been	in	Italy	during	the	war	and	had	made	friends	with
Giovanni.	A	few	years	later	he	went	back	to	Rome	to	visit	his	friend.	As	soon	as
Giovanni	saw	Bob,	he	could	not	do	enough	for	him.	He	showed	him	the	sights
and	 then	 took	him	out	 for	 a	beautiful	meal	of	 finest	 spaghetti.	After	 the	meal,
Giovanni	insisted	that	Bob	meet	his	sister.
"Is	she	pretty?"	asked	Bob.
"Bella!	Bella!"	cried	Giovanni.
"Is	she	young?"	continued	Bob.
"Si!	Si!"	cried	Giovanni.
"And	is	she	pure?"	asked	Bob.
"My	god!"	said	Giovanni,	"you	Americans	really	are	crazy!"
Sex	has	become	a	thing	of	the	marketplace.	On	the	one	hand,	religions	have	been
repressing	sexual	energy	and	creating	perversions	which	have	culminated	in	the
dangerous	disease	AIDS,	which	has	no	cure.	The	whole	credit	goes	to	religions,
and	 if	 they	 have	 any	 sense	 of	 being	 human,	 then	 all	 the	 churches	 and	 all	 the
monasteries	and	the	Vatican	itself	should	be	turned	into	hospitals	for	the	people
suffering	 from	 AIDS,	 because	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 have	 created	 them.
Theirs	 is	 the	 responsibility.	 They	 have	 forced	 men	 to	 live	 separately	 from
women;	they	have	insisted	that	celibacy	is	the	very	foundation	of	a	religious	life.
But	celibacy	is	unnatural,	and	anything	unnatural	cannot	be	the	foundation	of	a
religious	life.
Because	celibacy	is	unnatural,	and	religions	have	divided	men	and	women	into
different	monasteries,	 they	 have	 created	 the	 situation	 for	 homosexuality.	 They
are	 the	pioneers	of	homosexuality,	 and	homosexuality	has	 led	 to	AIDS,	which
cannot	be	 called	 simply	a	disease	because	 it	 does	not	 come	 in	 the	 category	of
diseases.	It	is	death	itself.
So	on	 the	one	hand	 religions	have	created	perversions;	on	 the	other	hand	 they
insisted	 on	 monogamy,	 which	 in	 fact	 means	 monotony.	 That	 has	 created	 the
profession	of	 the	prostitute.	The	priest	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	prostitute.	 It	 is	 so
ugly	and	sick	that	we	have	created	objects,	commodities,	things	to	be	exploited
out	of	so	many	beautiful	women.
Even	 today,	 it	 is	 not	 understood	 exactly	what	 sex	 is.	 It	 need	not	 be	 repressed,
because	 it	 is	 your	 very	 energy.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 transformed	 certainly;	 it	 has	 to	 be
raised	to	its	highest	purity.
And	as	you	start	moving	upwards...	 the	name	of	 the	 ladder	 is	meditation...	 sex
becomes	 love,	 sex	 becomes	 compassion,	 and	 ultimately	 sex	 becomes	 the
explosion	 of	 your	 inner	 being,	 the	 illumination,	 the	 awakening,	 the
enlightenment.	But	it	is	sexual	energy...	it	can	rot,	it	can	go	into	perversions.	But
if	 it	 is	 to	 be	 understood	 naturally	 and	 helped	 through	 meditation	 to	 move
upwards	 towards	 silent	 spaces,	 to	 pass	 through	 your	 heart	 and	 reach	 to	 the
seventh	center	at	the	highest	point	in	your	body...	you	will	feel	grateful	towards
the	energy.	Right	now	you	feel	only	ashamed.
This	 shame	 and	 guilt	 is	 created	 by	 the	 religious	 organizations,	 founders	 of
religion.
Naturally	 the	 question	 arises,	 Why	 did	 they	 make	 sex	 a	 mess?	 And	 through
making	a	mess	of	sex	they	have	messed	up	the	whole	world	and	its	mind	and	its
growth.	Why?	--
because	 this	was	 the	 simplest	 way	 to	 keep	 humanity	 in	 slavery.	 This	was	 the
simplest	way	to	keep	people	guilty,	and	anybody	who	feels	guilty	can	never	raise
his	head	in	revolt.	So	all	the	vested	interests	wanted	man	to	lose	his	dignity,	self-
respect,	 to	feel	guilty,	ashamed.	They	have	been	condemning	sex	continuously,
and	 their	 condemnation	 has	 lead	 the	 whole	 world	 into	 a	 very	 miserable,
psychologically	abnormal	state.	And	they	are	still	doing	their	work....
Just	 the	 other	 day,	 one	 shankaracharya,	 Jayendra	 Saraswati,	 has	 given	 a
statement	that	no	religious	man	can	support	family	planning	--	and	all	religions
will	agree	with	the	Hindu	shankaracharya.	But	I	am	puzzled.	The	Christian	God
has	only	one	begotten	 son:	 if	 that	 is	not	 family	planning,	 then	what	 is	 it?	The
Hindu	God	Shiva	has	only	two	sons:	if	that	is	not	family	planning,	then	what	is
it?
To	say	that	no	religious	person	can	support	family	planning	is	simply	madness.
The	world	has	already	become	overpopulated	because	of	these	religious	people.
By	 the	 end	 of	 this	 century	 almost	 half	 of	 humanity	 will	 have	 to	 die	 through
starvation	--	and	who	will	be	responsible	for	it?	These	religious	people	who	are
not	in	favor	of	family	planning.
I	 would	 like	 to	 contradict	 Shankaracharya	 Jayendra	 Saraswati:	 without	 any
exception,	 absolutely	 anyone	 who	 is	 religious	 is	 bound	 to	 support	 family
planning.	 And	 those	 who	 don't	 support	 it	 are	 not	 religious;	 they	 are	 cunning
politicians.	 They	 want	 the	 world	 to	 remain	 poor,	 they	 want	 the	 world	 to	 be
always	in	a	state	of	begging,	so	rich	people	can	enjoy	donations	and	can	make
reservations	in	paradise	by	those	donations.	If	there	is	nobody	poor	in	the	world,
who	is	going	to	accept	their	donations?
The	politicians	want	people	to	remain	starving	because	starving	people	are	very
obedient;	 they	 don't	 have	 the	 energy	 to	 revolt,	 to	 be	 disobedient.	 Nobody	 is
concerned	with	humanity;	everybody	is	concerned	with	his	own	power.	And	still
in	this	century,	when	things	are	coming	to	such	a	great	crisis,	a	shankaracharya	--
who	is	the	equivalent	of	a	pope	to	the	Hindus	--	declares	that	family	planning	is
against	 religion.	 Then	 starvation	 and	millions	 of	 people	 dying	 through	 hunger
seems	 to	be	 religious,	 seems	 to	be	 the	will	of	God,	who	 is	called	 love,	who	 is
called	compassionate.
What	kind	of	compassion	is	this?	But	these	religious	people	are	more	interested
in	 the	 numbers;	 Jayendra	 Saraswati	 is	 interested	 in	 numbers.	 Hindu	 society
should	not	follow	any	birth	control	methods,	because	if	they	follow	birth	control
methods	 then	 their	 number	 will	 shrink	 --	 and	 Christians	 will	 go	 on	 growing
bigger	and	bigger.	It	is	politics	of	numbers.
Mohammedans	 insist	 that	 they	 should	 be	 allowed	 to	 have	 four	wives,	without
any	consideration	that	in	existence	there	is	a	certain	balance,	an	equal	number	of
women	and	men.	If	a	man	is	allowed	to	have	four	wives,	what	about	 the	 three
men	who	will	be	deprived	of	women?	They	are	bound	to	go	 to	 the	prostitutes,
they	are	bound	to	become	homosexuals,	they	are	bound	to	practice	sodomy.
All	 these	 crimes	 are	 perpetuated	 by	 your	 so-called	 virtuous	 leaders,	 religious
saints.	But	 they	have	been	doing	 this	harm	for	 thousands	of	years.	Rather	 than
helping	man	 to	 sublimate	 his	 energies,	 to	make	 them	 creative,	 they	 have	 only
been	able	to	force	man	to	repress	his	energies.	And	repressed	energies	become	a
cancer,	repressed	energies	create	all	kinds	of	perversions.
The	 teacher	 asked	 her	 children's	 art	 class	 to	 draw	 on	 the	 blackboard	 their
impressions	of	the	most	exciting	thing	they	could	think	of.
Little	Hymie	got	up	and	drew	a	long	jagged	line.
"What	is	that?"	asked	the	teacher.
"Lightning,"	said	Hymie.	"Every	time	I	see	lightning	I	get	so	excited,	I	scream."
"Very	good,"	said	the	teacher.
Next,	little	Sally	drew	a	long	wavy	line.	She	explained	that	it	was	the	sea	which
always	excited	her.	The	teacher	thought	that	was	excellent	too.
Then	little	Ernie	came	up	to	the	blackboard,	made	a	single	dot	and	sat	down.
"What	is	that?"	asked	the	puzzled	teacher.
"It	is	a	period,"	said	Ernie.
"Well,"	said	the	teacher,	"what	is	so	exciting	about	a	period?"
"I	don't	know,"	said	Ernie	to	the	teacher,	"but	my	sister	has	missed	two	of	them
and	my	whole	family	is	excited."
This	 excitement	 has	 made	 the	 whole	 world	 a	 mad	 asylum,	 and	 it	 goes	 on
growing	so	fast	that	it	always	defeats	all	scientific	calculations.
Just	forty	years	ago,	when	India	became	free,	it	had	four	hundred	million	people.
Now,	 after	 only	 forty	 years,	 it	 has	 nine	 hundred	million	 people.	 Five	 hundred
million	people	have	been	produced	in	forty	years;	and	by	the	end	of	this	century,
the	calculations	of	the	scientists	are	that	it	will	be	the	biggest	nation	in	the	world
for	the	first	time	--	up	to	now	China	has	been	the	first	--	it	will	go	beyond	one
billion	people.	And	Jayendra	Saraswati	 is	 talking	about	no	family	planning,	no
birth	control....
Is	 this	 country	 capable	 of	 managing	 one	 billion	 people?	 --	 their	 food,	 their
clothes,	their	education,	their	medicine?	It	will	not	be	even	able	to	provide	them
with	drinking	water.
Food	is	impossible;	even	today,	half	the	population	of	India	sleeps	hungry	in	the
night	because	they	cannot	afford	more	than	one	meal	a	day.
I	have	seen	people	who	have	not	been	able	 to	 find	even	one	meal	a	day.	Then
sleep	is	very	difficult:	your	stomach	is	turning,	asking	for	food,	it	is	aching,	it	is
painful.	With	my	own	eyes	I	have	seen	people	putting	a	brick	on	their	stomach
and	 tying	 it	 around	 the	 waist,	 just	 to	 feel	 some	 weight,	 because	 inside	 the
stomach	there	is	nothing.	These	people	suffering	in	misery	are	the	responsibility
of	people	like	Shankaracharya	Jayendra	Saraswati	--	these	are	the	criminals.
When	one	thousand	people	were	dying	per	day	in	Ethiopia,	even	then	the	pope
was	 continuously	 talking	 about	 no	 birth	 control,	 Mother	 Teresa	 was	 talking
about	no	birth	 control.	You	have	 to	 see	 the	 implications:	Mother	Teresa	needs
orphans;	without	orphans	she	does	not	have	any	qualifications	to	have	a	Nobel
prize.	But	from	where	can	you	get	orphans	if	birth	control	methods	are	applied?
And	strangely	enough,	they	condemn	birth	control	methods	because	they	are	not
God's	 creation,	 but	 they	 don't	 condemn	 medicine,	 which	 is	 also	 not	 God's
creation.	 At	 least	 there	 is	 no	mention	 of	medicine	 in	 those	 six	 days	 when	 he
made	the	world.
Medicine	has	given	man	longer	life.	There	are	people	in	the	Soviet	Union	who
have	passed	their	one	hundred	and	eightieth	year,	and	they	are	still	young;	there
is	every	possibility	that	they	will	pass	their	second	century.	There	are	thousands
who	 have	 passed	 beyond	 one	 hundred	 and	 fifty...	 and	 no	 religious	 leader
condemns	it,	saying	that	medicine	should	be	stopped	from	giving	people	health
and	 longevity.	 No	 religious	 leader	 goes	 on	 saying	 that	 diseases	 should	 be
allowed	because	they	are	God-created.
Medicine	can	be	used;	people	can	be	made	more	healthy...	and	naturally	when
they	 are	 more	 healthy	 they	 are	 more	 sexually	 powerful.	 But	 birth	 control
methods	 cannot	 be	 used	 because	 they	 will	 reduce	 the	 numbers	 of	 their
congregations.	It	is	a	competition	of	numbers.
Catholics	 are	 six	 hundred	million	 in	 number.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 religion	 in	 the
world	--	only	because	of	the	numbers;	otherwise	it	is	the	most	third-rate	religion
in	the	world,	there	is	nothing	much	in	it	which	can	be	called	religious.	But	it	is
the	 biggest	 religion,	 the	 greatest	 religion,	 only	 on	 the	 strength	 of	 numbers.	 It
cannot	allow	numbers	 to	decline	 --	even	 if	 these	numbers	are	going	 to	kill	 the
whole	of	humanity.
I	 am	 in	 absolute	 favor	 of	 birth	 control	methods	 for	 two	 reasons:	 birth	 control
methods	 will	 keep	 the	 world	 healthy,	 nourished;	 secondly,	 once	 birth	 control
methods	are	used,	sex	loses	its	profanity	--	or	its	sacredness.	It	becomes	simple
fun,	 it	 becomes	 just	 a	 joyful	 exchange	of	 energies.	According	 to	me,	 the	birth
control	 pill	 is	 the	 greatest	 invention	 that	 man	 has	 made.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest
revolution	because	it	can	make	man	and	woman	equal,	liberated.	Otherwise	the
woman	 is	 constantly	 pregnant,	 and	 because	 of	 her	 pregnancy	 she	 cannot	 be
independent	financially,	she	cannot	be	independent	educationally,	she	cannot	be
independent	from	man's	domination.
Once	she	is	free	from	being	pregnant	compulsorily	she	will	have	as	much	time,
as	 much	 energy	 to	 be	 creative.	 Until	 now	 half	 of	 humanity	 has	 remained
uncreative...	no	great	poets,	no	great	saints,	no	great	musicians,	no	great	artists.
Women	 have	 had	 no	 time.	 I	 was	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 even	 the	 books	 on
cookery	are	written	by	men,	not	by	women.
And	the	best	cooks	are	men,	not	women:	in	all	the	great	five-star	hotels	you	will
find	great	cooks,	always	men.	Strange...	That	has	been	the	domain	of	the	woman
forever,	but	 she	has	no	energy	 left.	Because	of	 these	 religious	people,	 she	will
never	be	liberated.
Sex	 energy	 has	 to	 be	 welcomed	 and	 transformed	 through	 the	 alchemy	 of
meditation	into	higher	states	of	being,	into	creativity	in	different	dimensions,	not
only	creating	more	and	more	children.	Life	has	 to	be	planned,	 it	should	not	be
accidental.
I	have	heard	that	when	God	was	making	the	world,	he	called	man	aside	and	gave
him	twenty	years	of	normal	sex	life.	Man	was	horrified:	"Only	twenty	years?!"
he	cried.	But	God	would	not	budge.	That	was	all	he	would	give	him.
Then	God	called	the	monkey	and	gave	him	twenty	years.	"But,	God!	I	don't	need
that	much,"	said	the	monkey,	"ten	is	enough."
Man	spoke	up	and	said,	"Can	I	have	the	other	ten?"	--	and	the	monkey	agreed.
Then	God	called	the	lion	and	gave	him	twenty	years.	The	lion,	too,	only	wanted
ten.
Again	the	man	said,	"Can	I	have	the	other	ten?"
The	lion	roared,	"Of	course!"
Then	came	the	donkey.	He	was	given	twenty	years,	but	he	also	only	wanted	ten.
Man	asked	for	the	extra	ten,	and	got	them.
This	explains	why	man	has	twenty	years	of	a	normal	sex	life,	then	ten	years	of
monkeying	around,	ten	years	of	lion	about	it,	and	ten	years	of	making	an	ass	of
himself.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	A	glimpse	of	your	own	future
2	October	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8710025
ShortTitle:
PILGR26
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
81
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	SOMEONE	WHO	IS	NOT	YET	PREPARED	FOR
ENLIGHTENMENT	MIGHT	DIE	FROM	THE	EXPERIENCE.	I	BELIEVE	IT
IS
ALSO	POSSIBLE	THAT	THE	EXPERIENCE	REMAINS	A	SHORT	SATORI
AND
THE	PERSON	COMES	BACK	TO	HIS	NORMAL	STATE.	THIS	IS	MY	OWN
EXPERIENCE.	I	WAS	IN	A	STATE	OF	EXTREME	HAPPINESS	AND
PROBLEMLESSNESS,	AND	HAD	A	STRONG	FEELING	OF	"I	AM	LOVE,"
AND
THEN	 I	 CAME	 BACK	 AFTER	 MAYBE	 HALF	 AN	 HOUR.	 CAN	 YOU
PLEASE
COMMENT?
Veet	Diti,	you	came	quite	soon!	 It	 is	 really	unique	--	 just	 in	half	an	hour!	You
made	 a	 great	 comeback.	 You	 had	 gone	 through	 the	 experience	 of
problemlessness,	 of	 extreme	 happiness	 and	 of	 the	 feeling	 of	 "I	 am	 love."	 But
what	happened	after	half	an	hour?	The	problems	must	have	come	back,	and	the
misery	 may	 have	 deepened.	 And	 what	 to	 say	 about	 the	 experience	 of	 "I	 am
love"?	Now	who	are	you?	--	I	mean	after	half	an	hour.
You	 really	 did	 a	 great	 job!	 I	 am	 at	 a	 loss	what	 to	 say	 to	 you,	 from	where	 to
begin?	--
before	half	an	hour	or	after?
Satori	is	not	such	a	thing.	Satori	is	a	miniature	experience	of	samadhi,	but	once
you	 get	 into	 it,	 you	 cannot	 get	 out	 of	 it.	 That's	 the	 real	 test	 and	 the	 criterion.
Anything	 that	 comes	and	goes	 is	of	 the	mind;	 it	 is	 imagination.	Anything	 that
comes	 and	 remains,	 even	 in	 spite	 of	 you,	 even	 if	 you	 want	 it	 to	 go	 it	 is
impossible	to	get	out	of	it...	Satori	is	forever.
Samadhi	is	just	like	the	total	opening	of	the	lotus,	and	satori	is	the	beginning	of
the	opening	of	the	petals.	Satori	is	the	beginning,	samadhi	is	the	climax.	But	you
don't	get	out	of	it.	It	is	one-way	traffic;	nobody	has	come	out	of	it.
But	 mind	 is	 capable	 of	 imagining	 anything.	 It	 can	 imagine	 that	 there	 are	 no
problems,	but	if	you	look	deep	down	you	will	feel	that	you	are	uneasy	about	"no
problems."	Deep	down	you	will	find	absolutely	a	feeling..."What	has	happened
to	me?"	You	will	not	feel	blissful	because	there	are	no	problems.	You	will	feel
very	 lonely	 because	 all	 your	 friends	 are	 gone,	 all	 your	 relatives...	 the	 whole
family	has	disappeared,	leaving	you	alone	in	darkness.	You	will	make	a	problem
out	of	this	situation.	This	situation	will	not	be	a	blissful	state,	but	a	state	of	deep
anguish,	anxiety,	loneliness	and	a	deep	longing	to	be	somehow	out	of	it.
What	 you	 think	 is	 happiness	 is	 just	 a	 dream	 of	 your	 mind.	 Your	 mind	 is
inherently	 capable	 of	 dreaming	 about	 everything.	 It	 can	 dream	 about	 satori,	 it
can	dream	about	samadhi,	in	a	dream	it	can	become	the	Buddha	--	but	the	dream
cannot	last	long.	Even	half	an	hour	is	too	much!
But	you	seem	to	have	fallen	into	the	trap	of	the	mind.	You	say,	"I	have	heard	you
say	that	someone	who	is	not	yet	prepared	for	enlightenment	might	die	from	the
experience."	You	 have	 heard	 it,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 understood	 it.	You	 have	 not
explored	all	the	implications	of	it.
What	I	am	saying	is:	Enlightenment	can	happen	this	very	moment,	even	in	your
unpreparedness,	 because	 it	 does	 not	 depend	 on	 your	 preparedness.	 It	 is	 not
something	that	depends	on	your	efforts,	readiness.	It	is	a	happening	beyond	you,
beyond	your	reach.	It	can	happen	this	very	moment.	It	is	not	happening	because
this	will	be	dangerous	to	your	very	life.
The	 experience	 of	 enlightenment	 is	 such	 a	 great	 shock	 to	 your	 body,	 to	 your
mind,	to	your	very	system.	It	 is	exactly	a	lightning	experience.	Everything	that
you	 have	 been	 is	 simply	 shattered.	 The	 shock	 is	 so	 much	 you	 may	 forget
breathing,	you	may	forget	that	your	heart	has	stopped.
Preparedness	 is	needed	not	 for	enlightenment,	but	 to	absorb	 it.	Preparedness	 is
needed	not	 to	achieve	enlightenment,	but	so	 that	when	 it	comes,	you	don't	 fall
apart	 but	 you	 remain	 centered	 and	 silent	 and	 peaceful	 and	 let	 the	 great
experience	happen.	But	it	does	not	destroy	you.	Your	preparedness	is	necessary
to	save	your	life	from	the	great	experience,	which	is	almost	like	fire.
Unless	 you	 are	 prepared,	 enlightenment	 and	 death	 are	 almost	 simultaneous.
Many	people	have	died	because	of	sudden	enlightenment.	They	were	not	ready
for	it,	it	was	too	much.
Their	body,	 their	whole	 system,	was	 too	 fragile	 for	 the	experience.	They	were
too	small	and	the	experience	was	too	big.
So	 when	 people	 say	 to	 you,	 "Prepare	 for	 enlightenment,"	 they	 really	 mean,
"Prepare...	not	for	enlightenment,	it	will	not	come	by	your	preparedness;	prepare
so	that	you	can	welcome	it	without	being	shattered,	without	being	killed	by	the
great	joy."	Have	you	not	heard	of	many	people	dying	out	of	great	excitement?
I	 have	 heard...	 a	man	was	 continuously	 purchasing	 every	month	 a	 ticket	 for	 a
million	dollar	lottery.	He	had	been	purchasing	it	for	years,	and	all	his	friends	and
his	family	had	become	tired	of	telling	him,	"What	is	the	point,	why	do	you	go	on
wasting	money	in	purchasing	the	ticket?	We	have	seen:	almost	thirty	years	have
passed,	nothing	comes."
But	the	man	had	become	so	accustomed	to	the	habit.	The	day	he	got	his	salary,
the	first	 thing	he	did	was	to	purchase	a	 ticket	for	 the	coming	lottery.	Then	one
day	a	telegram	came.	He	was	in	the	office,	his	wife	received	the	telegram	--	he
has	won	the	lottery,	and	by	the	evening	the	money	will	be	delivered.
His	 wife	 became	 very	 much	 worried.	 They	 had	 been	 poor,	 they	 had	 lived	 in
poverty;	she	knew	that	it	will	be	too	much	for	her	poor	husband	--	one	million
dollars	out	of	the	blue!
He	was	 not	 even	 expecting...	 Thirty	 years	 have	 passed;	 he	 had	 even	 forgotten
why	 he	 goes	 on	 purchasing	 the	 ticket.	He	 knew	perfectly	well	 that	 it	was	 not
going	to	happen	to	him.	It	is	not	his	fate.
The	 wife	 suddenly	 remembered	 the	 Catholic	 priest	 --	 they	 were	 Catholics	 --
"This	is	the	moment	I	should	run	to	the	priest	and	ask	his	advice...	`What	to	do?
Because	the	moment	he	will	hear	it	--	one	million	dollars	--	I	am	afraid	he	will
have	a	heart	attack.	You	are	a	wise	man	and	this	is	the	time	we	need	your	help.'"
The	priest	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	I	am	coming	with	you.	You	need	not	convey
the	message;	I	will	convey	the	message,	and	I	will	convey	it	in	installments,	so
he	 does	 not	 get	 the	 shock	 so	 suddenly	 --	 one	million	 dollars!	 First	 I	will	 say,
`You	have	got	 fifty	 thousand	dollars.'	When	he	has	absorbed	 it	 I	will	say,	 `No,
you	have	got	really	one	hundred	thousand	dollars.'	When	he	has	absorbed	that,
and	I	am	certain	that	he	is	still	alive,	I	will	go	on.	This	way	by	a	slow	process	he
will	be	able	to	come	to	the	point	where	he	can	accept	one	million	dollars."
The	wife	 said,	 "You	are	 really	great!	You	 are	 certainly	 the	wisest	man	 around
and	if	you	can	save	my	husband's	life	I	will	donate	fifty	thousand	dollars	to	the
church."
The	 priest	 said,	 "What?	Fifty	 thousand	 dollars?"	 --	 and	 he	 fell	 down	 then	 and
there.	 He	 never	 came	 back	 after	 half	 an	 hour!	 Fifty	 thousand	 dollars	 so
suddenly...	the	poor	priest,	and	he	was	not	expecting	it	at	all.
Enlightenment	is	the	greatest	experience	in	life.	You	cannot	even	conceive	what
it	is	--	no	conceptualization	is	possible.	You	can	think	of	pleasure,	great	pleasure;
you	can	think	of	happiness,	because	you	have	known	something	of	 it	--	a	 little
bit.	You	can	think,
"Perhaps	 there	 will	 be	 no	 problems."	 But	 these	 are	 not	 the	 real	 contents	 of
enlightenment.
Because	 here	 you	 are	 constantly	 living	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 full	 of	 longings	 for
enlightenment,	 your	 mind	 can	 start	 weaving,	 spinning	 dreams.	 But	 don't	 take
those	dreams	seriously.	You	have	done	that.	You	say,	"I	believe	it	is	also	possible
that	 the	 experience	 remains	 a	 short	 satori	 and	 the	 person	 comes	 back	 to	 his
normal	state."	You	don't	understand	what	is	your	normal	state.
Enlightenment	is	your	normal	state!
The	 state	 in	which	you	 are	 is	 abnormal!	Coming	back	 from	 satori	 to	 your	 so-
called	 normal	 state	 is	 coming	 back	 from	 satori	 into	 insanity.	 It	 is	 simply	 not
possible.	Once	you	have	seen	the	light	you	cannot	become	blind	again.	Once	you
have	known	love,	hate	cannot	raise	its	head	in	your	being.	Once	all	problems	are
dissolved,	from	where	can	they	come	back	again?
Michelangelo	was	painting	the	ceiling	of	the	Sistine	chapel.	He	was	getting	tired
of	 lying	 on	 his	 back,	 so	 he	 rolled	 over	 and	 sat	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 scaffold.
Looking	 down	 he	 noticed	 a	 little	 old	 lady	 praying	 in	 front	 of	 a	 statue	 of	 the
Virgin	Mary.	Wanting	to	have	some	fun,	he	shouted	down	in	a	deep	voice,	"I	am
Jesus	Christ,	I	am	Jesus	Christ!	Listen	to	me	and	I	will	do	miracles."
The	old	 lady	 looked	up,	clasping	her	rosary,	and	shouted	back,	"You	shut-up-a
your	mouth!	I	am-a	talking	to	your	mother!"
"The	last	time	I	met	you,"	said	the	priest,	"you	made	me	very	happy	because	you
were	sober.	Today	you	have	made	me	unhappy	because	you	are	drunk."
"True,"	said	the	drunk	with	a	smile,	"but	today	is	my	turn	to	be	happy."
Beware	of	your	mind	--	it	can	deceive	you!
There	is	not	anything	in	life	which	mind	cannot	hallucinate	about,	and	when	you
are	 living	 in	 a	 special	 atmosphere	 like	 this,	 where	 meditation,	 enlightenment,
blissfulness,	ecstasy	are	in	the	very	air,	where	everybody	is	thinking	about	these
extraordinary	 experiences...	This	 is	 not	 a	 common	place.	 In	 the	market	 people
are	thinking	about	money,	about	power,	about	respectability.
This	is	not	a	marketplace.
This	is	a	temple	of	silence.
Here	everything	is	vibrating,	and	it	is	very	easy	to	get	caught	into	imagination.
And	particularly	a	woman	is	more	capable	of	imagination	than	a	man.
Veet	Diti	 --	 a	man	 thinks,	 a	woman	 feels.	Feeling	 is	 irrational.	A	man	 finds	 it
hard	 to	 imagine.	 A	woman	 is	 very	 easily	 capable	 of	 imagining	 anything.	 Her
center	of	functioning	is	feeling,	emotion,	sentiments;	her	eyes	are	continuously
filled	with	dreams.
These	dreams	can	be	useful	 in	poetry,	 in	drama,	but	 these	dreams	cannot	be	of
any	help	--
on	the	contrary	they	are	great	hindrances	--	on	the	path	of	truth.
Truth	is	not	your	imagination,	it	is	not	your	feeling.
Truth	is	your	being.
But	 the	 woman	 is	 very	 easily	 persuaded...	 it	 is	 not	 her	 fault,	 it	 is	 her	 nature.
These	are	the	differences	between	man	and	woman.	Men	are	basically	skeptical,
doubtful	about	everything,	suspicious;	hence	they	are	more	capable	of	scientific
research.
For	a	woman	it	is	difficult	to	be	a	scientist,	very	rare.	But	as	far	as	imagination	is
concerned,	if	she	is	allowed	--	but	she	has	not	been	allowed	for	centuries	--	then
no	painter	can	compete	with	her,	no	poet	can	compete	with	her,	no	musician	can
go	higher	than	she	can	go,	no	dancer	can	come	even	close	to	her.	She	can	prove
of	 tremendous	 help	 in	 creating	 a	 beautiful	 planet.	 She	 can	 fill	 it	 with	 songs,
dances	and	love.
But	unfortunately	man	has	not	allowed	her	freedom	to	stand	on	her	own	and	to
contribute	 to	 life.	 Half	 of	 humanity	 has	 been	 deprived	 of	 contributing,	 and
perhaps...	it	is	my	understanding	that	this	has	been	done	out	of	fear.
Man	is	afraid	of	woman's	imagination.	He	is	afraid	because	once	she	is	allowed
freedom	to	be	creative,	man	will	not	be	able	to	compete	with	her.	His	superiority,
his	ego,	is	in	danger.	Because	of	this	fear	that	his	superiority	will	be	destroyed,
that	all	his	great	poets	will	look	like	pigmies,	and	all	his	great	painters	will	look
amateur,	it	is	better	not	to	allow	the	woman	education,	the	opportunity	to	express
her	feelings	and	her	heart.
But	 as	 far	 as	 enlightenment	 is	 concerned,	 man's	 problem	 is	 his	 reason	 and
woman's	problem	is	her	feeling.	Both	are	barriers	to	enlightenment.	Man	has	to
drop	his	reasoning,	the	woman	has	to	drop	her	feeling.	Both	are	at	equal	distance
from	enlightenment.	Man's	distance	is	of	reasoning,	of	mind;	woman's	distance
is	of	feeling,	of	heart	--	but	the	distance	is	equal.	Man	has	to	drop	his	logic	and
woman	 has	 to	 drop	 her	 emotions.	 Both	 have	 to	 drop	 something	 which	 is
hindering	the	path.
In	various	stages	of	her	life	a	woman	resembles	the	continents	of	the	world.	As	a
child	she	is	like	Africa,	virgin	territory,	unexplored.	In	her	youth	she	is	like	Asia,
hot	and	exotic.	In	her	prime	she	is	like	America,	fully	explored	and	free	with	her
resources.	In	middle	age	she	is	like	Europe,	exhausted,	but	not	without	places	of
interest.	And	after	that	she	is	like	Australia	--	everyone	knows	it	is	down	there,
but	nobody	much	cares.
Man	 has	 to	 drop	 his	 approach	 towards	 reality;	 he	 is	 always	 thinking	 and	 the
woman	 is	 always	 feeling.	 Both	 are	 equally	 incapable	 of	 experiencing
enlightenment,	 because	 one	 is	 filled	 with	 thoughts,	 the	 other	 is	 filled	 with
feelings.
Enlightenment	 is	 possible	 only	when	 you	 are	 utterly	 empty	 --	 no	 thought,	 no
feeling,	just	utter	silence.	Then	what	happens	remains.	It	never	goes	away.
So	 the	 question	 is	 significant	 for	 all.	 In	 your	 longing,	 in	 your	 desire,	 in	 your
passion	you	are	vulnerable	to	hallucinate,	to	start	thinking	or	feeling	that	which
you	would	like	to	experience.	But	this	is	dangerous	because	it	will	become	your
final	block.	You	will	never	be	able	to	reach	beyond	this	barrier.
It	is	good	to	be	alert	from	the	very	beginning.	Never	imagine!	Remember	all	that
you	 can	 do	 for	 enlightenment	 is	 a	 preparedness,	 a	 silent	 being,	 a	 serenity.
Enlightenment	 will	 come	 at	 the	 right	 moment,	 whenever	 you	 are	 absolutely
silent.
You	don't	have	to	imagine	it,	you	don't	have	to	even	worry	about	what	it	is	like.
You	don't	have	to	find	the	definition	of	it,	you	don't	have	to	be	concerned	about
the	description	--	what	qualities,	what	experiences	are	going	to	happen	through	it
--	 because	 all	 that	 is	 dangerous.	 All	 that	 can	 give	 your	 mind	 beautiful
opportunities	to	imagine,	to	think	and	to	believe...	and	Diti	has	even	mentioned
the	word,	saying	that	she	believes:	"I	believe	it	is	also	possible..."
The	world	of	experience	is	not	the	world	of	belief:	either	you	know	or	you	don't
know.
Belief	is	deceptive.	An	authentic	religious	person	has	nothing	to	do	with	belief.
It	is	the	unauthentic,	the	false,	the	phony	who	lives	in	systems	of	beliefs.	These
systems	 of	 beliefs	 make	 you	 Christians,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans...	 they	 don't
allow	you	to	become	simply	and	purely	religious.	And	remember	that	unless	you
are	simply	religious,	you	are	not	religious	at	all.
It	is	not	a	question	of	your	believing.
It	is	a	question	of	your	experiencing.
And	 for	 the	 experience,	 get	 prepared!	 Become	 the	 right	 receptive	 host...	 the
guest	comes.
I	am	reminded	of	a	beautiful	story.	Rabindranath	has	made	a	poem	based	on	the
story;	 his	 poem	 is	 named,	 "The	 King	 of	 the	 Night."	 There	 is	 a	 great	 temple,
perhaps	 the	greatest	because	 there	are	one	 thousand	priests	 in	 the	 temple.	 It	 is
vast	and	has	thousands	of	statues,	and	millions	of	people	pass	through	the	temple
every	day.
The	high	priest	one	night	dreams	that	God	has	come	into	his	dream.	God	says	to
him,
"You	 have	 been	 preparing	 the	 temple	 every	 day	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 with
flowers,	with	fragrance	and	you	are	waiting	for	me.	I	am	sorry	that	I	could	not
come	before,	but	tomorrow	I	am	coming."
Just	the	idea	that	God	is	coming	tomorrow...	in	the	middle	of	the	night	the	priest
woke	up.	He	was	in	a	very	great	dilemma	--	whether	to	tell	the	other	priests	or
not,	because	nobody	is	going	to	believe	it.	They	will	laugh,	they	will	say,	"You
have	got	old	and	senile.	God	has	never	come.	It	was	only	a	dream	after	all,	and
dreams	don't	come	true.
Dreams	are	dreams!	So	don't	be	worried	about	it,	nobody	is	going	to	come."
But	 then	he	was	also	afraid.	 If	 it	 turns	out	 to	be	 true	and	God	comes,	 then	 the
temple	will	not	be	perfectly	ready	for	him.	So	much	work	has	to	be	done	--	the
garden	has	to	be	cleaned,	the	path	has	to	be	made	clean,	the	whole	temple	has	to
be	washed,	delicious	food	has	to	be	made	--	the	great	guest	is	going	to	come.	He
thought,	"It	is	better	to	be	thought	to	be	mad,	senile,	but	it	is	dangerous	to	take
the	risk	of	not	telling	others."	Alone	he	cannot	do	it	--	the	work	is	vast	and	the
time	 is	 short.	Tomorrow	 --	who	knows	at	what	 time	 --	maybe	 in	 the	morning,
maybe	in	the	afternoon,	or	by	the	evening	certainly	he	will	be	coming.
So	he	woke	up	all	the	priests,	one	thousand	priests.	They	were	all	angry	that	he
is	talking	nonsense	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	They	said,	"You	just	go	to	sleep.
You	have	become	 too	old.	Thinking	and	 thinking	continuously	 for	your	whole
life	that	God	will	come	one	day,	now	you	have	convinced	yourself.	This	is	just	a
dream	managed	by	your	own	unconscious.	You	simply	go	to	sleep!"
He	said,	"I	will	go	to	sleep,	but	I	don't	want	to	take	any	chance.	What	is	the	harm
if	we	clean	the	whole	temple?	It	is	good	--	it	has	not	been	cleaned	thoroughly	for
centuries.
There	is	no	harm;	even	if	God	does	not	come	it	is	good	to	clean	the	temple,	to
clean	the	garden,	to	clean	the	road	as	if	he	is	coming.	And	who	knows,	he	may
come!"
The	other	priests	also	thought	that	it	was	not	good	to	take	a	chance,	so	the	whole
garden	was	cleaned,	the	whole	temple	was	washed,	all	the	statues	were	washed
and	so	much	incense,	so	much	fragrance,	so	many	flowers...	The	whole	day	they
were	 waiting	 with	 delicious	 food	 prepared,	 but	 they	 could	 not	 eat	 unless	 the
guest	had	come.	And	when	it	was	afternoon	and	he	had	not	come,	doubt	started
arising	and	a	few	priests	started	saying,
"It	is	all	nonsense!	We	have	been	unnecessarily	tortured	the	whole	day;	now	it	is
afternoon	and	he	has	not	come."
Slowly,	 slowly,	more	 and	more	 skepticism,	more	 and	more	 doubt,	 and	 by	 the
evening	almost	 everybody	 --	 except	 the	high	priest	 --	was	 against	waiting	 any
longer.	They	said,
"You	simply	managed	to	torture	us.	We	have	been	starving	the	whole	day;	now	it
is	enough.	The	sun	 is	setting	and	 the	day	 is	complete.	Now	we	should	eat,	we
should	 be	 allowed	 to	 eat.	 And	 we	 want	 to	 go	 to	 sleep	 early;	 we	 are	 tired."
Unwillingly	the	high	priest	agreed;	they	ate	and	they	went	to	sleep.
In	the	middle	of	the	night	a	golden	chariot	comes	to	the	doors	of	the	temple.	The
noise	that	the	wheels	of	the	chariot	make	reaches	the	priests	in	their	sleep.
One	priest	says,	"It	seems	he	has	come,	because	I	can	hear	a	strange	noise	which
can	only	come	from	the	great	wheels	of	a	chariot."
Others	say,	"Shut	up	and	go	to	sleep!	There	is	no	chariot,	nothing;	it	is	just	the
clouds	in	the	sky...."	(A	SUDDEN	BURST	OF	FIRECRACKERS)	You	listen	to
the	clouds	--	it	feels	like	he	is	coming!
And	finally	 the	chariot	 stops	at	 the	gate.	He	steps	down;	he	climbs	 the	marble
steps	up	to	the	main	gate.	Somebody	says,	"I	hear	his	steps,	he	has	come.	I	have
even	heard	a	knock	on	the	doors."
But	many	others	 shout,	 "You	 idiots,	will	you	allow	us	 to	sleep	or	not?	We	are
tired,	the	whole	day	waiting	and	cleaning	and	working,	and	now	somebody	hears
the	chariot,	somebody	is	hearing	 the	footsteps.	Nobody	has	come,	 it	 is	 just	 the
wind	that	is	knocking	on	the	doors.	Just	go	to	sleep!"
In	the	morning	when	they	opened	the	door,	they	were	shocked:	the	chariot	had
come,	because	there	were,	on	the	dirt	road	coming	to	the	temple,	the	marks	of	a
chariot.	They	could	see	on	the	steps	some	footprints.
They	were	all	silent.	Their	eyes	were	full	of	tears	and	the	high	priest	said,	"You
did	 not	 listen	 to	me!	 For	 centuries	 this	 temple	 has	 been	waiting,	 and	 now	 the
King	 of	 the	 Night	 has	 come.	 And	 we	 forgot	 completely	 that	 the	 temple	 was
known	as	the	temple	of	the	King	of	the	Night.	Naturally	the	King	of	the	Night
will	come	in	the	night,	not	in	the	day.
We	waited	in	the	day,	and	we	went	to	sleep	when	it	was	time	to	be	awake	and
alert	and	to	watch	and	to	wait.	We	missed	the	opportunity."
All	that	you	need	is	a	waiting	consciousness.
In	 absolute	 silence	 --	 aware,	 conscious	 --	God,	 enlightenment,	 truth,	whatever
you	name	it,	comes.
It	has	always	come,	whenever	somebody	was	ready;	it	has	never	been	otherwise.
In	 your	 readiness	 is	 the	 guarantee,	 the	 promise,	 that	 the	 ultimate	 is	 going	 to
happen	to	you.	You	are	not	to	think	about	it;	you	have	to	drop	all	thinking.	You
are	not	to	have	any	feeling	about	it;	you	have	to	forget	all	feeling.
You	have	to	be	just	a	silent	waiting	with	deep	trust,	with	great	love,	with	infinite
gratitude.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
DURING	THE	DAYS	YOU	WERE	NOT	SPEAKING,	I	WAS	IN	A	TOTAL
EMOTIONAL	AND	MIND	CRISIS.	 I	GOT	SO	MUCH	LOVE,	 JUICE	AND
ENERGY
FROM	SITTING	TWO	TIMES	A	DAY	IN	DISCOURSE	--	AND	AFTER	YOU
STOPPED	 SPEAKING	MY	 ENERGY	 BROKE	DOWN.	 IT	 SEEMED	 THAT
ALL	THE
DIRT	 AND	 MIND	 CAME	 OUT	 EVEN	 STRONGER	 THAN	 BEFORE.
PLEASE
COMMENT.
Deva	Shikha,	it	is	going	to	happen	to	you	--	it	is	natural.	But	you	have	to	learn	to
transcend	it.	I	cannot	be	always	with	you.	I	would	love	to,	but	existence	does	not
allow	it.
Existence	 gives	 only	 so	 much	 rope,	 and	 it	 is	 good;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 start
taking	me	for	granted.
One	day	I	will	not	be	amongst	you.	It	is	good	that	once	in	a	while	I	am	absent,	so
you	can	start	 learning	that	what	happens	in	my	absence	is	your	reality.	When	I
am	with	you,	you	become	overwhelmed	with	me.	You	forget	yourself.
And	you	have	not	to	forget	yourself!
You	have	to	remember	yourself,	because	only	through	remembrance	you	will	be
able	to	transform	yourself.
It	is	natural;	hence	I	am	not	condemning	it.	But	you	are	in	search	of	something
beyond	--
beyond	 the	normal,	 the	natural	 --	 something	 transcendental.	You	have	 to	 learn
the	way,	and	the	way	has	to	be	traveled	alone.
I	cannot	come	with	you.	I	can	show	you	the	way,	I	can	show	you	the	moon.	But
my	 fingers	 are	 not	 the	 moon,	 and	 I	 cannot	 continue	 to	 show	 you	 the	 moon.
Sooner	or	later	you	have	to	forget	my	fingers	and	you	have	to	look	at	the	moon
yourself.	You	have	to	follow	the	path	alone.
Naturally	when	 I	was	not	coming	daily,	morning	and	evening,	 to	be	with	you,
you	started	feeling	a	kind	of	breakdown.	It	was	not	a	breakdown;	it	was	simply
that	your	reality	was	surfacing.	It	had	not	been	getting	the	opportunity	to	surface.
I	was	so	much	with	you	that	you	had	gone	into	the	shadow,	into	the	background.
I	had	become	more	real	to	you	than	yourself.
When	 I	was	not	 coming,	 in	my	absence	your	 reality	was	exposed	 to	you.	 It	 is
good,	because	unless	you	know	what	you	are,	where	you	are,	your	pilgrimage
cannot	begin.	So	those	days	were	of	great	importance.
Remember:	whatever	you	find	within	yourself,	however	much	rubbish	it	may	be,
it	is	your	reality.	It	can	be	cleaned,	it	can	be	dropped;	you	can	move	away	from
it.	But	before	anything	can	be	done	about	it,	you	have	to	know	it.	That	is	the	first
and	the	most	significant	thing.
A	 farmer,	 plowing	 with	 one	 ox,	 kept	 crying	 out:	 "Giddup,	 Joe!	 Giddup,
Alexander!
Giddup,	Henry!	Giddup,	Ronnie!"
A	man	passing	by	asked	him,	"How	many	names	does	that	ox	have,	anyway?"
"Only	one,"	the	farmer	replied.	"His	name	is	Pete,	but	he	does	not	know	his	own
strength.
So	I	put	blinkers	on	him,	yell	a	lot	of	names,	and	he	thinks	there	are	half	a	dozen
other	oxen	helping	him."
That's	what	 I	 have	been	doing	with	 you.	You	 are	 alone,	 but	 I	 go	on	 shouting,
"Giddup,	 Joe!	Giddup	Alexander!	Giddup,	Henry!	Giddup,	Ronnie!"	And	 you
feel	relaxed...	you	are	not	alone,	so	many	people	are	on	the	path.
But	the	truth	is	that	everybody	is	alone.	And	it	is	good	to	understand	that	you	are
alone.	It	will	make	you	aware	of	your	own	strength.	You	have	enough	strength	to
complete	 the	 pilgrimage;	 in	 fact	 you	 have	more	 strength	 than	 any	 pilgrimage
needs.	You	are	just	not	aware	of	it.
When	you	are	with	me,	you	are	not	with	yourself	--	it	is	perfectly	right.	But	once
in	 a	while	 you	 have	 to	 be	with	 yourself	 too,	 just	 to	 get	 the	 comparison	 --	 the
comparison	 between	what	 you	 are	 and	what	 you	 can	 be.	Otherwise	 you	 don't
have	 any	 sense	of	 direction,	 you	don't	 know	where	 to	move,	what	 is	 the	 right
dimension	for	you.	You	don't	know	your	potential.
If	my	presence	 can	make	you	 aware	of	 your	 potential,	 your	 possibilities,	 your
blossomings,	then	I	have	done	my	work.	I	have	given	you	a	glimpse	of	your	own
future.
But	remember,	it	is	your	future	not	your	present.
Once	in	a	while	you	have	to	be	reminded	of	your	present	too;	otherwise	you	will
start	living	in	a	euphoria	of	the	future	and	you	will	forget	all	about	your	reality	in
the	present.
That	reality	in	the	present	has	to	be	changed:	you	have	to	go	beyond	it.	You	have
to	attain	that	euphoria	and	make	it	real.	But	it	has	to	be	your	own	--	not	mine,	not
anybody	else's.
The	false	teacher	is	one	who	never	gives	you	a	chance	to	know	that	his	euphoria
has	become	slowly,	slowly	your	euphoria,	 that	his	experience	and	his	presence
has	become	a	kind	of	drug.	You	feel	good,	but	a	drug	cannot	be	 the	source	of
ultimate	transformation.
The	authentic	master	goes	on	continuously	giving	you	glimpses	of	 the	beyond,
but	 always	 reminds	 you	 about	 the	 earth	 you	 are	 standing	 upon.	 He	 goes	 on
telling	you	about	the	flowers	and	the	spring	that	is	going	to	come,	but	he	never
allows	you	to	forget	your	roots	and	your	reality.	Your	spring	has	not	come	yet.	It
is	 possible	 to	 experience	my	 fragrance	 and	 get	 into	 a	 delusion	 that	 it	 is	 your
fragrance,	your	peace,	your	silence,	your	love.
I	am	not	your	enemy	and	I	will	never	do	such	a	 thing.	I	am	your	friend,	and	I
would	 like	 you	 always	 to	 remember	 your	 reality	 --	 side	 by	 side	 with
remembering	your	ultimate	potential.	What	you	are	and	what	you	can	be,	both
have	to	be	remembered.	Then,	and	only	then,	the	transformation.
The	understanding	between	me	and	you	is	not	always	exactly	 the	way	I	would
like	 it	 to	 be.	But	 I	 never	 expect	 anything	 impossible	 from	you;	 in	 fact	 I	 don't
expect	anything	from	you.	I	share	my	experience,	knowing	perfectly	well	all	the
possibilities	 of	 misunderstanding.	 So	 I	 go	 on	 making	 you	 alert	 about	 the
misunderstandings	that	are	possible.	They	can	be	avoided	if	you	are	alert.
All	communication	is	a	difficult	process,	because	I	want	to	say	something	which
cannot	be	said,	and	yet	I	have	to	say	it	--	and	I	have	to	say	it	in	words	which	are
absolutely	impotent	to	convey	it.	I	say	something,	you	hear	something	else.	But	I
know	this	is	natural,	and	particularly	in	those	sannyasins	who	are	new,	who	will
only	 listen	 to	 my	 words	 and	 interpret	 those	 words	 according	 to	 their	 own
prejudices.	 Those	who	 are	 old	 enough,	who	 have	 lived	 long	 enough	with	me,
know	perfectly	well	my	ways	of	working.
A	girl	said	to	her	date,	"You	remind	me	of	the	sea."
"You	mean,"	he	said,	"because	I	am	so	wild,	magnificent,	and	romantic?"
"No,"	she	said,	"because	you	make	me	sick."
Human	communication	is	a	difficult	problem!
Walking	down	the	street	in	New	York,	Hymie	Goldberg	said	to	his	wife	Becky,
"Hey,	did	you	see	that	pretty	girl	smiling	at	me?"
"That's	nothing,"	said	Becky.	"The	first	time	I	saw	you	I	laughed	out	loud."
Paddy	 complained	 to	 his	 friend	 Sean,	 that	 he	 had	 seen	 his	 wife	 going	 into	 a
movie	with	a	strange	man.
"Did	you	follow	them	inside?"	asked	Sean.
"No	way,"	replied	Paddy,	"I	had	already	seen	the	movie."
A	hotel	night	clerk	was	surprised	to	see	a	guest	walking	through	the	lobby	in	his
pink	pajamas.
"Hey	there,"	he	shouted,	"what	do	you	think	you	are	doing?"
The	 guest	 woke	 up	 and	 apologized.	 "I	 beg	 your	 pardon,"	 he	 said,	 "I	 am	 a
somnambulist."
"Well,"	 said	 the	 clerk,	 "you	 can't	 walk	 around	 here	 like	 that,	 no	 matter	 what
religion	you	belong	to."
Farmer	Jenkins	had	two	cows,	Daisy	and	Tinkerbell.	One	day	he	borrowed	the
bull	 from	 the	next	 farm	and	 instructed	his	 farmhand,	 Jake,	 to	watch	and	make
sure	that	the	bull	did	his	job	properly.
That	afternoon	the	local	priest	came	round	for	tea	and	just	as	the	farmer's	wife
was	pouring	 it,	Jake	came	rushing	 into	 the	room	and	shouted,	"Mister	Jenkins,
the	bull	just	screwed	the	hell	out	of	Daisy."
Jake's	face	fell	when	he	saw	the	priest,	and	the	farmer	was	furious.	He	took	Jake
into	 the	 other	 room	 and	 said,	 "Look,	 I	want	 to	 be	 kept	 informed	 of	 the	 bull's
progress,	 but	 this	 is	 too	 much.	 Next	 time	 use	 the	 word	 `surprised',	 not
`screwed'."
Twenty	minutes	later	Jake	came	running	in	again	and	said,	"Boss!	Boss!	The	bull
just...
the	bull..."	but	seeing	the	priest	he	could	not	say	another	word.	The	farmer	got
up	and	said,	"Jake,	did	the	bull	surprise	Tinkerbell	this	time?"
"Surprise	Tinkerbell?	I	will	say	he	did,"	cried	Jake	enthusiastically.	"He	screwed
the	hell	out	of	Daisy	again!"
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	Become	the	mystery
3	October	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8710030
ShortTitle:
PILGR27
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
123
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THE	MYSTERY	OF	WOMEN?
Devageet,	it	is	one	of	the	ancientmost	questions.	Man	has	always	puzzled	about
women,	and	the	real	problem	is	neither	man	nor	woman.	Reduced	to	the	factual,
to	the	existential,	the	problem	is	between	the	head	and	the	heart.
The	 head	 cannot	 understand	 the	 mystery	 of	 the	 heart.	 The	 head	 is	 logical,
rational,	mathematical,	scientific;	the	heart	knows	nothing	of	reason,	nothing	of
logic.	The	heart	functions	in	a	totally	different	way.	Its	functioning	creates	in	the
head	the	idea	of	the	mystery.	It	 is	not	a	question	about	women;	it	 is	a	question
that	arises	because	women	function	through	the	heart	and	man	functions	through
the	 head.	 Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 any	 women	 asking,	 "What	 is	 the	 mystery	 of
man?"	They	simply	know	it.
The	problem	arises	out	of	logical	reasoning.	It	is	a	very	superficial	phenomenon.
It	is	good	with	objects,	with	dead	things;	it	deals	with	them	perfectly	because	a
dead	thing	has	no	interiority,	a	dead	thing	has	no	inner	being,	it	has	no	life.	The
scientist	is	perfectly	right	about	objects,	but	the	moment	he	comes	to	think	about
subjectivity	--	the	interiority
--	he	is	baffled,	because	reason	cannot	function	there.
The	 heart	 knows	 without	 any	 process	 of	 knowing,	 without	 any	 syllogism,
without	 any	 argument.	 How	 do	 you	 know	 that	 the	 rose	 is	 beautiful?	 Is	 it	 a
rational	conclusion?	If	you	bring	reason	in,	you	will	not	be	able	to	prove	that	the
rose	is	beautiful,	because	reason	cannot	fathom	the	phenomenon	of	beauty.
When	you	 say	 the	 rose	 is	beautiful,	you	are	 functioning	 from	 the	heart.	When
you	say	the	starry	night	overwhelms	you,	it	is	not	a	rational	statement;	if	you	are
forced	 to	 prove	 it	 rationally,	 you	 will	 be	 at	 a	 loss.	 Then	 suddenly	 you	 will
become	aware	 that	 it	was	 the	heart	 that	has	spoken,	and	 the	head	 is	absolutely
incapable	of	figuring	out	how	the	heart	functions.
But	 the	heart	 is	 not	 in	 the	 same	difficulty	 about	 the	head,	 because	 the	head	 is
superficial	and	the	heart	is	deep	down	within	you.	The	lower	cannot	understand
the	 higher.	 The	 higher	 simply	 understands	 the	 lower,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 any
reasoning.	Your	heart	is	both	higher	than	your	head	and	deeper	than	your	head.
The	woman	can	be	a	poet,	but	cannot	really	be	a	mathematician.	Mathematics	is
purely	a	game	of	the	mind.	Poetry	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 Frau	 Einstein,	 Albert	 Einstein's	 wife.	 She	 was	 a	 poet,	 and
Albert	 Einstein	 was	 perhaps	 the	 greatest	 scientific	 thinker	 of	 all	 the	 ages.
Naturally	Frau	Einstein	wanted	her	husband	to	know	about	her	poetry.	Einstein
tried	 to	 avoid	 the	 subject	 as	much	 as	 he	 could,	 but	 finally	 one	 night,	 the	 full
moon	 in	 the	 sky,	 Frau	 Einstein	 could	 not	 resist	 the	 temptation.	 She	 had
composed	a	beautiful	poem	about	the	full	moon,	and	she	recited	the	poem.
Albert	Einstein	looked	at	her	with	great	surprise,	almost	shocked.	She	could	not
understand,	"Why	is	he	looking	at	me	in	this	weird	manner?	At	the	most	he	can
say	that	the	poetry	is	not	great...	but	he	is	looking	at	me	as	if	I	am	insane!"	After
the	recital	of	the	poem	she	asked	Albert	Einstein,	"What	do	you	think?"
He	said,	"I	had	never	thought	that	you	are	so	crazy.	You	talk	about	the	moon	as
beautiful,	 you	 talk	 about	 the	moon	 reminding	you	of	 your	 beloved.	 It	 is	 sheer
nonsense!	The	moon	 is	 too	big,	 it	cannot	be	substituted	for	your	beloved.	And
the	moon	is	not	at	all	beautiful!
It	 is	 just	 as	 ordinary	 as	 the	 earth,	 even	 more	 ordinary	 because	 there	 is	 no
greenery,	no	water,	just	barren	land.	And	the	light	that	you	see	reflected	from	the
moon	is	not	its	own.
That	 light	 is	 borrowed	 from	 the	 sun,	 it	 is	 not	 coming	 from	 the	 moon.	 The
sunlight	 falls	on	 the	moon	and	 the	 rays	 are	 reflected	back,	 and	 those	 reflected
rays	are	coming	to	your	eyes;the	moon	is	not	the	source	of	them.	I	had	always
thought	 that	 you	 are	 well	 educated,	 but	 you	 don't	 know	 even	 the	 ABC	 of
physics!"
Now	was	the	chance	for	Frau	Einstein	to	look	at	him	as	if	he	is	insane,	because
for	centuries	poets	have	sung	songs	about	the	moon	--	its	beauty,	its	tremendous
magnetic	force,	its	cool	light.	It	has	a	certain	hypnotic	spell	on	the	heart...	and	it
is	now	also	proved	by	facts	that	it	has	a	certain	hypnotic	spell.
More	people	--	in	fact	all	except	Mahavira	--	have	become	enlightened	on	a	full-
moon	 night.	Mahavira	 is	 the	 only	 exception;	 he	 became	 enlightened	 on	 a	 no-
moon	night.
Gautam	Buddha	was	born	on	a	 full-moon	night,	became	enlightened	on	a	 full-
moon	night,	died	on	a	full-moon	night.	He	is	a	perfect	example	of	the	hypnotic
spell	of	the	moon.	Many	more	people	go	mad	on	the	full-moon	night	--	these	are
approved	statistics	-
-	and	more	people	commit	suicide	on	full-moon	nights.
The	full	moon	somehow	drives	man's	mind	into	dimensions	beyond	reasoning.
And	 it	 is	 not	 only	 man	 that	 is	 affected	 by	 the	 full	 moon;	 even	 the	 ocean	 is
affected.	But	a	physicist,	a	mathematician	will	not	be	able	to	understand	it	--	and
Frau	Einstein	never	again	mentioned	poetry	to	Albert	Einstein	in	her	whole	life.
Although	she	went	on	composing,	she	was	not	publishing	them.	It	was	decided
on	the	first	recital	that	that	kind	of	dialogue	is	not	possible	between	her	and	her
husband	--	but	it	is	not	any	exceptional	case.
No	husband	and	no	wife	are	in	the	situation	of	understanding	each	other.
Misunderstanding	is	the	natural	situation.	The	man	says	something,	the	woman
immediately	understands	something	else.	The	man	cannot	believe	how	she	has
come	to	this	conclusion	--	and	to	the	woman	that	conclusion	is	absolutely	clear,
there	is	no	doubt	about	it.	And	whatever	she	says,	the	man	is	at	a	loss	to	figure	it
out.
Psychologists	have	started	calling	couples	intimate	enemies.	They	are...	because
no	one	understands	 each	other.	But	 the	 reason	 is	not	 the	woman	and	 the	man.
The	reason	is	far	deeper.	It	is	the	head	and	the	heart.
So	I	would	like	to	emphasize	the	point,	Devageet,	that	the	question	from	the	very
beginning	has	been	formed	in	a	wrong	way.	It	is	not	the	mystery	of	women,	it	is
the	mystery	of	the	heart	--	which	the	head	is	incapable	of	figuring	out.	The	heart
has	no	problem	about	the	head;it	is	a	lower,	more	superficial	layer,	and	the	heart
understands	it.
So	 when	 men	 say	 that	 women	 are	 mysteries,	 women	 simply	 smile	 amongst
themselves:Look	 at	 these	 idiots!	Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 any	woman	 saying	 that
women	 are	 mysteries?	 They	 know	 each	 other	 perfectly	 well.	 There	 is	 no
mystery.
It	will	be	better	to	understand	in	a	different	dimension	too.	Forget	about	man	and
woman;	 just	 think	 about	 your	 own	 head	 and	 your	 own	 heart.	Do	 they	 have	 a
communion?	 Are	 they	 capable	 of	 understanding	 each	 other?	 I	 have	 not	 met
Albert	Einstein,	but	I	would	have	loved	to	meet	him	for	the	simple	reason	that	I
wanted	 to	ask	him	how	he	 fell	 in	 love	with	Frau	Einstein.	What	physics,	what
mathematics,	what	science	is	behind	the	experience	of	falling	in	love?
But	perhaps	he	never	thought	about	it.	Love	is	coming	from	the	heart;	it	cannot
come	from	the	head.	Even	the	greatest	scientist	once	in	a	while	goes	astray	from
the	head.	One	beautiful	 sunset	 and	he	 is	 overwhelmed.	He	 forgets	 that	 he	 is	 a
scientist	and	he	 is	not	allowed	to	do	such	things,	feminine	 things;	he	 is	a	male
mind.	And	every	scientist	falls	in	love	with	a	woman	without	ever	thinking	what
love	is.	It	is	a	mystery...	even	your	own	heart	is	a	mystery	to	you.
My	own	understanding	is	that	Mahavira	at	first	denied	any	women	to	be	initiated
into	sannyas.	The	same	was	the	case	with	Gautam	Buddha;he	denied	women	to
be	 initiated	 into	 sannyas.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 the	 case	 with	 other	 religions;	 they
have	all	put	woman	 in	a	 secondary	place.	And	 the	 reason,	 according	 to	me,	 is
that	all	our	so-called	religions	are	head-oriented...	too	much	head.	Their	God	is
not	 their	 love,	 their	God	 is	 their	 idea.	 It	 is	 a	 hypothesis.	 They	 have	 created	 a
system	--	rational,	logical,	flawless	--	but	it	is	their	own	mind	which	is	creating
the	system.	It	is	not	a	discovery.	It	is	not	unveiling	the	mystery	of	existence.
And	why	have	 all	 these	 religions	 been	 so	 afraid	 of	women?	There	were	 other
reasons,	 but	 the	most	 fundamental	 reason	 is	 that	 all	 the	 founders	 of	 religions
were	male,	 and	 their	 theologies	were	 from	 the	 head.	 To	 allow	women	 among
their	 fellow	 travelers	 was	 to	 create	 unnecessary	 trouble,	 because	 they	 speak
different	languages,	they	understand	different	languages.	They	are	coming	from
different	spaces.	At	the	most,	they	can	tolerate	each	other.
That	is	what	is	happening	between	every	wife	and	every	husband:	they	are	just
tolerating	 each	other.	There	 seems	 to	 be	no	possibility	 of	 a	 sane	 conversation.
Any	conversation	between	a	wife	and	husband	immediately	leads	to	conflict,	and
the	woman	 starts	behaving,	 according	 to	man,	 in	 such	a	 crazy	way...	 throwing
things,	breaking	things.	He	cannot	understand	--	what	argument	is	this?	But	the
woman	knows	perfectly	well	that	only	this	argument	will	decide	the	thing	--	and
it	decides!	The	man	 simply	agrees,	 "You	are	 right,	but	 just	don't	destroy	more
things!"	 In	 every	 argument	with	 a	woman,	 the	woman	 is	 the	winner,	 although
she	knows	nothing	about	argumentation.
The	 day	 he	 initiated	 the	 first	woman	 into	 sannyas,	Gautam	Buddha	 said,	 "My
religion	 was	 going	 to	 last	 for	 five	 thousand	 years.	 Now	 it	 will	 last	 only	 five
hundred	years"	--	not	a	great	welcome	to	the	poor	woman!
Asked	why	he	was	saying	so,	he	said,	"It	 is	 impossible	to	include	both	women
and	men	without	them	coming	into	conflict.	The	religion	will	destroy	itself	from
within.	If	it	had	remained	just	confined	to	males	there	was	a	possibility	for	it	to
continue	 at	 least	 for	 five	 thousand	 years,	 because	 they	 can	 understand	 each
other."
You	have	to	be	very	alert	about	it....	I	am	the	first	man	who	makes	no	difference
between	 initiating	men	 and	women,	 and	my	 feeling	 is	 --	 if	 I	were	 to	 reply	 to
Gautam	Buddha,	 I	would	say,	"If	 it	was	only	males	 it	would	 last	 for	only	 five
hundred	years.	Now	it	is	men	and	women	together	it	can	last	for	eternity."
When	 heart	 and	 head	 are	 together,	 you	 are	 more	 complete	 and	 more	 whole.
Heart	 is	 a	part,	head	 is	 a	part,	but	 together...	 if	 a	 communion	 is	possible,	your
strength	is	not	doubled,	it	is	multiplied.	How	can	the	head	and	the	heart	come	to
a	point	of	meeting?
And	it	is	a	multidimensional	question:
It	is	between	the	woman	and	the	man.
It	is	between	the	heart	and	the	head.
It	is	between	the	East	and	the	West.
One	 of	 the	 royal	 poets	 of	 England,	 Rudyard	Kipling,	 has	written	 two	 famous
lines	which	have	become	better	known	than	anything	else	that	he	wrote.	Those
lines	 are,	 "East	 is	 East	 and	 West	 is	 West,	 and	 never	 the	 twain	 shall	 meet."
Nobody	has	argued	against	it...	and	he	was	the	royal	poet	of	the	British	Empire.
But	 I	 disagree	 absolutely,	 without	 any	 conditions	 and	 reservations,	 because
wherever	 you	 are	 standing	 East	 and	 West	 are	 meeting.	 Bombay	 is	 West	 to
Calcutta,	Calcutta	is	East	to	Bombay;Tokyo	is	East	to	Calcutta,	and	Calcutta	is
West	to	Tokyo.	Wherever	you	are,	you	cannot	say	you	are	in	the	East	or	in	the
West.	They	are	relative	terms;they	are	not	fixed	territories.	Wherever	you	are,	in
every	man,	in	every	tree,	in	every	bird,	East	and	West	are	meeting.
Rudyard	Kipling	is	simply	talking	nonsense!	But	he	has	a	point	in	his	ridiculous
statement	--	and	the	point	is	the	same.	The	West	is	head-oriented	and	the	East	is
heart-oriented.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 question	 in	 different	 directions:	 How	 can	 they
meet?	How	can	 there	 be	 an	 intimate	 love	between	 the	head	 and	 the	heart,	 not
intimate	enmity?	--	it	is	a	contradiction	in	terms.
They	meet	in	meditation,	because	in	meditation	the	head	is	empty	and	the	heart
is	empty:	the	head	is	empty	of	thoughts	and	the	heart	is	empty	of	feelings.	When
there	 are	 two	 emptinesses	 you	 cannot	 keep	 them	 separate,	 because	 there	 is
nothing	between	them	to	keep	them	separate.	Two	zeros	become	one	zero...	Two
nothingnesses	 cannot	 exist	 separately;	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 become	 one	 because
there	is	not	even	a	fence	between	them.
But	Rudyard	Kipling,	although	he	lived	in	India	almost	his	whole	life,	has	never
heard	about	meditation.	 It	 is	meditation	 in	which	 the	head	and	heart	 lose	each
other,	melt	into	each	other.	It	is	meditation	in	which	man	and	woman	melt	into
each	other.
In	 India	 we	 have	 an	 ancient,	 very	 ancient	 statue	 --	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful
pieces	of	art	-
-	a	 statue	of	Ardhanarishwar.	The	statue	 is	half	man	and	half	woman.	 It	 is	 the
statue	of	Shiva,	 the	Hindu	God,	and	half	of	 the	body	 is	of	 the	woman	and	 the
other	half	of	the	body	is	of	the	man.	Up	to	the	time	of	Carl	Gustav	Jung	it	was
thought	that	it	is	only	a	mythology,	metaphor,	poetry	--	but	this	cannot	be	true.
The	whole	credit	goes	to	Carl	Gustav	Jung	for	introducing	to	the	world	that	this
is	not	a	metaphor,	this	is	a	reality.
Every	man	and	every	woman	are	both,	because	every	child	 is	born	of	a	 father
and	a	mother.	So	something	of	the	mother	and	something	of	the	father	is	present
in	 every	 child,	 whether	 the	 child	 is	 a	 girl	 or	 the	 child	 is	 a	 boy.	 The	 only
difference	 can	 be	 that	 the	man	 is	 a	 little	more	man,	 perhaps	 fifty-one	 percent
man	and	forty-nine	percent	woman,	and	the	woman	is	fifty-one	percent	woman
and	forty-nine	percent	man.	But	the	difference	is	not	much.
That's	why	it	has	become	scientifically	possible	 to	change	the	sexes	--	because
the	other	sex	is	also	present,	just	the	percentage	of	hormones	has	to	be	changed.
What	was	 fifty-one	percent	 has	 to	 be	made	 forty-nine,	 or	what	was	 forty-nine
has	to	be	made	fifty-one...
then	the	man	becomes	woman	and	the	woman	becomes	man.
But	even	within	you,	you	are	not	at	ease.	There	is	a	conflict,	continuous	conflict
between	the	head	and	the	heart,	between	the	man	and	the	woman.	This	conflict
can	be	dissolved	only	if	the	head	drops	its	thinking	and	the	heart	drops	its	feeling
and	both	are	 just	pure	empty	spaces.	In	 that	emptiness	 there	 is	a	great	meeting
and	a	great	understanding.
I	don't	see	any	woman	as	a	mystery.	I	have	looked	hard,	and	perhaps	there	will
not	be	another	man	in	the	whole	world	who	has	come	in	contact	with	so	many
men	and	 so	many	women.	But	neither	 the	man	seems	 to	be	a	mystery	nor	 the
woman	seems	 to	be	a	mystery,	because	within	myself	 the	head	and	heart	have
melted	into	each	other,	and	that	has	given	me	a	new	perspective	and	has	changed
the	whole	vision	around	me.
Devageet,	if	you	really	want	to	understand	the	mystery	of	women	you	will	have
to	 understand	 the	 art	 of	melting	 your	 head	 into	 your	 heart.	That	will	 not	 only
help	 you	 to	 know	 the	 mystery	 of	 women,	 it	 will	 also	 help	 you	 to	 know	 the
mystery	of	men.	Not	only	that,	it	will	help	you	to	know	the	mystery	of	the	whole
existence.
A	 shy	 young	 girl	 was	 about	 to	 get	 married,	 so	 she	 went	 to	 see	 her	 very
experienced	friend	for	some	advice.
"Doris,"	she	began,	"it	may	sound	silly,	but	there	are	a	few	things	I	just	have	to
ask	you."
"That's	okay,"	said	Doris.	"Just	go	ahead."
"Okay,"	 said	 the	 shy	girl,	 "is	 it	 all	 right	 to	 talk	 to	your	husband	while	making
love?"
"Well,"	said	Doris,	"I	must	admit	that	I	have	never	done	that,	but	I	suppose	there
is	nothing	wrong	in	it	--	as	long	as	there	is	a	telephone	within	reach."
There	 is	mystery	but	 it	 is	not	confined	only	 to	women.	The	whole	existence	 is
mysterious.	This	 beautiful	 rain...	 this	music	of	 the	 falling	 rain...	 the	 joy	of	 the
trees.	Don't	you	think	there	is	great	mystery?
There	was	a	hill	station	in	the	state	where	I	was	a	professor	for	many	years,	and
on	that	hill	station	was	a	resthouse	far	away	deep	in	the	hills,	absolutely	lonely.
For	 miles	 there	 was	 nobody...	 even	 the	 servant	 who	 used	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the
resthouse	used	 to	 leave	by	 the	evening	 for	his	own	home.	 I	used	 to	go	 to	 that
resthouse	 whenever	 I	 could	 find	 time	 and	 sometimes	 it	 used	 to	 rain	 just	 like
this...	and	I	was	alone	in	that	resthouse	and	for	miles	there	was	nobody.	Just	the
music	of	rain,	just	the	dance	of	the	trees...	I	have	never	forgotten	the	beauty	of	it.
Whenever	it	rains	I	again	remember	it.	It	has	left	such	a	beautiful	impact.
If	you	 look,	 then	each	flower	 is	a	mystery.	From	where	do	 those	colors	come?
Every	rainbow	is	a	mystery,	every	moment	of	life	is	a	mystery.	Just	to	be	here...
is	it	not	a	mystery	that	you	are	nowhere	else	but	here?
Once	 your	 eyes	 are	 clear	 and	 your	 head	 and	 heart	 are	 no	 more	 in	 conflict,
everything	starts	becoming	mysterious.	Then	you	don't	want	 to	de-mystify	it	 --
that	 is	 absolutely	 ugly	 and	 criminal!	 The	 mystery	 of	 existence	 has	 to	 be
welcomed	 as	 it	 is.	 Dissecting	 it,	 demystifying	 it,	 is	 a	 violation,	 aggression,
violence.
A	man	of	meditation	simply	enjoys	the	flowers,	the	birds,	the	trees,	the	rain,	the
sun,	 the	moon,	 the	 people.	 It	 is	 good	 that	we	 are	 all	 engulfed	 in	 a	mysterious
whole.	Life	will	be	utterly	boring	if	every	mystery	is	decoded.
Science's	whole	effort	is	to	demystify	existence.	Poetry	and	art	are	concerned	in
rejoicing,	 in	welcoming	 the	mystery	of	 existence.And	 the	mystic,	 the	 religious
man,	lives	the	mystery	--	not	from	the	outside	as	a	poet,	but	from	the	very	inside
of	it.	He	becomes	himself	mystery.
There	is	a	beautiful	story.	Unfortunately	it	cannot	be	true.	I	would	have	loved	it
to	have	been	true...!	In	the	East	there	have	been	many	lovers,	very	famous	lovers
--	 Heer	 and	 Ranjha,	 Sheeri	 and	 Farhad	 --	 and	 the	 most	 famous	 is	 the	 third
couple,	Laila	and	Majnu.
None	of	 them	could	meet	and	 live	with	each	other.	That	 is	 their	great	 fortune;
hence	they	remained	loving	each	other	for	their	whole	life.
Majnu	was	 a	poor	man.	Laila	was	 a	very	 rich,	 super-rich	girl,	 and	 the	parents
were	not	willing	to	give	their	only	girl	into	the	hands	of	Majnu,	who	was	nobody
at	all,	just	a	beggar.	Just	to	avoid	him,	and	to	avoid	any	slander,	the	parents	left
the	town	for	another	city;	they	had	businesses	in	many	cities	and	houses	in	many
cities.
The	 day	 they	 left,	Majnu	was	 standing	 outside	 the	 city	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 tree,
hiding	himself	in	the	foliage	of	the	tree,	just	to	see	for	the	last	time	his	beloved
Laila	 moving	 away.	 He	 saw	 Laila	 on	 her	 camel,	 and	 the	 whole	 caravan	 was
moving	away.	He	went	on	looking	and	looking	as	far	as	he	could,	and	in	a	desert
you	can	see	very	far,	there	are	no	obstructions.
Finally,	beyond	the	horizon,	they	disappeared...	but	Majnu	went	on	looking.	This
is	where	the	story	becomes	a	myth,	but	of	tremendous	significance.	He	never	left
that	place.
He	trusted	his	love,	and	he	hoped	that	one	day	Laila	will	return	from	the	same
route.
There	was	no	other	route	going	out	from	the	town.
After	twelve	years,	Laila	returned.	The	father	was	dead	and	now	she	was	free	at
last.	 She	 never	married	 anyone	 else;	 she	 had	 insisted	 that	 if	 she	was	 going	 to
marry	 anyone,	 she	 would	 marry	Majnu.	 Her	 father	 had	 said,	 "If	 that	 is	 your
decision,	 then	my	 decision	 is	 that	 you	will	 never	marry."	But	when	 the	 father
died,	Laila	came.
Now	twelve	years	is	a	long	time.	In	these	twelve	years	Majnu	had	been	standing
by	the	side	of	the	tree.	The	foliage	had	grown	much;	he	had	not	eaten,	he	had	not
drunk	water,	 and	 by	 and	 by	 he	 had	 become	 joined	with	 the	 tree.	 Standing	 for
twelve	years	was	so	long...	slowly,	slowly	he	became	part	of	the	tree.
Laila	came	and	she	enquired	about	Majnu	in	the	town.	The	people	said,	"It	is	a
very	 sad	 story.	He	 had	 gone	 to	 say	 goodbye	 to	 you,	 but	 he	 never	 came	 back.
Only	 once	 in	 a	while	 in	 the	 deep	 silences	 of	 the	 night,	 from	 a	 certain	 tree,	 a
sound	comes	calling	your	name:
`Laila,	 it	 is	 too	 long.	When	 are	 you	 going	 to	 come	 back?'	 --	 and	 people	 have
become	 afraid	 of	 the	 tree	 because	 it	 seems	 the	 tree	 is	 haunted	 by	 ghosts	 or
something.	Nobody	comes	close	to	the	tree."
Laila	went	to	the	tree.	She	heard	the	voice,	she	heard	the	joyful	welcome,	but	she
could	not	see	where	Majnu	was	hiding.	She	entered	into	the	foliage	of	the	tree.
With	great	difficulty	she	could	figure	out	that	Majnu	had	become	part	of	the	tree.
It	cannot	be	factual...	but	 the	mystic	becomes	part	of	 the	mystery	of	existence.
And	the	story	of	Laila	and	Majnu	 is	a	Sufi	story.	Perhaps	 it	 is	symbolic	of	 the
ultimate	union	with	existence.
Not	 trying	 to	demystify	 it,	but	becoming	a	part	of	 the	mystery	yourself,	 that	 is
the	only	true	understanding.	The	mystery	will	remain	amystery,	but	by	becoming
yourself	a	mystery,	you	will	understand.
That	is	the	only	true	understanding.	All	other	understandings	are	only	knowledge
borrowed	from	others.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	MISUNDERSTANDING	NATURAL	TO	THE	HUMAN	MIND?
Milarepa,	misunderstanding	 is	 certainly	 natural	 to	 the	 human	mind.	Mind	 is	 a
misunderstanding,	 and	 through	 mind	 whatsoever	 you	 understand	 is
misunderstanding.
Understanding	arises	only	when	mind	is	absent,	because	what	is	mind	after	all?	-
-	 just	a	collection	of	 thoughts,	none	of	which	 is	your	experience.	Through	 that
screen	of	collected	thoughts,	whatever	you	see	you	interpret.	You	never	see	what
is	 there,	you	only	see	what	your	mind	can	interpret.	And	all	 interpretations	are
misunderstandings.
When	there	is	no	interpretation,	you	simply	see	the	fact,	the	truth...	that	which	is.
Then	the	mind	does	not	distort,	does	not	color,	does	not	give	meanings	to	it.	You
don't	have	any	mind;	you	are	just	an	opening,	a	mirror	reflecting	reality	as	it	is.
What	 are	 the	 differences	 in	 the	world	 between	 people?	What	 is	 the	 difference
between	a	Christian	and	a	Hindu,	or	a	Buddhist	and	a	Mohammedan?	Nobody	is
born	 as	 a	Buddhist	 or	 a	Christian	 or	 a	Hindu.	The	 differences	 are	 only	 of	 the
mind	and	you	don't	bring	the	mind	with	you	when	you	are	born.	It	is	all	nurtured.
Your	mind	 is	created	by	 the	society	you	are	born	 in,	and	of	course	 they	create
your	mind	 for	 their	own	purposes.	 It	 is	not	 for	you	but	 for	 the	 society,	 for	 the
state,	for	the	church.
Your	mind	is	a	slave.	Whoever	has	created	it	has	created	it	for	its	own	purposes	-
-	to	exploit	you.
Every	nation	fills	your	mind	with	nationality.	Every	religion	fills	your	mind	with
the	idea	that	even	to	die	for	your	religion	is	the	greatest	virtue	or	to	kill	for	your
religion	is	not	a	sin.	All	these	religions,	all	these	nations,	these	political,	social,
religious	 ideologies,	 go	 on	 conflicting,	 fighting.	 Man	 has	 not	 done	 anything
much	on	the	earth	except	fighting	or	preparing	for	fighting.	There	are	only	two
periods	in	history:	one	is	preparation	for	war,	and	the	other	is	war	itself.	Man	has
never	known	peace.
My	history	teacher	in	the	high	school	was	at	a	loss	when	I	told	him	this,	because
he	 was	 talking	 about	 periods	 of	 peace	 when	 there	 was	 no	 war,	 and	 he	 was
dividing	history	into	war	periods	and	peace	periods.	I	said,	"I	cannot	agree	with
you	because	what	do	you	do	 in	your	peace	 time?	 --	you	prepare	 for	war.	So	 I
would	 like	 to	 divide	 history	 into	 two	 periods:	 preparation	 for	 war,	 and	 war
itself."
He	was	a	very	nice	gentleman,	hence	he	was	not	angry.	For	a	moment	he	was
silent	 and	 then	 he	 said,	 "Perhaps	 you	 are	 right.	 My	 whole	 life	 I	 have	 been
dividing	history	into	these	two	periods...	but	you	seem	to	be	more	clear,	because
if	there	is	a	peace	period,	from	where	does	the	war	come	in?"
The	day	we	will	have	peace,	then	there	will	be	no	war.	But	up	to	now	we	have
not	known	peace.	What	 is	 the	reason	for	all	 this	conflict	and	war	and	violence
and	murders	and	massacres?	The	mind!
The	world	will	know	peace	only	when	we	have	learnt	how	to	go	beyond	mind.
Then	you	are	not	a	Christian	and	you	are	not	an	Indian,	you	are	not	a	Chinese
and	you	are	not	a	communist.	Then	you	are	simply	a	human	being.	In	that	utter
purity	 of	 humanness,	 the	world	will	 come	 to	 know	 exactly	what	 peace	 is	 and
what	a	celebration	it	brings	with	itself.
Mind	as	such	is	nothing	but	misunderstanding.	If	you	really	want	to	understand,
get	rid	of	the	mind.	But	people	do	just	the	opposite:	in	trying	to	understand	they
go	on	strengthening	their	minds.	They	think	a	stronger	mind	--	more	nourished,
more	reformed,	more	educated	--	will	be	able	to	understand.	I	have	seen	the	most
educated	 people,	 but	 their	 Christianity	 remains	 there,	 their	 Hinduism	 remains
there.	 Even	 the	 very	 highly	 educated	 culture	 remains	 superstitious...	 and	 their
misunderstanding	becomes	even	deeper.	Now	they	have	more	refined	arguments
for	their	misunderstanding.
One	 great	 Christian	 missionary,	 Stanley	 Jones	 used	 to	 stay	 with	 me.	 He	 had
fallen	in	love	with	me.	He	was	an	old	man	and	a	world	famous	missionary,	very
educated,	 very	 refined	 and	 sophisticated.	 But	 I	 asked	 him	 one	 day,	 "The	 only
thing	 that	 puzzles	 me	 is	 that	 with	 so	 much	 information	 and	 so	 much
sophistication,	 you	 are	 still	 a	Christian,	 you	 have	 not	 yet	 become	 just	 human.
Deep	down	you	still	think	that	Christianity	is	the	only	true	religion,	that	all	other
religions	are	so-so...	 they	may	be	 faraway	echoes	of	 truth,	but	Christianity	has
the	monopoly	of	truth.
"Even	with	your	understanding	you	have	not	been	able	to	see	that	Jesus	Christ
cannot	be	compared	to	Gautam	Buddha.	Jesus	Christ	remains	a	Jew,	dies	a	Jew.
He	 had	 no	 idea	 that	 his	 crucifixion	 would	 become	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 new
religion.	 He	 had	 never	 thought	 beyond	 the	 boundaries	 of	 Jewish	 thinking.
Gautam	Buddha	was	a	rebel.	He	was	born	a	Hindu,	but	he	renounced	Hinduism.
By	 renouncing	 Hinduism,	 he	 renounced	 the	 whole	 mind	 that	 the	 Hindus	 had
given	 to	him.	He	became	clear	and	pure,	 just	a	child	again.	That	makes	him	a
totally	unique	and	different	person	than	all	other	religious	people."
Stanley	 Jones	 said	 to	me,	 "Whenever	 you	 argue	 for	 anything,	 you	 argue	well!
But	there	are	reasons	which	cannot	be	dispelled	by	argument."
I	said,	"What	kind	of	reasons?"
He	said,	"I	cannot	refute	you	on	this	point,	but	in	the	deepest	part	of	me	I	cannot
put	anybody	above	Jesus	Christ."
I	said,	"This	is	what	I	call	the	mind.	You	don't	have	any	argument,	but	still	you
have	a	conditioning	so	deep...	with	this	conditioning	you	cannot	look	around	the
world	with	open	eyes,	unprejudiced,	impartial.
"You	 go	 on	 arguing	 against	 other	 religions	 without	 any	 difficulty.	 You	 go	 on
finding	superstitions	in	Hindus,	in	Mohammedans,	in	Jainas,	in	Buddhists,	but	I
have	never	heard	you	talk	about	the	superstitions	of	Christians.	Do	you	mean	to
say	that	they	don't	have	any	superstitions?	Or	is	it	simply	that	your	mind	cannot
conceive	of	it	because	it	has	been	created	by	Christians?	In	Christian	colleges,	in
theological	trainings,	your	mind	has	been	completely	filled	with	Christian	ideas,
and	you	think	it	is	your	mind.	In	fact	you	are	being	used."
But	this	is	the	situation.	People	think	they	need	a	greater	mind	to	understand.	I
want	you	to	see	it	clearly:	you	need	no	mind	if	you	want	to	understand.	You	need
only	a	meditative	silent	space.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
AM	I	REALLY	A	GOOD	THERAPIST?
Prasad,	to	be	a	good	therapist	is	a	very	difficult	job.	A	good	therapist	has	to	be
immensely	compassionate,	because	 it	 is	not	his	 techniques	of	 therapy	that	help
people,	 it	 is	 his	 love.	There	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 love	 as	 far	 as	 healing	 the
wounds	 of	 a	 man's	 being	 are	 concerned.	 All	 other	 techniques	 can	 be	 helpful,
supportive,	but	the	basic	is	not	a	technique	but	a	loving	heart.
A	 therapist	 cannot	 be	 a	 professional.	 The	 moment	 a	 therapist	 becomes
professional	 things	start	going	wrong,	because	the	profession	of	 therapy	means
that	 the	patient	should	never	be	cured.	He	should	be	given	hope	but	he	should
never	 be	 cured,	 because	 once	 you	 cure	 him	 you	 have	 lost	 one	 customer.	 The
physician	or	the	therapist,	their	profession	is	very	strange.
I	have	heard	about	an	old	doctor.	His	son	came	back	from	the	medical	college,
fresh,	and	he	told	the	father,	"Now	you	have	become	old	and	I	can	take	charge	of
all	your	patients.
You	can	rest.	If	I	need	any	advice	I	will	ask	you."
The	father	said,	"I	was	waiting	for	this.	You	are	now	well	educated.	You	know
more	than	I	know,	you	know	the	latest	researches	in	medicine,	but	if	I	can	be	of
any	help,	I	will	be	available."
After	three	days	the	father	asked	the	son	how	things	were	going.	He	said,	"Great,
just	great.	The	woman	you	have	been	treating	for	thirty	years	for	arthritis	I	have
cured	within	three	days."
The	 father	 said,	 "My	 god!	 You	 are	 an	 idiot.	 That	 woman	 is	 so	 rich,	 she	 can
afford	 to	 remain	 uncured	 for	 her	 whole	 life.	 And	 how	 do	 you	 think	 I	 was
supporting	 you	 in	 the	 university?	 That	 woman	 has	 provided	 money	 for	 your
education,	 and	 that	 woman	 was	 going	 to	 provide	 money	 for	 your	 younger
brother.	That	woman	was	almost	a	goldmine."
The	son	was	shocked.	He	said,	"What	are	you	saying?"
The	 father	 said,	 "You	 are	 young,	 you	 don't	 understand.	 This	 profession	 is	 a
contradiction.
You	have	to	cure,	but	in	such	a	way	that	the	cure	takes	as	long	as	possible."
The	poor	get	cured	sooner,	the	richer	get	cured	on	a	long	term	basis...!
And	 psychotherapy	 in	 particular	 is	 in	 an	 even	 more	 dangerous	 contradiction.
There	is	not	a	single	person	in	the	whole	world	who	is	totally	psychoanalyzed.	In
the	 first	 place,	 psychoanalysts	 are	 making	 great	 earnings;	 they	 are	 the	 most
highly	paid	professionals	in	the	world.	They	cannot	afford	to	lose	rich	patients	--
and	they	have	only	rich	patients.
Poor	 countries	 don't	 suffer	 from	 any	 diseases	 which	 psychoanalysis	 can	 help.
When	 people	 are	 hungry,	 what	 can	 psychoanalysis	 do?	 Psychoanalysis	 comes
only	when	people	are	so	rich	they	don't	know	what	to	do	with	their	money.	Then
psychoanalysis	 comes	 in	 and	 shows	 them	 what	 to	 do	 with	 it	 --	 be
psychoanalyzed!
Prasad,	a	good	therapist	is	one	who	avoids	being	a	professional.	It	should	be	part
of	your	 love,	not	part	of	your	business;	only	 then	can	you	be	a	good	therapist.
And	as	far	as	I	know,	you	are	one	of	the	best	therapists	around	here.	I	don't	see	in
you	 things	 which	 lead	 therapists	 astray.	 One	 is	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 gurudom.	 A
therapist	should	not	become	a	guru,	because	the	moment	you	become	a	guru	you
start	changing	your	patients	into	your	disciples,	you	start	exploiting	their	misery
for	 your	 own	 aggrandizement,	 for	 your	 own	 ego.	 You	 start	 playing	 a	 role	 of
being	superior	to	you,	higher	than	you.
I	 have	not	 seen	 in	your	 eyes	 that	 ugly	 ego	which	 changes	helping	people	 into
exploiting	people.	 I	have	 seen	so	many	 therapists	who	sooner	or	 later	 fall	 into
the	 trap.	Because	 they	know	 something	more	 than	 the	ordinary	normal	human
being,	 they	 are	 in	 a	 position	 to	 exploit,	 they	 are	 in	 a	 position	 to	 create	 a
following.	That	is	not	the	work	of	the	therapist.
The	work	of	the	therapist	is	to	help	the	patient	to	drop	his	tensions,	to	drop	his
unnecessary	 problems,	 to	 drop	 his	 habit	 of	 creating	 problems.	 Most	 of	 the
patients	 that	 come	 to	you	are	hypochondriacs;	 they	are	not	 suffering	 from	any
real	problem.	Seventy	percent	of	their	problems	are	just	imaginary.
I	 have	 seen	 people	 looking	 into	medical	 periodicals,	medical	 encyclopedias	 to
find	out	what	 kind	of	 disease	 they	have	 --	 they	don't	 have	 any	disease!	But	 it
seems,	particularly	in	the	most	advanced	countries,	women	are	bragging...	just	as
they	used	to	brag	in	the	past	about	their	ornaments,	about	their	mink	coats,	about
their	houses,	about	 their	 luxuries,	now	they	are	bragging	about	psychoanalysis:
"Who	is	your	psychoanalyst?"	--
some	poor	guy	or	some	great	psychoanalyst,	only	very	few	people	can	afford	his
services...	And	 it	 becomes	 an	 addiction,	 particularly	 in	 societies	where	 people
don't	have	time	to	listen	to	anybody,	where	everybody	is	in	a	rush.
Bertrand	 Russell	 mentions	 in	 his	 autobiography,	 "The	 way	 psychoanalysis	 is
growing,	I	can	predict	that	in	the	next	century,	if	man	still	remains	on	the	earth,
there	will	be	psychoanalysts	on	every	street	 in	 the	world."Everybody	will	need
once	in	a	while	to	go	to	the	psychoanalysts	--	not	because	he	has	a	disease,	not
that	 he	 has	 some	mental	 problem,	 but	 just	 to	 talk.Nobody	 listens,	 nobody	 has
time.	You	have	to	pay	the	psychoanalyst	for	listening.
In	 fact,	 if	you	are	attentively	 listening	 to	 somebody	a	 subtle	help	happens.	He
unburdens	himself;	things	that	he	cannot	say	to	other	people	he	can	say	to	you,
because	it	is	part	of	your	work	that	you	will	keep	it	secret,	that	you	will	not	start
gossiping	about	it.	So	in	privacy	and	secrecy	he	can	open	his	heart,	his	wounds
which	 he	 goes	 on	 hiding	 in	 the	 society.	 And	 by	 hiding	 the	 wounds,	 you	 can
never	cure	them.	By	exposing	them	to	light	they	are	cured.
I	have	heard	about	a	young	psychotherapist	who	was	working	as	an	assistant	to	a
famous	 old	 psychoanalyst.	He	 used	 to	 get	 bored	 because	 people	were	 coming
with	 the	 same	dreams,	 the	 same	problems,	 the	 same	worries...	 every	day	 from
morning	 till	 evening	 you	 have	 to	 listen	 and	 listen	 and	 listen,	 and	 it	 becomes
heavy,	 so	heavy	 that	 even	 in	 the	night	you	 cannot	 sleep.	You	have	 listened	 so
much	that	until	it	gets	settled	you	cannot	sleep.
But	he	had	never	seen	the	old	man	ever	feeling	tired	or	bored.
So	one	day,	getting	out	of	the	office,	in	the	elevator,	the	young	man	asked	the	old
psychoanalyst,	"What	is	your	secret?	You	must	have	been	in	psychoanalysis	for
almost	sixty	years	--	sixty	years	of	listening	to	all	kinds	of	garbage	and	crap!	I
have	 just	 been	 here	 for	 three	 months,	 and	 I	 am	 tired	 and	 finished	 and	 I	 am
thinking	I	have	to	change	the	profession.	These	people	will	drive	me	crazy!"
The	old	man	laughed	and	he	said,	"Who	listens?	There	is	no	need	to	listen.	Just
pretend."
That's	why	Sigmund	Freud	has	devised	a	beautiful	couch.	The	patient	lies	on	the
couch,	and	behind	the	couch	--	 the	patient	cannot	see	--	sits	 the	psychoanalyst.
Whether	 he	 is	 there	 or	 not	 does	 not	matter.	 Once	 in	 a	while	 he	 goes	 out	 and
comes	in,	and	the	psychoanalysis	continues.	The	man	goes	on	talking	about	his
dreams,	about	his	worries,	about	his	problems,	uncoiling	his	mind,	and	he	feels
better.	The	psychoanalyst	is	not	doing	anything;	he	is	simply	giving	his	time	and
pretending	to	be	attentive.
But	this	becomes	an	addiction.	The	patient	has	 to	come	twice	or	 thrice	a	week
because	so	much	goes	on	gathering	in	his	head	that	he	has	to	unburden	it.	But	I
will	 not	 call	 that	 old	 man	 a	 good	 therapist.	 He	 is	 simply	 exploiting	 the
weaknesses	and	the	frailties	of	human	beings.
Prasad,	be	attentive,	be	respectful,	be	loving.	That	makes	a	good	therapist.	The
patient	is	not	different	from	you.	You	are	in	the	same	boat.	You	not	only	allow
him	to	open	his	heart,	you	also	open	your	heart	to	him	to	give	him	a	feeling	that
he	is	not	alone	in	his	suffering,	that	perhaps	everybody	in	the	world	is	suffering
and	hiding	it.
The	good	 therapist	will	 create	 a	 friendliness,	 a	deep	 intimacy	with	 the	patient.
He	should	not	 remain	on	a	high	pedestal,	 far	above,	as	 if	he	has	no	problems.
The	 fact	 is	 therapists	 have	more	problems	 than	 anybody	 else.	They	have	 their
own	problems	and	they	have	other	people's	problems	too;	hence	four	times	more
therapists	 go	 insane	 than	 any	 other	 profession,	 and	 four	 times	more	 therapists
commit	suicide	than	any	other	profession.	It	is	not	just	accidental.
But	if	you	can	be	friendly,	if	you	can	hold	the	hand	of	the	patient,	if	you	can	tell
him	that	these	are	your	problems	too	and	it	is	good	to	have	a	companion,	to	have
a	friend,	"We	can	work	it	out	 together.	 It	 is	not	only	 that	you	will	be	helped,	I
will	be	helped	also..."
Unless	a	therapist	comes	to	this	humbleness,	he	is	not	going	to	help.	And	I	can
see	in	your	eyes	the	possibility	of	this	humbleness.
In	 the	 middle	 of	 her	 psychiatric	 session,	 Mrs.	 Blossom	 suddenly	 exclaimed,
"Doctor,	I	simply	can't	resist	you!	How	about	a	little	kiss?"
"Absolutely	not!"	the	doctor	replied	indignantly.	"That	would	be	contrary	to	the
ethics	of	my	profession.	Now	continue	what	you	were	telling	me."
"Well,	 as	 I	was	 saying,"	 the	 patient	 reluctantly	 resumed,	 "I	 am	 always	 having
arguments	with	my	 husband	 about	 his	 father,	 and	 just	 yesterday...	 I	 am	 sorry,
doctor,	 I	 just	can't	go	on	 talking.	 I	have	 this	overwhelming	impulse.	Come	on!
What	harm	would	there	be	if	you	gave	me	just	one	little	kiss?"
"That's	absolutely	impossible!"	the	doctor	snapped.	"In	fact,	I	should	not	even	be
lying	here	on	this	couch	with	you!"
Patients	 are	 being	 exploited	 sexually,	 financially,	 in	 every	 possible	 way.	 The
patient	 has	 to	 be	 given	 as	much	 respect	 and	 dignity	 as	 you	 can	manage.	You
should	be	 a	humble	helper,	 not	 a	 savior,	 then	you	can	help	people	 immensely.
You	can	be	a	good	therapist.
You	have	to	be.
My	 therapists	 have	 to	 be	 in	 a	 different	 way	 than	 the	 therapists	 in	 the	 outside
world.	 There	 they	 are	 business	 people.	 Here	 you	 are	 helping	 your	 fellow
travelers,	 your	 brothers,	 your	 sisters.	 And	 by	 helping	 them,	 you	 are	 helping
yourself	because	their	problems	and	your	problems	are	not	different.
The	 village	 idiot	 was	 very	 famous.	 His	 name	 was	 Elmer.	 One	 day	 a	 village
resident	wanted	to	show	a	visiting	friend	just	what	an	idiot	Elmer	was.
"Watch	this,"	he	said.	"Hey,	Elmer!	I	have	got	something	for	you."	He	then	held
out	his	hand,	and	on	the	outstretched	palm	were	a	nickel	and	a	dime.	"Go	ahead,
Elmer,"	he	said,
"take	one."
So	Elmer	said,	"Thank	you,	I	will	take	the	big	one,"	and	picked	up	the	nickel.
The	man	winked	at	his	friend	and	then	said,	"See	what	an	idiot	he	is?"
But	as	Elmer	shuffled	off,	the	visitor	felt	sorry	for	him	and	ran	after	him.
"Listen,	Elmer,"	he	said	earnestly,	"don't	you	know	that	the	small	coin	is	worth
twice	as	much	as	the	big	one?"
"Of	course	I	do,"	said	Elmer,	"but	the	first	time	I	pick	up	the	dime,	they	will	stop
playing	the	game."
Even	idiots	are	not	so	much	idiots	as	you	think;	they	have	their	own	intelligence.
Your	patients	are	not	just	to	be	treated	objectively.	You	have	to	bridge	yourself
with	your	patient.	You	have	to	become	a	friend	before	you	can	be	a	therapist	--
and	 particularly	 the	 therapists	 who	 are	working	 in	 the	 field	 of	 sannyas.	 Their
function	 is	 not	 the	 same	 as	 the	 function	 of	 the	 psychotherapist	 in	 the	 outside
world.
In	 the	outside	world,	 psychotherapy	 is	 nothing	but	 a	 strategy	of	 the	 society	 to
keep	people	within	their	normal	limits;	the	psychologist,	psychoanalyst,	therapist
are	all	helping	the	society.	Whenever	somebody	starts	going	beyond	the	normal
standards,	 they	pull	him	back	down.	 It	 is	not	necessarily	helpful...	One	can	go
below	mind,	and	then	it	is	good	to	pull	him	up.	But	if	somebody	is	going	beyond
mind,	then	to	pull	him	down	is	not	a	help.
It	is	just	the	opposite	of	help.
Here	 within	 my	 field	 therapy	 is	 used	 only	 as	 a	 cleaning	 process.	 It	 is	 just
preparing	the	ground,	taking	out	the	wild	weeds,	the	stones,	so	that	I	can	manage
to	bring	the	roses	of	meditation	into	your	life.	Here	therapy	is	only	a	preparation
for	meditation;	 its	function	is	 totally	different	from	in	the	outside	world.	There
you	have	to	bring	the	person	back	into	mind.	Here	you	have	to	help	the	person	to
be	courageous	so	that	he	can	step	beyond	mind.
You	are	preparing	people	for	me.	The	ultimate	push	is	going	to	be	through	me.
You	have	just	to	give	them	courage	and	encouragement.	This	can	be	done	not	by
being	special,	not	by	being	higher,	not	by	being	holier.	You	are	not	priests	and
you	are	not	professionals.
You	are	just	fellow	travelers	 in	this	vast	caravan,	and	you	have	to	help	people,
prepare	people	because	now	there	is	a	gap	that	never	used	to	be	in	the	past.
Buddha	never	needed	any	psychotherapy	for	his	sannyasins;	 those	people	were
innocent.
But	 in	 these	 twenty-five	centuries,	people	have	 lost	 their	 innocence,	 they	have
become	too	knowledgeable.	People	have	lost	their	contact	with	existence.	They
have	become	uprooted.
I	 am	 the	 first	 person	 who	 uses	 therapy	 but	 whose	 interest	 is	 not	 therapy	 but
meditation,	just	as	it	was	with	Chuang	Tzu	or	Gautam	Buddha.	They	never	used
therapy	 because	 there	was	 no	 need.	 People	were	 simply	 ready,	 and	 you	 could
bring	the	rosebushes	without	clearing	the	ground.	The	ground	was	already	clear.
In	 these	 twenty-five	 centuries	 man	 has	 become	 so	 burdened	 with	 rubbish,	 so
many	wild	weeds	have	grown	in	his	being	that	I	am	using	therapy	just	to	clean
the	ground,	 take	away	the	wild	weeds,	 the	roots,	so	 the	difference	between	 the
ancient	man	and	the	modern	man	is	destroyed.
The	modern	man	has	 to	be	made	as	 innocent	as	 the	ancient	man,	as	simple,	as
natural.	He	has	lost	all	these	great	qualities.	The	therapist	has	to	help	him	--	but
his	work	is	only	a	preparation.	It	is	not	the	end.	The	end	part	is	going	to	be	the
meditation.
As	far	as	you	are	concerned,	Prasad,	you	are	doing	perfectly	well.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Great	Pilgrimage:	From	Here	to	Here
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	Education	for	life	--	and	for	death
3	October	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8710035
ShortTitle:
PILGR28
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
103
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 STILL	 STUDY	 IN	 SCHOOL	 AND	 I	 WANT	 TO	 KNOW:	WHAT	 IS	 THE
SECRET	OF
EDUCATION?
Maya,	 it	may	be	a	 little	difficult	 for	you	 to	understand	 the	secret	of	education.
But	I	cannot	come	down	from	my	vision,	so	I	will	tell	what	I	feel	is	the	secret,
knowing	perfectly	well	perhaps	you	may	not	be	able	to	understand	it	yet,	you	are
too	 young.	But	 through	 you	 perhaps	 others	may	 understand,	 and	 one	 day	 you
will	also	grow	up	and	be	in	a	position	to	understand	it.
The	 question	 is	 very	 complex	 and	 I	 can	 see	 that	 you	 have	 asked	 it	 without
knowing	its	implications.	It	 is	the	question	that	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental
for	the	future	of	man.	I	would	like	to	begin	from	the	very	beginning.
Up	 to	 now,	man	 has	 been	 living	 an	 accidental	 life.	 No	 one	 knows	what	 your
potential	 is,	 what	 you	 are	 supposed	 by	 nature	 to	 be.	 And	 the	 question	 --	 the
secret	of	education	--
cannot	 be	 decided	 without	 knowing	what	 your	 potential	 is.	 Are	 you	 going	 to
become	a	musician?	a	poet?	an	engineer?	a	doctor?	Without	knowing	anything
about	your	possibilities,	almost	groping	in	the	dark,	we	go	on	deciding	people's
destiny	for	strange	reasons.
The	very	word	education,	in	its	roots,	means	to	draw	out.	It	has	the	very	secret	in
its	 root-meaning.	Whatever	 is	within	you	as	a	seed	has	 to	be	drawn	out,	given
full	opportunity,	so	that	it	can	blossom.	But	no	one	knows	what	is	hidden	within
you,	what	 kind	 of	 soil	 you	 need	 and	what	 kind	 of	 gardener,	what	 is	 the	 right
climate	and	the	right	season	and	the	right	time	for	you	to	be	sown.
Parents	decide	about	their	children	according	to	their	own	ambitions.	Somebody
wanted	to	be	very	rich	and	could	not	be:	he	is	hoping	through	his	children	that
his	 ambitions	 should	 be	 fulfilled.	 Although	 he	 could	 not	 manage	 it,	 he	 will
manage	through	his	children.	Naturally	he	would	not	like	his	children	to	move	in
directions	where	 possibilities	 of	 becoming	 rich	 are	 scarce.	As	 a	musician	 you
cannot	 earn	much;	 as	 a	 flute-player	 you	 cannot	 compete	with	 engineers,	 with
doctors,	with	politicians,	with	industrialists.
Naturally	the	parents	who	have	been	interested	in	money	would	like	to	send	their
children	 into	 a	 certain	 pattern	 of	 education	 which	 brings	 them	 the	 right
qualification	to	be	rich.
The	 decision	 is	 arbitrary.	 The	 person	 about	 whom	 it	 is	 being	 decided,	 his
potential	has	not	even	been	taken	into	consideration.	He	may	have	the	potential
of	becoming	a	great	dancer,	or	 a	great	painter,	he	may	not	have	any	greed	 for
money,	 but	 you	 are	 forcing	 him	 into	 a	 direction	where	 greed	 for	money	 is	 an
essential	to	be	successful.
Even	 if	 he	 succeeds...	 of	which	 there	 is	 not	much	 chance,	 because	 unless	 you
have	an	inner	urge,	an	instinct	for	money,	the	chances	of	your	success	are	rare.
You	will	be	a	failure,	and	your	life	will	become	a	long,	drawn-out	misery.	But	if
by	 chance	 you	 succeed	 and	 you	 become	 rich,	 still	 your	 misery	 will	 not	 be
dropped,	 because	 you	 never	wanted	 to	 be	 rich	 in	 the	 first	 place.	This	was	 not
your	destiny.	You	are	living	somebody	else's	life	--
how	can	you	be	happy?	You	are	 trying	 to	fulfill	somebody	else's	ambition	and
you	are	not	in	a	position	to	fulfill	your	own	nature.
Hence	the	immense	misery	in	the	world:	the	person	who	could	have	been	a	great
musician	has	become	just	a	pigmy	industrialist.	A	person	who	could	have	been	a
great	mystic	has	been	forced	to	become	a	mathematician.	Almost	everybody	is
in	the	wrong	place.	And	to	be	in	the	wrong	place	is	very	painful.	You	yourself
are	not	aware	of	why	you	are	suffering,	because	you	yourself	are	not	aware	that
you	have	missed	your	target.
You	are	following	somebody	else's	idea	of	what	you	should	be.
So	the	first	 thing,	according	 to	me,	begins	with	genetic	engineering.	There	 lies
the	secret	of	all	education.	Up	to	now	what	we	have	been	calling	education	is	a
chaos.
People	 have	 been	 consulting	 astrologers	 about	 what	 their	 children	 should	 be.
Now	stars	 are	not	 interested	 in	your	children	 --	 I	don't	 see	any	possibility	 that
stars	are	even	aware	of	your	children.	That	the	congregation	of	stars	in	a	certain
position	is	going	to	give	your	child	a	certain	potential	is	an	unproved	hypothesis.
Millions	of	children	are	born	in	the	world	almost	at	the	same	moment,	but	those
millions	 of	 children	 cannot	 have	 the	 same	 destiny	 although	 the	 stars	were	 the
same.
It	 is	 such	 a	 far-fetched	 idea	 that	 stars	 can	 decide	 your	 life.	 And	 if	 stars	 are
deciding,	then	they	are	deciding	in	an	insane	way.	Life	on	the	earth	shows	that
the	decisions	made	about	man	are	made	wrongly,	whosoever	is	making	them.
People	 consult	 palmists,	who	 decide	 by	 reading	 the	 lines	 of	 the	 hand.	 It	 is	 all
sheer	 nonsense!	Birth-charts	 cannot	 say	 anything	 about	 you,	 but	 all	marriages
are	made	by	consulting	birth-charts...	and	you	can	see	what	those	birth-charts	are
doing!	I	used	to	live	in	a	city	for	a	few	years,	and	just	opposite	me	lived	a	very
famous	astrologer	who	was	deciding	people's	marriages	by	 reading	 their	birth-
charts.	 As	 we	 were	 living	 opposite	 each	 other,	 it	 did	 not	 take	 long	 to	 get
introduced	to	him.
I	told	him,	"Do	you	really	believe	that	what	you	are	doing	is	sane?"
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?	I	am	the	best	astrologer	around	this	area.	People
come	to	me	from	hundreds	of	miles	away."
I	said,	"That	I	can	see	myself.	But	I	also	see	that	your	wife	beats	you.	Did	you
look	at	your	birth-charts	when	you	got	married	to	this	woman?	And	if	you	could
not	decide	even	for	yourself,	don't	you	feel	ashamed	that	what	you	are	doing	is
simply	stupid	--	and	not	only	stupid,	inhuman?"
He	was	at	a	loss.	I	said,	"Remember,	I	am	a	strange	man.	I	will	spread	this	news
to	everybody,	and	I	will	sit	in	the	front	of	my	garden	to	prevent	people	coming	to
you.	I	will	tell	them	what	is	happening	in	your	life."
At	that	very	moment	his	wife	came	in	from	the	kitchen	and	she	said,	"You	are
right.	I	will	support	you.	This	man	is	simply	an	idiot.	He	knows	nothing;	he	has
destroyed	my	 life,	he	has	destroyed	his	 life,	 and	he	 is	destroying	 thousands	of
other	people's	lives!"
But	 this	 goes	 on.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 will	 consult	 the	 I-Ching,	 who	 will
consult	the	Tarot	cards...	But	the	real	thing	is	somewhere	else.	And	it	is	known,
but	religious	prejudices	are	preventing	humanity	from	using	it.
The	secret	is	in	genetic	engineering.	Now	it	is	scientifically	possible	to	find	the
program	 of	 each	 human	 being,	 even	 before	 his	 birth.	 The	male	 sperm	 carries
many	of	the	programs	for	his	life	and	what	he	can	become;	whether	he	will	be
male	or	female,	whether	he	will	be	a	strong-bodied	man	or	a	weakling,	whether
he	will	live	a	life	of	health	or	will	remain	continually	sick,	his	resistance	against
disease,	 how	 long	he	will	 live...	 and	what	 kinds	of	 potentialities	 are	hidden	 in
him	--	whether	he	can	become	a	great	mathematician	or	a	great	painter	or	a	great
poet	or	a	great	industrialist.	Your	destiny	is	written	in	the	biological	beginnings
of	your	life,	not	in	the	birth-chart,	nor	in	the	stars,	nor	in	the	lines	of	your	hands.
Now	there	are	scientific	openings	to	a	new	world:	each	sperm	can	be	read	almost
like	an	open	book.	You	can	decide	your	child's	life.	Before	he	is	born,	you	can
choose	what	you	want	your	child	 to	be.	To	me,	 the	real	education	begins	from
there.
In	each	 lovemaking	 the	man	releases	at	 least	one	million	sperms,	but	only	one
sperm	may	 be	 able	 to	 reach	 the	 female	 egg.	 It	 is	 a	marathon	 race.	 The	 small
sperm	 --	which	 is	 not	 visible	 to	 the	 bare	 eyes	 --	 in	 proportion	 to	 his	 size,	 the
track	 that	he	has	 to	 follow	 towards	 the	mother's	 egg	 is	almost	 two	miles	 long,
and	he	has	only	two	hours'	lifespan.	So	if	he	does	not	reach	within	two	hours,	he
will	die.	Such	competition	he	will	never	again	face	in	his	life.
The	whole	 life	will	be	competitive,	but	 the	beginning	 is	 the	worst	competition
you	can	conceive:	one	million	people	rushing	towards	the	female	egg,	and	only
one	is	going	to	win	the	race!	The	remainder	are	going	to	die.
Rarely	it	happens	that	two	sperms	reach	at	the	same	time	--	that's	why	twins	are
born.
Sometimes	 even	 nine	 children	 have	 been	 given	 birth	 to	 by	 a	woman,	 because
nine	sperms	reached	at	the	same	time.	The	reason	is	this:	the	female	egg	remains
open	only	for	the	first	sperm	reaching	to	it.	The	moment	the	sperm	has	entered
the	 egg,	 the	 egg	 automatically	 becomes	 hard,	 it	 is	 no	more	 porous,	 so	 others
reaching	 are	 rejected.	 But	 if	 two	 reach	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 then	 their	 entry	 is
possible	because	the	egg	is	still	porous.
Now	it	is	a	blind	game	--	most	probably	the	idiots	will	reach	first.	That's	why	the
world	 is	 full	 of	 idiots!	The	 idiots	will	 not	 take	 any	 care,	 any	 consideration	 of
anybody;	they	will	simply	rush	blindly	with	full	force.	The	wiser	ones	may	stand
by	 the	 side	 and	 see	 what	 is	 happening.	 The	 really	 wise	 ones	 may	 not	 even
participate	in	the	race,	it	is	so	stupid.
These	problems	can	be	solved.	But	religious	superstitiousness	is	a	great	barrier
in	the	world	for	every	kind	of	progress	and	new	idea.
I	will	be	opposed	by	all	the	religions	--	it	does	not	matter,	I	have	been	opposed
my	whole	life	--	but	my	proposal	is	that	every	male	who	wants	children	should
donate	his	sperms	to	a	hospital	and	the	medical	science	board	should	work	out
for	those	sperms	what	the	possibilities	are.
In	 those	 one	million	 sperms	 there	may	be	Albert	Einsteins,	Bertrand	Russells,
Martin	 Heideggers,	 great	 musicians	 like	 Yehudi	 Menuhin,	 great	 dancers	 like
Nijinsky,	great	philosophers	like	Friedrich	Nietzsche,	great	novelists	like	Fyodor
Dostoevsky.	They	can	be	picked	out	and	the	father	and	mother	can	choose	what
they	want.	When	 you	 can	 choose	 the	 great	 diamonds,	why	 go	 for	 the	 colored
stones?	And	when	you	can	be	the	chooser,	why	be	accidental?
They	 can	 choose,	 if	 they	 want,	 a	 Henry	 Ford,	 who	 will	 make	 great	 riches
possible.
Money	is	an	art,	just	as	anything	else;	it	has	its	own	geniuses.	Everybody	cannot
be	a	Henry	Ford!
If	you	want	your	child	to	be	a	Gautam	Buddha,	then	you	have	to	see,	according
to	the	genetic	analysis,	which	sperm	has	the	potentiality	of	being	a	mystic.	The
sperm	 has	 to	 be	 injected,	 so	 he	 need	 not	 be	 in	 competition	 with	 all	 kinds	 of
fellows	in	a	crowd.	From	that	choice	starts	your	education.
This	is	only	the	beginning	of	genetic	engineering.	Finally	it	is	going	to	happen,
the	 work	 is	 growing	 every	 day...	 the	 chosen	 sperm	 has	 a	 program,	 but	 the
program	can	be	changed	a	little	bit.	It	may	be	possible	that	he	has	the	mind	of	an
Albert	Einstein,	but	not	the	body,	not	the	health	--	that	can	be	added,	the	program
can	 be	 changed	 a	 little	 bit.	 He	 may	 have	 just	 a	 life	 of	 fifty	 years,	 but	 that
program	 can	 be	 changed.	 He	 can	 be	 given	 as	 long	 a	 life	 as	 you	 want	 --	 the
maximum	lifespan	can	be	almost	three	hundred	years	--	and	as	much	health	and
as	much	resistance	against	disease.	All	these	things	can	be	added	to	the	program.
The	child	now	starts	 the	 journey	with	 the	parents'	 full	awareness	of	what	he	 is
going	to	become,	to	what	school	he	should	be	sent,	and	what	kind	of	education
he	should	be	given	according	to	the	genetic	code.	Then	the	world	will	be	full	of
geniuses,	 talented	 people,	 healthy	 people.	 It	 is	 possible	 to	 avoid	 old	 age
completely...	a	man	can	go	on	living	youthfully	up	to	the	point	of	death.
Now	these	are	not	fictions,	these	have	become	scientific	facts.	But	religions	are
even	 preventing	 these	 scientific	 facts	 from	 being	 known	 to	 the	 public,	 to	 the
people.	 They	 are	 afraid	 of	 strange	 things.	 Their	 fear	 is	 that	 morality	 will	 be
disturbed.	So	let	it	be	disturbed...!	Anyway,	what	kind	of	morality	exists	in	the
world?	Except	hypocrisy,	there	exists	no	morality.
Genetic	engineering	can	decide	even	the	character,	the	morality,	the	discipline	of
the	individual	who	is	going	to	be	born.	From	there	many	things	become	possible.
For	the	child,	a	clearcut,	non-accidental	career,	and	for	the	parents	--	because	the
child	is	not	be	given	birth	through	sex	--	sex	becomes	pure	fun.	It	does	not	carry
any	responsibility,	any	danger.
Now	there	are	one	hundred	percent	safe	pills	for	males.	For	the	women	the	pill	is
not	one	hundred	percent	safe;	she	has	to	take	it	every	day.	If	she	misses	one	day,
because	 she	 is	 not	 thinking	 she	will	make	 love	on	 that	 day,	 then	 suddenly	 the
husband	 turns	up,	or	 suddenly	 the	husband	 is	gone...	 either	way	 it	works.	The
opportunity	 of	 love	 arises,	 and	mind	 tends	 to	 take	 chances.	Mind	 just	 thinks,
"Every	time	you	make	love	you	don't	become	pregnant."
A	 man	 in	 the	 ordinary	 course	 of	 his	 sexual	 life	 has	 intercourse	 at	 least	 four
thousand	times.	That	is	the	norm;	I	am	not	talking	about	sex	maniacs!	This	is	the
very	 average	 shop-keeper...	 four	 thousand	 times	 means	 forty	 million	 people.
Existence	is	really	abundant.	The	man	may	have	only	two	or	three	children	out
of	forty	million	people.	Forty	million	people	can	make	a	whole	country.
Now	they	have	developed	two	other	pills.	The	first	pill	that	they	have	developed
was	a	great	revolution,	because	it	prevented	women	from	becoming	pregnant.	In
the	past	a	woman's	whole	life	was	nothing	but	a	factory	to	produce	children.	She
was	continuously	pregnant;	her	life	was	nothing	more	than	the	life	of	a	cow.	So
the	 first	 pill	 prevented	her	being	pregnant,	 but	 it	was	not	one	hundred	percent
safe.
The	second	pill	 is	a	greater	revolution,	because	 it	can	be	 taken	after	you	make
love.	The	 first	was	 before	 you	make	 love;	 the	 second	 is	 a	 great	 advancement,
because	 now	 you	 need	 not	 be	 worried;	 you	 can	 make	 love	 whenever,	 with
whomsoever	 the	 possibility	 arises.	And	 one	 never	 knows	when	 the	 possibility
will	 knock	 on	 your	 door	 --	 perhaps	 in	 a	 train,	 and	 you	may	 have	 forgotten	 to
bring	your	pills	and	the	possibility	may	not	strike	again.	It	is	just	a	stranger	and
suddenly	you	 feel	 like	 this	 is	 the	man	you	are	made	 for,	he	 is	made	 for	you...
although	when	the	next	station	comes,	he	will	be	gone.	The	next	pill	is	a	greater
advancement:	you	can	take	it	afterwards.
The	third	pill	is	even	more	significant:	the	woman	need	not	take	it,	the	man	can
take	it.
Within	these	three	pills	all	accidental	birth	can	be	avoided.	Sex	becomes	just	a
playfulness,	loses	all	seriousness	that	it	has	carried	in	the	past;	and	you	can	get	a
child	 of	which	 you	 can	 really	 be	 proud.	You	 can	 fill	 the	whole	 earth	with	 the
right	kind	of	people.
Criminals	 can	 be	 avoided,	 politicians	 can	 be	 avoided,	 priests	 can	 be	 avoided,
murderers	can	be	avoided,	rapists	can	be	avoided,	violent	people	can	be	avoided,
or	if	they	have	some	special	quality	in	them,	then	their	program	can	be	changed,
their	violence	can	be	taken	out.	Rather	than	teaching	people	not	to	be	violent,	not
to	be	thieves,	not	to	be	criminals...	For	thousands	of	years	we	have	been	teaching
and	it	seems	to	have	no	effect.
On	the	other	hand,	we	have	been	making	laws	against	criminals.	The	laws	goes
on	becoming	more	and	more	complicated	--	more	courts,	more	jails,	more	legal
experts	--
but	 nothing	 has	 been	 of	 any	 help.	 Criminals	 go	 on	 increasing.	 Our	 whole
approach	is	unscientific.	If	a	child	is	born	with	a	program	of	being	a	murderer,
you	cannot	do	anything.	No	moral	preaching	is	going	to	help,	no	legal	threat,	"If
you	murder	somebody,	you	will	be	sent	to	the	gallows,"	is	going	to	help.
In	England	in	the	middle	ages	it	was	thought	that	if	criminals	were	punished	in
the	middle	of	the	town,	so	that	the	whole	town	can	see	what	happens	if	you	steal
or	if	you	do	something	wrong,	against	the	law...	Criminals	were	beaten,	naked,
and	thousands	of	people	were	watching	them.	The	idea	was	that	these	thousands
of	people	will	get	 the	 idea	 that	 stealing	 is	dangerous:	you	have	 to	stand	naked
before	your	whole	town,	you	lose	all	your	dignity.	Not	only	that,	one	thousand
lashes...	your	whole	body	starts	losing	blood,	your	skin	is	broken	everywhere,	it
was	sheer	humiliation,	torture.
But	 the	 process	 had	 to	 be	 stopped,	 because	 then	 it	 was	 found	 that	 when
thousands	of	people	were	attentively	watching	a	criminal	being	tortured,	thieves
were	working	 in	 the	 crowd,	 picking	 people's	 pockets.	When	 it	was	 found	 that
even	 in	 that	 crowd	many	 people	 had	 lost	 the	 contents	 of	 their	 pockets...	 they
were	so	attentive	that	they	forgot	about	pockets	and	they	forgot	that	there	may	be
thieves....	Finally	the	government	came	to	the	conclusion	that	this	is	not	going	to
help.	If	people	are	picking	poeple's	pockets	while	another	thief	is	being	tortured,
you	cannot	teach...!
People	 have	 been	 sentenced	 to	 death	 in	 thousands,	 but	 it	 has	 not	 prevented
murderers.
The	reason	is	 that	 the	murderer	has	a	program	in	which	he	is	not	able	to	make
any	 change.	 It	 is	 intrinsic	 in	 his	 biology,	 in	 his	 physiology,	 in	 his	 chemistry,
about	which	he	is	not	able	to	do	anything.	It	is	in	every	cell	of	his	body,	and	he
will	have	to	fulfill	his	destiny.
All	your	laws	are	stupid,	all	your	courts	are	idiotic,	and	all	your	lawmakers	are
utterly	 ignorant	 people.	 They	 want	 to	 do	 something	 which	 no	 individual	 is
capable	 of	 and	 which	 can	 be	 done	 only	 before	 the	 child	 is	 conceived	 --	 not
afterwards.	The	world	is	full	of	blind	people,	crippled	people,	paralyzed	people,
deaf	people.	They	cannot	respect	themselves.
Just	the	other	day	I	received	a	letter	from	England.	Now	I	feel	at	a	loss	what	to
do.	A	young	man...	he	is	a	sannyasin...	but	he	is	so	ugly	that	people	feel	a	kind	of
repulsion,	 sickness,	 even	 to	 be	 near	 him.	 Now	 his	 biology	 demands	 that	 he
should	fall	 in	love	with	some	woman,	some	woman	should	accept	him.	But	no
woman	even	comes	close	to	him.
He	has	written	a	letter,	What	should	I	do?
Now	really	he	is	not	responsible	for	his	ugly	face;	his	parents	should	have	taken
care.	He	had	no	necessity	to	be	born;	a	beautiful	face	could	have	been	chosen,
because	even	the	face,	the	beauty,	the	color,	everything	is	in	the	program...	But
now	it	is	too	late,	so	what	to	say	to	him?	No	meditation	can	make	him	beautiful.
Meditation	can	help	him	to	go	beyond	this	urge,	biological	urge,	but	he	does	not
want	 to	 go	 beyond	 the	 biological	 urge.	 His	 question	 is:	 "Why	 am	 I	 deprived
when	 everybody	 else	 is	 enjoying	 the	 love	 of	 somebody?	 What	 sin	 have	 I
committed?"	 He	 has	 not	 committed	 any	 sin,	 it	 is	 just	 that	 his	 parents	 were
ignorant.	The	only	 thing	 that	 can	be	 suggested	 to	 him	 is	 to	 go	 through	plastic
surgery.
But	there	are	blind	people,	there	are	deaf	people,	there	are	crippled	people,	there
are	 people	 who	 are	 retarded.	 They	 don't	 have	 any	 more	 possibilities	 of
intelligence	 --	 and	who	 is	 responsible	 for	 this?	The	 priests	 of	 all	 the	 religions
have	been	deceiving	humanity.
They	are	the	great	deceivers.	They	have	been	telling	people,	"You	are	suffering
from	blindness,	from	crippledness,	from	paralysis	because	of	your	past	life's	evil
acts."
This	 is	 not	 true.	 The	 scientific	 truth	 is	 that	 people	 are	 unnecessarily	 suffering
because	we	are	 listening	 to	 the	priests	and	not	 to	 the	scientists.	The	priests	are
absolutely	against	interfering	as	far	as	human	life	is	concerned.	They	start	great
protests	immediately	that	you	should	not	interfere	in	the	work	of	God.
But	I	cannot	see	what	kind	of	work	God	is	doing.	Now	what	about	 this	young
man	who	 is	created	ugly?	 --	 this	 is	God's	work?	And	all	 these	people	who	are
retarded,	 stupid	 --	 this	 is	God's	work?	And	 the	priests	 are	not	 ready	 to	have	 a
different	world.	They	are	against	family	planning,	they	are	against	birth	control,
they	are	against	everything	that	man	is	now	capable	of	doing	to	create	a	better
world,	a	better	humanity.
So	this	 is	my	first	 thing:	education	will	never	be	right	unless	children	are	born
through	genetic	 engineering,	 not	 through	 the	 old	 bullock	 cart	method	 that	 you
have	followed	up	to	now.	This	is	one	of	the	most	significant	secrets:	unless	we
listen	to	sanity	and	intelligence,	we	are	not	going	to	revolutionize	human	life.
Secondly,	a	 few	 things	about	education.	 I	want	education	 to	be	divided	 in	 two
parts:	the	first	part	should	be	given	in	the	beginning	and	the	second	part	should
be	given	at	the	time	a	person	retires.
The	first	part	of	education	should	be	for	attaining	the	highest	possible	standard
of	 livelihood.	 It	 should	 consist	 of	 the	 art	 of	 living	 and	 love.	 It	 should	 teach
people	how	to	be	 total	 in	 their	acts,	how	to	use	 the	opportunity	of	 life	without
losing	anything,	to	squeeze	every	drop	of	juice	that	existence	provides.	The	first
part	will	be	for	the	young	people	--
training	for	life	and	training	for	love,	training	for	intensity,	training	for	totality.
The	 second	part	will	 be	 after	 retirement,	which	will	 depend	 how	 long	we	 can
allow	man	 to	 live.	 It	 may	 be	 according	 to	 the	 present	 average	 lifespan,	 sixty
years,	seventy	years	--
but	as	 the	person	retires.	There	are	people	 in	 the	area	of	Kashmir	occupied	by
Pakistan	 who	 have	 passed	 the	 one	 hundred	 and	 fiftieth	 year	 --	 thousands	 of
people.	That	small	area	of	Kashmir	seems	to	be	the	most	healthy	area.	They	are
poor	people,	with	no	medical	facilities,	but	even	at	the	age	of	one	hundred	and
fifty,	they	are	young.
But	there	are	other	places	also	in	the	world,	particularly	in	the	Soviet	Union,	in
Kazakhstan,	 in	 Azerbaijan,	 in	 the	 Caucasus,	 where	 people	 have	 lived	 even
longer	--	one	hundred	and	eighty	years	--	and	thousands	of	people,	not	just	one.
They	are	still	working	in	the	fields,	in	the	gardens,	in	the	orchards;	you	cannot
call	them	old,	they	are	still	capable	of	producing	children.
So	 it	 will	 depend...	 If	 genetic	 engineering	 succeeds	 in	 destroying	 the
superstitions	of	humankind,	then	the	second	part	will	come	very	late.	The	second
part	will	be	preparation	for	death.	Just	as	the	first	part	was	preparation	for	life,
the	second	part	will	be	preparation	for	death	--	how	to	die	meditatively,	silently,
peacefully;	how	to	meet	death	with	a	song	and	a	dance	and	a	welcome.
The	 second	 part	will	 be	 basically	 religious,	 just	 as	 the	 first	 part	was	 basically
scientific.
The	education	will	be	complete,	but	it	has	to	be	at	both	the	ends	--	the	beginning
and	the	end.	Each	university	should	have	a	double	structure:	one	for	the	young
people	who	are	going	to	enter	into	life,	and	the	other	for	the	old	people	who	are
going	to	enter	into	the	unknown	world	of	death.
The	first	part	of	education	will	be	of	many	dimensions	--	all	sciences,	all	arts,	all
kinds	of	crafts.	Somebody	is	a	great	carpenter,	somebody	is	a	great	shoemaker,
somebody	 is	a	great	 scientist,	 somebody	 is	a	great	moneymaker	 --	 they	are	all
contributing	 whatever	 their	 potential	 allows	 them	 to	 life,	 with	 totality,	 not
holding	 anything	 back.	Naturally	 they	 should	 have	 equal	 opportunity	 to	 grow,
and	 they	 should	 have	 equal	 respect.	 Just	 because	 a	 man	 is	 a	 president	 of	 a
country	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 he	 should	 have	 respect	 and	 the	 man	 who	 makes
perfect	 shoes	 should	 not.	Both	 are	 fulfilling	 certain	 needs	 of	 the	 society;	 both
should	have	the	same	honor	and	the	same	dignity.
This	 equal	 opportunity,	 equal	 respect	 will	 begin	 from	 the	 very	 world	 of
education.	And	for	education	to	make	all	these	changes,	education	will	have	to
go	through	many	changes	itself.
For	 example,	 examinations	 should	 be	 dissolved,	 because	 examinations
emphasize	people's	memory,	not	their	intelligence.	Memory	is	not	a	great	thing;
particularly	in	the	future	it	is	not	going	to	be	of	any	importance.	You	can	carry
your	small	computer	in	your	pocket	which	will	have	all	 the	memories	that	you
need,	and	any	time...	immediately	the	computer	will	supply.	There	is	no	need	to
fill	your	head	with	unnecessary	rubbish.
The	 computer	 is	 going	 to	 replace	 the	 whole	 system	 of	 education	 which	 has
depended	up	to	now	on	memory.	Whoever	can	memorize	more	comes	first	class,
gets	 a	 gold	medal,	 tops	 the	 university.	But	 have	 you	 ever	 thought	 about	what
happens	 to	 these	 gold	medalists	 in	 the	world?	They	 don't	 show	 anywhere	 any
genius.	 Somebody	 is	 just	 a	 head	 clerk,	 somebody	 is	 just	 a	 stationmaster,
somebody	 is	 a	 postmaster	 --	 what	 happened	 to	 their	 gold	 medals?	 What
happened	to	the	great	respect	that	their	university	paid	to	them?
In	 fact	 the	 university	 paid	 respect	 to	 their	memories	 and	memories	 are	 of	 not
much	use	in	actual	life.	In	actual	life	you	need	intelligence.	And	the	difference
should	be	made	clear	to	you.	Memory	is	a	ready-made	answer.	But	life	goes	on
changing,	it	is	never	ready-made	--	so	all	your	ready-made	answers	are	lagging
behind	life.
Life	 needs	 a	 living	 response...	 not	 a	 ready-made	 answer,	 but	 a	 spontaneous
response	this	moment;	it	needs	intelligence.
Up	 to	 now	 education	 systems	 have	 not	 been	 creating	 intelligence	 at	 all.
Intelligence	 needs	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 structure.	 Examinations	 are	 for
memory,	 they	 are	 a	 memory	 test	 of	 how	 much	 you	 can	 memorize.	 But	 if
questions	are	asked	which	you	have	not	memorized,	you	are	at	a	loss.	You	don't
have	the	intelligence	to	respond	to	a	new	question	for	which	the	answer	has	not
been	memorized	before.
The	 whole	 system	 of	 examinations	 is	 futile.	 A	 different	 structure	 should	 be
created:	each	student,	every	day,	should	get	his	credit	marks	from	the	teacher	to
show	if	he	is	behaving	intelligently,	if	he	is	answering	things	intelligently	--	not
just	a	repetition	of	the	textbooks,	but	something	original.
Originality	should	be	respected	and	honored,	not	repetition	--	not	being	a	carbon
copy.
And	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	wait	 for	 one	 year;	 if	 a	 student	 can	 get	 enough	marks
within	six	months,	he	should	pass	into	a	higher	standard.	There	is	no	question	of
anybody	 failing	 or	 anybody	 passing.	 Just	 as	 you	 start	 getting	 closer	 to	 the
standard	beyond	your	standard...
there	 is	 no	 examination.	 Just	with	 your	 teachers	watching	 your	 responses	 and
your	intelligence,	you	will	be	moving	on.	Somebody	may	come	one	month	later,
somebody	may	come	a	few	months	later,	but	there	is	no	question	of	a	fixed	year
program.	 I	 have	 been	 a	 teacher	 in	 the	 university	 and	 I	 know....	 There	 were
students	who	were	so	talented	that	they	could	have	passed	the	whole	course	set
for	one	year	in	two	months;	now	ten	months	are	wasted.	Who	is	responsible	for
that?	And	there	were	retarded	students;	even	one	year	was	not	enough	for	them.
I	have	seen	one	person	 failing	 ten	 times	 in	his	matriculation	examination.	You
will	 ask	 what	 happened	 the	 eleventh	 time?	 --	 he	 did	 not	 appear	 in	 the
examination.	 Enough	 is	 enough!	 He	 was	 the	 most	 experienced	 matriculate,
although	 he	 never	 passed	 in	 ten	 years	 continuously.	 People	 who	 had	 been
colleagues	with	him	became	his	 teachers	and	he	was	still	 there	 --	 ready,	stable
and	permanent.
Each	individual	should	be	given	credit	for	his	own	intelligence.	There	should	not
be	 any	 time	 limit,	 because	 that	 time	 limit	wastes	 the	more	 talented,	 the	more
genuinely	intelligent,	the	geniuses,	and	waits	for	the	retarded,	for	the	idiotic	and
the	stupid.	It	is	an	ugly	system.
Of	course	with	genetic	engineering	the	idiots	and	the	stupid	will	not	be	allowed
to	enter	into	life.	Move	somewhere	else!	--	there	are	fifty	thousand	planets	in	the
universe	where	life	exists	--	why	bother	us?	Move	on,	go	somewhere	else	where
people	are	still	 idiots	and	still	 listen	 to	 the	priests	and	go	to	 the	churches.	This
planet	is	no	more	for	you.
The	 classroom	will	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 form.	 It	will	 not	 be	 the	 classroom
where	the	teacher	teaches	you;	although	he	knows	more	and	you	know	less,	his
knowledge	 is	out	of	date.	He	has	 learned	everything	 thirty	years	ago,	when	he
was	 a	 student.	 In	 thirty	 years	 everything	 has	 changed.	 It	 is	 such	 an	 insane
structure	 that	 people	 who	 are	 teaching	 in	 the	 universities	 are	 all	 out	 of	 date.
What	they	are	teaching	is	no	more	relevant.
According	to	me,	the	library	can	be	the	only	classroom.	The	teacher	can	only	be
a	guide	to	help	the	students	to	find	the	latest,	the	recentmost	researches	in	every
subject.	 In	 the	 library	 the	 students	 should	 be	 there,	 and	 the	 teacher	 should	 be
there	 just	 to	help	 them,	because	he	 is	more	acquainted	with	 the	 library,	he	has
been	 longer	 in	 the	 library,	 he	 knows	 about	 the	 new	 discoveries	 and	 the	 latest
inventions	which	have	arrived.	His	function	should	be	that	of	a	guide	to	lead	the
students	to	the	up	to	date	knowledge.
This	 can	 be	 facilitated	 very	 easily	with	 computers,	with	 television	 sets.	 In	 the
twentieth	 century	 you	 need	 not	 teach	 people	 geography	 with	 a	 map	 when
television	can	bring	you	exactly	to	the	place	you	are	learning	about	--	New	York
or	London	or	Peking	--	you	need	not	bother	yourself	looking	at	maps,	looking	at
pictures,	 descriptions.	 On	 the	 television	 screen	 you	 can	 be	 instantly	 in	 New
York,	and	what	is	seen	is	remembered	more	easily	than	what	is	heard,	than	what
is	read.
The	 future	 belongs	 to	 the	 televisions,	 to	 the	 computers,	 because	 they	 are	 the
memory	systems.	The	teacher	will	have	a	totally	new	function	that	will	not	be	of
teaching	but	only	of	guidance	--	where	you	can	find	the	right	book	in	the	library,
where	you	can	find	 the	 right	video	 in	 the	 library,	where	you	can	find	 the	 right
information	in	the	computer.
Teaching	becomes	more	alive,	more	colorful,	more	real.	And	the	day	is	not	far
away	when	television	will	be	three-dimensional.	Then	it	will	seem	exactly	as	if
people	are	walking	and	may	come	out	of	 the	 television	 set	 any	moment.	Only
two	three-dimensional	films	were	made,	then	the	idea	was	dropped	because	they
were	too	costly.	But	they	will	come	back.	With	better	techniques	they	will	not	be
that	costly.
I	have	seen	one	of	the	films.	It	was	a	strange	experience.	A	man	throws	a	spear	--
and	the	whole	audience	in	the	movie	hall	gives	way,	because	it	is	as	if	that	spear
is	going	through	the	hall.	 It	 is	 three-dimensional;	 it	 is	as	realistic	as	any	actual
spear	can	be.	A	man	comes	running	on	his	horse	and	people	shriek	and	divide	to
give	way	 to	 the	horse...	 it	 is	 just	entering	 into	 the	hall.	 It	never	enters!	Slowly
they	become	accustomed,	by	the	end	of	the	film:	"Don't	be	worried.	Just	sit	tight
in	your	seat.	Nothing	is	coming	out	of	the	screen.	It	comes	only	up	to	the	screen
and	stops."
When	 things	 can	 be	 taught	 in	 three-dimensional	 televisions	 and	 films,	 when
everything	that	you	need	to	memorize	can	be	done	by	a	small	computer...	It	can
be	connected	with	 the	national	 computer,	which	carries	 all	 the	knowledge	 that
has	been	found	since	man	started	coming	down	from	the	trees.	You	can	get	every
information,	information	which	will	be	very	difficult	to	remember.
For	example,	if	I	ask	you	--	and	you	are	all	educated	people	here	--	"On	what	day
was	 Socrates	married?"...	Now,	 how	 educated	 are	 you?	You	 cannot	 remember
the	date	Socrates	was	married;	it	was	such	a	great	date	that	he	suffered	his	whole
life,	and	you	don't	even	have	compassion	enough	to	remember	the	date!	But	your
computer	 can	 remember	 all	 that	 you	 want.	 It	 can	 contain	 whole	 libraries
immediately	at	hand.
The	future	of	education,	if	scientifically	worked	out,	is	going	to	be	a	tremendous
adventure.	Up	 to	 now	 it	 has	 been	 a	 kind	 of	 enforcement;	 students	 have	 to	 be
forced,	bribed.
Education	can	become	so	colorful,	so	actual,	so	real	that	you	will	not	need	to	say
to	the	students,	"Be	attentive!"	They	will	be	attentive	automatically.
And	the	same	for	the	second	part	of	education.	All	scientific	technology	can	be
used	to	give	you	experiences	very	close	to	death.	You	can	be	taught	meditations,
you	can	be	taught	relaxation,	you	can	be	taught	how	to	go	deeper	in	your	sleep.
Hypnotism	will	 play	 a	great	 role	 in	 the	 second	part	 of	 education,	because	you
can	be	hypnotized	so	deeply	that	you	can	almost	touch	the	territory	of	death.
Hypnotism	became	condemned	by	the	same	people	who	are	always	condemning
everything	 that	can	make	man's	 life	more	easy,	more	pleasant,	more	 juicy.	The
organized	 religions	 have	 been	 such	 poisoners.	 They	 condemned	 hypnotism,
which	is	a	science	in	itself	and	has	to	be	revived	again.	It	is	the	only	way	to	take
you	to	the	whole	area	that	you	will	pass	through	when	you	die.
If	you	have	passed	that	area	many	times	death	will	not	be	anything	to	be	feared.
On	 the	 contrary,	 you	will	 be	 tremendously	 excited.	You	 have	 lived,	 you	 have
lived	so	fully,	you	are	contented	with	life;	you	would	love	to	know	what	death
is...	a	new	challenge,	a	new	beginning,	entering	into	the	universal,	getting	out	of
the	imprisonment	of	the	body,	becoming	just	pure	consciousness.
Unless	education	can	teach	you	both	life	and	death	it	is	not	complete	education.
Unless	education	can	make	everybody	dignified,	self-respectful,	neither	inferior
to	anybody	nor	superior	to	anybody,	it	is	not	education.
So	I	begin	with	genetic	engineering.
I	end	up	with	meditation,	enlightenment.
Before	death	you	must	realize	what	tremendous	beauty	and	splendor	is	contained
within	 your	 consciousness.	 Then	 education	 covers	 your	 whole	 life,	 and	 gives
you	the	most	perfect	possibility	of	your	growth.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THESE	 DAYS	 I	 FEEL	 LIKE	 A	 FRUITCAKE.	 ALSO	 I'M	 READING	 THE
IDIOT	BY
FYODOR	 DOSTOEVSKY.	 DO	 YOU	 THINK	 THERE	 IS	 ANY
CONNECTION?
Vimal,	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	feeling	like	a	fruitcake.	It	is	really	delicious.	It
is	 so	 nice...	 and	 it	 cannot	 have	 any	 connection	 with	 the	 reading	 of	 the	 great
masterpiece	of	Fyodor	Dostoevsky,	THE	IDIOT.	THE	IDIOT	is	only	the	name,
but	 the	 person	 he	 calls	 the	 idiot	 in	 that	 great	 novel...	 That	 novel	 has	 to	 be
considered	one	of	the	ten	great	novels	in	the	whole	world	literature.	There	is	no
way	 to	 think	 that	 anything	 better	 than	 Fyodor	 Dostoevsky's	 IDIOT	 can	 be
created.
The	idiot	is	a	sage.	He	is	called	idiot	by	the	people	because	they	can't	understand
his	simplicity,	his	humbleness,	his	purity,	his	trust,	his	love.	You	can	cheat	him,
you	can	deceive	him,	and	he	will	still	trust	you.	That's	why	people	think	he	is	an
idiot.	 He	 is	 really	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 characters	 ever	 created	 by	 any
novelist.
The	novel	could	just	as	well	have	been	called	THE	SAGE.	His	trust	is	so	much
that	 it	does	not	matter	 that	you	deceive.	 It	does	not	matter	 that	you	cheat	him;
that	 is	 your	 problem,	 it	 is	 not	 his	 problem.	 His	 love,	 his	 trust	 will	 continue.
Dostoevsky's	idiot	is	not	an	idiot;	he	is	one	of	the	sanest	men	amongst	an	insane
humanity.
But	this	is	the	problem:	if	you	are	living	in	a	society	where	everybody	is	blind
and	only	you	have	eyes,	you	will	be	 in	constant	difficulty.	Those	blind	people
will	 not	 believe	 that	 you	 have	 eyes;	 those	 blind	 people	would	 like	 to	 destroy
your	eyes,	because	your	eyes	are	giving	them	constant	anxiety	and	tension.	But
somebody	has	 something	which	nobody	 else	 has...	 so	most	 probably	 they	will
destroy	your	eyes.
In	an	insane	world,	to	be	sane	is	the	most	difficult	situation.	If	you	can	become
the	idiot	of	Fyodor	Dostoevsky,	it	 is	perfectly	beautiful;	 it	 is	really	a	fruitcake!
There	is	no	harm	in	it.	It	is	better	than	to	be	a	cunning	politician,	better	than	to
be	a	cunning	priest.
Humbleness	has	such	a	blessing.
Simplicity	has	such	a	benediction.
Solomon	Fiegenbaum	came	home	one	evening	and	was	startled	to	find	a	young
girl	 ransacking	his	 apartment.	Looking	at	her	 sternly,	he	 said,	 "Young	woman,
you	are	a	thief!	I	am	going	to	call	the	police."
"Please,	sir,"	she	pleaded,	"if	I	get	in	trouble	again,	I	will	be	put	away	for	years.
Please	don't	call	the	police."
"I'm	very	sorry,	but	I	have	to,"	replied	Sollie.
"Please,	sir,"	she	begged	him	tearfully,	"I	will	do	anything	for	you.	I	will	even
give	you	my	body."
Sollie	thought	for	a	moment.	"Okay,"	he	said,	"take	off	your	clothes	and	get	into
my	bed."
The	girl	did	so	and	Sollie	quickly	followed.	He	tried	and	tried	and	tried	for	about
half	an	hour.	Exhausted,	he	finally	gave	up.
"It's	no	use,"	Sollie	cried,	"I	just	can't	make	it.	I	will	have	to	call	the	police."
Such	cunning	people...	but	the	world	is	full	of	them.	Be	simple	like	a	small	child
--	that	is	the	idea	of	Dostoevsky	in	THE	IDIOT.
Elmer,	 aged	nine,	was	puzzled	over	 the	girl	 problem	and	discussed	 it	with	his
friend,	Ernie.
"I've	walked	her	to	school	three	times,"	said	Elmer,	"and	carried	her	books,	and	I
have	bought	her	an	ice	cream	twice.	Now,	do	you	think	I	ought	to	kiss	her?"
"No,	 you	 don't	 need	 to,"	 said	 Ernie.	 "You	 have	 already	 done	 enough	 for	 that
girl."
Children	have	a	beauty,	and	 they	have	an	 insight	which,	as	you	grow	old,	you
lose.
The	village	priest	approached	a	group	of	small	boys	sitting	in	a	circle	around	a
dog.
When	he	came	up	to	them,	he	asked,	"What	are	you	doing	to	the	dog?"
Little	Ernie	answered,	"Whoever	tells	the	biggest	lie,	wins	the	dog."
"Ah!"	exclaimed	the	priest,	"I'm	surprised	at	you	boys.	When	I	was	young	like
you,	I	never	told	a	lie."
There	was	silence	for	a	while,	until	little	Ernie	shouted	out,
"Give	him	the	dog!"
The	 printed	 sign	 on	 the	 church	 lawn	 said,	 IF	 TIRED	 OF	 SIN	 --	 COME	 IN.
Scrawled	underneath	in	lipstick,	IF	NOT,	CALL	THE	STAR	HOTEL	AND	ASK
FOR	LUCY.
Okay	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Into	the	open	sky
Chapter	title:	Suddenly	you	have	blossomed
Chapter	title:	Expectation	breeds	frustration
Chapter	title:	Drunk	with	awareness
Chapter	title:	Innocence	regained
Chapter	title:	The	alphabet	of	rejoicing
Chapter	title:	Cowards	cannot	enter	here
Chapter	title:	Become	the	mystery
