1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Open	Secret
Talks	given	from	1/11/77	to	30/11/77
Darshan	Diary
29	Chapters
Year	published:	1980
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711015
ShortTitle:	OPENSE01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Anand	means	bliss,	and	avid	means	one	who	knows	--	one	who	knows	blissfully,
one	 who	 knows	 through	 bliss,	 a	 knowing	 blissfulness.	 And	 God	 can	 only	 be
known	 that	way;	God	cannot	be	known	 through	 suffering.	Everybody	 tends	 to
remember	God	when	 they	 suffer.	But	 the	 real	 lovers	 are	 those	who	 remember
him	when	 they	 are	 happy,	 because	 it	 is	 only	 in	 happiness	 that	we	 are	 open	 to
him.	Happiness	really	means	that	we	are	very	close	to	him,	because	happiness	is
possible	 only	when	we	 are	 close	 to	 him.	 So	 remember	when	 you	 are	 happy...
make	 it	 a	 point,	whenever	 there	 is	 happiness,	 to	 turn	 it	 into	 prayer.	Whenever
you	are	joyous	bow	down,	and	that	will	bring	you	closer	and	closer	to	God	every
day.	And	God	is	not	far	away:	he	is	just	around	the	corner!
[A	 sannyasin	 at	his	 leaving	darshan	 says	he	wants	 to	 return	 forever...	 and	also
that	he	has	a	problem	relaxing.]
...	It	will	be	good	if	you	can	come	because	much	more	will	be	possible	while	you
are	here	close	to	me.
There	are	different	types	of	people.	There	are	a	few	people	who	can	grow	even
far	away	from	me.	You	will	not	be	able	to;	you	will	need	the	physical	presence.
You	are	a	very	earth-bound	person,	and	that	may	be	one	of	the	reasons	why	you
can't	relax.	You	are	a	very	practical	person,	empirical,	experimental.
Dreamers	can	relax	very	easily.	In	fact	it	is	very	difficult	for	them	to	be	active;
laziness	comes	very	easy	to	them.	Whenever	there	is	an	opportunity	they	can	fall
asleep;	 activity	 is	 difficult.	 To	 you	 activity	 is	 not	 difficult	 and	 if	 you	 are	 not
physically	 active	 then	 you	 are	 mentally	 active.	 That's	 why	 listening	 to	 me	 or
listening	to	the	tape	helps	you	to	relax	because	is	goes	on	boggling	your	mind.
You	 cannot	 think:	 it	 absorbs	 you	 totally.	 Nothing	 is	 left	 to	 think	 about.	 It
magnetises	 your	 whole	 attention.	 It	 takes	 your	 whole	 mind	 so	 nothing	 is	 left
behind;	there	is	emptiness.	Then	you	can	relax.
Just	being	close	to	me	you	will	be	able	to	relax	utterly.	And	it	is	not	that	I	turn
people	into	inactive	people	--	no,	not	at	all;	I	put	them	to	activity.	But	I	take	the
actor	away	from	them.	The	doer	is	taken	away	but	not	the	doing.	That's	what	you
need:	you	need	action	without	any	tension.	And	that	is	a	difficult	thing.
It	is	easy	to	be	non-tense	when	you	are	not	active.	It	is	easy	to	be	active	but	then
you	are	tense,	you	are	not	relaxed.	Relaxation	alone	is	easy,	action	with	tension
is	easy,	and	the	whole	point	is	to	be	active	and	yet	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
relaxed.	That	is	the	synthesis	that	is	needed.
So	 this	will	 be	 the	 right	opportunity	 for	you.	Manage	 things	 so	you	can	 come
back.	A	few	difficulties	are	always	there;	finish	them.	Just	by	being	here	you	will
start	relaxing	because	there	is	nothing	to	worry	about.	And	all	those	great	ideas
that	 go	 on	 wandering	 in	 your	 mind	 I	 can	 put	 to	 use!	 They	 need	 to	 be
implemented.	And	they	will	bring	you	joy	because	they	can	become	creative.
Remember	this:	whenever	there	are	great	ideas	in	the	mind	if	you	don't	put	them
to	use	they	will	torture	you,	they	will	become	your	worries.	If	you	put	them	to
use,	if	you	become	creative,	if	you	start	transforming	those	ideas	into	reality	then
they	will	not	be	worries.	They	will	bring	great	joy	to	you.
It	is	said	that	if	you	want	some	work	to	be	done	give	it	to	the	person	who	is	very
busy.	 If	 you	 give	 the	 work	 to	 somebody	 who	 is	 not	 busy	 there	 is	 not	 much
possibility	that	it	will	be	done.	A	busy	person	has	more	time	than	the	non-busy
person.	 That	 is	 strange	 but	 that's	 how	 it	 is.	 A	 busy	 person	 can	 always	 have
holidays,	 can	 relax,	 can	 go	 into	 hobbies.	 A	 non-busy	 person	 has	 no	 holiday
possible	because	all	his	activity	goes	on	 in	 the	mind.	A	busy	person	can	come
home	 and	 relax	 in	 the	 swimming	 pool	 but	 a	 non-busy	 person	 never	 goes
anywhere.	 Sitting	 by	 the	 swimming	 pool	 he	 is	 busy;	 his	mind	 is	 continuously
working	there.
You	 need	 activity.	 You	 have	 energy	 for	 it	 and	 your	 mind	 can	 become	 very
creative.	So	I	will	not	suggest	anything	that	can	tranquillize	your	mind;	that	will
not	 be	 good.	 That	 will	 give	 you	 a	 kind	 of	 relaxation	 but	 a	 very	 uncreative
relaxation.	That	 is	getting	something	at	a	very	high	cost.	Relaxation	in	 itself	 is
not	valuable.
Relaxation	is	valuable	only	if	it	is	creative.	Creativity	in	itself	is	not	valuable;	it
is	valuable	only	if	it	brings	relaxation.
So	you	come!	Relaxation	will	happen;	nothing	to	be	worried	about.
[A	visitor	says	she	feels	fine	--	better	than	ever.]
That's	very	good.	Go	on	becoming	better	and	better	and	better.	One	can	go	on
rising	higher	and	higher.
If	you	don't	go	higher	 then	you	start	 falling	back,	because	 life	 is	a	movement.
You	cannot	stay	anywhere;	you	have	to	go	on.	If	you	don't	go	on,	you	go	back.
Either	grow	or	fall	back	but	life	does	not	allow	anybody	any	rest	because	rest	is
stagnancy.	Life	is	movement,	riverlike.
So	this	has	 to	be	understood,	 that	one	should	go	on	moving	higher	and	higher.
Never	try	to	stay	anywhere:	go	on.	One	who	starts	staying	begins	receding	and
then	 there	 is	misery.	Because	nobody	wants	 to	 fall	 back	 to	 those	 lower	places
which	one	has	passed.	They	were	beautiful	when	one	was	passing	through.
Now	they	are	no	more	beautiful	because	they	are	lower	than	you	are.	Something
higher	is	needed,	so	go	on	trying	to	reach	the	higher.	In	that	very	reaching	you
grow.
And	never	feel	satisfied.	with	worldly	things	it	is	perfectly	good	to	be	satisfied,
but	with	the	inner	being,	with	joy,	with	bliss,	with	God,	never	feel	satisfied!	And
people	do	the	opposite:	with	God	they	are	perfectly	satisfied.
With	the	house	they	are	not	satisfied.	With	their	money	they	are	not	satisfied.	So
naturally	the	money	goes	on	growing,	because	whatsoever	you	are	not	satisfied
with	 grows.	 The	 house	 goes	 on	 becoming	 bigger	 but	 you	 go	 on	 becoming
smaller	because	with	yourself	you	are	completely	satisfied.
This	 is	my	whole	message	 of	 sannyas	 --	 that	 one	 should	 be	 satisfied	with	 the
ordinary	 things.	 It	 doesn't	 matter	 whether	 you	 have	 big	 diamonds	 or	 not.	 It
doesn't	 really	matter,	but	you	should	be	a	big	diamond;	 that	matters.	The	inner
treasure	should	go	on	growing.	It's	good....	Now	become	a	sannyasin!
[A	 sannyasin	 says	he	 is	 undecided	whether	 to	 continue	working	 in	 the	 ashram
bakery	or	return	to	the	West.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
Very	good.	No	need	 to	go	anywhere,	mm?	 --	The	bakery	 is	 the	place	 for	you.
And	I	will	tell	[the	coordinator]	to	rub	on	your	third	eye.	It	is	perfectly	good;	no
need	 to	 go	 anywhere.	 Right	 now	 going	 will	 not	 be	 good,	 mm?	 things	 are
happening.	 Become	 more	 meditative	 in	 your	 work.	 Love	 the	 work	 and	 get
absorbed	completely.
Something	is	going	to	happen	soon.	And	when	something	is	going	to	happen	the
mind	starts	thinking	to	go	to	Goa	or	go	to	somewhere	else.	That	is	the	way	of	the
mind	to	avoid	something	that	is	just	very	very	close.	The	mind	starts	becoming
suspicious	of	it.	It	starts	feeling,	it	has	a	kind	of	hunch,	that	if	you	don't	escape
then	something	is	going	to	happen.	And	that	something	is	unknown;	it	frightens.
It	 thinks	 to	go	 somewhere	where	 there	will	be	 less	possibility	of	 it	happening.
Right	now,	no.
When	I	see	that	things	are	perfectly	good	and	there	is	no	problem	I	can	tell	you
to	go	to	Goa.	For	a	few	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
weeks	you	can	enjoy	it	there,	or	if	I	feel	it	is	right	for	you	to	go	back	to	Australia
you	can	go,	but	right	now,	no.
Right	 now	 put	 yourself	 completely	 into	 work.	 And	 let	 the	 work	 be	 worship.
Don't	 do	 it	 just	 as	 a	 kind	 of	 job;	 no,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 job.	 You	 are	 preparing	 for
sannyasins,	you	are	preparing	for	my	people.	You	are	preparing	for	me!	So	do	it
with	 immense	 love.	We	 are	 going	 to	 create	 a	 great	 family	 so	 this	 is	 just	 the
beginning.	Each	has	to	learn	to	sacrifice	oneself	with	love,	with	gratitude,	with
thankfulness	that	one	is	accepted,	that	one's	work	is	valued.
You	are	needed!	Everybody	who	is	here	is	needed.	Many	more	are	coming	who
will	be	needed.	And	they	all	have	to	put	all	that	they	have	into	it.	Only	then	can
this	family	grow	and	become	a	great	miracle.	It	can	become	one	of	the	greatest
experiments	that	has	ever	happened	to	humanity.	It	can	become	a	herald	for	the
future.	So	this	is	not	the	time	to	escape!
[A	sannyas	couple	are	present.	The	woman	has	just	completed	the	tantra	group.
The	man	said	he	was	very	jealous	while	she	was	in	the	group.	She	says	they	had
a	war	but	everything	is	beautiful	now.]
Mm	mm...	 now	 there	 is	 no	 problem?	 I	wanted	 you	 to	 go	 into	 it	 and	 I	wanted
[your	partner]	also	to	go	into	it.	This	was	good.
And	 one	 is	 always	 surprised.	 You	 never	 know	 yourself.	 We	 have	 been
suppressing	ourselves	so	much	that	we	have	become	almost	unacquainted	with
major	parts	of	our	being.	We	are	acquainted	only	with	that	part	which	we	allow.
But	 we	 have	 a	 great	 being,	 many	 aspects	 are	 completely	 denied...	 and	 these
groups	 bring	 up	 those	 aspects	 of	 your	 being.	 They	 make	 them	 alive;	 again
vitality	moves	 through	 them...	and	you	are	surprised.	The	group	has	been	very
good.
Now	you	will	feel	more	alive	in	your	relationship	with	Govind;	more	love	will
be	flowing	because	now	you	will	be	less	repressive.	When	you	repress,	 love	is
automatically	 repressed.	Repress	 anything	 and	 a	part	 of	 love	will	 be	 repressed
immediately.	 If	 you	 have	 repressed	 many	 things	 then	 the	 major	 part	 of	 your
lovelife	will	be	repressed.	Allow	everything,	become	free	again	and	you	will	see
that	your	 love	 is	going	so	high;	 it	has	never	been	before.	 It	will	become	more
orgasmic.
Tantra	is	a	must	for	every	couple.	If	you	really	want	to	love	you	have	to	free	love
from	all	restrictions.
That	 creates	 trouble	 in	 the	 beginning:	 jealousy	 and	 fear	 and	 insecurity	 about
what	is	going	to	happen.	And	the	great	fear	comes	from	oneself,	from	seeing	that
one	 can	 enjoy	 this	 and	 can	 go	 into	 it.	 So	what	 about	 the	 old	 identity,	 the	 old
image	 of	 yourself	 that	 you	 had	 been	 carrying?	 It	 falls	 down	 and	 shatters!	But
that's	my	whole	work	here:	to	shatter	all	your	images.
Once	all	your	images	are	gone	you	become	a	free	human	being	for	the	first	time.
Then	there	is	no	should,	no	ought.	And	it	is	not	only	that	you	become	free;	you
start	being	compassionate	towards	the	other.
For	example,	if	some	day	you	find	[your	partner]	enjoying	Tantra	you	will	not	be
hurt,	because	you	know	you	enjoyed	it.	You	will	not	feel	hurt	at	all,	because	you
know	that	you	enjoyed	Tantra	yourself	and	it	was	not	against	him,	it	was	not	a
betrayal	of	him.	In	fact	by	going	into	Tantra	you	came	closer	to	him	and	so	if	he
enjoys	Tantra	you	will	be	completely	with	him.	Maybe	the	old	mind	feels	a	little
hurt	and	jealous,	but	you	will	know	that	this	is	absolutely	absurd.	This	old	mind
is	not	worth	cooperating	with.	You	will	feel	great	compassion	for	[your	partner]
and	you	will	feel	happy	that	he	is	also	enjoying,	that	he	was	also	repressed	and
now	 he	 will	 no	 more	 be	 repressed;	 a	 few	 aspects	 of	 his	 life	 have	 become
available	to	him.
Now	 he	 will	 be	 more	 alive,	 now	 he	 will	 be	 bigger	 than	 he	 was	 before.	 And
naturally	when	you	move	with	a	person	who	 is	 free,	unrestricted,	unrepressed,
uninhibited,	there	is	great	joy:	the	joy	of	meeting,	of	merging	into	each	other.
It	has	been	very	good.	I	was	a	little	worried	about	how	things	would	go	because
I	was	creating	an	unnecessary	trouble!	But	 it	has	been	good.	The	trip	has	been
good	and	you	arrived	safely!
[Another	tantra	group	member	says	she	had	a	fight	with	her	boyfriend;	he	tried
to	strangle	her	and	she	wanted	to	die.	But	after	she	felt	bad	about	it.	Osho	checks
her	energy.]
Good!	You	misinterpreted	it.	It	was	not	that	you	wanted	to	be	killed	--	it	was	a
deep	 surrender;	 it	was	 a	 surrender	 in	 love.	And	okay!	 If	 death	 comes	 through
love	it	is	perfectly	okay.	You	didn't	resist	and	that	was	good;	that's	how	it	should
be.	When	you	love	a	person	you	are	ready:	if	he	wants	to	kill	you,	that's	perfectly
okay.
It	has	been	immensely	beautiful.	It	was	a	kind	of	surrender	or	acceptance,	a	total
acceptance	that	'Okay.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
f	death	happens	then	it	is	okay.'	This	is	the	best	moment	--	to	be	killed	by	your
own	lover,	the	person	you	love.	Where	else	can	you	find	a	better	death?	So	you
accepted	and	you	relaxed.
Later	 on	 your	 fears	 started	 coming	 up	 and	 your	mind	 started	working	 around
what	had	happened.	The	mind	said	it	is	death,	it	is	a	kind	of	suicidal	instinct,	and
why	do	you	want	to	be	killed.
[She	answers:	I	felt	it	very	deep.]
It	 is	 deep	but	 the	 interpretation	 is	 very	 superficial.	The	 interpretation	 is	 of	 the
mind.	The	mind	always	comes	back.	In	that	moment	the	mind	was	not	there	so
you	relaxed;	you	said,	'okay'.	You	were	ready	to	accept	it.
In	 that	moment	 the	mind	was	 not	 there.	 The	mind	 cannot	 be	 in	 those	 intense
moments.	It	comes	only	when	that	intensity	is	no	more	there.	Then	it	takes	hold
of	 the	 past	 and	 starts	 playing	 with	 it...	 starts	 interpreting,	 analysing.	 Then	 it
brings	in	its	own	philosophy.
That	moment	was	 really	 deep	 and	 if	 death	 had	 happened	 in	 that	moment	 you
would	have	died	 the	best	kind	of	death,	 a	death	more	valuable	 than	 life	 itself,
because	it	would	have	been	a	love	surrender,	a	sacrifice.
It	would	have	been	sacred.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	the	word	sacrifice;	 it	comes
from	the	same	root	as	sacred.
But	later	on	the	mind	came	in.	And	it	is	bound	to	come,	to	take	account	of	the
whole	 situation	 and	 of	 what	 happened.	 It	 surveyed	 the	 whole	 thing	 and	 it
interpreted	it	as	a	kind	of	suicidal	instinct	in	you,	mm?	--
what	Freud	calls	'thanatos',	that	one	is	drawn	towards	death.	Then	one	becomes
afraid;	this	is	pathological!
To	want	to	be	killed	seems	like	an	illness,	a	kind	of	madness.	But	it	was	not	that
at	all.
And	maybe	because	you	were	so	 totally	surrendered	 the	other	person	was	also
possessed	 to	 see	 how	 long	 you	 could	 go.	 Not	 that	 he	 wanted	 to	 kill	 you,
otherwise	he	would	have.	But	you	were	giving	a	great	 challenge	 to	him	 --	 the
challenge	that	you	were	ready	to	die,	that	you	were	ready	to	go	so	far.	Now	the
only	way	to	judge	whether	you	were	really	going	so	far	was	to	try	it.	So	he	tried!
But	he	could	not	kill	you	because	he	was	not	 there	 to	kill	you;	 it	was	 just	 that
your	acceptance	created	the	challenge.	So	in	his	deep	unconscious	it	came	to	him
to	 see	 how	 long	 and	 how	 far	 you	went	 on	 saying	 yes.	He	 could	 see	 that	 you
could	go	on	saying	yes.	Then	at	the	last	moment	he	stopped	because	there	would
be	no	point	in	going	on.	He	was	not	there	to	kill	you,	was	not	wanting	to	kill	you
but	wanting	to	see	how	far	you	could	go.	And	that	too	was	unconscious.
Sometimes	 these	 things	happen.	Your	unconscious	was	ready	to	go	 to	 the	very
end,	his	unconscious	was	also	 trying	to	 take	you	at	 least	 if	not	 to	 the	very	end
then	just	a	little	bit	before	it,	 to	the	last	 'but'.	He	took	you	just	to	the	boundary
and	then	it	was	certain	that	you	were	ready	to	go	even	into	death.	Now	your	love
can	grow	very	very	deep.
But	his	mind	will	also	come	back	just	like	your	mind	and	he	will	start	thinking
he	is	aggressive,	violent,	and	he	wanted	to	kill	the	woman	who	loves	him:	'This
is	dangerous;	 is	he	a	murderer	or	something?'	 Just	as	your	mind	will	 interpret,
his	mind	will	interpret;	he	may	start	feeling	guilty.	Make	it	clear	that	he	need	not
feel	guilty,	you	need	not	feel	pathological.	Suddenly	you	will	see	that	your	love
has	taken	a	new	jump	and	friendship	will	grow	now	on	a	different	 level.	Don't
miss	 that	opportunity.	Make	 it	 clear	 to	him	and	help	him	also	 to	become	clear
about	it.
Otherwise	you	can	drift	away,	mm?	--	he	is	thinking	that	this	is	dangerous	and
sometime	if	he	is	possessed	to	kill	again	and	he	does,	that	will	not	be	right.	It	is
better	he	leave,	go	away;	this	is	dangerous.
You	may	start	thinking	that	if	it	happens	again	and	you	allow	him	and	he	really
kills	you,	 then	what?	Better	 separate	before	 it	 happens.	Your	minds	can	create
such	a	situation,	an	interpretation,	that	you	start	drifting	away,	you	can	separate.
But	there	is	no	need.
So	first	have	a	good	communion	with	your	friend.	Make	your	whole	heart	clear
to	him	and	let	him	also	pour	his	heart	out	to	you	too.
I	 don't	 see	 that	 there	 is	 any	 problem.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 murderer	 and	 you	 are	 not
suicidal.	 But	 in	 love	 sometimes	 this	moment	 comes.	 Sometimes	 only	 because
there	is	great	love	does	this	moment	come.	It	is	very	difficult	to	find	a	lover	who
has	 not	 sometimes	 thought	 to	 kill	 the	 woman	 he	 loves.	 That	 is	 a	 kind	 of
absorption.	If	one	loves	a	woman	one	wants	to	be	so	together	with	her	that	her
separate	existence	is	a	constant	reminder	that	she	is	separate.	So	is	the	case	with
the	woman	too:	deep	inside	the	woman	also	wants	to	absorb	the	man	completely,
to	eat	up	the	man.
Have	you	ever	heard	that	it	has	happened	sometimes?	--	lovers	eat	parts	of	each
other's	 bodies.	 That	 looks	 mad.	 But	 it	 is	 because	 of	 very	 intense	 love	 that	 it
happens.	They	become	so	absorbed	in	it	 that	they	forget	all	reason.	Lovers	can
become	 consumers	 of	 each	 other;	 they	 can	 be	 cannibals.	 Love	 is	 a	 kind	 of
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
cannibalism.	 So	 you	 just	 make	 it	 clear	 to	 him,	mm?...	 and	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be
killed,	be	killed	by	me!
[Another	 tantra	group	member	 says	he	had	very	good	and	 total	 experiences	 in
the	group	but	now	he	feels	a	lot	of	tension	and	fear.]
It	will	go;	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Sometimes	it	happens	that	if	a	group	has
gone	very	very	well	 as	 this	Tantra	group	has,	 after	 the	group	you	 start	 feeling
tense.	It	is	as	if	one	has	been	rich	and	suddenly	becomes	poor.	One	was	enjoying
a	different	kind	of	world	and	then	falls	back	into	the	ordinary	world....
That's	my	 feeling	about	why	you	 feel	 so	much	 fear	 and	 so	much	 tension.	You
have	 been	 in	 a	 very	 nice	 dream	 (chuckling)	 and	 now	 you	 are	 awake	 to	 the
ordinary	 reality.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 that:	 in	 the	morning	you	have	been	going	 into	a
beautiful	dream,	living	in	a	golden	palace,	enjoying	all	kinds	of	things,	and	then
suddenly	the	milkman,	the	horrible	alarm,	and	your	wife	shouting	in	the	kitchen!
(laughter)	That's	why	you	are	feeling	a	little	tense.	Nothing	to	worry	about.
[Another	 sannyasin	 says:	 I	 feel	 tense.	 I	 always	 feel	 afraid	when	 I	 come	 here.
Osho	 chuckles	 understandingly.	 Nothing	 to	 worry	 about,	 he	 says.	 There	 is
something	to	be	afraid	of!]
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711025
ShortTitle:	OPENSE02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Prem	Sushila.	It	means	love	virtue...	and	love	is	the	only	virtue.	Other	virtues	are
needed	only	when	love	is	missing.	They	are	substitutes	and	very	poor	substitutes
at	 that.	 Love	 is	 the	 only	 commandment.	 If	 love	 is	 missing	 then	 the	 ten
commandments	are	needed,	and	even	 those	 ten	cannot	 fulfill	 the	need	because
all	 will	 be	 formal,	 imposed.	 Only	 love	 arises	 from	 within.	 Law	 is	 always
imposed	from	the	outside,	and	that	which	is	imposed	from	the	outside	cripples,
paralyses;	it	makes	you	a	slave.
That	which	brings	bondage	cannot	be	virtue.	Virtue	has	to	bring	freedom,	virtue
has	to	be	freedom.
Love	brings	freedom	because	it	knows	no	imposition.	And	it	is	not	that	love	is
against	law.	It	is	only	against	it	when	law	is	against	love,	otherwise	not.
And	whenever	 law	 is	against	 love	 it	 is	not	 lawful,	 it	 is	not	 just.	Law	 is	 lawful
only	when	it	is	in	harmony	with	love.	Love	is	the	criterion,	even	the	criterion	of
law.	It	is	the	decisive	factor	and	to	me	it	has	the	highest	value.	There	is	no	higher
religion	than	love.	And	all	religions	and	all	paths	are	nothing	but	approaches	to
love	in	different	ways.
So	 that's	why	I	have	given	you	 the	name.	Let	 love	be	your	only	virtue.	Forget
everything	else!	Meditate	on	 love,	 live	 through	 love,	 live	as	 love	and	miracles
happen.	The	greatest	miracle	is	that	love	gives	you	intensity	in	life,	makes	your
life	aflame	and	yet	deep	at	the	very	core	you	remain	cool.
When	passion	and	coolness	meet	they	become	compassion.	When	there	is	only
the	heat	of	passion	and	there	is	no	coolness	within,	then	it	is	lust,	it	is	not	love.
Then	it	 is	 tiring,	exhausting.	Yes,	 it	does	give	a	certain	occupation	to	 the	mind
and	 the	body,	 and	a	 certain	 release	 too,	but	 it	 is	 a	vicious	 circle.	One	goes	on
moving	in	the	same	rut	again	and	again;	it	is	repetitive.	Lust	is	repetitive,	love	is
non-repetitive.	 Love	 is	 non-mechanical:	 it	 is	 always	 new.	 You	 don't	 go	 on
moving	in	the	same	rut;	it	is	always	surprising.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	 teaching	 is:	 live	as	passionately	as	possible.	Live	a	 little	hot,	and	yet	deep
down	 in	 the	 innermost	 core	 remain	 cool.	 These	 are	 paradoxical	 but	 then	 you
have	the	full	expanse	of	your	being:	coolness	and	heat.
Then	negative	and	positive	meet,	yin	and	yang	meet.	And	whenever	 there	 is	a
meeting	of	yin	and	yang,	the	positive	and	the	negative,	the	hot	and	the	cool,	the
dark	and	the	light,	the	summer	and	winter,	there	is	great	joy.	There	is	rejoicing,
celebration.
Celebration	comes	only	out	of	the	meeting	of	the	paradox,	the	opposites.	When
the	 paradox	 is	 bridged	 there	 is	 joy.	When	 the	 paradox	 is	 not	 bridged	 there	 is
division	and	misery.	So	let	love	be	your	virtue.	Let	that	be	your	passion	and	your
meditation,	your	heat	and	your	coolness.	Live	intensely	and	yet	silently....
Deva	Sadhya.	It	means:	God	is	reachable.	Deva	means	God	and	sadhya	means
reachable.	God	is	not	impossible,	God	is	possible.	It	is	not	far	away,	it	is	within
our	reach.	We	are	capable	of	getting	to	that	state	where	God	becomes	possible...
not	only	possible	but	becomes	our	very	being,	 the	very	ground	of	being.	 I	 am
giving	you	 this	name	 to	create	a	great	desire,	an	expectancy,	an	urgency	and	a
hope.
Modern	man	 suffers	very	much	 from	hopelessness	because	 all	 that	 is	valuable
seems	 to	be	 impossible:	God,	 truth,	goodness,	beauty.	All	 that	has	been	within
the	grasp	of	man	in	past	ages.	But	slowly,	slowly,	man	has	become	so	arrogant,
so	 egoistic,	 so	 closed,	 hard	 like	 a	 stone,	 so	 anything	 that	 is	 beyond	 looks
impossible.	 It	 seems	man	 is	condemned	 to	 remain	man...	and	 that	 is	not	worth
anything.	It	is	a	meaningless	rut,	repetition,	routine.	One	goes	on	doing	the	same
thing	every	day;	nothing	ever	seems	to	happen.
Young	people	hope	a	little	but	sooner	or	later	their	hopes	start	dwindling.	By	the
time	 somebody	 is	 thirty	 hopes	 are	 finished.	 Hope	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 illusion	 of
youth,	particularly	now	 it	 seems	 to	be	 so.	The	mature	person	 is	one	who	 lives
without	 hope,	 but	 then	 he	 lives	meaninglessly.	 There	 is	 no	 significance	 in	 his
life,	no	fragrance,	no	light,	nothing	to	wait	for	except	death.	That's	utterly	wrong.
Man	has	never	been	so	utterly	wrong	as	he	is	now.
For	 the	 first	 time	 all	 that	 is	 high	has	 disappeared.	Only	 the	 baser	 instincts	 are
left.	It	seems	that	there	is	no	way	to	go	uphill.	One	can	go	only	downhill	and	one
day	 fall	 into	one's	grave...	 and	 that	 seems	 to	be	 the	ultimate	end.	This	attitude
towards	life	is	sheer	stupidity.	It	has	no	logos,	no	meaning.
[This	 can]	 bring	 a	 logos	 to	 your	 life,	 a	meaning,	 a	 significance.	Everything	 is
possible...	even	God	is	possible!	And	God	is	the	ultimate	beyond	which	there	is
nothing.	Even	that	which	is	so	far	away,	so	beyond,	is	possible.	It	is	beyond	but
it	is	at	the	same	time	within	you;	it	is	the	beyond	within.	If	we	are	asleep	then	it
is	very	far	away.	If	we	become	awake	it	starts	coming	closer.	The	moment	our
life	is	a	perfect	awareness	suddenly	God	is	there,	hidden	in	our	being.	And	that
is	the	goal!
One	has	to	be	really	passionate	to	create	that	awareness.	One	cannot	allow	one's
life	 to	 be	 just	 lukewarm;	 it	 has	 to	 be	 really	 hot	 --	 only	 then	 can	 something
happen.	And	people	are	not	even	lukewarm;	they	are	cold,	frozen.
...	Stop	being	cold.	Wherever	you	find	anything	frozen	in	you,	melt	it.	Become
more	 liquid,	 flowing,	 loving,	and	be	full	of	hope.	God	 is	possible,	 in	 fact	only
God	is	possible.	Everything	else	only	looks	possible	but	never	happens.	Money,
power,	 prestige	 look	 as	 though	 they	 are	 possible,	 but	 even	 when	 you	 have
arrived	 and	 you	 have	 much	 money	 and	 much	 power	 nothing	 has	 really
happened.	You	are	in	a	kind	of	illusion,	you	are	deluded.
The	 rich	 person	 knows	 how	 poor	 he	 is.	Once	 a	 rich	man	 came	 to	me	 and	 he
wanted	to	give	me	many	thousands	of	rupees.	He	had	brought	them	in	a	bag	and
he	poured	them	at	my	feet.	I	told	him	'If	I	need	them	sometime	I	will	ask	you	but
right	now	I	don't	have	any	need.	Where	will	I	put	these?'...	I	was	a	wanderer	and
there	was	no	need	for	money.	He	started	crying	and	he	said	'You	have	to	accept	it
because	when	you	are	 in	need	I	can't	be	certain	I	will	have	 it.	 I	am	a	gambler.
And	you	have	to	accept	it	otherwise	you	will	break	my	heart!'
I	said	'Why?'
He	 said	 'I	 am	 so	 poor	 that	 I	 have	 nothing	 else	 except	 money.	 I	 want	 to	 give
something	 to	 you	 but	 I	 don't	 have	 anything	more	 valuable.	 I	 have	 only	 these
notes.	If	you	reject	them,	you	reject	me.	Just	accept	them.
You	can	throw	them	away	or	you	can	give	them	to	anybody;	that	is	none	of	my
business.	But	accept	them;	don't	say	no!'
And	I	could	see	that	that	man	had	learned	one	thing	of	great	importance	--	that
money	is	valueless.	And	he	was	one	of	the	richest	men	of	this	country.
When	one	has	riches	one	comes	to	know	how	poor	one	is.	When	one	has	power
one	comes	to	know	how	helpless	one	is.	So	if	you	fail	int	he	world,	you	fail;	if
you	succeed,	then	too	you	fail.	In	the	world	nobody	succeeds.	Failure	is	failure
and	 so	 is	 success.	 In	 fact	 success	 is	more	 of	 a	 failure	 than	 failure	 than	 failure
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
itself	 because	 in	 failure	 some	 hope	 can	 live	 --	 that	maybe	 tomorrow	 you	will
succeed.	A	little	more	effort	is	needed.	It	has	not	happened	up	to	now	but	it	may
happen	in	the	future.	There	is	a	little	ray	of	light.
But	when	it	has	happened	and	you	have	all	the	money	that	you	desire,	suddenly
you	see	the	hollowness,	emptiness	within;	then	it	is	utter	failure.	The	world	is	the
place	 where	 nothing	 else	 is	 possible	 other	 than	 failure.	 And	 God	 is	 the	 state
which	is	the	only	possible	thing	that	can	happen.
So	if	one	is	not	moving	towards	God	one	is	always	moving	towards	failure.	The
day	you	start	moving	towards	God	--	and	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about	--	you
start	succeeding.	In	one	way	you	start	disappearing	because	your	ego	will	melt
and	 disappear,	 and	 in	 another	 sense	 you	 start	 succeeding	 because	 God	 starts
succeeding	in	you.	It	is	always	God	who	succeeds	in	you.
So	by	being	 initiated	 into	 sannyas	you	are	changing	your	whole	vision	of	 life.
Now	 it	 will	 be	 a	 life	 offered	 to	 God,	 a	 life	 in	 search	 of	 God,	 a	 life	 with	 an
enquiry,	with	a	great	quest	and	search,	a	life	passionate	for	truth!
[A	sannyasin	says	that	sex	depletes	his	energy	but	it	is	a	toy	he	cannot	let	go	of.
Without	sex	he	feels	high,	but	horny.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
A	few	things	to	be	understood....	One	is:	psychologically	you	are	finished	with
sex	but	not	physically.
So	 the	problem	 is	not	great.	 If	 it	 is	vice	versa	 the	problem	 is	bigger:	 if	 one	 is
finished	 physiologically,	 physically,	 and	 is	 not	 finished	 psychologically	 the
problem	is	bigger	and	more	complicated.	It	is	very	difficult	to	come	out	of	it.
Psychologically	you	are	 finished.	 It	 is	 no	more	 than	 a	 toy.	That	understanding
has	happened	to	you	but	your	body,	your	physical	energies,	are	still	not	finished
with	it.
So	no	need	to	force	any	fasting	on	the	body,	otherwise	you	will	feel	horny.	You
will	 feel	 high	because	 psychologically	 there	will	 be	 less	 complication.	So	you
will	 feel	 high.	Your	 psychological	 being	will	 be	 able	 to	 soar	 and	 fly	 high	 but
your	body	will	feel	tense.	It	will	bring	you	down	and	it	will	pull	you	down	again
and	again.	 It	goes	on	nagging.	That	nagging	 is	 the	horny	feeling	 that	happens;
the	body	goes	on	nagging.
It	is	as	if	you	are	hungry	and	the	body	nags	you	to	eat.	The	body	is	full	of	energy
and	 it	 knows	 only	 one	 thing	 -	 to	 transform	 every	 energy	 into	 sexual	 energy.
Nothing	wrong	in	it;	that's	all	the	body	can	do.	The	body	can	transform	energies
only	into	sex.	The	body	grows	slowly;	 the	mind	can	have	jumps	of	 insight	but
not	the	body.	The	body	has	a	very	slow	growing	process,	it	goes	at	its	own	pace.
So	 don't	 force	 any	 fast	 on	 yourself.	 You	 have	 to	 continue	 to	 remain	 a	 sexual
being	a	little	longer.	And	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	that.
But	psychologically	you	are	becoming	free,	so	now	let	 it	be	a	conscious	thing;
that's	 what	 I	 would	 like	 to	 tell	 you.	 Let	 it	 be	 a	 conscious	 thing.	 Go	 into	 a
relationship	as	a	plaything;	then	it	 is	not	heavy.	You	know	it	 is	a	toy	thing	and
the	body	needs	 it;	 and	 the	 bodily	 need	has	 to	 be	 fulfilled.	So	don't	 create	 any
guilt	 and	don't	 create	 any	problem	 for	yourself	 as	 to	why	 this	 continues	when
you	know	that	it	is	just	a	kind	of	occupation.
It	takes	you	away	from	me,	from	meditation,	from	your	own	being	because	you
are	 still	 taking	 it	 very	 seriously.	 Not	 because	 it	 is	 sex,	 no;	 the	 problem	 is
somewhere	else.	 It	 is	not	sex	that	 takes	you	away	from	me;	 it	 is	your	 taking	it
seriously.	Take	it	 just	like	play	and	it	will	bring	you	closer	to	me	because	your
body	will	be	satisfied,	you	will	feel	more	harmonious	through	it	and	you	will	be
more	creative.
There	 are	 two	kinds	 of	 creativities	 possible.	One	 is	 through	 repression	 of	 sex.
That's	what	people	have	done	down	the	ages.	That's	why	Freud	says	that	all	art
and	 all	 creativity	 is	 nothing	 but	 sexuality	 perverted,	 repressed.	 To	 him	 all	 the
great	geniuses,	painters,	 poets,	 novelists,	 are	 all	 repressed	people;	 they	are	not
healthy	in	his	vision.	And	he	is	right;	up	to	a	point	he	is	absolutely	right.	So	that
is	one	kind	of	creativity.
You	 go	 on	 damning	 sexual	 energy.	 It	 becomes	 too	much;	 it	 creates	 a	 kind	 of
restlessness.	You	have	 to	put	 that	 restlessness	 into	 some	work.	You	have	 to;	 it
becomes	a	substitute	for	sex.	You	write	poetry,	you	write	a	book,	you	paint,	you
become	 a	 sculptor.	You	 do	 something	 because	 something	 has	 to	 be	 done.	The
energy	is	there	and	it	won't	leave	you	unless	you	relieve	it	in	some	way	or	other.
Then	your	art	becomes	a	substitute	for	sex.
So	it	is	not	accidental	that	poets	go	on	talking	about	sex	and	love	and	painters	go
on	painting	nude	women	and	sculptors	go	on	sculpting	nude	statues.	That	is	not
accidental.	 It	 is	 heavy	 on	 their	 head;	 it	 is	 really	 their	 substitute.	 They	 have
repressed	something	and	that	has	become	fantasy.
For	 example,	 Henry	 Miller	 or	 people	 like	 that	 go	 on	 talking	 about	 sex	 and
masturbation	and	intercourse	and	love-making,	and	they	go	into	such	details.	It
simply	shows	that	this	man	has	suffered.	What	he	always	wanted	to	do	and	could
not	do	he	is	now	doing	in	his	fantasy.	All	pornography	is	born	that	way.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
One	can	use	 this	 repressed	energy	 in	 religious	ways	also	--	 there	 is	no	need	 to
use	it	sexually	--	but	then	too	it	will	erupt	in	some	way	or	other.	You	may	make	a
temple	but	 the	 temple	will	 become	a	Khajuraho	 temple.	 It	 is	 a	 temple	 and	 the
man	who	made	it	was	thinking	that	he	was	going	to	make	a	temple.	It	turns	out
to	be	the	greatest	sexual	sculpture	ever.	You	may	be	sculpting	Ram	and	Sita	but
your	Sita	will	 look	 like	 a	 film	 actress...	with	 big	 boobs	 and	 everything.	 It	 has
entered	from	the	back	door.
You	may	be	making	a	temple	for	Shiva	but	 it	may	be	just	a	phallic	statue,	and
nothing	 else,	 and	 the	 religious	 symbolism	will	 be	 lost.	 Now,	 nobody	 in	 India
thinks	that	the	Shivalinga	is	phallic.	It	is	placed	in	the	yoni,	in	the	vagina;	both
male	and	female	are	there.	And	people	worship	it.	It	is	one	of	the	greatest	sexual
symbols	ever.	Nobody	has	worshipped	sex	symbols	in	such	a	way!
The	 phallus	 is	 inside	 the	 vagina;	 it	 represents	 a	 state	 of	 orgasm.	 So	 it	 can	 be
religious	but	 it	will	 still	become	sexual.	That	 is	one	kind	of	creativity	 that	has
been	known	down	the	ages.	That	is	a	little	pathological,	nightmarish.
There	 is	another	kind	of	creativity	 that	has	not	been	known	much,	only	 rarely.
There	 have	 been	 people	 who	 have	 been	 creative	 without	 repressing	 their
sexuality.	They	have	been	creative	out	of	 a	harmony,	out	of	 an	understanding,
out	of	satisfying	their	sexual	needs,	their	body	and	everything.	There	is	not	that
other	type	of	creativity;	that	hectic,	mad,	rushing	kind	of	activity	is	not	there.	It
is	very	silent,	very	slow,	but	it	has	a	depth.	People	may	not	be	able	to	understand
it,	because	to	understand	it	they	will	have	to	go	a	little	higher;	only	then	can	they
understand	it.
My	 feeling	 is	 that	 creativity	 is	 good	 but	 not	 through	 repression;	 that	 is
pathological.	And	all	the	so-called	creators	have	suffered	much.	If	you	look	into
their	 lives	you	will	be	surprised.	A	Dostoevsky...	his	whole	life	is	nightmarish!
He	cannot	sleep,	he	cannot	live,	he	cannot	enjoy	anything.	But	he	creates	great
pieces	--	'The	Brothers	Karamazov'	or	'The	Idiot'.	He	creates	great	masterpieces
but	if	you	look	deep	into
'The	Brothers	Karamazov',	you	will	find	all	his	nightmares	spread	out	in	it.	It	has
been	created	out	of	much	suffering,	great	suffering.	He	has	never	lived	himself;
he	has	poured	his	whole	life	into	his	dream	and	naturally	those	dreams	are	very
dangerous.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 accident	 that	 many	 creative	 people	 go	 mad,	 commit
suicide,	and	are	always	psychologically	 imbalanced...	a	 little	eccentric,	bizarre.
These	are	natural	consequences	of	repression.	I	will	not	recommend	that.
To	me	Buddha	is	also	creative.	He	is	really	creative	but	his	creativity	is	coming
out	of	a	deep	harmony	of	being.	It	is	coming	out	of	silence.	Those	words	that	he
has	uttered	have	come	through	wordless	consciousness.	Each	word	is	precious.	It
does	not	have	that	quality	of	Dostoevsky,	that	ill	and	pathological	and	abnormal
state	in	it.	It	 is	out	of	such	immense	harmony	that	it	carries	that	harmony	even
today.
So	my	suggestion	is	that	you	don't	be	repressive	about	your	sex;	just	become	less
anxious	about	it.	Let	it	be	there.	And	it	is	beautiful...	but	it	is	a	play!	There	is	no
need	 to	 force	 it	 on	 yourself	 either,	 because	 that	 is	 another	 extreme.	 I	 am	 not
saying	that	when	the	body	is	not	willing	and	the	mind	is	not	willing,	go	into	it,
because	 that	 again	 is	 repression.	Listen	 to	 the	body.	The	body	 is	your	vehicle;
help	it	to	remain	healthy.	If	it	needs	food,	food;	if	it	needs	sex,	sex:	whatsoever
its	need	is,	give	it.	You	will	find	slowly,	slowly	that	the	body	is	no	more	nagging
you.	It	is	completely	satisfied	so	nagging	disappears.	When	nagging	disappears
yom	energies	will	 be	 released	and	 those	will	 be	healthy	 energies;	 they	will	 be
holier.
So	don't	create	this	conflict.	Just	be	total	in	accepting	the	body	and	its	needs.	It	is
your	instrument;	you	have	to	take	care	of	it.	So	never	go	into	fasting	and	never
go	 into	 indulgence.	 Just	 keep	 a	 balance,	 and	 whenever	 the	 body	 needs
something,	give	it.	By	and	by	you	will	find	that	the	body	is	no	more	asking	for
anything;	 it	 is	 contented.	 In	 that	 contentment	 comes	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	of
creativity.	You	may	not	be	able	to	produce	much,	but	how	much	is	not	the	point.
The	quantity	will	not	be	the	thing	but	the	quality.
Dostoevsky	can	create	much	but	it	is	out	of	such	suffering	and	hell.
Just	accept	it	and	go	with	it.	And	it	is	sometimes	good	even	to	play	with	a	toy;
nothing	wrong	in	it.	Mm?
that	makes	you	more	childlike.	It	is	good:	just	the	sheer	joy	of	somebody's	body.
Just	 playing	with	 each	 other's	 body	 is	 good;	 nothing	 is	wrong	 in	 it.	 Let	 it	 be
meditative	and	worshipful.
Otherwise	things	are	going	well.	Things	are	changing	!
The	Open	Secret
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711035
ShortTitle:	OPENSE03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin	 asks:	 I	 was	 taught	 as	 a	 child	 to	 pray	 and	 the	 prayer	 was	 of
thanksgiving.	Now	I	don't	know	who	I'm	praying	to	any	more.	Am	I	praying	to
Osho?	I've	heard	you	say	that	God	is	just	a	name	for	one's	innermost	core.	Am	I
praying	then	to	myself?]
Prayer	need	not	be	addressed,	it	need	not	have	any	address.	In	fact	the	addressed
prayer	is	not	very	deep.
It	should	just	be	a	song	of	the	heart,	unaddressed,	to	the	whole	of	existence:	to
the	trees,	to	the	mountains,	to	the	stars,	to	all	that	is.	And	that	is	the	meaning	of
the	word	 'God'.	God	does	not	mean	a	person.	If	we	make	God	a	person	we	are
simply	imagining	God	as	being	in	our	own	image.	That	is	very	anthropomorphic.
Then	we	think	that	he	has	a	nose	like	us,	eyes	like	us	and	hands	and....	A	little
better,	a	 little	bigger,	more	beautiful,	 stronger,	but	 the	difference	 is	of	quantity
not	of	quality.	So	we	are	just	magnifying	ourselves;	through	a	magnifying	glass
we	are	looking	at	our	own	self	and	creating	God.	So	God	is	our	imagination	in
that	way.
But	the	real	meaning	of	God	is	the	totality,	all	that	is,	all	that	has	been,	all	that
will	 be.	The	 totality	of	 the	whole	 time	and	 space....	And	prayer	 is	nothing	but
gratitude	 to	 the	whole.	Because	we	belong	 to	 the	whole.	We	come	from	it,	we
live	in	it,	we	live	as	it,	and	one	day	we	dissolve	back	into	it	and	disappear	into	it.
It	 is	 our	 home,	 it	 is	 our	 source	 and	 our	 goal.	 So	 in	 prayer	 we	 are	 simply
remembering	 our	 source,	 remembering	 our	 goal.	 In	 prayer	 we	 are	 reminding
ourselves	that	we	are	not	separate.	One	tends	tO	forget	that.	In	the	mundane	life
one	has	to	use	the	word	'I,	I...'	again	and	again.	It	is	a	must:	without	it	it	would
be	very	difficult	to	live.	You	have	to	relate	to	people	and	of	course	you	have	to
relate	as	an	individual,	as	an	ego,	as	a	self.	You	have	to	struggle	and	fight	and
protect	and	naturally	all	these	things	make	you	a	separate	entity.
Prayer	 is	 just	 relaxing	 again	 into	 non-separation	with	 existence,	 for	 a	moment
forgetting	 that	 one	 is,	 for	 a	moment	 dissolving,	 for	 a	moment	melting...	 for	 a
moment	remembering	the	real.	The	real	thing	is	that	we	are	one	with	the	whole.
[The	sannyasin	asks:	So	it	is	a	meditation?]
Prayer	 is	 meditation...	 with	 love.	 That's	 the	 difference.	 Meditation	 is	 purely
scientific,	mathematical.
Prayer	 has	 a	 little	 poetry	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 but	 the	 formulation	 is	 poetic.
Meditation	is	also	the	same	but	the	formulation	is	mathematical.	The	difference
is	of	formulation;	the	reality	is	one.
It	 is	 just	as	when	a	scientist	 looks	at	a	 rose	and	a	poet	 looks	at	 the	same	rose.
Their	descriptions	will	be	different;	the	rose	is	the	same.	They	both	looked	at	the
rose	at	 the	same	time,	 they	may	have	been	standing	holding	each	others'	hand.
But	the	scientist	looks	through	science;	his	description	is	going	to	be	completely
different.
Meditation	 is	 God	 seen	 through	 the	 scientific	 vision	 the	 mathematical	 vision.
Prayer	 is	 poetry.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 reality	 but	 seen	with	 loving	 eyes,	 seen	with	 a
loving	heart.	Prayer	is	richer	than	meditation	because	it	has	something	more	than
meditation.
So	prayer	can	move	you.	Meditation	can	only	make	you	silent.	It	will	give	utter
silence	 but	 it	 cannot	 give	 you	 ecstasy.	 Prayer	 can	 give	 you	 ecstasy	 because
prayer	 can	 give	 you	 great	 passion.	 It	 can	move	 you,	 it	 can	make	 your	 energy
dance,	 sing.	 So	 if	 prayer	 is	 possible	 then	 don't	 settle	 for	 meditation;	 go	 into
prayer.	If	prayer	is	not	possible	then	I	say	go	into	meditation.
[A	sannyasin	says	that	he	is	feeling	some	resistance	to	being	here.	In	the	last	few
weeks	he	noticed	he	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
was	forgetting	his	mala,	and	to	wear	orange.]
Very	good!	This	is	great!	Things	like	that	happen	because	it	 is	very	difficult	 to
remain	 constant	 in	 anything.	Even	 in	your	 trust,	 even	 in	your	 love,	 you	go	on
falling	back	again	and	again.	Only	after	a	very	long	time	does	it	become	possible
to	remain	in	the	same	state.	It	is	natural,	so	nothing	to	be	worried	about.
And	when	you	love	me	many	times	you	will	fight	with	me	too;	that	is	part	of	it.
Many	times	you	will	be	angry,	many	times	you	will	resist.	Many	times	you	will
go	against	me;	that	is	part	of	it	!	So	never	think	that	it	is	something	wrong.	It	is
perfectly	understandable	and	is	accepted.	This	is	how	you	will	grow	beyond	it	by
and	by.	 If	you	can	persevere	 then	 these	 things	will	become	less	and	 less.	They
will	 happen	 in	 small	 gaps	 and	 then	 they	 will	 disappear.	 One	 day	 you	 will
suddenly	find	they	have	disappeared	forever.	When	they	disappear	forever	there
will	be	great	joy	and	great	tranquility	because	then	one	starts	moving	smoothly.
When	 you	 are	 fighting	with	me	 you	 are	 really	 fighting	with	 your	 own	 being.
When	you	are	fighting	with	me	you	are	fighting	with	your	own	bliss,	your	own
silence,	your	own	peace.	By	fighting	with	me	you	are	not	harming	me.	How	can
you	 harm	 me	 by	 fighting	 with	 me?	 By	 fighting	 with	 me	 you	 are	 harming
yourself	You	are	 creating	 a	process	which	 is	 self-defeating.	You	want	 to	grow
and	you	are	fighting	growth.	with	one	hand	you	go	on	making	the	building	and
with	another	hand	you	go	on	pulling	the	bricks	down	so	the	house	will	never	be
ready.	 But	 this	 is	 what	 everybody	 does	 in	 the	 beginning	 So	 it	 is	 nothing
unnatural,	nothing	unexpected	--	just	understanding	is	needed.	Do	a	few	groups;
they	will	be	helpful....
You	cannot	escape!	You	can	try,	but	mala	or	no	mala,	orange	or	no	orange,	you
cannot	 escape.	You	 are	 trapped.	And	when	one	 is	 trapped	 one	 tries	 to	 escape;
that	too	is	right!	But	don't	be	worried...	good!
[A	visitor	says	he	can	only	stay	three	weeks	because	of	his	job.]
So	next	time.	You	will	have	to	come	again,	because	much	is	possible	here,	many
things	 are	 available.	 If	 you	go	 through	 them	you	will	 encounter	 new	 facets	 of
your	 being.	 You	will	 come	 to	 know	 yourself	 in	 new	ways,	 and	 that	 knowing
transforms	one's	very	life.
Many	people	try	to	transform	their	life	but	they	never	succeed.	The	only	reason
they	can't	 succeed	 is	 that	 they	don't	know	 themselves	enough.	They	know	 just
one	aspect	 and	 they	 try	 to	change.	 If	you	know	many	aspects	of	yourself	 then
you	know	that	many	alternatives	are	possible.	Then	you	can	simply	change	your
gears	from	one	aspect	to	another	aspect	and	you	are	a	different	person.	By	and
by,	as	more	aspects	become	available	to	you,	the	richer	you	become.	You	have	a
variety.	And	you	need	not	be	contaminated	by	one	aspect	continuously.	That	one
aspect	creates	boredom,	creates	monotony.
It	 is	as	 if	you	are	just	standing	at	one	window	forever	and	looking	at	 the	same
sky	and	the	same	tree	while	the	house	has	many	windows,	many	doors,	opening
in	different	dimensions,	 in	different	directions.	At	one	window	 there	 is	 sun,	 at
another	window	there	 is	sea,	at	one	window	there	 is	desert,	at	another	window
there	 is	 a	 garden;	 and	 there	 are	 many	 windows.	 Once	 we	 start	 knowing	 our
house	perfectly	well	 things	become	very	 easy.	One	need	not	 remain	 fixed	 and
obsessed	with	one	thing.
[Osho	asks	him	if	he	loves	his	job.	He	replies	that	he	wouldn't	want	to	lose	it.]
That	is	another	thing!	But	do	you	love	it	or	not?	--	that's	the	point.	You	may	like
it	because	of	security	and	things	like	that	but	do	you	love	it?	That	is	a	different
thing.
Because	 if	 you	 love	 your	 job	 that	will	 be	 very	 helpful	 in	 bringing	 peace.	My
feeling	 is	 that	 many	 people	 go	 on	 doing	 things	 that	 they	 don't	 love	 and	 that
creates	a	constant	tension	in	them.	I'm	not	saying	that	it	is	not	financially	good;
that	is	not	the	point.	Financially	it	may	be	good	and	still	you	may	not	like	it.	It
may	be	a	well-paid	job,	respectable,	but	that	is	not	the	point.	Whether	it	fits	with
your	being	is	the	point.	If	it	fits	that	will	be	very	helpful.
There	are	a	few	things	which	create	this	state	of	unpeace.	One	is	the	work	that
you	do,	 because	 it	 takes	 at	 least	 one-third	of	your	 time.	Another	 is	 the	people
you	 live	with	 --	 the	wife,	 the	mother,	 the	 father,	 the	 brother.	 If	 you	 are	 living
with	people	you	don't	like,	you	don't	love,	then	life	becomes	very	nightmarish.
And	the	 third	 thing:	 the	person	that	you	are	and	who	you	think	you	are.	These
are	the	three	things:	you	live	with	your	job,	you	live	with	your	family	and	you
live	with	yourself...	and	without	loving	yourself	you	cannot	be	at	peace.	That	is
the	 most	 fundamental	 thing	 --	 to	 love	 oneself.	 Then	 the	 second	 fundamental
thing	is	to	love	people	you	are	living	with	so	harmony	arises.	And	then	the	work
that	you	do,	love	it!	If	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
these	three	things	are	fulfilled	I	don't	see	that	there	is	any	cause	to	be	tense,	in
anxiety.
But	 the	 time	you	have	chosen	 is	 really	 too	short.	Still,	we	will	 try.	For	at	 least
two,	 three	weeks,	meditate,	do	 the	Centering	group,	 listen	 to	me,	 feel	me,	and
next	 time	you	 come,	 come	at	 least	 for	 two,	 three	months.	Those	 three	months
will	 cleanse	 your	 mind	 completely.	 Just	 time	 is	 needed;	 nothing	 much	 is	 the
problem.
And	what	about	your	sannyas?	Do	you	have	to	think	about	it	or	can	you	take	the
jump?
[The	visitor	replies:	I	can't	jump.]
When	would	you	like	to	jump?	--	tomorrow?	It	will	be	a	jump	whenever	you....
It	 will	 be	 a	 jump.	And	 one	 should	 be	 capable	 sometimes	 of	 doing	 something
almost	 irrational.	 It	 has	 no	 reason.	 Why	 you	 should	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 no
reason;	that's	why	the	jump.
One	 should	be	 able	 to	 take	 a	 few	 things	without	 any	 reasoning	 and	 should	be
able	 to	 go	 into	 a	 few	 things	 through	 feeling.	 One	 should	 live	 at	 least	 a	 few
moments	intuitively...	and	that	will	help	much.	Now	if	you	start	thinking	about	it
it	will	create	more	unrest	in	your	mind....
Come	close	to	me!	Just	look	at	me....	There	are	not	great	problems	in	your	head	-
-	 small	problems...	 just	 small	people,	crowded	 together.	They	can	be	dispersed
very	 easily.	 But	 you	 have	 become	 too	 involved	with	 this	 crowd,	mm?	One	 is
pulling	you	to	one	side,	another	is	pulling	you	to	another.	They	are	Lilliputians,
nothing	big.	If	you	shout	loudly	they	will	escape!
In	 these	 twenty	 days	 that	 you	 are	 here	 dance	 as	 totally	 as	 possible,	 sing,
meditate.	 In	 the	 night	 they	 have	 a	music	 group.	 Go	 there	 and	 just	 blow	 your
head!
They	are	not	big	problems,	mm?	I	have	more	difficult	people	here!	They	are	just
very	small	problems	but	you	may	have	gone	on	accumulating	them	so	they	have
become	too	many...	small	but	too	many.	Just	a	good	shout....
Anand	 means	 bliss,	 and	 prarthi	 means	 one	 who	 is	 praying	 for	 --	 one	 who	 is
praying	for	bliss,	one	who	is	asking	for	bliss,	one	who	is	knocking	at	the	door	of
God.	 Jesus	 says,	 'Seek	and	you	shall	 find.	Ask	and	 it	 shall	be	given	unto	you.
Knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened....'	That	is	prarthi:	one	who	asks,	one	who
seeks,	one	who	knocks.
And	bliss	is	the	goal.	Forget	the	word	peace;	become	more	concentrated	on	bliss.
Peace	 is	 a	 negative	 goal.	 It	 is	 always	 good	 to	work	 for	 something	 positive;	 it
comes	 easier.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 are	 sitting	 in	darkness	 and	you	 start	 fighting	with
darkness.	That	is	negative	and	you	will	not	win;	one	cannot	defeat	darkness.	It	is
better	to	search	for	a	candle	rather	than	fighting	with	the	darkness.	If	the	candle
is	 there	 the	 darkness	will	 go	 on	 its	 own.	You	 just	 have	 to	 bring	 in	 a	 lamp,	 a
candle	--	light.	Search	for	light.
Peace	 is	 a	 negative	 thing:	 it	 simply	 wants	 tension	 not	 to	 be	 there.	 Bliss	 is	 a
positive	goal:	not	that	tension	should	not	be	there	but	joy	should	be	there.	And
remember,	when	joy	comes	peace	comes	automatically	as	a	shadow.	Peace	is	the
shadow	of	 joy	and	you	cannot	 seek	 the	 shadow	directly.	You	can	 invite	me	 to
your	home.	My	shadow	will	come	but	you	cannot	invite	my	shadow.	You	can	go
on	inviting;	my	shadow	cannot	come.
So	 remember,	 never	make	 peace	 your	 goal;	 that	 is	 a	wrong	 goal.	You	 are	 not
asking	for	something	positive.	Ask	for	something	positive,	bliss,	joy,	and	peace
comes	on	its	own!	Good,	Prarthi!
[A	 sannyasin	 describes	 two	 energy	 experiences:	 When	 she	 goes	 to	 a	 strange
space	 she	 feels	 very	 lost	 and	 in	 a	 darkness;	 and	 after	 hypnotherapy	 group	 her
heart	was	beating	quickly	and	there	was	much	ecstasy.
Osho	checks	her	energy.]
Good...	very	good!	It	has	been	really	significant.	Both	things	are	good;	even	that
darkness	is	good.
We	have	been	brought	up	 in	such	a	way	that	we	have	wrong	associations	with
darkness	so	it	becomes	a	frightening	experience;	otherwise	it	is	not.	Darkness	is
immense	silence.	The	silence	is	so	thick;	that's	why	it	looks	dark.	The	silence	is
so	tangible;	that's	why	it	looks	dark.	It	is	because	of	depth.	It	is	as	when	a	river	is
shallow	it	 looks	clear.	If	 it	 is	deep	it	 looks	bluish.	If	 it	 is	very	deep	it	becomes
dark.
And	 that	 first	 experience	 prepared	 you	 for	 the	 second.	 Everybody	 has	 to	 go
through	deep	darkness;	only	then	is	there	light.	It	is	only	after	the	dark	night	that
there	is	dawn.	The	dark	night	prepares	the	dawn.	It	is	not	against	it,	remember.
The	dawn	comes	out	of	the	dark	womb	of	the	night;	it	gets	ready	there.	It	is	like
the	way	a	 seed	has	 to	go	 into	 the	dark	 soil.	Only	 then	can	 it	 sprout	 and	come
back	to	light.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Everything	is	made	of	two	things:	mud	and	sun.	Mud	is	dark.	The	seed	first	has
to	go	into	the	mud	and	disappear	there.	Only	then	is	it	worthy	enough,	capable	of
coming	 to	 the	 light.	 Then	 it	 starts	 growing	 towards	 the	 sun.	 But	 when	 it	 has
reached	a	height	and	can	have	a	whispering	dialogue	with	the	sun,	even	then	its
roots	are	deep	in	the	darkness.	It	is	a	kind	of	bridge	between	sun	and	mud.	It	is
between	these	two	that	a	tree	lives.
And	so	is	the	situation	with	man.	Earth	and	sky	meet	in	him.	Earth	is	dark,	sky	is
light.	But	first	one	has	to	go	into	darkness.
Your	energy	is	really	beautiful.	Feel	grateful	and	feel	very	happy,	mm?	Good.
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711045
ShortTitle:	OPENSE04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	seeker	who	is	taking	sannyas	says	that	he	has	spent	nine	years	serving	other
indian	gurus,	which	has	brought	him	to	Osho.	He	has	been	critically	ill	for	 the
last	two	years	with	disorders	arising	from	a	congenital	problem.]
Deva	means	divine,	narendra	means	a	king	--	divine	king.
And	stop	thinking	about	yourself	as	if	you	are	missing	anything;	you	are	not.	It
is	just	a	wrong	notion	that	has	settled	in	you.	You	have	made	it	such	a	constant
thinking	that	your	thinking	is	keeping	it	going	like	a	wound.	Nothing	is	wrong
with	your	energy.	An	idea	has	just	settled	in	you.
So	the	first	basic	thing	is	to	drop	that	idea.	And	don't	think	too	much	of	the	body;
start	thinking	of	the	inner	king.	Emphasis	should	be	on	consciousness,	not	on	the
body.	And	 there	 is	 a	 complexity:	 if	 you	 think	 too	much	of	 the	body,	 the	body
becomes	ill,	and	when	the	body	becomes	ill,	naturally	you	think	about	it	more.
Then	it	becomes	a	vicious	circle.
Even	 if	 a	 healthy	 person,	 a	 perfectly	 healthy	 person,	 starts	 thinking	 about	 his
stomach	--	how	he	is	going	to	digest	this	and	that	and	what	is	going	to	happen	--
within	twenty-four	hours	his	stomach	will	be	disturbed.
And	once	it	is	disturbed,	he	will	think	more.
So	nothing	is	basically	wrong	with	 the	body.	It	 is	 just	 that	an	 idea	has	become
settled.	Medicine	can't	help	because	medicine	can't	cure	the	idea.	So	you	can	go
from	one	doctor	to	another,	from	one	'pathy'	to	another	'pathy'	and	they	will	not
be	 of	much	 help.	They	may	 even	 disturb	 you	 because	 their	medicines	will	 do
something	but	they	cannot	cure	the	idea.	And	there	is	no	other	disease	except	the
idea.	So	their	medicines	will	have	after-effects;	they	are	all	poisons.
And	the	more	you	fail	with	the	doctor,	the	more	you	become	concerned	with	the
body.	Then	a	body-consciousness	arises.	One	becomes	very	very	 touchy	about
the	body.	Just	a	slight	change,	just	a	slight	difficulty,	just	a	slight	discomfort,	and
one	 gets	 into	 a	 panic.	 Then	 panic	 helps	 the	 body	 to	 become	 more	 and	 more
disturbed.
So	the	first	thing	in	my	suggestion	is:	you	drop	the	idea.	Start	living.
It	happened	once....	A	man	was	told	by	a	doctor	that	he	would	not	live	more	than
six	months.	 That	man	 had	 been	 ill	 for	 twenty	 years	 with	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
kinds	of	illnesses.	All	that	can	happen	to	a	human	being	was	happening	to	him.
The	 doctors	 were	 tired;	 and	 he	 was	 very	 rich.	 He	 was	 a	 hypochondriac,	 and
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
just	out	of	sheer	tiredness	the	doctors	said,	'You	cannot	survive	so	forget	certain.
Now	nobody	can	save	you.
So	if	you	want	to	live,	you	can	live	for	six	months.'
The	man	 thought	 'If	 I	 am	 going	 to	 live	 only	 for	 six	months	 then	why	 bother
about	 the	 body?	 It	 is	 going	 to	 die.'	 So	 for	 the	 first	 time	 he	 shifted	 his
consciousness.	He	ordered	 the	best	 clothes,	he	purchased	 the	best	 cars,	 and	he
planned	a	world	tour.	He	went	to	every	place	that	he	always	wanted	to	go	to	but
had	not	gone	because	of	the	body.	He	travelled	around	the	world,	ate	everything
that	he	always	wanted	to	eat,	made	love	to	women,	purchased	everything	that	he
wanted...	really	lived!	Death	was	coming	so	there	was	no	point	in	holding	back.
After	 six	months	when	 he	went	 back,	 he	was	 healthier	 than	 he	 had	 ever	 been
before.	He	lived	thirty	years	more	and	the	problem	never	came	up	again!
You	 have	 to	 drop	 that	 consciousness.	Naturopathy	 is	 good	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a
pathy;	it	is	just	a	rest.	(He'd	asked	if	he	should	go	to	a	Naturopathic	Clinic	some
distance	 from	 here.)	 But	 don't	 become	 a	 faddist,	 otherwise	 that	 is	 an	 illness.
Naturopathy	in	itself	is	not	a	pathy;	it	is	just	giving	rest	to	the	body,	giving	the
body	a	situation	where	it	can	become	attuned	to	nature.	It	is	an	attuning	with	the
instinctive	nature;	it	is	non-medicinal.	But	the	problem	with	Naturopathy	is	that
it	can	become	a	fad.	Then	the	fad	is	more	dangerous	than	the	disease.	And	it	is
very	rare...	Naturopathy	helps	many	people,	but	it	is	very	rare	that	a	person	who
has	been	helped	by	Naturopathy	does	not	become	ill	with	Naturopathy	itself.	It	is
very	rare;	then	it	becomes	a	fad.	He	is	constantly	thinking	what	to	eat,	what	not
to	eat,	where	to	go,	where	not	to	go,	and	about	ecology	and	all	that.
Then	life	becomes	difficult	again.	You	cannot	breathe	because	there	is	so	much
pollution	in	the	air.	You	cannot	eat	in	a	hotel	because	things	are	not	prepared	in	a
natural	way.	You	cannot	eat	this	and	you	cannot	eat	that,	because	you	would	like
only	natural	foods.	You	cannot	live	in	a	city.	And	then	things	become	difficult.
Always	remember,	Naturopathy	is	just	a	rest.	Good	--	once	in	a	while	even	for
no	reason	one	should	go	to	a	Naturopathy	clinic	and	rest	for	 two,	 three	weeks,
one	month,	 two	months,	 for	 as	much	 as	 one	 can	 afford	 every	 year	 and	 for	 no
particular	reason,	just	to	enjoy	nature	and	natural	foods	and	bath	and	sauna,	and
massage.	Not	for	any	particular	reason	but	just	for	simple	joy,	the	sheer	joy	of	it.
So	my	suggestion	is	that	you	go	to	the	Naturopathy	clinic,	enjoy	it,	but	drop	the
idea	that	you	are	ill....
So	think	of	the	inner	king;	the	body	is	just	a	palace.
[The	new	sannyasin	asks	if	he	should	go	to	the	nature	cure	clinic,	or	take	some
therapy	here.]
If	you	are	enjoying	here,	then	there	is	no	need	to	go...	then	there	is	no	need	to	go
anywhere....
Then	 take	 massage	 here.	 We	 have	 many	 kinds	 of	 massages	 available;	 the
Alexander	 Technique	 is	 available.	 That	 will	 be	 very	 good,	 mm?	 --	 the	 most
helpful	 thing.	Massage	 is	 available	 and	 if	 you	 feel	 like	 it	 then	 Rolfing,	 Neo-
rolfing,	Postural	Integration.	Take	these	things.	And	if	you	are	enjoying	it	here,
then	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.
...	Have	you	done	any	groups	before?	Anything	like	Encounter,	Gestalt?...	Mm,
in	Australia?	They	didn't	help	much?	No,	nothing	like	that	can	help	you.	But	you
will	come	out	now;	nothing	is	the	problem.
First	 do	 these	 things:	 Alexander	 Technique	 and	 Massage,	 Neo-rolfing,	 these
three.	Then	Hypnotherapy	and	Deep	Hypnotherapy.	Then	I	will	see	if	something
else	is	needed.
And	just	enjoy	being	here;	that	will	help	immensely.	Mix	with	my	people;	they
are	beautiful	people.
Befriend	 them,	 be	 loving,	 and	 forget	 yourself	 in	 the	 whirlwind	 that	 is	 here.
Forget	yourself.	Sing,	go	to	the	Music	Group	and	Sufi	Dancing.	Whatsoever	you
can	 do	 easily,	 go	 into	 it.	 Drop	 body-consciousness	 and	 attain	 to	 more	 inner
consciousness.	And	within	a	month	things	will	have	gone.	Good,	good!
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 that	 he	 has	 trouble	 with	 the	 idea	 of	 surrender.	 I	 can't
understand	it.	I	don't	know	whether	I	am	already	surrendered.	I'd	do	anything...
but	I	see	that	as	love;	I	don't	see	it	as	surrender.
Mm!	 but	 they	 are	 the	 same	 thing,	 Osho	 replies.	 Love	 and	 surrender	 are
synonymous;	they	are	two	names	for	the	same	thing.	Love	is	surrender.	And	you
are	surrendered;	that's	why	it	is	hard	for	you	to	comprehend	what	it	is.	Because
you	 are	 already	 that	 and	 there;	 you	 are	 in	 that	 space.	 It	 is	 easy	 to	 understand
when	you	are	outside.	You	can	watch,	you	can	be	more	objective;	you	can	move
around.	But	when	you	are	in	that	space,	when	you	are	that	space,	then	it	becomes
very	difficult	because	then	there	is	nobody	to	see	it.	The	knower	and	the	known
are	no	more	separate....	]
[A	 sannyasin	 couple	 are	 present.	 The	 man	 feels	 good	 but	 not	 enough...	 he	 is
stuck	in	his	mind	and	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
difficulty	to	stay	with	his	feelings.]
It	is	not	a	question	of	seriousness	or	sadness...	if	you	label	it	as	seriousness	and
sadness	you	will	never	be	able	 to	solve	 it,	because	 the	 labelling	 is	wrong.	 It	 is
just	 a	 depth	 that	 is	 arising	 in	 you	 and	 you	 are	 putting	 negative	 labels	 on	 it.	 It
happens	many	times	that	we	can	misinterpret	something.	We	call	it	a	name	and
that	 name	 can	 destroy	 the	 whole	 vision.	 For	 example,	 depth	 also	 feels	 like
sadness	because	sadness	has	a	depth.
And	we	know	sadness,	we	don't	 know	depth,	 so	when	 for	 the	 first	 time	depth
happens	it	looks	like	sadness.
Now,	you	are	 really	going	well.	Your	meditation	 is	good,	you	are	 flowing,	but
because	of	this	meditation	and	flow,	depth	is	arising.	That	depth	will	look	to	you
as	if	it	is	sad.	You	have	to	enjoy	this	depth,	you	have	to	love	this	depth.	And	then
the	 interpretation	 disappears,	 a	 new	 door	will	 open	 and	 you	will	 see	 it	 is	 not
sadness.	But	they	overlap,	that	is	true,	and	they	look	alike.
A	very	silent	person	can	look	sad.	Buddha	sitting	silently,	not	doing	anything....
He	does	not	even	smile	but	he	is	not	sad.	He	looks	sad,	and	many	have	thought
that	Buddha	is	sad,	but	even	a	smile	is	meaningless	in	that	depth.	He	is	so	deep
down	in	his	being	that	even	if	he	laughs	from	there	it	will	not	come	to	the	lips,	or
by	the	time	it	reaches	the	lips	it	will	be	almost	nil;	it	will	lose	all	energy.	But	he
is	not	sad.	He	is	immensely	ecstatic,	he	is	blissful.	How	can	he	be	sad?
Something	of	the	depth	is	arising,	so	be	loving	towards	it,	be	respectful	towards
it.	If	you	call	it	sadness,	you	have	showed	your	disrespect	towards	it.	Then	you
can	stop	 it	and	you	can	start	pulling	yourself	out	of	 it.	There	 is	no	need;	 relax
into	it.
And	 of	 course	 when	 you	 start	 falling	 into	 depth,	 insecurity	 arises;	 that	 is	 a
natural	consequence	of	depth.
Because	 depth	 means	 death.	 Depth	 means	 you	 start	 disappearing	 from	 the
periphery.	The	you	that	you	have	always	known	yourself	to	be	is	disappearing.
Insecurity	 will	 arise,	 and	 when	 insecurity	 arises	 you	 will	 start	 to	 project
insecurity	somewhere.	You	will	project	it	on	the	woman	you	love	because	she	is
the	closest.	You	need	some	curtain	on	which	to	project	it,	and	[your	girlfriend]
becomes	the	curtain.
One	 has	 to	 rationalise,	 otherwise	 the	mind	 feels	 very	 uneasy.	One	 has	 to	 find
some	reason	as	to	why	one	is	insecure.	The	mind	says	you	are	insecure	because
of	 [your	girlfriend].	She	may	 leave	you	some	day	or	she	may	go	 to	somebody
else	or	something	may	happen,	and	this	love	affair	may	not	be	always.	These	are
the	 explanations	 the	 superficial	 mind	 is	 giving	 to	 you,	 but	 they	 help	 you	 to
rationalise.	Uneasiness	goes;	now	you	know	what	is	the	problem.
Maybe	you	 cannot	 solve	 the	 problem	by	 the	 explanation.	No	 explanation	 ever
solves	anything	but	it	gives	you	a	kind	of	consolation	--	that	you	know	what	the
problem	is.	At	least	you	know	the	problem	even	if	you	don't	know	the	solution.
Maybe	if	you	think	over	the	problem	the	solution	will	be	coming.	But	it	 is	not
coming	from	[your	girlfriend];	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	her....
It	is	your	own	depth	that	is	creating	the	fear	of	death.	I	can	see	inside	you	that	a
great	trembling	is	there.
That	 trembling	 love,	 nothing.	 It	 is	 coming	 from	 your	 core;	 the	 fear	 is	 arising
from	 there.	You	 need	 some	 explanation	 outside	 but	 those	 explanations	 are	 not
helpful;	they	will	be	hindrances.
Go	into	it!	This	fear	is	good,	this	trembling	is	good.	This	is	spiritual	trembling.
Every	 seeker	 has	 to	 go	 through	 it	 because	 every	 seeker	 has	 to	 die,	 and	before
death	there	will	be	trembling,	great	trembling.	One	cannot	die	easily!	The	mind
will	find	all	kinds	of	ways	and	means	to	avoid	it.	The	mind	will	fight	and	resist.
It	will	give	great	 trouble	 to	you	before	 it	 relaxes,	before	 it	accepts	 it,	before	 it
starts	tumbling	into	the	depth.
It	will	tremble	on	the	shore.	It	will	cling	to	anything.
So	 just	 look	 at	 the	 depth,	 start	 falling	 into	 it...	 allow	 it	 to	 happen.	 Something
incredibly	beautiful	is	very	close	by.	No	explanation	is	needed,	no	rationalisation
is	needed.	Stop	asking	the	mind	what	is	happening.
Simply	go	into	the	happening.	This	is	not	the	time	to	ask;	this	is	the	time	to	go
into	it.
And	you	have	come	in	the	right	moment.	You	need	me	and	it	will	be	good	if	you
are	close	by.	The	jump	will	be	easier.	So	nothing	to	be	worried	about....
[A	sannyasin	has	been	invited	to	live	in	Lao	Tzu	house	with	the	condition	she	is
indoors	by	eleven	at	night	and	settles	with	one	lover	for	six	months,	 instead	of
running	 around	 with	 many	 men.	 She	 says	 she	 feels	 at	 a	 turning	 point.	 Osho
checks	her	energy.]
You	are	at	a	turning	point.	And	this	moment	can	be	used	very	very	creatively.	I
have	 been	watching	 you:	 you	 have	 been	 running	 after	men	 desperately.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	men,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	sex;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
all	 that.	 It	 is	 just	 that	you	are	avoiding	yourself	 through	occupation,	and	sex	 is
very	occupying	because	it	brings	all	kinds	of	misery.	Sex	is	just	the	engine	and
the	train	is	of	so	many	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
things,	mm?
All	types	of	compartments	are	there:	jealousy	and	misery	and	pain	and	fight	and
anger	and	hatred.	The	whole	train	is	loaded	and	sex	is	just	the	engine:	It	is	not
much;	it	just	keeps	the	train	running....
People	go	on	doing	but	it	is	a	vicious	circle.	Again	you	feel	empty	and	then	what
to	 do?	 And	 it	 is	 always	 better,	 the	 mind	 says,	 to	 be	 occupied	 than	 not	 to	 be
occupied.	 The	mind	 says	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 have	 something,	whatsoever	 it	 is,
than	have	nothing.	Even	if	it	is	misery	it	is	okay;	at	least	one	is	occupied.
But	the	time	has	come	now:	you	stop!	There	is	no	need	to	run	after	anybody.	If
the	relationship	is	going	on	with	Veda	make	it	more	and	more	loving	and	silent,
make	it	more	and	more	of	a	friendship.	There	is	no	need	to	reject	him	half	 the
time	and	then	hanker	for	him	the	other	half.	That's	what	sexuality	continues	 to
do.	It	hankers	and	when	the	man	starts	coming	towards	you,	you	start	running;
that	is	the	whole	game.
When	 the	 man	 starts	 going	 somewhere	 else,	 you	 start	 running	 after	 him.	 So
either	the	man	is	going	away	and	the	woman	is	following,	or	the	woman	is	going
away	and	the	man	is	following;	they	are	never	together.
It	becomes	an	ego	trip.	You	enjoy	somebody	desiring	you,	you	enjoy	somebody
following	you.	You	enjoy	it	that	somebody	is	desperately	in	need	of	you;	so	how
to	feel	that	Attract	him	and	then	reject	him!
When	you	reject	him	he	is	in	need	and	he	is	like	a	fish	thrown	out	of	water.	You
enjoy	 it.	 You	 know	 that	 you	 are	 very	 very	 significant	 to	 this	man.	 Look	 how
much	he	is	suffering	without	you!	And	you	can	only	know	this	if	you	reject.
When	he	 is	 suffering	 too	much	you	go	and	console	him	and	you	 shower	your
love	on	him	and	you	say
'Look	how	 loving	 I	 am,	without	me	where	will	 you	be?'	Then	he	 starts	 taking
you	for	granted;	again	you	have	to	reject	him	to	create	the	same	situation.
These	are	 the	games...	but	you	have	played	 them	enough	!	 I	have	not	 told	you
before	because	I	felt	that	it	was	necessary	for	you	to	go	into	it.	But	during	this
one	year	you	have	done	enough.	Mm?	what	people	do	 in	 two,	 three	 lives,	you
have	done	in	one	year!	It	 is	finished!	Now,	with	Veda,	stop	playing	games.	Be
friendly,	be	loving....
No	need	 to	chase;	drop	chasing.	And	 if	Veda	chases	somebody,	 that	 too	 is	not
your	 business.	 Just	 be	 friendly.	 When	 he	 comes	 to	 you,	 be	 friendly	 and	 be
loving.	If	he	wants	to	chase	somebody...	maybe	he	needs	to	still,	mm?
Just	as	you	did	for	one	year,	he	may	too,	so	no	need	to	create	any....
[She	says	she	is	preoccupied	about	sex	and	being	young	and	beautiful.]
Mm	mm,	that	will	stop	automatically	once	you	stop	chasing	people.	That	is	part
of	 the	 chasing.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 chase	 people	 you	 have	 to	 remain	 young	 and
beautiful	and	this	and	that.	And	in	fact,	just	the	opposite	happens:	the	more	you
chase	people,	the	older	you	will	be,	and	sooner.
Have	you	heard	the	story?	--	 that	a	king	had	many	wives.	Outside	the	town	he
had	made	a	special	place	for	them.	He	had	one	man	who	had	to	go	to	fetch	one
wife	every	night	for	him.	The	king	lived	up	to	seventy	and	by	that	time	at	least
seven	persons	who	had	to	go	and	bring	the	wife	had	died.	So	it	is	not	women	that
kill	--	it	is	the	chasing!
[She	 says	 she	 is	 worried	 about	 being	 indoors	 at	 eleven	 at	 night	 because	 her
energy	is	still	moving.]
Mm	mm,	 let	 it	move!	 In	your	 room	 let	 it	move!	Nothing	 to	be	worried	about.
Stop	chasing	and	then	you	won't	be	worried	about	the	body.	And	you	will	remain
younger	and	beautiful	longer.	In	fact	if	a	person	drops	all	kinds	of	chasing	and
desiring,	even	in	the	old	days	he	remains	beautiful.	In	fact	the	older	you	become,
the	more	beautiful,	because	age	has	a	grace	which	youth	cannot	have.
Youth	is	a	little	foolish...	bound	to	be	so,	it	is	natural.	Youth	is	shallow.	It	can't
have	depth	because	depth	needs	 experience	of	 life,	many	 experiences	 --	 sweet
and	bitter	and	all.	When	one	has	passed	through	many	experiences	and	one	has
seen	all	that	life	makes	available,	then	a	grace,	a	silence,	a	dignity	arises.
One	becomes	luminous	from	within.
And	 that	 is	 the	criterion	 for	whether	 the	 life	has	 really	been	 lived	or	not.	 If	 in
your	old	 age	you	become	more	 and	more	beautiful	 every	day,	 that	means	you
have	lived	rightly.	You	lived;	it	has	not	been	a	sheer	wastage.	The	last	day	has	to
be	the	most	beautiful	day	in	your	whole	life.	And	the	last	moment,	when	one	is
dying,	has	to	be	the	most	graceful.
And	 it	 happens!	 One	 just	 has	 to	 stop	 hankering,	 chasing,	 desiring,	 lusting,
because	 those	 things	 create	 turmoil;	 they	 are	 destructive.	 So	 stop	 chasing.	 Be
friendly...
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[She	says	she	has	a	lot	of	hang-ups	about	sex	and	orgasms;	feeling	inferior	and
left	out	of	things.]
You	 have	 the	western	 attitude	 about	 sex;	 that	 is	 creating	 trouble.	 The	western
attitude	is	always	about	making	things	happen,	doing	something!	And	there	are	a
few	things	which	cannot	be	done.	There	the	West	becomes	very	very	crazy!
For	example,	sleep,	sex.	These	are	things	you	cannot	do,	so	the	West	suffers	very
much	from	lack	of	sleep	also,	insomnia,	and	also	from	sex.	Everybody	is	worried
that	he	is	not	experiencing	it	as	it	should	be.
The	orgasm	is	not	coming	or	it	 is	very	local	or	 it	 is	very	lukewarm	or	it	 is	not
total.	And	sleep	is	not	good:	there	are	too	many	dreams.	Many	times	one	wakes
or	one	has	to	wait	hours	for	it	 to	come.	People	are	trying	all	kinds	of	things	to
bring	sleep:	the	tranquillizers,	the	tricks,	the	mantras	and	TM.
And	about	sex	also	people	are	very	very	worried.	That	very	worry	and	that	very
effort	 to	 do	 something	 is	 the	 problem.	 Sex	 happens;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 thing	 that	 you
have	 to	 do.	 So	 you	 have	 to	 learn	 the	 eastern	 attitude	 toward	 sex,	 the	 Tantra
attitude.	The	Tantra	attitude	is	that	you	be	loving	to	a	person.	There	is	no	need	to
plan,	there	is	no	need	to	rehearse	in	the	mind.	There	is	no	need	to	do	anything	in
particular:	just	be	loving	and	available.	Go	on	playing	with	each	other's	energy.
And	when	you	start	making	 love,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	make	 it	great.	Otherwise
you	will	be	pretending	and	so	will	the	other	person.	He	will	pretend	that	he	is	a
great	 lover	 and	 you	 will	 pretend	 that	 you	 are	 a	 great	 lover...	 and	 both	 are
unsatisfied!	There	is	no	need	to	pose	anything.
It	is	a	very	silent	prayer.	Making	love	is	meditation.	It	is	sacred,	it	is	the	holiest
of	holies.	So	while	you	are	making	 love	 to	a	man	go	very	slowly...	with	 taste,
taking	 in	 every	 flavour	 of	 it.	 And	 very	 slowly:	 there	 is	 no	 hurry,	 no	 need	 to
hurry;	enough	time	is	there.
And	while	making	love,	forget	about	orgasm.	Rather,	be	in	a	relaxed	state	with
the	man,	relax	into	each	other.	The	western	mind	is	continuously	thinking	about
when	 it	 is	 coming	 and	 how	 to	make	 it	 fast	 and	 great	 and	 this	 and	 that.	 That
thinking	does	not	allow	the	body	energies	to	function.	It	does	not	allow	the	body
to	have	its	own	way;	the	mind	goes	on	interfering....
Relax	with	the	man.	If	nothing	happens	there	is	no	need	for	anything	to	happen.
If	 nothing	 happens	 then	 that	 is	 what	 is	 happening...	 and	 that	 too	 is	 beautiful!
Orgasm	is	not	such	a	 thing	 that	 it	has	 to	happen	every	day.	Sex	should	be	 just
being	together,	 just	dissolving	into	each	other.	Then	one	can	keep	making	love
for	half	an	hour,	for	one	hour,	just	relaxing	into	the	other.	Then	you	will	of	utter
mindlessness,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 the	 mind.	 Love	 is	 the	 only	 thing
where	the	mind	is	not	needed;	and	that's	where	the	West	is	wrong:	it	brings	in	the
mind	even	there!
So	just	relax	into	each	other	and	forget	about	the	mind.	Enjoy	the	very	presence
of	the	other,	the	meeting,	and	get	lost	in	it.	Don't	try	to	make	anything	out	of	it;
there	is	nothing	to	make.	Then	one	day	there	will	be	a	valley	orgasm;	there	will
be	no	peak.	There	will	be	only	relaxation,	but	 that	has	 its	own	peak	because	it
has	depth.	Some	day	the	body	will	trigger	itself	into	a	peak	orgasm	but	that	will
also	be	coming;	you	will	just	be	there.
Sometimes	there	will	be	a	valley,	sometimes	there	will	be	a	peak...	and	that	is	a
rhythm.	You	cannot	have	a	peak	every	day.	If	you	have	only	peaks	then	the	peak
will	 r	be	very	big.	You	have	 to	earn	 the	peak	by	going	 into	 the	valley.	So	 it	 is
half	and	half.	Sometimes	it	will	be	a	valley	orgasm.	Then	get	lost	in	the	darkness
of	the	valley,	the	coolness	and	the	peace.	That	is	how	you	earn	a	peak.	One	day
the	energies	are	ready:	they	themselves	are	going	towards	the	peak.	Not	that	you
are	taking	them.	How	can	you?	Who	are	you	and	how	can	you	manage	to?	By
being	 in	 the	valley	 the	energy	accumulates;	 the	peak	 is	born	out	of	 the	valley.
Then	there	is	great	orgasm;	your	whole	being	is	suffused	with	a	joy.
In	the	peak	it	will	be	joy,	in	the	valley	it	will	be	peace.	Both	are	beautiful.	And
finally,	 peace	 is	more	 valuable	 than	 joy,	 because	 joy	will	 be	momentary:	 you
cannot	be	on	the	peak	for	more	than	a	moment.	A	peak	means	it	is	very	small;	it
is	 like	a	pyramid.	You	cannot	stand	there	for	 long,	you	can	be	 there	only	for	a
moment.	But	vou	can	be	when	a	valley	comes,	good.	Both	have	to	be	enjoyed;
both	have	something	to	deliver.	Both	are	meaningful	and	both	help	you	to	grow.
Finally	Tantra	 says,	 the	valley	orgasm	 is	 far	more	 superior	 than	 the	peak.	The
peak	orgasm	is	immature,	the	valley	orgasm	has	a	great	maturity	in	it.	The	peak
orgasm	has	excitement:	it	is	feverish,	it	is	passion.	It	has	a	thrill	but	that	thrill	is
tiring.	The	valley	orgasm	has	no	 thrill	but	 it	has	silence,	and	 that	silence	 is	 far
more	valuable,	far	more	transforming.	That	will	remain	with	you	for	twenty-four
hours.	Once	you	have	been	in	a	valley	that	valley	will	follow	you.	The	peak	will
be	lost	and	you	will	be	exhausted	and	will	fall	in	sleep.
The	valley	will	continue;	for	days	it	can	have	a	kind	of	effect	on	you.	You	will
feel	relaxed,	together.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Both	are	good,	but	nothing	can	be	done.	One	has	simply	to	allow.	So	love	is	a
kind	of	relaxation	i}i	which	things	have	to	be	allowed.	Drop	the	western	mind....
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 that	 since	 she	 separated	 from	 her	 boyfriend,	 she	 has	 been
depressed,	wanting	to	escape	from	the	ashram,	even	hating	Osho.]
Mm	mm.	Nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about;	 these	moments	 come.	These	moments
come	 --	 when	 the	 disciple	 turns	 against	 the	 master,	 hates	 the	 master.	 These
moments	come	when	the	disciple	wants	to	go	away...	and	these	are	the	precious
moments.	Don't	listen	to	that	voice!	It	is	your	ego	that	is	making	the	final	effort
to	somehow	take	you	away	so	that	it	can	survive!	You	are	not	going	to	die;	your
ego	 is	going	 to	die.	So	 the	ego	 is	 trying	 in	every	way.	 It	will	 find	all	kinds	of
reasons	to	get	away	from	here.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 one	 very	 good	 man	 was	 going	 to	 take	 sannyas;	 then	 he
escaped	at	 the	 last	moment.	He	has	been	 in	business,	very	successful.	Then	he
dropped	out	of	business	because	he	knew	that	there	was	nothing	to	it	any	more.
He	became	a	Christian	monk	and	for	seven	years	he	remained	a	monk.	He	saw
that	 nothing	 was	 happening	 there;	 he	 had	 been	 wasting	 his	 time.	 It	 was	 all
rubbish,	scholarship	and	all	that,	but	there	was	nothing,	no	real	thing.
He	came	here.	For	three	days	he	listened.	He	had	come	to	become	a	sannyasin
and	yesterday	he	was	to	come	to	darshan	but	he	escaped.	He	told	Laxmi,	'This	is
too	 much.	 If	 I	 don't	 escape	 now,	 I	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to!'	 So	 this	 is	 the	 last
chance.	He	thought	that	if	he	can	escape,	he	should	escape.	I	know	he	will	come
back4.	That	fear	is	natural...	that	fear	is	natural.	It	is	a	dangerous	place	to	be.	But
that	is	the	whole	point	of	being	here:	because	it	is	dangerous!	So	don't	listen	to
that	voice;	that	voice	is	of	the	devil!	Mm?	the	old	name	for	it	was	the	devil.	I	call
it	the	mind,	the	ego,	but	it	is	the	same	thing.	There	is	no	other	devil.	If	you	can
stay	 in	 this	moment,	 if	you	can	still	go	on	 trusting	and	 loving,	 then	something
very	urgent	that	is	waiting	to	happen	there	is	going	to	happen.
[A	sannyasin	ashram	gardener	says	he	feels	 like	a	zombie	 in	 the	garden	and	 is
attracted	to	work	with	dress-design	in	the	ashram.]
Be	a	zombie	but	be	in	the	garden...	and	enjoy	being	a	zombie!	If	you	enjoy,	you
are	 no	 more.	 Enjoy	 being	 a	 zombie;	 that	 very	 enjoyment	 will	 become	 the
transcendence.	What	is	wrong	in	being	a	zombie?	Just	enjoy	it!
It	 is	 far	better	 to	be	with	 the	 trees	and	 the	 rocks	 than	 to	be	with	clothes.	Your
vegetable	garden	is	doing	perfectly	well.	I	am	very	happy!	I	was	thinking	to	give
you	a	bigger	garden	in	the	new	place.	So	get	in	tune	with	your	zombie;	no	need
to	worry.	I	have	already	planned	a	very	big	garden	for	you	so	there	is	no	way	of
going	to	[dress	design],	mm?	Good!
[Osho	 mentioned	 this	 problem	 the	 following	 morning	 in	 the	 discourse	 when
talking	about	the	way	a	master	works.	He	mentioned	seven	points,	the	first	being
catalytic,	 'contact	high'	or	satsang,	and	the	second	he	termed	catalepsy.	He	said
catalepsy	is	the	suspension	of	the	disciple's	old	being...
'When	you	are	in	contact	with	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha	your	old	being	is	suspended,
out	of	the	very	shock.
You	cannot	function	as	you	used	to	before.	The	very	presence	is	such	a	shock;
everything	is	suspended.	For	a	moment	all	thoughts	stop,	all	feelings	disappear.
For	 the	moment	 you	may	miss	 a	 heartbeat.	That's	why	 it	 happens	 that	 around
great	masters	you	will	 see	many	people	who	 look	 like	 zombies.	They	are	 in	 a
kind	of	suspension.
'Just	 the	 other	 day	Divyananda	 came	 to	me;	 he	works	 in	my	garden.	He	 said,
"What	is	happening	to	me?
I	have	become	almost	like	a	zombie!	I	am	afraid.	Should	I	go	and	do	something
else?"
'I	told	him,	"Be	a	zombie!	Be	a	perfect	zombie,	that's	all.	Continue	your	work."
'Now,	something	 immensely	valuable	 is	happening	but	he	cannot	understand	 it
yet.	This	is	what	is	happening	--	catalepsy.	He	is	open	to	me,	and	working	in	my
garden	he	has	become	even	more	open	to	me.
He	is	in	a	shock.	He	is	forgetting	who	he	is,	he	is	losing	his	old	identity.	He	is
paralysed.	Why	paralysed?
Because	the	old	cannot	function	and	the	new	has	yet	to	be	born,	so	he	is	in	the
interval.	This	is	going	to	happen	to	many.	Don't	be	afraid	when	it	happens.	It	will
go,	it	is	not	going	to	remain.	But	it	is	on	the	way,	it	happens	on	the	way.
'This	 is	 a	 state	 of	 not-knowing.	 You	 don't	 know	 what	 is	 what.	 All	 your
knowledge	is	lost,	all	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
cleverness	is	gone.	You	become	idiotic...	you	look	like	an	idiot.	People	will	say
that	you	have	become	hypnotised	or	something,	 that	you	are	no	more	your	old
self.	That	is	true.
'It	is	a	kind	of	shock,	and	good,	because	it	will	destroy	the	past.	It	will	make	you
discontinuous	 with	 the	 past	 and	 it	 will	 bring	 the	 fresh,	 the	 new.	 It	 will	 allow
something	original	to	happen,	but	before	the	original	can	happen	the	past	has	to
go.'
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711055
ShortTitle:	OPENSE05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin	 is	 leaving	 and	 says	he	has	 a	 restaurant	 called	 'The	Traveller'.	 So
make	a	little	corner	in	it	for	me!	says	Osho....	So	I	will	give	you	a	new	name	for
it.	 It	will	 be	 helpful	 for	 you	 to	 talk	 about	me.	 Soon	 you	will	 find	 that	 I	 have
started	working	through	you.	Pathik	--	it	means	The	Traveller.
The	 sannyasin	 then	 asks	why	 there	 is	 so	much	 onion	 and	 garlic	 in	 the	meals,
which	 does	 not	 fit	 with	 meditation.	 Osho	 says,	 Mm!	 Then	 come	 back	 and
manage	things	here!.]
[A	sannyasin	received	a	telegram	and	air	ticket	home	because	his	mother	is	in	a
coma.	He	does	not	know	the	details,	but	is	leaving.]
You	go!	And	do	one	thing....	Sit	by	the	side	of	your	mother	and	put	this	(a	box)
on	her	third	eye;	just	keep	it	there.	And	become	very	very	silent	and	open	to	me.
Feel	as	 if	you	are	being	possessed	by	me,	as	 if	 I	am	coming	 through	you,	and
pour	your	energies	 into	her	 through	 the	box.	That	will	be	of	great	help.	 If	 she
survives	 it	will	 be	 of	 help.	 If	 she	 goes	 then	 too	 she	will	 be	 going	 in	 the	 right
direction,	in	a	more	beautiful	space.
The	real	thing	is	not	whether	she	survives	or	not;	that	is	never	the	real	thing.	The
real	thing	is	if	her	consciousness	changes.	If	she	survives,	good;	if	she	goes,	that
too	 is	 good,	 but	 she	 should	 go	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 attunement	 with	 the	 whole.	 That
should	be	the	effort	--	that	she	should	not	go	in	a	kind	of	struggle;	she	should	go
perfectly	relaxed.	She	should	go	as	if	she	is	going	home.
And	that	is	one	of	the	problems	that	the	western	consciousness	has	to	face.	It	is
very	much	afraid	of	death...	 too	much	fear	of	death.	There	have	been	only	two
kinds	of	pathological	cultures	in	the	world.	One	pathology	arises	out	of	the	fear
of	 sex	 and	 another	 pathology	 arises	 out	 of	 the	 fear	 of	 death.	 These	 are	 two
pathologies	of	humanity,	two	illnesses.
[Osho	goes	on	to	talk	about	how	the	East	fears	sex,	the	West,	death.]
In	the	West	the	body	is	the	only	life.	The	body	seems	to	be	the	only	existence,	so
if	it	is	gone	all	is	gone;	hence	the	fear	of	death.	And	when	you	become	afraid	of
death,	you	become	incapable	of	living	life.	These	are	the	problems	that	come	in
the	wake:	if	you	are	afraid	of	death	how	can	you	love	life?	You	can	only	pretend,
because	 it	 is	 life	 that	 brings	 death	 finally.	 It	 is	 through	 life	 that	 death	 comes.
How	can	I	love	you	if	my	death	is	coming	through	you?	It	is	impossible;	you	are
my	enemy.	Whatsoever	I	say,	that	is	not	the	point,	but	deep	down	I	know	that	it
is	life	that	brings	death.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	in	the	western	mind	all	efforts	have	been	made	down	the	ages	to	stop	life	at	a
certain	stage.	Women	start	 thinking	about	how	to	stop	 it...	and	 they	do	stop	 it!
After	 a	 certain	 age,	 sixteen,	 eighteen,	 they	 don't	 grow	 annually.	 In	 two,	 three
years,	 they	grow	only	one	year.	By	 the	 time	 they	 are	 thirty	 they	 start	 clinging
very	 very	 deeply:	 they	 don't	want	 to	 go	 beyond	 that.	Cosmetics	 and	medicine
and	 all	 kinds	 of	 technical	 supports	 are	 available	 to	 help	 you	 to	 keep	 yourself
young,	to	remain	youthful.
Because	 of	 that	 fear	 you	 cannot	 grow.	 You	 cannot	 love	 life	 because	 you	 are
afraid	of	life,	and	the	fear	is	coming	from	death.
The	East	 is	 afraid	 of	 life;	 it	 cannot	 die	 rightly.	The	West	 is	 afraid	 of	 death;	 it
cannot	 live	 rightly.	And	when	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 death	 you	 cannot	 go	 into	 sex
either	 because	 the	 last	 orgasmic	moment	 in	 sex	 is	 similar	 to	 death.	 So	 people
have	become	non-orgasmic.	They	make	love,	they	want	to	go	into	orgasm,	deep
orgasm,	they	want	to	relax	and	disappear,	but	the	fear	of	death	is	there.	It	does
not	allow	them:	they	go	only	so	far	and	then	they	shrink	back.
And	because	each	 time	 they	go	so	 far	and	shrink	back,	unsatisfied,	 sex	haunts
their	life	continuously.
Again	and	again	they	think,	'I	could	not	make	it	with	this	woman	--	I	will	make	it
with	 another.	 If	 not	 with	 this	 person	 then	 there	 must	 be	 somebody	 else	 with
whom	 I	 can	make	 it....	 '	And	 the	problem	 is	 not	with	women.	The	problem	 is
with	you,	because	you	are	afraid	of	dying...	and	sex	is	a	kind	of	death.
One	 thing	 has	 been	missed	 down	 the	 ages	 and	 that	 is	 that	 life	 and	 death	 are
together;	 they	are	two	faces	of	one	reality.	So	the	real	person	accepts	both;	 the
real	 person	 lives	 in	 both	 the	 poles	 together.	 Through	 polarisation	 he	 achieves
self-actualisation.	Those	poles	are	opposite,	and	that	is	the	beauty	of	a	real	man	-
-
that	he	goes	on	floating	from	one	pole	to	another.
So	go,	and	help	her	to	relax.	Just	put	this	(the	box)	on	her	third	eye,	sit	silently,
become	completely	mindless.	Just	remember	me,	feel	I	have	taken	possession	of
you,	 I	 am	flowing	 through	you	 into	her.	You	will	 feel	energy	moving	and	you
will	feel	symptoms	on	her	face,	in	her	body.
Both	are	the	possibilities:	she	may	come	back	--	then	she	will	be	a	different	kind
of	woman	 --	or	 she	may	go.	But	 then	 too	 she	will	be	going	a	different	person
from	who	she	was.	In	both	ways	you	will	be	helpful.
So	don't	have	any	desire	 in	 the	mind	 that	 she	 should	 survive.	 If	you	have	 that
desire	then	you	are	also	afraid	of	death;	you	cannot	be	of	any	help.	You	follow
me?	If	you	have	the	desire	that	she	should	survive	anyhow	then	you	will	not	be
of	much	help.	You	have	not	to	have	any	desire.	Simply	be	there,	choiceless.
Thy	will	be	done...	whatsoever	it	is.	If	she	survives,	good;	if	she	goes,	perfectly
good.	No	choice	on	your	part,	only	then	can	you	become	a	vehicle	for	me.	It	will
be	a	great	experience	to	you	too.	What	happens	to	her	is	secondary;	something
will	happen	to	you.
So	use	this	opportunity	for	a	great	meditation...	and	help	her.	Good.
[A	sannyas	couple	who	have	just	fallen	in	love	are	present.	The	woman	says:	I
would	like	to	give	more	love.]
Mm	mm!	Give!	Don't	go	on	 thinking	 --	give.	Hold	hands	and	close	your	eyes
and	pour	your	 love	 into	each	other.	 If	 something	starts	happening	 in	 the	body,
allow	it	--	any	moving,	shaking,	trembling	but	don't	leave	the	hands....
Good...	 come	 back,	 mm?	 (to	 the	 man)	 Just	 one	 thing:	 you	 both	 seem	 to	 be
disciplined	too	much,	controlled	too	much.	That	is	a	barrier	in	love.	Discipline	is
good	in	war,	not	in	love.	And	to	be	controlled	is	good	in	the	world	when	you	are
dealing	with	people	with	whom	you	are	not	really	related.	But	when	you	are	in
love	 you	 should	 be	 completely	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 let-go,	 entirely	 available,
uncontrolled,	undisciplined.
Only	 then	 can	 the	hearts	meet	 and	merge	 and	can	boundaries	become	blurred.
You	both	have	very	special	boundaries;	you	are	not	overlapping	each	other.	Your
energy	is	separate,	her	energy	is	separate.	This	control	will	not	be	good.
Love	has	to	be	wild...	love	has	to	be	animalistic!	Only	when	it	is	wild	is	it	great.
Controlled,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 tiny	 thing,	mediocre;	 it	 doesn't	 satisfy.	And	 that's	why
[your	lover]	asks	how	to	love	more.	It	is	not	a	question	of	how	to	love	more	--
love	is	there;	just	go	into	a	little	more	uncontrol.
(to	the	woman)	And	your	question	about	how	to	love	more	is	again	a	question	of
control.	You	want	 to	 control	 love	 too:	 you	want	 to	 dial	 it	 so	 you	 can	make	 it
more	or	 less.	You	cannot	 control	 love.	Love	 is	 bigger	 than	you.	You	can	only
allow	 it,	 and	when	 it	 comes	 you	 have	 to	 be	 flooded	 by	 it,	 completely	washed
away,	 taken	 away,	 possessed	 by	 it	 love	 is	maddening,	 and	 for	 a	 few	moments
you	have	to	be	mad.
(to	the	man)	That	is	a	cultural	problem	for	the	Japanese:	control.	So	you	have	to
be	a	little	less	Japanese.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Go	madly	into	it,	headlong,	and	you	will	not	be	a	loser.	Great	will	be	your	gain,
but	only	those	who	lose	themselves	gain.	So	let	this	be	remembered:	next	time
you	 are	 together	 just	 go	wildly	 together.	 Pulsate,	 dance,	 sing,	 for	 no	 reason	 at
all...	just	for	the	sheer	joy	of	it.
Much	 is	possible,	mm?	(to	 the	woman)	Help	him!	You	will	have	 to	 take	more
care,	because	after	all	he	is	a	Japanese,	mm?	It	will	be	very	very	difficult	for	him
to	come	out	of	it.	He	will	try,	but	if	you	help	he	can	come	out	more	easily.	It	is	a
cultural	characteristic	and	for	centuries	Japan	has	been	trained	to	be	mannerly,	to
follow	 the	 etiquette	 to	 the	minutest	 detail.	A	 slight	 thing	 that	 goes	 against	 the
morals,	 against	 the	 manners,	 against	 the	 national	 etiquette,	 is	 enough	 for	 the
Japanese	to	commit	suicide.	It	is	a	very	suicidal	country!	Sometimes	very	small
things....
It	happened	once	that	a	general	just	did	something,	a	very	minor	thing.	When	the
king	was	 speaking	 to	 him	 he	 spoke	 back	 in	 an	 unmannerly	way.	He	 had	 said
nothing	wrong	but	it	was	not	as	appropriate	as	it	should	have	been.	He	talked	as
if	he	were	talking	to	just	another	man.	Immediately	he	was	reminded	that	he	had
forgotten	how	he	should	talk	to	the	king	he	committed	suicide	--	just	to	save	his
honour.	Because	he	committed	suicide	three	hundred	of	his	disciples	committed
suicide	 --	 three	 hundred!	 Because	 their	 master	 had	 committed	 a	 mistake	 it
became	their	shame.
Now,	it	could	not	have	happened	anywhere	else.	He	could	have	just	said	'Sorry!';
that	was	enough	for	the	mistake.	But	to	commit	suicide	and	then	three	hundred
more	people	committing	suicide	because	of	it!
That's	how	Japan	has	lived	down	the	ages.	Now	things	have	changed	but	this	has
gone	into	the	blood	and	the	bones.	So	be	a	little	helpful,	mm?	You	have	to	nurse
him	out	of	it!
[A	sannyasin	had	been	waiting	a	long	time	for	his	girlfriend	to	come	to	Poona.
Now	she	 is	here	he	 is	having	problems.	When	he	did	 the	 tantra	group	he	was
more	in	touch	with	his	energy	than	now.	She	is	also	present	and	previously	said
that	she	was	not	 interested	to	do	groups	but	 is	helping	her	boyfriend	by	taking
notes	for	him	while	he	does	acupuncture.]
That's	 how	people	wait	 for	 trouble!	And	when	 they	 come	 then	 you	become....
Now	the	problem	is	that	you	have	changed	a	lot	and	she	seems	to	be	reluctant	to
change.	She	is	very	defensive,	she	is	very	afraid.
She	is	not	open	to	anything	here.
...	Mm,	she	is	not	open	to	me,	so	it	will	be	a	little	difficult.	If	she	were	open	then
things	would	have	been	easier,	but	she	will	create	all	kinds	of	trouble.	You	have
changed	a	lot	so	there	is	a	disparity.	You	used	to	love	her	but	then	you	used	to	be
different.	She	used	to	love	you	but	you	were	different	then.	She	is	the	same	and
you	have	changed	so	there	is	a	gap.
If	you	want	to	bridge	that	gap	then	you	will	have	to	stay	patient	for	a	few	weeks.
It	will	be	troublesome	but	if	you	want	to	close	that	gap,	bridge	that	gap,	then	that
much	sacrifice	has	to	be	made.
...	It	can	happen...	I	cannot	say	it	will	happen.
Because	this	is	a	problem.	She	may	not	be	interested	at	all	in	the	meditations,	in
the	work	that	is	going	on	here;	she	does	not	seem	to	be.	If	she	is	not	interested
then	it	is	very	difficult.	If	she	is	interested	just	time	is	needed.	She	can	go	into	a
few	 groups,	 she	 can	 do	 a	 few	meditations.	 But	 she	 is	 not	willing	 to;	 she	 just
wants	to	cling	to	you	and	take	notes	when	you	are	doing	acupuncture.	Then	it	is
okay	like	that.	She	is	not	ready	to	leave	you.
Help	her	to	go	into	groups!	You	will	be	alone,	she	will	be	alone,	and	that	will	be
very	good.
[The	sannyasin	says:	I	think	I	push	her	too	much.	That's	part	of	the	problem.]
Mm	 mm...	 then	 just	 drop	 pushing;	 just	 accept.	 At	 least	 for	 four	 weeks	 see.
Suffer,	mm?	What	can	be	done?	You	never	ask	me,	otherwise	I	would	not	have
said	to	invite	her	here.	Why	call	her?	Why	create	trouble	for	her?
We	 don't	 understand	 how	 things	work.	When	 one	 partner	 changes	 it	 becomes
really	difficult	for	the	other	partner	to	cope.	She	is	also	in	difficulty.	She	has	not
done	anything	wrong,	but	you	have	fallen	apart.
Love	is	 there;	she	loves	you	--	 that's	why	she	has	come.	You	love	her	but	now
the	 gap	 is	 big;	 you	 are	 shouting	 from	 far	 away	 and	 she	 is	 also	 far	 away.	You
cannot	 talk;	you	are	 too	distant	 from	one	another.	You	cannot	understand	each
other.	You	say	something;	she	understands	something	else.	She	says	something;
you	understand	something	different.	Communication	will	become	difficult.
...	Wait	 for	 two,	 three	weeks,	and	 if	 it	happens,	good;	otherwise	say	good-bye.
Because	there	 is	no	need	to	suffer	over	 it	and	to	make	her	suffer	also.	It	 is	not
only	that	you	are	in	trouble,	she	is	also	in	trouble,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
maybe	 in	 more	 trouble	 than	 you!	 Because	 she	 is	 alone	 here;	 you	 have	 a	 big
orange	 family.	 She	 could	 be	 in	 much	 more	 trouble	 because	 she	 will	 have	 to
defend	 herself	 continuously,	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	 You	 have	 all	 kinds	 of
support;	she	has	no	support.	But	she	seems	to	be	of	the	strong	kind.
But	if	she	chooses,	make	the	choice	clear.	If	she	wants	you,	if	she	loves	you,	she
has	to	become	open	to	this	climate.	If	she	does	not	want	you,	if	she	does	not	love
you,	then	say	good-bye.	It	will	be	in	sadness,	but	what	can	be	done?	Don't	make
her	 suffer	 and	 don't	make	 yourself	 suffer.	 Just	make	 one	 thing	 clear:	 that	 you
cannot	go	back.	Whatsoever	has	happened	to	you	cannot	unhappen	now.
Mm?	that	 is	one	of	 the	difficulties	 in	 life:	 if	something	happens	you	cannot	go
back;	 there	 is	no	way	back.	 If	you	have	known	something	you	cannot	make	 it
unknown	 again.	 If	 you	 have	 done	 something	 you	 cannot	 undo	 it.	 It	 has
happened;	it	will	be	there	forever	now.	You	can	go	on	adding,	changing	things,
but	it	will	be	there.	It	has	become	part	of	your	very	substance.
So	you	cannot	go	back.	The	only	possibility	is	that	she	comes	forward	and	enters
the	world	 into	which	you	have	entered.	 If	she	 loves	you,	she	will.	But	make	 it
clear.	If	she	is	not	that	much	in	love	she	will	be	ready	to	sacrifice	you	rather	than
change	herself....	But	a	change	would	not	be	bad	for	her;	a	change	would	be	her
life's	blessing....	But	that	is	for	her	to	decide	--	whether	she	wants	to	choose	that
blessing	or	not.
Just	make	it	clear	and	then	wait	two,	three	weeks.	Suffer	patiently,	lovingly,	and
if	things	don't	change	just	say	good-bye.	Send	her	back.	There	is	no	need	to	be
worried,	mm?
[He	answers:	 I	 feel	 reluctant	 to	work	with	her.	After	 taking	sannyas	my	whole
energy	is	so	different.]
Yes,	it	is	different;	I	understand	your	difficulty.	But	you	should	have	asked	me.
Unless	I	see	the	picture	and	I	feel	the	girl,	I	would	not	have	said	to	you	to	call
her.	That	is	an	unnecessary	trouble...	not	worthwhile.
You	don't	need	her	notes?	(he	shakes	his	head)	Then	she	could	do	some	groups.
But	she	does	not	want	to;	that	note-taking	seems	to	be	a	safety	device.
Just	see	for	a	few	days	and	then	if	it	is	not	happening,	just	send	her	back.	It	will
be	sad	but	what	can	be	done?
Sometimes	one	has	to	accept	something.	Or	maybe	she	will	start	thinking	about
it	 again	 and	 change	 herself!	 Just	 three,	 four	 groups	 and	 she	will	 be	 different.
Wait,	let	us	see,	mm?	I	will	do	my	best!
[A	 sannyas	 couple	 had	 previously	 spoken	 to	 Osho	 because	 the	 woman	 was
feeling	jealous	when	the	man	was	attracted	to	other	woman.	Now	she	is	moving
with	other	men	and	he	is	feeling	hurt.	He	says	that	when	he	is	aware	it	is	fine,
but	sometimes	he	falls	asleep.]
Then	let	it	be	fine;	don't	disturb	it!	There	is	no	need.	Start	taking	life	with	ease.
Don't	be	too	serious	about	small	things;	they	don't	matter....
So	it	is	a	good	situation	to	become	more	and	more	aware	in,	mm?	Your	woman
is	giving	you	a	great	opportunity.	If	she	goes	with	somebody,	become	aware.	The
more	 she	 goes,	 the	 better:	 you	 will	 be	 more	 and	 more	 aware!	 These	 are	 all
devices.	 If	 you	 use	 them,	 you	 will	 be	 happy	 that	 they	 happened.	 Because
jealousy	is	poison.	There	is	no	need,	no	point	in	it...	just	a	misunderstanding	of
thousands	of	years.
When	your	woman	goes	to	somebody	else	you	start	feeling	hurt.	You	feel	as	if
you	have	been	rejected.
You	 start	 feeling	 as	 if	 you	 are	 not	 adequate,	 not	 enough;	 she	 needs	 somebody
else.	You	are	not	the	right	person	or	you	are	not	fulfilling	her.	One	starts	feeling
as	if	something	is	missing	in	one.	That	is	not	the	point	at	all;	that	is	a	complete
misunderstanding.
It	is	like	eating	the	same	thing	every	day.	One	day	you	feel	like	eating	something
else.	Not	that	you	hate	the	food.	It	may	be	nutritious,	it	may	be	the	best	food	for
your	health.	It	may	be	fitting	perfectly,	you	may	be	feeling	absolutely	okay,	but
still	 you	 are	 fed	up	with	 it.	You	would	 like	 to	 go	 to	 some	hotel	 and	 eat	 some
rubbish	(laughter)	which	is	not	nourishing,	which	is	not	healthy!	You	may	have	a
stomach	ache	and	a	headache	afterwards	but	still	sometimes	it	is	needed.
You	have	not	 said	anything	about	 the	 food	 that	you	have	been	eating	but	your
mind	needs	a	 little	variety.	When	 the	mind	goes,	only	 then	does	 the	desire	 for
variety	go.	Then	one	can	live	with	a	single	note	of	music	for	one's	whole	life!
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 musician	 who	 used	 to	 play	 just	 one	 note	 on	 his	 sitar,
continuously,	for	hours	together.
The	wife	was	becoming	mad,	the	neighbours	were	becoming	mad.	Finally	they
all	gathered	 together	and	 they	 said	 'What	 are	you	doing?	You	will	drive	us	all
mad!	Evening,	morning,	night,	you	continue	playing	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
one	note.	Can't	you	play	something	else!'
He	said	'But	why	should	I	play	something	else?'	And	they	said	'Everybody	plays
several	different	notes!'
He	said	'They	are	still	searching	for	their	note	--	I	have	found	mine!	This	is	the
thing	I	was	searching	for	my	whole	life...	and	I	have	found	it	so	now	there	is	no
need....'
But	 that	 can	happen	only	when	 the	mind	has	disappeared.	Then	you	 find	your
note.	Then	love	with	a	woman	has	a	totally	different	quality:	it	has	the	quality	of
eternity.	Otherwise	 all	 love	 affairs	 are	 tentative,	 temporal,	 because	 the	mind	 is
there.	The	deciding	factor	is	the	mind.	The	mind	is	tentative	and	temporal.
How	can	it	give	you	something	permanent?	It	is	not	possible.
And	have	compassion	for	the	woman	also:	she	gets	tired,	you	also	get	tired!	Just
look	at	things:	don't	you	get	tired?	Every	day	the	same	woman	and	then	you	see
another	woman	walking	on	 the	 road	and	you	become	alive.	You	were	walking
with	 your	 woman	 and	 feeling	 dull.	 You	were	 almost	 dead	walking	 along	 and
carrying	 on	 somehow.	 Then	 a	 new	 woman	 passes	 by.	 She	 may	 not	 be	 more
beautiful	 than	 your	 woman;	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 Just	 the	 newness	 of	 it:	 the
different	 body,	 different	 shape,	 different	 proportions,	 different	 eyes,	 different
hair.	 Just	 the	 difference,	 and	 suddenly	 you	 become	 alive	 and	 again	 you	 start
pulsating.
Just	watch	your	own	mind	and	then	you	will	understand	everybody's	mind.	Then
great	compassion	comes.	Just	try	to	understand	things...	and	they	are	all	good.
In	this	commune	these	things	are	going	to	happen.	It	is	not	a	small	family;	there
are	so	many	people,	and	my	approach	is	to	make	you	free.	It	is	not	a	restrictive,
repressive	 community.	 It	 is	 not	 some	 old	 orthodox,	 inhibited...	 a	 tabooed
commune.	My	whole	approach	is	to	make	you	free	and	loving.	When	I	make	you
free	and	loving	these	things	are	going	to	happen	every	day.
Just	watch	and	become	aware.	Each	situation	has	to	be	used,	and	each	situation
will	be	a	foundation	for	your	growth.	Nothing	to	get	worried	about,	mm?	If	some
affair	is	going	absolutely	well,	I	will	create	some	trouble!
[A	sannyasin	is	leaving	for	the	West	to	finish	things	so	she	can	come	to	live	in
poona.	She	asks	how	she	can	be	conscious	while	she	is	away,	which	will	be	for
six	months.]
Then	my	suggestion	 is	 that	you	don't	 try	awareness	 this	 time;	otherwise	 it	will
take	longer.	You	would	have	to	pay	attention	to	awareness	as	well.	This	time	you
do	 as	 you	 have	 been	 doing	 your	whole	 life:	 just	 act	 unconsciously	 and	 finish
things!	Otherwise	 it	will	 take	years!	 It	will	be	a	non-ending	 thing.	 It	 is	 a	 long
process.	After	four	months,	when	you	return,	just	practise	awareness.	There	is	no
problem.
There,	finish	with	acting	and	then	let	there	be	a	change.	It	may	make	you	very
very	tense	if	you	want	to	remain	aware.	there	and	you	have	to	act,	and	you	are	in
a	hurry	and	you	want	to	wind	things	up	soon.	I	will	take	the	sin	on	myself,	mm?
For	four	months	you	are	free	to	act	unconsciously!
Keep	this	(a	small	wooden	box)	with	you,	and	whenever	you	become	conscious
just	put	it	on	your	heart	and	forget	about	consciousness,	mm?	This	is	to	remind
you	that	you	have	to	act!
[A	 sannyasin,	 who	 has	 just	 completed	 the	 Kyo	 group,	 says	 that	 he's	 worried
because	he	doesn't	feel	his	heart....	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
Mm	mm,	good!	Forget	about	it.	It	will	happen	on	its	own;	you	cannot	manage	it
because	all	that	you	can	do	will	be	from	the	head.	The	head	won't	allow	you	to
go	into	it;	the	head	has	to	forget	about	it.
Just	don't	make	a	problem	out	of	it;	it	is	not	a	problem.	It	will	happen	on	its	own.
It	is	going	to	happen.
Any	day	suddenly	you	will	find	it	has	happened,	but	it	will	be	sudden	and	you
will	 be	 caught	 unawares.	 If	 you	 are	waiting	 for	 it,	 it	won't	 happen.	 If	 you	 are
looking	 for	 it,	 you	 will	 be	 the	 barrier,	 because	 all	 looking,	 all	 waiting,	 all
desiring	is	from	the	head.	And	the	head	is	the	problem	The	energy	has	to	drop
into	the	heart.
Now,	it	remains	hooked	up	there	if	you	are	searching	for	it.
So	 you	 cannot	 make	 it	 happen;	 there	 is	 no	 way.	 Just	 enjoy,	 dance,	 sing,	 and
forget	about	it;	that's	not	a	problem	for	you.	Let	that	be	my	problem.	Mm?
...	[In	the	next	group]	completely	forget	this	nonsense.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with
you;	it	will	happen	on	its	own.
[He	answers:	I	tend	to	forget	it	and	just	feel	good,	and	then	people	keep	telling
me	there	must	be	something	wrong	with	my	heart	centre.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
No,	no,	no,	nothing	is	wrong.	Just	tell	them	that	nothing	is	wrong....
Don't	be	worried	about	people,	mm?	I	have	great	astrologers	and	great	occultists
and	parapsychologists	and	healers	--	all	kinds	of	mad	people	are	around	me	--	so
don't	get	into	their	things,	mm?	Otherwise	everybody	will	put	his	trip	on	you	and
you	will	be	in	difficulty.	Just	say	that	you	have	been	certified	as	everything	being
okay,	mm?
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711065
ShortTitle:	OPENSE06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Deva	 means	 divine,	 and	 vihan	 means	 morning.	 And	 let	 this	 be	 your	 divine
morning.	Forget	the	night	that	you	have	been	in	and	forget	all	those	nightmares.
Once	we	are	able	to	forget	them	they	disappear.	By	remembering	them	again	and
again	we	go	on	watching;	that	is	a	kind	of	nourishment	for	them.	So	one	should
be	capable	of	forgetting	things.	That	 is	far	more	important	 than	the	capacity	 to
remember	things.
Remembrance	is	very	ordinary;	forgetfulness	is	unique.	And	many	people	suffer
from	remembrance.
Remembrance	 is	 like	 going	 on	 playing	with	 your	wounds	 so	 you	 never	 allow
them	to	heal.	The	healing	comes	through	forgetfulness.	Forgetfulness	is	healing	-
-	and	if	you	can	forget	the	past	you	are	forgiving	the	past...
[The	new	sannyasin	 says	 she	 feels	 to	 study	Naturopathy	 in	Berlin.	That's	very
good,	Osho	says.
Anything	concerned	with	nature	is	always	good....
Osho	 then	 says	 not	 to	make	 a	 fad	 out	 of	 being	 natural,	 to	 be	 natural	 but	 in	 a
relaxed	way.	If	one	takes	it	to	its	extreme,	one	finds	it	difficult	to	remain	part	of
society.	Then	back	to	the	jungle!]
Naturopaths	go	on	praising	the	jungle,	and	it	was	not	a	good	place	to	live	!	Wild
animals	were	there	and	poisonous	snakes	were	there,	and	life	was	impossible	in
the	jungle.	It	was	not	as	good	as	they	go	on	saying.
And	if	not	wild	animals,	not	snakes,	then	mosquitoes!
Life	 should	 be	 taken	 in	 a	 very	 relaxed	 and	 easy	way.	 I	 am	 all	 for	 nature	 but
always	against	faddism	because	that	is	an	ugly	phenomenon.	That	is	man	not	in
his	senses.
So	 learn	Naturopathy	but	never	become	a	naturopath.	 It	 is	good	as	 a	 life-style
but	that	too	has	to	be	taken	in	small	doses.	And	to	keep	balance	it	is	always	good
to	go	against	nature	sometimes,	beyond	nature.
That	brings	variety	to	life.	To	be	ill	is	not	always	bad	because	sometimes	illness
brings	things	which	health	can	never	bring.
So	 once	 in	 a	 while	 it	 is	 good	 to	 enjoy	 illness	 too.	 It	 makes	 people	 more
meditative,	more	prayerful,	helps	them	to	see	that	the	body	is	going	to	die,	helps
them	to	see	the	reality	of	the	body,	gives	them	a	gap,	an	interval	in	which	to	slow
down,	and	time	to	think	about	things	for	which	there	is	ordinarily	no	time.
I	am	not	saying	remain	ill;	I	am	saying	that	once	in	a	while	it	is	good	to	fall	ill.
Deva	 means	 divine,	 anil	 means	 the	 element	 of	 air,	 the	 air	 element.	 It	 is	 a
metaphor	to	indicate	that	God	is	like	the	wind:	invisible	and	yet	surrounding	you
from	everywhere,	invisible,	but	you	cannot	live	without	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it.	 You	 are	 continuously	 breathing	 him	 in	 and	 out....	 It	 is	 he	 who	 goes	 on
rejuvenating	you	each	moment,	awake	or	asleep.	If	for	just	a	single	moment	your
bridge	with	the	air	is	broken,	you	are	gone.
In	a	similar	way,	on	a	deeper	plane,	God	 is	pouring	his	energy	 into	your	spirit
too.	 Just	 as	 the	 wind,	 the	 air,	 keeps	 your	 body	 alive	 and	 functioning,	 that
invisible	 god-element	 keeps	 your	 soul	 alive.	 Hence,	 so	 much	 emphasis	 on
breathing	 in	 all	 the	 schools	 of	 Yoga,	 because	 once	 you	 have	 understood	 the
mechanism	of	breathing	you	will	be	able	to	understand	the	deeper	mechanism	of
breathing	--	 that	 is	 that	God	 is	continuously	breathed	 in	and	breathed	out.	 It	 is
the	 same	 process	 --	 running	 on	 exactly	 the	 same	 lines,	 parallel.	 If	 we	 can
understand	 breathing	 perfectly	 we	 have	 understood	 all.	 That's	 why	 in	 India
breathing	is	called	'prana';	prana	means	life.
The	wind	is	invisible,	so	is	God.	The	wind	is	invisible	but	goes	on	touching	you;
it	is	not	untouchable.	It	is	so	with	God	too!	Just	a	little	more	sensitivity	is	needed
and	you	will	start	feeling	his	embrace	from	everywhere.	So	don't	 look	for	God
through	 the	 eyes,	 because	 he	 is	 invisible.	 To	 be	 hidden	 is	 his	 nature.	 It	 is	 his
intrinsic	 quality	 to	 be	 hidden	 just	 as	 it	 is	 the	 intrinsic	 quality	 of	 air	 to	 remain
invisible;	it	is	not	accidental.
God	 is	 not	 hiding,	 God	 is	 hiddenness.	 So	 there	 is	 no	 way	 for	 God	 to	 appear
before	 you.	 And	 if	 sometimes	 you	 feel	 that	 God	 is	 standing	 before	 you,
remember:	 this	 is	 just	 an	 hallucination,	 your	 imagination	 playing	 games	 with
you.	You	are	in	a	dream,	you	have	fallen	asleep.	It	is	a	projection	of	your	mind.
If	you	see	Christ	or	Buddha	or	anybody	standing	in	front	of	you,	this	cannot	be
the	real	Christ	and	cannot	be	the	real	Buddha.	Even	when	you	are	facing	the	real
Buddha	you	cannot	 see	him;	you	only	 see	 the	body,	which	 is	not	 the	Buddha.
You	hear	the	words,	which	are	not	the	Buddha.	Buddha	is	silence,	utter	silence
and	utter	hiddenness.
So	 there	 is	no	way	 to	see	 the	Buddha	but	 there	 is	a	way	 to	 touch	 the	Buddha.
That's	why	 in	 the	East	 touching	 the	 feet	 of	 the	master	 became	very	 symbolic.
You	cannot	see	but	you	can	 touch!	Christ	used	 to	put	his	hand	on	people.	The
laying	on	of	hands	became	very	very	symbolic;	that	is	giving	a	touch.
And	remember,	eyes	are	very	small,	ears	are	very	small,	so	 is	 the	nose,	and	 in
fact	 they	 are	 all	 parts	 of	 the	 skin,	 specialized	 parts	 of	 the	 skin.	 The	 nose	 is
nothing	but	skin;	it	has	become	an	expert	in	smelling.
And	as	all	experts	become	narrow,	so	the	nose	has	become	narrow;	it	can	only
smell.	The	ears	can	only	hear;	they	had	to	lose	much	to	become	specialized.
Mm?	It	is	as	a	man	becomes	more	and	more	specialized	in	a	particular	branch	of
science.	First	he	specializes	in	medicine;	then	he	cannot	go	into	philosophy	and
poetry	 and	 mathematics	 and	 physics	 and	 chemistry.	 Those	 doors	 are	 closed.
Then	 he	 starts	 specializing	 in	 eyes.	He	 has	 to	 drop	 the	whole	 body,	 he	 has	 to
become	forgetful	about	the	whole	body;	he	will	think	only	about	the	eyes.	And	I
have	heard	a	futuristic	story	about	a	woman	who	enters	a	doctor's	office	and	says
'Look	at	my	eyes,	there	is	something	wrong	with	them.'	The	doctor	says	'which
one,	 right	 or	 left?'	And	 the	woman	 says	 'Right.'	He	 says	 'Sorry,	 I	 am	 only	 an
expert	on	the	 left	eye.	For	 the	right	eye	 just	go	ahead	a	few	buildings	and	you
will	find	the	right	doctor.'	Yes,	specialization	can	go;	it	is	going	that	way.
The	 specialist	 is	 one	 who	 knows	 more	 and	 more	 about	 less	 and	 less.	 And	 a
specialist	is	one	who	becomes	more	and	more	knowledgeable	about	tiny	things,
and	naturally	in	the	same	proportion	he	becomes	ignorant	of	many	more	things.
An	expert	is	ignorant	about	a	thousand	and	one	things	and	knowledgeable	about
one	thing.	That's	what	has	happened	to	the	eyes,	to	the	nose,	to	the	ears.
Only	touch	is	the	unspecialized	sense	in	your	body.	And	this	is	the	biggest	sense;
it	 covers	 the	whole	body.	 It	 is	 the	primordial	 sense.	 In	 the	mother's	womb	 the
first	sense	that	comes	to	the	child	is	touch;	other	things	evolve	later	on.	But	the
first	 thing	 that	 the	 child	 starts	 feeling	 is	 touch;	 that's	 why	 there	 is	 a	 great
hankering	 for	 touch.	 If	 your	 loved	 one	 does	 not	 touch	 you,	 you	 will	 feel
unsatisfied.	There	 is	a	need	 to	hug,	a	great	need	because	 that	 is	our	primordial
sense,	the	fundamental	sense.	All	others	are	specializations.
God	cannot	be	seen	but	can	be	 touched.	The	master	cannot	be	seen	but	can	be
touched.	Remember	 these	 two	 things	about	your	name:	 the	 invisibility	and	 the
touchability.	So	the	process	is	to	become	more	and	more	holy	and	total.	The	eyes
are	very	small,	they	are	partial	--	we	cannot	see	God;	but	we	can	jump	into	him.
We	cannot	hear	him,	but	we	can	penetrate	him	and	he	can	penetrate	us.
[A	 sannyasin	 who	 is	 leaving	 says	 the	 encounter	 group	 helped	 him	 feel	 very
blissful	and	ecstatic.	Osho	suggests	he	do	more	groups	at	a	centre	in	the	West.]
...	Do	a	few	groups	first	 then	start	helping.	and	by	helping	you	learn.	Within	a
few	months	you	will	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ready;	there	is	no	problem,	mm?	And	it	will	be	good;	it	is	one	of	the	best	things
to	learn	and	do!
[A	sannyasin	had	done	a	meditation	camp	in	the	west,	remaining	blindfolded	and
in	silence	throughout,	after	which	he	became	sick	and	felt	as	though	something
was	not	functioning	in	him.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
Good!	Things	are	perfectly	good.	And	much	more	is	going	to	happen.	Things	are
changing,	but	for	the	better.	No	problem.
...	When	 something	 starts	 changing	 then	many	 things	 stop	 because	 the	 energy
will	be	needed	for	the	new.	The	old	cannot	function,	and	between	the	old	and	the
new	there	 is	a	 time	gap	--	what	I	was	 talking	about	 this	morning,	 'catalepsy'	 --
because	 the	 energy	 takes	 time	 to	 move	 from	 the	 old	 structure	 to	 the	 new
structure.	And	when	it	starts	moving,	the	old	no	more	functions,	cannot	function.
It	 goes	 out	 of	 function	 and	 the	 new	 will	 take	 time.	 The	 energy	 has	 to	 be
absorbed,	 the	 new	 structure	 has	 to	 start	 growing.	 It	will	 take	 a	 little	 time,	 but
things	are	moving	for	the	better.	Just	enjoy	!
[A	sannyasin	said	that	after	doing	office	work	in	the	ashram,	she	has	been	feeling
mentally	spastic.	Osho	checks	her	energy.]
Nothing	 to	 be	 worried	 about.	 You	 are	 simply	 getting	 rid	 of	 unnecessary
memories,	that's	all.	Mm?	it	is	not	harmful.	It	is	just	a	kind	of	cleansing	of	old
dust.
Calculation	 and	money	 is	 not	 your	 dimension,	 so	 you	 can	 get	 disturbed	 there.
You	are	getting	out	of	the	past	and	out	of	memories	more	and	more,	and	falling
more	in	tune	with	the	present;	that's	what	is	happening.	It	is	perfectly	good,	it	is
what	is	needed.	So	don't	make	a	problem	out	of	it,	it	is	not	a	problem.
be	happy	about	it!
[A	sannyasin	child	shows	Osho	a	painting,	then	whispers:	I	love	you.]
That's	right!	that's	right.	Nobody	has	heard;	nothing	to	worry	about!	I	also	love
you!	Mm?
Whenever	you	feel	like	coming,	just	come	and	sit	here	in	darshan.	Do	you	want
to	come	sometimes?...
So	special	permission	is	given	to	you....
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711075
ShortTitle:	OPENSE07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Deva	means	 divine,	 arjava	means	 straightforwardness,	 simplicity,	 authenticity,
sincerity...	all	those	things.	The	fundamental	thing	is	authenticity.	One	should	not
allow	any	kind	of	imposition...	not	by	others,	not	by	oneself	either.	One	should
not	wear	masks.	One	should	live	one's	original	face	whatsoever	the	cost.
One	has	 to	pay	much	 for	 it;	 that's	why	people	decide	not	 to	be	authentic.	 It	 is
sacrifice,	it	 is	martyrdom,	it	 is	carrying	one's	cross.	But	immense	is	the	benefit
that	comes	out	of	it.
The	sacrifice	 is	great,	 so	 is	 the	achievement...	 far	greater	 than	sacrifice.	But	 in
the	beginning	you	need	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	 sacrifice,	 the	 suffering.	Only	 in	 the	 end	when	 you	 have	 suffered	 totally	 --
when	suffering	has	done	 its	work,	has	cleansed	you,	burned	your	ego,	purified
you,	destroyed	all	that	was	false,	when	only	that	which	was	true	is	left,	when	the
fire	has	passed	--	do	you	start	feeling	the	ecstasy	of	life.
And	that	fire	can	be	long;	it	depends	on	you.	If	you	go	very	very	slowly	into	it,
are	very	miserly,	then	it	can	take	years	or	even	lives.	If	one	can	go	passionately
into	it,	intensely	into	it,	it	can	be	finished	within	a	single	moment.	Of	course	that
moment	will	be	almost	like	eternal	hell.	The	intensity	of	it	will	be	there;	it	will
not	be	spread	over	a	long	period.
But	 once	 you	 understand	 that	 suffering,	 if	 accepted	 --	 through	 authenticity,
sincerity,	truth	--	brings	joy,	if	you	can	remember	that,	then	sooner	or	later	you
will	become	acquainted	with	the	whole	alchemy	of	life.	I	am	not	a	supporter	of
suffering,	 remember.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 to	 create	 suffering	 for	 yourself;	 that	 is
moving	to	the	other	extreme.
There	 are	 people	 who	 go	 on	 living	 a	 comfortable,	 convenient	 bourgeois	 life.
They	think	they	are	very	happy,	that	this	is	joy.	And	for	this	so-called	happiness
they	go	on	compromising.	They	become	more	and	more	false.	The	conveniences
are	 there	 but	 they	 become	 untrue.	 To	 purchase	 those	 conveniences,	 those
comforts,	they	go	on	compromising.	They	go	on	selling	their	soul	and	increasing
their	possessions.	This	is	one	type	of	person,	one	extreme,	who	becomes	pseudo.
The	 other	 is	 he	 who,	 seeing	 the	 way	 convenience,	 comfort,	 pleasures,	 makes
people	 impotent,	 soulless,	moves	 to	 the	 other	 extreme.	He	 starts	 searching	 for
misery,	for	suffering.	He	starts	creating	torture	for	himself.	He	thinks	to	live	in
inconvenience,	to	live	in	discomfort,	to	move	in	thorns	is	going	to	help	bring	up
his	authentic	face,	to	give	him	reality.	That	too	is	false.	His	authentic	face	never
comes	from	inconvenience;	how	can	it?
So	 I	 am	not	 saying	 create	 suffering	 for	yourself;	 that	 is	 pathology.	What	 I	 am
saying	is	that	 life	wants	joy.	That	is	 life's	basic	instinct.	Follow	it!	But	life	can
have	joy	only	if	it	is	authentic.	Then	comes	the	problem	and	the	dilemma	of	life.
Life	needs	joy,	life	is	meaningful	only	when	there	is	joy;	life	searches	for	joy,	but
joy	is	possible	only	if	life	is	true,	if	it	is	based	on	truth.
Truth	will	bring	much	suffering,	but	it	 is	not	that	you	create	it.	It	comes	out	of
your	facing	reality.
Because	everybody	is	false	and	you	start	being	true,	you	start	getting	out	of	tune
with	people;	hence	the	suffering.	It	is	not	really	coming	out	of	truth;	it	is	coming
because	everybody	is	false.	You	become	a	stranger,	you	become	an	outsider;	you
don't	 fit	 any	more.	Wherever	you	go,	you	don't	 fit.	That	continuous	not-fitting
hurts	 but	 one	 has	 to	 go	 through	 it	 knowing	 perfectly	 well	 that	 it	 is	 part	 of
cleansing.	The	gold	has	to	go	through	the	fire	to	become	pure.	And	great	is	the
blessing....
Once	you	have	come	to	your	originality	with	no	imposition,	with	no	false	face,
with	no	covering,	with	no	curtain,	when	you	have	come	to	your	nudity,	to	your
nakedness	of	being,	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about...
Deva	means	God,	ashar	means	refuge,	shelter.	God	is	the	only	shelter.	If	you	are
searching	anywhere	else,	you	are	 searching	 in	vain.	Man	goes	on	 searching	 in
every	dimension	except	the	dimension	of	God.
But	I	hope	now	your	sannyas	will	become	the	search	in	the	right	direction.	We
can	be	happy	only	with	God	and	in	God.	Life	can	have	meaning	only	when	it	is
for	God.	And	by	God	I	mean	the	totality	of	existence,	this	whole	celebration	of
stars	and	rivers	and	mountains....
Deva	means	divine,	avega	means	excitement	--	divine	excitement.	And	you	have
to	be	more	and	more	ecstatic,	not	silent.	Silence	will	come	as	a	by-product;	you
are	not	 to	 seek	 it.	You	are	 to	 seek	ecstasy,	 excitement.	You	are	 to	 seek	a	 state
where	you	are	possessed	by	God	--	in	a	dance,	in	a	song.	God	will	happen	to	you
that	way,	not	by	sitting	like	Buddha	under	a	tree.	That	way	God	will	not	happen
to	 you;	 that	 way	 you	 will	 feel	 suffocated.	 That	 way	 you	 will	 feel	 stifled,
regimented;	that	will	not	come	natural	to	you.
There	are	two	types	of	people	in	 the	world	and	the	type	is	decided	by	the	way
God	 happens	 to	 them.	 To	 a	 few	 people	 he	 happens	 in	 utter	 inactivity,	 as	 it
happened	to	Lao	Tzu	or	Buddha	--	utter	inactivity,	almost	as	if	they	were	dead,
no	 excitement,	 no	 wave,	 no	 ripple	 even.	 Their	 being	 is	 absolute	 nothingness;
then	God	happens.
And	to	the	other	type	God	happens	when	they	are	nothing	but	vibration,	nothing
but	pulsation.	When	their	energies	are	streaming	forth	in	every	direction,	when
there	is	a	great	dance	and	ecstasy	inside	their	being	it	happens.
To	you	it	will	happen	the	second	way,	so	don't	miss	any	opportunity	to	take	part
in	 all	 the	 groups	 that	 are	 available	 here,	 all	 the	meditations	 in	which	 you	 can
become	possessed.	And	the	whole	point	is	to	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
possessed	by	God.	Let	God	dance	in	you	and	sing	in	you,	move	in	you,	run	in
you.	Let	God	become	your	excitement!
...	 So	 enjoy	 all	 that	 is	 available	 here.	 Become	 a	 part	 and	 participate	 in
everything.	Don't	miss	a	single	opportunity	and	a	single	moment.	It	takes	a	little
time	 to	 get	 into	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 life	 and	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 climate...	 and	 this	 is	 a
totally	different	kind	of	climate.	This	climate	has	disappeared	from	the	world.
Churches	are	no	more	alive,	temples	are	only	graves.	At	one	time,	thousands	of
years	ago,	 there	may	have	been	 life,	but	 the	flame	has	gone.	Those	houses	are
empty;	 the	master	no	more	 lives	 there.	So	people	have	become	almost	entirely
unacquainted	with	religion...	alive	religion!
They	 are	 acquainted	with	 these	 corpses	 --	 Hinduism,	 Islam,	 Christianity	 --	 so
whenever	a	new	religion	comes,	when	God	descends	in	a	new	way,	when	God
starts	 searching	 for	man	again,	when	he	 spreads	his	hand	and	 finds	 some	new
people	 to	get	 involved	with	him,	 it	 is	such	a	new	climate,	such	a	strange	thing
that	it	looks	very	difficult	to	enter	into,	to	become	part	of.	But	if	one	can	become
part	 of	 it,	 only	 then	 can	one	know	what	 life	 is	 and	what	God	 is	 and	what	 the
significance	of	being	here	on	this	planet	 is;	otherwise	we	go	on	missing.	So	in
these	few	weeks	that	you	will	be	here	become	part	of	things.	And	something	is
going	to	happen!
Prabhu	means	God,	 alol	means	moved	 by,	 turned	 by,	whirled	 by	 --	moved	 by
God,	turned	by	God	like	a	wheel.	and	that	has	to	be	remembered:	movement	is
your	meditation.	Let	your	meditation	be	more	and	more	of	movement.
For	example,	running	will	be	a	beautiful	meditation	for	you,	swimming	will	be	a
beautiful	meditation	for	you,	dancing	will	be	a	beautiful	meditation	for	you.	To
movement,	awareness	has	to	be	added.
Movement	plus	awareness;	that	is	the	formula	for	you.	Run,	but	run	with	perfect
awareness;	keep	alert.
It	is	natural	and	easy	to	keep	alert	while	you	are	in	movement.	When	you	are	just
sitting	silently	the	natural	thing	is	to	fall	asleep.	When	you	are	lying	on	your	bed
it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 keep	 alert	 because	 the	 whole	 situation	 helps	 you	 to	 fall
asleep.	But	in	movement	naturally	you	cannot	fall	alseep.	You	function	in	a	more
alert	way.	The	only	problem	is	that	the	movement	can	become	mechanical.	You
may	 be	 just	 running	mechanically.	You	may	 become	 an	 expert,	 a	 professional
runner;	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 alertness.	 the	 body	 goes	 on	 running	 like	 a
mechanism,	an	automaton;	then	you	miss	the	point.
Never	 become	 an	 expert	 in	 running.	 Remain	 an	 amateur	 so	 that	 alertness	 can
remain.	 If	 you	 feel	 sometime	 that	 running	 has	 become	 automatic,	 drop	 it.	 Try
swimming.	If	it	becomes	automatic,	then	dance.
The	 point	 to	 remember	 is	 that	 the	 movement	 is	 just	 a	 situation	 to	 create
awareness.	While	 it	creates	awareness	 it	 is	good;	 if	 it	 stops	creating	awareness
then	it	is	of	no	use	any	more.	Change	to	another	movement	where	you	will	have
to	be	alert	again.	Never	allow	any	activity	to	become	automatic.
If	we	can	de-automatise	our	 activities	 the	whole	of	 life	becomes	a	meditation.
Then	any	small	thing	--
taking	a	shower,	eating	your	food,	talking	to	your	friend	--	becomes	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 a	 quality;	 it	 can	 be	 brought	 to	 anything;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 specific	 act.
People	 think	 that	way:	 they	 think	meditation	 is	 a	 specific	 act	 in	which	you	 sit
facing	East,	you	repeat	certain	mantras,	you	burn	some	incense,	you	do	this	and
that	at	a	particular	time,	in	a	particular	way,	with	particular	gesture.	Meditation
has	nothing	 to	do	with	all	 those	 things.	They	are	all	ways	 to	automatise	 it	and
meditation	is	against	automatism.
So	if	you	can	keep	alert	any	activity	is	meditation.	And	movement	will	help	you
immensely.
[The	 new	 sannyasin	 says	 he	 has	 a	 problem	with	 his	 thoughts	 which	 are	 very
active.]
No,	 nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about.	 Just	 one	month	 and	 your	 bolts	will	 become
loose!	 Two	 months	 and	 then	 nobody	 can	 screw	 them	 back!	 It	 will	 happen;
nothing	to	worry	about.	The	whole	work	here	is	about	that,	mm?	It	will	happen;
it	 just	 takes	 a	 little	 time.	 Just	 old	 habits	 of	 thinking,	 and	 everybody	 has	 been
trained	 to	 think.	 The	 society	 pays	 so	 much	 for	 thinkers,	 so	 naturally	 it	 is	 an
economical	asset.	About	non-thinkers	the	society	does	not	bother.	It	does	not	pay
poets	 or	 the	 painters	 or	 the	 musicians.	 It	 pays	 mathematicians,	 engineers,
doctors,	professors.	It	pays	heads.	It	is	almost	against	lovers;	it	punishes	them.
It	 is	 against	 emotions,	 against	 feeling;	 it	 does	 not	 allow	 them.	 It	 is	 okay	 on	 a
holiday	but	not	ordinarily.
Once	in	a	while	you	can	relax,	can	take	a	little	alcohol	and	relax,	but	otherwise
you	have	to	remain	in	the	head.	The	world	is	run	by	the	head,	and	because	the
heart	 brings	 chaos	 the	 society	 does	 not	 allow	 it.	 School,	 college,	 university,
everything	has	been	made	in	such	a	way	that	the	heart	is	crushed.
People	who	belong	to	the	heart	suffer	much	because	they	behave	in	a	way	which
cannot	go	with	society,	with	the	majority.	They	are	always	falling	away	from	the
crowd,	from	the	mob.	They	never	walk	on	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
super-highway;	 they	 seek	 their	 own	 small	 footpaths	 in	 the	 jungle	 of	 life.	 The
society	 does	 not	want	 individuals.	 The	 head	 is	 a	 collective	 phenomenon.	This
has	to	be	understood.
For	 example,	 two	 plus	 two	 are	 four.	 Whether	 you	 make	 it	 or	 I	 make	 it	 or
anybody	else	makes	it,	it	is	universal,	it	is	collective.	Whether	you	do	it	in	Tibet
or	in	Iran	or	in	Japan	it	doesn't	matter.	Even	if	you	go	to	Mars	or	to	the	moon	it
will	be	the	same;	it	is	a	collective	phenomenon.	But	my	love	is	my	love	and	your
love	 is	your	 love	and	 there	 is	no	way	 to	make	 it	universal.	You	 love	a	woman
and	you	say	she	is	beautiful.
Nobody	may	 agree	with	 you	 but	 that	 doesn't	 bother	 you.	Nobody	 need	 agree;
that	is	your	personal	thing.
You	 like	 a	 rose	 flower;	 somebody	 may	 hate	 it.	 You	 like	 the	 peacock	 and	 its
beautiful	feathers;	somebody	may	feel	nauseous.
It	 remains	 individual.	 The	 heart	 is	 individual,	 the	 core	 of	 the	 individual.	 So
society	does	not	pay	respect	to	the	heart.	It	trains	generation	after	generation	for
the	head,	for	the	collective.	It	is	dependable,	predictable.	But	then	life	becomes
monotonous;	the	individual	is	killed,	is	just	a	computer.
Remember	that	computers	are	available	now	which	can	do	all	the	work	a	human
mind	can	do.	 In	 the	 future	 there	 is	every	possibility,	 it	 can	almost	certainly	be
predicted	that	computers	will	be	available	that	are	better	 than	the	human	mind.
But	no	computer	is	able	to	fall	 in	love.	No	computer	will	ever	compose	poetry
like	Shakespeare.	One	day	it	will	be	possible	for	computers	to	do	mathematical
calculations	as	well	 as	Albert	Einstein	or	even	better.	But	 there	 is	no	way	 that
computers	 will	 ever	 paint	 like	 Vincent	 van	 Gogh	 or	 will	 compose	music	 like
Beethoven.	There	is	no	possibility.	The	computer	has	no	heart.
One	day	man	will	have	to	assert	his	heart	to	protect	himself	from	the	computer.
Otherwise	the	computer	will	compete	with	man	very	dangerously;	the	computer
will	defeat	man.	Now	the	struggle	of	the	future	is	going	to	be	between	man	and
machine.	 It	 is	 no	more	 a	 question	 of	 the	 poor	 and	 the	 rich,	 the	 slave	 and	 the
maSter,	the	serf	and	the	feudal	lord.	Those	days	are	gone.	It	is	not	even	going	to
be	a	question	of	conflict	between	man	and	woman	but	conflict	between	man	and
machine...	and	man	himself	has	created	the	machine.
Man	 can	 survive	 only	 if	 he	 moves	 towards	 the	 heart.	 Then	 he	 can	 show	 the
machine	 that	 there	 are	 a	 few	 things	 only	 he	 can	 do,	 that	 machine	 cannot	 do:
poetry,	painting,	love,	meditation.	That	will	be	the	superiority	of	man.	That	day
is	coming,	it	is	close	by,	when	there	will	be	no	other	way	to	keep	one's	dignity
except	through	the	heart.
It	is	going	to	happen.	Just	watch	and	get	into	things.
Prem	means	 love,	 sapan	means	dream	--	a	dream	of	 love.	Love	 is	 the	greatest
dream	 and	 love	 is	 the	 greatest	 hope.	 It	 is	 love	 that	 keeps	 people	 alive	 and
flowing.	With	love	all	is	poetry;	with	love	all	is	music.
So	 keep	 that	 dream	 alive.	 Sacrifice	 everything	 for	 that	 dream.	 Put	 your	 all	 at
stake.	Let	that	dream	be	fulfilled.
Once	 that	 dream	 is	 fulfilled	 you	 can	 go	 beyond	 dreams,	 never	 before	 it.	 Yes,
there	is	something	beyond	the	dream,	too,	called	truth,	called	God,	but	the	dream
is	the	school	through	which	we	prepare	for	truth;	it	is	the	training.	If	your	dream
remains	 unfulfilled	 you	will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 know	what	 truth	 is,	 because	 the
unfulfilled	dream	will	go	on	haunting	you,	will	go	on	pulling	you	backwards.	It
will	go	on	enchanting	you,	creating	new	desires	and	it	won't	allow	you	to	rise	to
that	height	from	where	truth	becomes	available.
The	dream	has	 to	be	 fulfilled,	and	 there	 is	only	one	dream	 in	 the	human	heart
and	 that	 is	 of	 love.	All	 dreams	 are	 just	 fragments	 of	 that	 big	 dream.	And	my
understanding	is	that	once	that	dream	is	fulfilled	you	simply	transcend	life.	You
start	floating	like	a	cloud,	a	white	cloud.	You	are	no	more	attached	anywhere.
You	are	free...	you	are	freedom.	But	first	that	dream	has	to	be	lived.
So	my	approach	 sometimes	 seems	very	contradictory.	Because	 truth	 is	beyond
dreaming,	God	 is	beyond	dreaming.	All	dreams	have	 to	disappear.	When	your
eyes	 are	 completely	 empty	 of	 dreams,	 only	 then	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that
which	is.	But	still	I	preach	and	teach	and	help	people	to	dream,	because	unless
the	 dreaming	 is	 completely	 fulfilled	 --	 not	 even	 a	 small	 iota	 of	 dreaming	 has
remained	 unfulfilled	 in	 you,	 all	 seeds	 have	 been	 burned	 by	 fulfillment	 --	 only
then	will	your	eyes	be	empty	of	dreaming;	otherwise	they	will	remain	dreaming.
And	 if	 some	 seeds	 are	 still	 there	 they	will	 go	 on	 sprouting	 into	 new	 dreams.
They	will	go	on	bringing	you	back	into	life	again	and	again.	Then	no	death	will
be	a	real	death;	every	death	will	become	a	new	birth	in	a	new	womb.	And	again
the	same	story	starts,	with	new	actors,	but	the	story	remains	the	same,	basically
the	same.
Fulfill	the	dream	of	love	so	that	one	day	you	can	go	beyond	it!
[A	 sannyasin,	 who	 is	 leaving,	 says:	 I've	 been	 doing	 latihan	 for	 several	 hours
every	day.	Just	towards	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
end	 of	 the	 third	month	my	mind	 became	 very	 noisy...	 especially	when	was	 in
latihan.	It	has	become	difficult	to	continue	it	every	day.
Osho	checks	her	energy.]
Now	the	work	of	latihan	is	finished,	mm?	It	has	done	its	work	--	now	you	need
not	do	it.	For	a	few	days	you	may	miss	it	but	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Just
stop	it	completely;	its	work	is	complete.
When	 some	 medicine	 has	 worked	 and	 you	 go	 on	 taking	 it	 sometimes	 it	 can
create	illness	because	now	there	is	nothing	for	it	to	fight	with.	Mm?	there	were
the	germs	of	the	disease	and	the	medicine	was	fighting	with	the	germs.	It	helped
you;	the	germs	are	killed.	Now	the	medicine	will	start	killing	you.
All	methods	are	medicinal.	Hence,	so	much	need	for	a	master,	because	it	will	be
very	difficult	to	decide	when	the	medicine	is	no	more	needed.	Now	it	is	no	more
needed	so	it	will	create	noise;	it	will	create	many	problems.	The	noise	is	just	the
beginning;	it	will	create	many	problems.	That	is	happening	to	many	people	who
are	in	Subud	because	there	is	nobody	to	see	when	the	work	is	complete.
Subud	himself	is	not	a	master.	He	is	a	God-realised	person	but	not	a	master,	and
these	are	two	different	things.	Nobody	can	be	a	master	without	becoming	a	God-
realised	person,	but	everybody	who	becomes	God-realised	does	not	necessarily
become	a	master.	He	 is	a	 realised	man,	he	has	attained,	but	 the	attainment	has
been	 completely	 accidental,	 and	 the	 reason	 for	 his	 attainment	 and	 its	 being
accidental	 is	 that	 he	 is	 a	 Mohammedan.	 Mohammedans	 and	 Christians	 don't
believe	 in	past	 lives.	The	very	 idea	 that	 there	are	no	past	 lives	functions	 like	a
barrier.
It	will	 not	 harm	 those	 very	 rare	 people,	 those	who	 are	 near	 about	 ninety-nine
degrees.	Just	one	degree	and	 they	will	have	 jumped.	But	 it	 is	very	rare	 to	 find
people	who	are	 ready	ninety-nine	degrees.	One	who	 is	not	ninety-nine	degrees
ready...	 For	 example,	 someone	may	be	 only	 ten	 degrees	 ready,	 so	 after	 eleven
degrees	 problems	 will	 arise	 because	 Subud	 knows	 about	 only	 one	 degree.
Twelve	 degrees,	 thirteen	 degrees,	 subud	will	 be	 of	 no	 help:	 it	 will	 say	 go	 on
doing	it.
Your	work	with	 latihan	 is	over,	mm?	Simply	 forget	about	 it.	 It	has	been	good;
say	 good-bye	 to	 it.	 Now	 you	 can	 simply	 sit	 silently,	 just	 sit	 silently	 doing
nothing.	Even	that	nothing	has	not	 to	be	 imposed.	Just	sit	 relaxedly...	no	effort
even	for	this	nothingness,	otherwise	you	become	tense.	Just	sit.
In	the	beginning,	even	in	sitting	silently,	latihan	may	happen	a	few	times	because
it	 has	 become	an	old	habit.	Get	 out	 of	 it	 immediately:	 stand	up,	 start	moving.
Don't	go	into	it;	it	has	to	be	stopped	now.	It	has	become	almost	automatic.	For	a
few	days	you	have	 to	consciously	stop	 it.	Otherwise	 things	are	going	perfectly
well!	Good.
[A	sannyasin	group	leader	had	previously	written	to	Osho	about	his	relationship
as	his	girlfriend	was	interested	in	another	man.]
I	 received	your	 letter....	Love	 is	always	a	problem,	and	 it	 is	alive	only	while	 it
remains	a	problem.	Once	everything	is	solved	it	disappears.	So	to	remain	alive
love	 has	 to	 remain	 a	 problem.	 You	 cannot	 have	 love	 without	 problems,	mm?
Then	it	is	not	there.	You	go	beyond	it;	it	has	no	relevance.	So,	that	problems	are
there	 is	 intrinsic	 to	 love;	 in	 one	way	 or	 other	 the	 problems	 continue.	 Love	 is
ecstasy	and	agony	both.	The	agony	is	the	price	we	have	to	pay	for	the	ecstasy.	If
there	is	no	agony	in	it	there	will	be	no	ecstasy	either;	they	are	always	in	the	same
proportion.
You	love...	hence	suffering	will	be	there;	that	comes	as	part	of	it.	She	loves	you,
hence	 she	 also	 suffers.	 I	 have	never	 come	across	 a	 love	affair	where	 suffering
does	not	exist.	So	that	maturity	has	to	be	gained.
That's	 why	 many	 people	 have	 decided	 to	 go	 without	 love:	 then	 there	 is	 no
suffering.	Of	course,	 there	 is	no	ecstasy	either.	And	if	one	has	 to	decide	then	I
will	always	say	to	decide	in	favour	of	love.	It	is	better	to	have	loved	and	suffered
than	not	to	have	ever	loved.	Because	the	kind	of	peace	that	comes	without	love
is	 a	 very	 dull	 and	 dead	 peace	 --	 the	 peace	 of	 the	 cemetery.	 There	 is	 a	 higher
quality	 of	 peace	 that	 comes	 after	 these	 storms	 have	 passed.	One	matures	 only
through	these	storms.
They	say	 that	 the	cypress	 tree	goes	 the	highest	and	suffers	 the	most	--	 through
wind,	 sun	 and	 clouds.	 But	 that	 is	 the	 way	 it	 becomes	 seasoned.	 The	 cypress
wood	lasts	longest.	Even	when	the	tree	has	been	cut	and	the	wood	has	been	used
for	something	its	life	is	almost	endless...	even	the	dead	wood	lasts	forever.	From
where	 does	 this	 seasoning	 come?	 Those	 winds,	 the	 sun,	 those	 clouds,	 those
storms	and	that	continuous	fight	have	given	it	stamina.
So	accept	 this	 suffering.	And	another	 thing:	 accept	 that	 that	 also	 is	part	of	 the
game.	Love	is	really	an	intricate	game.	One	remains	a	chaser	and	the	other	the
chased.	If	you	are	the	chaser,	your	woman	is	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
chased.	 She	 tries	 to	 escape	 from	 you	 --	 only	 then	 can	 the	 game	 continue.
Otherwise	why	should	you	chase	her?	 If	 she	 is	 simply	available,	only	 for	you,
then	the	chasing	stops.	You	can	chase	her	only	 if	she	 is	running	away	in	some
way	 or	 other.	 If	 you	 stop	 chasing	 her	 there	 is	 every	 possibility	 she	may	 start
chasing	you...	but	then	you	will	have	to	run!
This	game	has	to	be	looked	into.	[Your	woman]	loves	you,	she	cannot	leave	you,
she	cannot	be	happy	without	you,	but	she	is	the	chased	and	you	are	the	chaser.
And	 this	 is	 just	 a	 game	 to	 continue	 the	 chasing,	 so	 she	 starts	 thinking	 of
somebody	 else.	 She	 cannot	 actually	 go	 to	 somebody	 else;	 she	 would	 not	 be
happy.	If	she	were	forced	only	then	would	she	go,	otherwise	she	would	not.	But
this	continuous	'going'	in	her	mind	keeps	her	running	away	from	you	and	keeps
you	running	after	her.
I	have	seen	so	many	couples	and	sometimes	the	miracle	happens....	For	example,
you	can	get	bored	with	this	whole	thing.	You	can	say	'Okay,	now	do	whatsoever
you	want,	and	you	start	becoming	interested	in	some	other	woman.	Suddenly	the
whole	game	changes;	she	will	start	chasing	you.	She	will	forget	about	the	man
she	 is	 thinking	 of.	 Now	 she	 will	 think	 about	 the	 woman	 you	 have	 started
thinking	 of.	Now	 the	whole	 thing	 changes	 but	 the	 problem	 remains	 the	 same!
The	 problem	 is	 there,	 and	 if	 both	 of	 you	 stop	 chasing	 and	 being	 chased	 then
suddenly	 you	 are	 stuck.	 You	 are	 not	 going	 anywhere	 and	 she	 is	 not	 going
anywhere;	 then	what	 to	 do?	You	 are	 stuck	with	 each	 other	 and	 then	 boredom
arises.	 That	 is	 far	worse	 !	Her	mind	 going	 to	 somebody	 else	 keeps	 the	whole
thing	alive.	She	does	not	allow	you	to	take	her	for	granted.	And	I	am	not	saying
she	 is	 doing	 all	 this	 deliberately.	 These	 are	 just	 unconscious	 games	 and	 they
continue	unless	you	become	completely	conscious.
Now,	what	 is	 happening	 is	 that	 because	you	 feel	 she	 cannot	 be	 totally	 in	 love
with	 you,	 unconditionally	 in	 love	with	 you,	 if	 she	 gives	 some	 love	 you	 don't
accept	that;	you	resist.	You	want	either	all	or	nothing.
That	too	is	part	of	the	unconscious	mind.	Because	you	want	all	or	none	she	will
start	thinking	more	of	the	other	person...	because	you	are	not	accepting	her	love.
By	not	accepting	you	are	helping	her	to	think	of	the	other	person.	The	more	she
thinks	of	 the	other	person,	 the	 less	 accepting	you	will	be,	 the	 less	you	will	 be
together.	Less	and	less	you	will	be	open	to	her,	and	more	and	more	you	would
like	 to	be	 left	alone.	And	you	will	not	do	anything	in	your	aloneness;	you	will
think	of	her.	But	whenever	she	 is	 there	you	will	at	 least	pretend	 that	you	don't
care;	you	will	become	hard.	One	has	to	protect	oneself,	one	has	to	protect	one's
pride.
When	 she	 is	 in	 an	 affair	 you	will	 be	 thinking	of	 her	 and	you	will	 be	worried.
When	she	is	there	you	will	show	that	you	don't	care	where	she	goes	and	what	she
does;	you	want	to	be	left	alone.	When	you	are	not	there	she	will	think	of	you	and
will	not	think	of	the	other	man.	When	you	are	there	she	will	 think	of	the	other
man.
Because	you	are	more	mature	than	her	your	responsibility	is	greater.	She	is	still
childish,	 hence	 this	 desire.	 That	 is	 part	 of	 the	 childish	 mind.	 She	 wants	 both
together,	she	wants	all.	She	is	simple,	innocent,	and	childish.	Your	responsibility
is	bigger	than	hers	so	you	have	to	be	more	alert.
For	example,	my	suggestions	are	 these:	when	she	gives	you	a	 little	bit	of	 love
accept	 it	 with	 great,	 deep	 gratefulness;	 accept	 it	 with	 immense	 gratefulness.
Don't	ask	for	everything;	even	a	fragment	is	good.	Accept	it	as	if	it	is	total...	and
feel	joyous!	Don't	try	to	escape	from	her;	that	will	be	throwing	her	away.
Then	you	will	change	the	whole	trend.	If	you	can	accept	her	little	love	with	joy,
she	will	be	ready	to	give	more.	Accept	that	too	and	she	will	be	able	to	give	more.
Because	when	somebody's	love	is	accepted	gratefully	it	is	so	satisfying.	To	give
love	is	more	satisfying	than	to	get.	So	don't	hurt	her,	otherwise	you	yourself	are
pushing	 her	 away.	 She	 is	 not	 as	mature	 as	 you.	Your	maturities	 are	 different,
there	is	a	gap,	so	naturally	your	responsibility	is	bigger.	If	something	goes	wrong
you	will	be	more	responsible	than	her.
So	just	see	the	game	and	play	this	chess	game	a	little	more	consciously.	Think	at
least	two,	three	moves	ahead.	The	great	chess	players	think	of	five	moves	ahead.
Think	at	 least	 two,	 three	moves	ahead	 --	 that	 if	you	do	 this	 then	how	will	 she
react?	If	you	do	that,	how	will	she	react?...	And	let	 it	be	a	game!	Don't	be	 too
worried;	there	is	nothing	to	worry	about.	She	is	not	going	anywhere;	she	cannot
go.	And	finally	I	am	here	so	you	need	not	worry.
Love	her	and	let	her	 think	whatsoever	she	wants	to.	Love	her	more	and	accept
whatsoever	love	she	can	give,	and	accept	with	gratefulness	--	not	as	if	you	take	it
for	granted.	And	within	a	few	days	that	idea	of	hers	will	disappear.	But	if	you	go
on	 doing	 these	 things	 that	 you	 are	 doing,	 you	 are	 helping	 her	 to	 go.	 Because
what	will	 she	 think	 then?	You	 don't	 accept	 her	 love	 so	 her	 infatuation	 for	 the
other	 person	 grows	 more.	 You	 are	 making	 her	 infatuated	 with	 the	 other.	 She
starts	 dreaming	 and	 thinking	 that	 maybe	 the	 other	 man	 will	 accept	 more
gratefully.	He	will	love	her	more,	he	will	not	escape	from	her.	He	will	not	reject
her.
Let	her	think	about	the	other.	And	just	be	in	this	game	a	little	more	consciously,
seeing	the	future	moves,	and	within	a	month	her	mind	will	be	changed;	there	is
no	problem	in	it.	It	is	just	that	she	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
indecisive	as	every	childish	consciousness	is.
It	is	just	like	a	child.	You	take	him	for	a	walk	and	he	wants	an	ice	cream	and	he
wants	that	toy	and	he	wants	to	purchase	this	car	and	that	elephant	too.	He	wants
everything!	Just	out	of	her	simplicity,	out	of	her	innocence,	she	sees	somebody
and	she	feels	infatuated.	But	she	loves	you,	and	that	is	the	basic	thing.
These	are	just	infatuations.	They	come	and	go,	they	come	to	everybody.	And	we
should	 be	 compassionate	 about	 them;	 they	 are	 natural.	Man	 is	 really	 helpless.
But	don't	become	part	of	the	unconscious	game;	play	it	consciously.	Try.	For	one
month	 let	 this	 game	be	 a	 conscious	game,	 from	your	 side,	 and	 then	 I	will	 see
your	woman.	Good!
[A	 sannyasin,	 who	 participated	 in	 the	 Tao	 group	 before	 leaving	 for	 the	West,
says:	I	feel	I've	got	in	touch	with	some	kind	of	softness	and	vulnerability...	and	I
want	to	keep	a	hold	of	that	somehow.]
It	will	remain.	Don't	try	to	keep	it.	In	that	very	trying	it	will	start	slipping	out	of
your	hands.	Don't	 try	 to	keep	 it;	 it	will	be	 there.	 Just	 remain	 relaxed,	 enjoy	 it.
Rather	than	trying	to	keep	it,	enjoy	it,	use	it	more.
Whenever	you	are	in	a	situation	remain	vulnerable.	In	different	states	try	it	and
taste	how	it	works.	Rather	than	trying	to	keep	it,	have	as	many	experiences	of	it
as	possible.
It	is	not	a	question	of	hoarding	it;	it	is	not	property.	It	is	a	very	subtle	experience.
It	grows	if	you	experience	it	more	and	more.
For	 example,	 you	 are	 talking	 to	 a	 friend.	 Relax	 and	 become	 very	 open,	 very
receptive.	You	 are	 holding	 somebody's	 hand.	Don't	 remain	 hard,	 become	 very
soft.	 Don't	 remain	 frozen,	 protective,	 defensive.	 Allow	 his	 energy	 to	 flow	 in,
allow	your	energy	 to	 flow	 in.	 Just	use	 it	 in	as	many	ways	as	possible.	Expose
yourself	to	more	and	more	situations	and	it	will	grow	through	that	experience.
You	cannot	possess	it	but	you	can	help	it	 to	grow...	and	the	difference	is	great.
You	can	possess	money,	you	cannot	possess	a	plant.	The	only	way	to	possess	a
plant	is	to	help	it	grow.	It	is	not	a	dead	thing.	All	that	is	alive	remains	only	while
it	is	growing.	The	moment	growth	stops	it	dies.	So	let	it	remain	breathing.	Don't
miss	any	opportunity.
Listening	 to	 me	 you	 should	 become	 vulnerable;	 sway	 with	 it.	 Seeing	 the
morning	sun,	become	vulnerable;	dance	with	it.	Swimming	in	the	pool	become
one	with	the	pool,	lose	boundaries.	I'm	just	giving	you	instances;	they	are	there
every	moment.	Then	you	will	see	it	is	growing,	growing,	and	it	can	grow	to	no
end'	It	can	go	on	growing;	it	is	an	endless	process.	It	begins,	it	never	ends.
[Osho	suggests	 she	 start	 a	centre	 in	 the	West.	She	 is	 surprised	and	says:	 I	 feel
pretty	green	to	be	starting	a	centre.]
No,	only	green	people	can	start!	Once	the	greenness	is	gone	then	it	is	difficult;
don't	be	worried	about	it....
It	just	means	to	help	people	towards	me.	Let	your	friends	be	acquainted	with	me,
with	what	is	going	on	here.	Sometimes	just	invite	a	few	friends	and	by	and	by	it
starts	growing.	Sometimes,	once	a	week,	meditate	with	a	 few	friends,	 listen	 to
the	tapes.	Keep	the	books,	sometimes	read	them	to	friends.	then	it	will	go	on	by
itself.	It	has	no	formal	structure.
This	will	be	the	name:	Avit.
It	means	to	know	well	--	to	know	well,	to	know	deeply.	Vita	means	to	know.	The
Indian	scripture	'veda'
comes	from	the	same	root.	It	means	to	know	so	deeply	that	the	knower	and	the
known	 become	 one,	 to	 know	 through	 love	 so	 that	 the	 distinction	 between	 the
knower	and	the	known	is	lost;	you	are	not	separate	from	the	known.
To	know	God	deeply	means	to	become	God;	that's	the	only	way.	If	God	and	you
are	 separate	 then	 it	 is	 not	 really	 knowing,	 mm?	 --	 you	 are	 going	 round	 and
round.	To	know	God	really	 is	 to	go	directly	 into	his	heart	and	disappear	 there;
that	is	the	meaning	of	avita.
Just	 invite	 a	 few	 people	 and	 it	 will	 start	 working.	 That's	 how	 all	 my	 centres
work,	mm?
[The	 assistant	 leader	 of	 the	 Tao	 group	 said	 she	was	 sick	 because	 she	 couldn't
accept	being	the	assistant	instead	of	the	leader.	But	when	she	became	conscious
of	this	she	was	able	to	clear	it.]
It	will	be	very	very	good	for	you;	you	can	learn	many	things	from	[the	leader].	It
will	make	you	more	rich.	It	is	always	good	to	be	around	people	who	have	a	kind
of	understanding	and	maturity;	it	makes	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
mature.	And	 to	 assist	 is	 far	more	 enriching	 than	 to	 lead	 because	 you	 have	 no
responsibility	 and	 you	 can	 absorb	 things	 more	 quietly,	 observe	 things	 more
quietly.
Sooner	 or	 later	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 a	 group-leader	 but	 I	 wanted	 you	 to
sometimes	assist	too.	I	have	the	idea	that	I	am	going	to	make	you	a	group-leader
but	many	 times	you	will	be	a	group-leader	and	many	 times	 I	will	 send	you	 to
work	with	somebody.	You	will	become	more	enriched.
Don't	 think	 in	 terms	of	your	being	second;	 there	 is	nobody	who	 is	 first.	 If	you
can	enjoy,	then	it	is	good;	assist	[the	leader].	If	you	feel	it	creates	trouble,	start
editing;	forget	about	the	group,	mm?	You	decide!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711085
ShortTitle:	OPENSE08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin	 has	 brought	 her	 two	 children	 from	 the	 West.	 The	 older	 son	 is
negative	and	wishes	to	return	to	the	West.	The	mother	says	she	doesn't	want	to
force	him	to	stay.]
Mm	mm.	So,	let	him	go,	and	whenever	he	wants	to	go...(to	the	son)	You	are	free
to	go,	mm?	because	happiness	is	the	thing.	If	you	are	not	happy	here	and	can	be
more	happy	there,	then	be	there.	(to	the	mother)	Just	make	him	free	and	then	he
will	be	more	at	ease	here.	If	he	decides	to	stay	that	is	his	business.	If	he	wants	to
go	allow	him.	From	your	side	he	should	be	free.	Then	if	he	decides	on	his	own....
Because	that	may	happen:	once	he	knows	that	he	can	go	his	mind	may	change.
It	makes	a	 lot	of	difference.	 If	he	feels	he	cannot	go	 then	he	will	continuously
think	of	going.	If	he	thinks	he	cannot	go	he	will	fight	and	he	will	not	make	any
move	to	like	anything	here.	He	will	not	get	into	anything	because	that	will	be	a
great	fear	to	him:	if	he	starts	liking	things	here	then	he	will	be	in	your	trap	and
he	will	not	be	able	to	go.
Once	 he	 knows	 that	 he	 is	 free	 to	 go	 there	 is	 no	 fear.	 He	 can	 meet	 with
sannyasins,	 play	 with	 sannyasins,	 dance,	 sing,	 because	 he	 is	 free;	 it	 is	 not	 a
problem.	Then	he	will	not	have	any	resistance,	and	in	that	non-resistance	he	may
start	liking	it	here.	But	if	he	does	not	then	it	is	perfectly	good	if	he	goes.	Some
day	he	will	come	back	again.
And	whenever	he	comes	on	his	own,	then	only	can	it	be	of	help	--	for	him,	for
you.	Otherwise	he	will	be	a	problem	to	you	and	a	problem	to	himself	and	you
will	feel	miserable	 that	he	is	unhappy.	Nothing	is	more	valuable	 than	freedom.
So	if	he	decides	to	go	that's	perfectly	good;	let	him	decide.
Make	his	mind	completely	at	ease	so	that	he	is	free,	whether	he	decides	to	go	or
stay.	Then	there	is	no	force	from	our	side	this	way	or	that,	for	or	against.	And	he
will	 feel	 good	 because	 he	 is	 respected.	 And	 every	 child	 has	 to	 be	 respected,
utterly	 respected.	We	are	nobody	 to	enforce	anything	on	anybody,	even	on	our
own	children,	because	even	though	they	come	from	us	they	don't	belong	to	us.
They	belong	to	themselves	and	they	will	live	their	own	life.	They	will	find	their
own	 truth,	 they	 will	 find	 their	 own	 way.	 They	 have	 to	 search	 and	 seek	 for
themselves.
So	we	can	make	available	to	them	whatsoever	is,	but	it	is	for	them	to	participate
or	not.	It	is	good	that	you	brought	him;	now	he	knows	this	place.	If	freedom	is
given	to	him	he	will	be	able	to	know	it	more	deeply	and	then	back	home	he	can
compare.	If	some	day	he	feels	like	coming	he	is	welcome...	but	only	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
when	he	feels.
Even	if	you	feel	a	little	sad	about	his	going,	that's	okay.	That	is	your	problem	not
his,	so	don't	make	him	feel	guilty	that	he	is	making	his	mother	unhappy.	Those
are	strategies	to	manipulate.	You	can	cry	and	weep	and	can	say	'Okay,	you	can
go	but	I	will	feel	unhappy.'	You	will	be	creating	a	division	in	his	mind;	this	is	a
kind	of	pressure.	He	does	not	want	to	make	you	unhappy	but	he	is,	so	he	starts
feeling	guilty.	Then	he	can	decide	out	of	guilt:	'Okay,	I	will	not	go.	It	is	better	to
feel	miserable	 than	 to	make	you	miserable.'	But	 if	he	 is	miserable	you	will	be
miserable,	and	then	he	will	make	you	feel	guilty.
These	 are	 the	 games	we	 go	 on	 playing	with	 each	 other.	He	will	 continuously
remind	you	it	is	because	of	you	that	he	is	staying	and	you	will	start	feeling	guilty
that	 you	 have	 been	 destructive	 to	 his	 freedom.	 Never	 create	 any	 guilt	 in	 a
relationship	because	guilt	is	poison	to	love.
(to	the	son)	So	you	are	completely	free,	mm?	Decide	about	staying	or	going	and
whenever	you	want	to	go,	immediately	arrangements	will	be	made	and	you	can
go.	And	if	you	want	to	be	here	a	little-little,	you	can	be.
[The	mother	says	she	is	not	sure	whether	to	return	to	the	West	with	her	son,	but
feels	it	would	be	nonsense.]
No.	It	is	absolute	nonsense;	you	need	not	go.	If	he	decides	to	go	he	will	be	with
his	father;	nothing	to	worry	about.	You	need	not	go....
So	that	is	his	decision	and	he	can	decide.	If	he	feels	it	is	not	good	there	he	can
always	come	here;	he	is	welcome.	But	you	need	not	go,	otherwise	there	you	will
create	the	guilt.	You	will	make	him	more	guilty	--
that	because	of	him	you	have	had	to	come	from	India	where	you	wanted	to	be.
These	things	have	to	be	understood	and	dropped.
And	the	idea	that	without	you	he	cannot	survive	or	without	you	he	cannot	grow,
is	utter	nonsense.	It	may	be	that	he	wants	to	escape	from	you...	because	children
want	to	escape	from	parents.	They	want	to	have	their	own	freedom.	When	they
are	at	the	parents'	side	they	are	always	thought	to	be	children.	Grown	up	as	they
are,	they	will	remain	children	to	you.
My	mother	 comes	 to	me	 and	when	 she	 sees	me	 eating	 this	 and	 that	 she	 starts
telling	me	'Don't	eat	that,	eat	this.	You	have	not	eaten	this!'	She	knows	what	she
is	doing	and	she	says	'I	am	mad!	I	should	not	say	these	things	to	you.'	But	when
she	comes	again	she	again	starts	telling	me....
And	I	can	understand,	so	I	understand	you.	But	you	need	not	go.	Just	be	here	and
give	him	full	freedom	so	he	can	enjoy	the	few	days	he	is	here.	And	whenever	he
wants,	send	him	back,	mm?	Good!
[An	elderly	sannyasin	says	how	much	she	enjoys	the	ashram	but	feels	she	is	still
sitting	on	the	fence	because	she	is	too	old	to	jump.]
Mm	mm.	You	will!	Because	from	the	fence	it	is	the	same	distance.	Whether	you
get	off	to	the	right	or	to	the	left,	it	is	the	same	distance.
...	It	is	always	a	jump.	Seven	or	seventy	it	is	always	a	jump.	And	the	older	you
are,	 the	 faster	you	have	 to	 take	 the	 jump,	because	you	don't	have	 time	 to	 lose,
you	cannot	afford	much	time	to	lose.	A	young	person	can	wait	--	life	is	long	--
but	for	an	old	person	waiting	is	not	good.	If	something	touches	the	heart,	then	do
it!	Go	into	it!	What	is	there	to	lose?
[She	answers:	My	head!]
That's	perfectly	good	to	lose,	mm?	That	is	perfectly	good	to	lose...	because	it	is
not	worth	saving.	How	long	will	be	you	be	staying?
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#9
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
9	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711095
ShortTitle:	OPENSE09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Osho	gives	someone	sannyas.]
Start	 feeling	 that	 a	 sound	 is	 arising	 upwards	 from	 your	 throat	 --	 a	 moaning,
groaning	or	a	humming	sound;	feel	ripples	of	sound	arising.	If	you	start	feeling
like	humming	or	moaning,	 go	 into	 it;	 don't	 be	 shy	 and	don't	 hold	 it.	And	 if	 it
starts	swaying	your	body	then	go	into	swaying.	Let	sound	possess	you.
...	There	is	great	sound	just	like	a	reservoir	in	your	being	and	it	wants	to	explode.
Unless	it	explodes	you	will	not	feel	light.	You	have	to	help	it.	It	wants	to	be	born
and	you	have	to	be	possessed	by	it;	that	is	the	only	way	one	can	help	it.
Our	basic	being	is	constituted	of	sound;	that	is	one	of	the	most	ancient	insights
into	human	being.	In	India	we	have	a	special	science	called	'surat-shabda	yoga';
the	 remembrance	 of	 the	 innermost	 sound,	 the	 path	 of	 the	 remembrance	 of	 the
innermost	sound.	And	that's	exactly	the	meaning	in	the	Bible	when	it	is	said,
'In	the	beginning	was	the	word.'
Pythagoreans	 in	 Greece	 worked	 a	 lot	 on	 those	 lines	 --	 of	 how	 to	 create	 a
harmony.	Music	seems	to	be	the	stuff	existence	is	made	of	and	we	have	forgotten
it	 completely.	 Man	 is	 almost	 unaware	 now	 that	 he	 consists	 of	 sound.	 The
primitives	 dance	 and	 sing	 and	 every	 night	 is	 a	 festival	 of	 music	 and	 sound.
Drums	are	beaten,	instruments	are	played.	Children,	old	people	and	young,	men,
women,	 all	 participate.	 It	 is	 an	 orgy	 of	 sound.	 It	 relaxes	 them.	 It	 keeps	 them
fresh,	young,	innocent.	It	is	a	kind	of	bath,	a	sound	bath.
Modern	 man	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 about	 it.	 Even	 if	 he	 goes	 to	 listen	 to
music,	 that	music	has	no	spirituality	 in	 it.	Rather	 than	helping	him,	rather	 than
helping	him	fall	into	a	peace	and	silence,	it	creates	turmoil	in	him.
Modern	 music	 is	 more	 or	 less	 completely	 against	 the	 human	 inner	 sound.	 It
creates	at	the	most	a	kind	of	sound	pornography.	It	excites	but	gives	no	silence.
Man	is	already	exhausted;	that	excitement	exhausts	him	more.	It	creates	a	kind
of	violence,	it	makes	you	more	tense.	And	the	people	who	listen	to	the	music	on
tv	or	on	the	radio	just	sit	in	their	chairs,	absolutely	non-participants.	Unless	you
participate	 your	 own	 sound	 cannot	 start	 working.	 It	 cannot	 work	 just	 by
listening.	It	has	to	become	active,	moving,	alive.
So	start	humming,	chanting.	Every	morning,	early	in	the	morning,	get	up	at	five
o'clock	 before	 the	 sunrise	 and	 for	 half	 an	 hour	 just	 sing,	 hum,	 moan,	 groan.
Those	sounds	need	not	be	meaningful.	Those	sounds	have	to	be	existential,	not
meaningful.	You	should	enjoy	 them,	 that's	all,	 that	 is	 the	meaning.	You	should
sway.	Let	it	be	a	praise	for	the	rising	sun	and	stop	only	when	the	sun	has	risen.
That	will	keep	a	certain	rhythm	in	you	the	whole	day.	You	will	be	attuned	from
the	very	morning	and	you	will	see	 that	 the	day	has	a	different	quality.	You	are
more	loving,	more	caring,	more	compassionate,	more	friendly,	less	violent,	less
angry,	less	ambitious,	less	egoistic.
So	this	is	your	special	meditation.	If	you	feel	like	dancing,	dance;	if	you	feel	like
swaying,	 sway.	The	whole	point	 is	 that	you	are	no	more	 in	 control;	 the	 sound
controls	you.
Christians	 have	 a	 few	 techniques	 like	 glossolalia	 --	 talking	 in	 tongues.	 That's
beautiful.	Possessed,	one	does	not	know	what	is	coming	out.	Whatsoever	comes
up	you	just	bring	out.	Meaningful,	meaningless,	relevant,	irrelevant....
...	Deva	means	divine,	shabda	means	sound	--	divine	sound....
[A	sannyasin	newly	returned	from	the	West	says	that	she	dreams	a	lot	at	night....
]
We	will	use	that	capacity.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	dreaming.	Even	dreaming	can	be
used	 for	 the	 right	 purposes.	 Everything	 has	 to	 be	 used	 for	 the	 right	 purpose.
Rather	 than	fighting	with	 it,	 it	 is	better	 to	 transform	it.	 If	somebody	dreams	of
money,	somebody	dreams	of	sex,	somebody	dreams	of	power,	the	best	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
way	is	not	to	stop	dreaming	because	that	will	be	very	difficult	in	the	beginning.
The	 best	 way	 is	 to	 start	 dreaming	 about	 meditation,	 about	 God,	 above	 love.
Change	 the	 object	 of	 dreaming	 first.	 Dreaming	 continues	 but	 the	 content
changes.	And	it	is	easier	to	stop	dreaming	when	the	content	is	very	high.
If	God	is	the	content	of	dreaming	then	it	can	be	dropped	very	easily	because	the
more	you	dream	about	God,	the	more	you	will	see	the	point	--	that	dreaming	is
becoming	 a	 barrier	 to	God.	By	 and	 by	God	will	 become	more	 important	 than
dreaming.	 This	 insight	 will	 dawn	 sooner	 or	 later	 --	 that	 if	 you	 really	want	 to
know	God	you	have	 to	drop	all	dreaming.	When	 this	 insight	 comes,	dreaming
can	be	dropped.
But	it	is	not	so	with	sex.	Sex	is	nothing	but	dreaming.	In	fact	in	a	person	whose
dream	has	 disappeared,	 sex	will	 disappear	 because	 sex	 can	 exist	 only	 through
dreaming.	 God	 can	 exist	 only	 without	 dreaming.	 So	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	 inner
strategies	--	to	put	your	dream	in	such	a	direction	where	it	cannot	go	for	long;	it
has	to	stop.
Do	 one	 thing:	 at	 night	 when	 you	 go	 to	 sleep	 start	 being	 creative	 about	 your
dreams.	 Start	 dreaming	 dreams	 deliberately;	 don't	 be	 an	 unconscious	 victim.
People	 don't	 know	 that	 --	 that	 that	 can	 be	 done.	 In	 Yoga	 there	 are	 many
techniques	for	creating	your	own	dreams.	Psychoanalysts	only	analyse	dreams;
Yoga	can	change	the	content.	There	is	no	need	to	go	on	dreaming	like	a	victim.
You	don't	want	to	dream	and	you	go	on	dreaming	a	certain	thing.	You	can	start
dreaming	 deliberately.	You	 can	 be	 very	 very	 choosy	 about	 dreaming;	 you	 can
plan	your	dream.
So	 from	 tonight	 start	 one	 experiment:	 just	 for	 ten	 minutes	 plan	 a	 dream.
Visualize	how	you	would	like	 the	dream	to	come	into	your	night	and	visualize
that	dream	every	night.	Within	two,	three	weeks	you	will	be	surprised:	fragments
of	that	visualization	have	started	entering	your	dream.	Within	three	months	you
will	be	surprised	to	see	that	the	whole	dream	has	been	created	by	you.	And	then
there	 arises	 great	 joy	 because	 you	 are	 no	 more	 a	 victim.	 You	 can	 have	 your
dream	according	 to	yourself.	 If	 this	happens	 then	 the	second	step	 is	very	easy:
you	can	stop	dreaming.	If	you	can	create,	you	can	stop.	If	you	cannot	create,	you
cannot	stop	either.
First	 start	 in	 the	 night,	 then	 the	 day-dreaming	 can	 be	 stopped,	 otherwise	 not.
People	dream	 twenty-four	hours	 a	day.	Even	when	 they	are	walking	along	 the
road	they	are	dreaming.	Reading	a	book	they	are	dreaming	about	something	else.
Talking	to	a	friend,	they	are	dreaming.	But	start	at	night	because	at	night	you	are
closer	to	your	unconscious.	Things	are	settling	deep	down	and	soon	you	will	fall
into	 deep	 sleep.	 If	 the	message	 reaches	 to	 that	 level	 of	 unconsciousness,	 from
there	everything	can	be	transformed.
So	create	a	dream.	Let	me	also	be	a	part	of	your	dream	so	I	will	go	on	watching
what	 you	 are	 doing.	 But	 make	 an	 elaborate	 dream.	 Note	 it	 down,	 plan	 it
perfectly.	Not	very	big,	just	a	small	dream	about	what	you	would	like.	Continue
the	same	dream.	Every	night	you	have	to	think	of	it	before	you	fall	asleep:	you
have	to	go	on	thinking,	thinking,	thinking.	Fall	asleep	thinking	it,	visualizing	it
fall	asleep,	because	there	comes	a	moment	when	the	gears	change.
Waking	is	one	gear,	sleep	is	another.	When	the	gears	change	and	you	pass	from
one	gear	 to	another,	 just	 in	the	middle	of	 the	two	there	comes	a	moment	when
you	are	neutral,	in	a	neutral	gear.	It	is	neither	sleep	nor	wakefulness.	That	is	the
most	potential	point	--	the	interval	between	the	two.	If	you	can	go	on	visualizing
in	that	interval	it	will	enter	your	sleep	immediately.
Once	you	have	understood	this	technique	you	can	do	many	miracles	through	it.
If	you	are	ill	you	can	simply	go	thinking	in	that	moment	that	you	are	not	ill.	And
if	 that	 moment	 and	 your	 thinking	 coincide	 illness	 will	 disappear.	 f	 you	 are
feeling	sad	go	on	thinking	that	you	are	not	sad.	Let	that	moment	and	your	idea
meet	and	the	sadness	will	disappear.	That	is	the	moment	the	psychoanalyst	in	a
very	round	about	way	tries	to	find.	The	hypnotist	goes	directly	to	it.
Hypnosis	 is	going	 to	be	 the	 future	psychoanalysis.	The	hypnotist	does	nothing
else	but	create	that	interval	between	sleep	and	waking.	If	he	gives	any	suggestion
in	that	moment	it	goes	to	the	deepest	root	of	your	being.	If	he	says	that	you	will
die	tomorrow	at	twelve	o'clock,	you	will	die	tomorrow	at	twelve	o'clock.
It	is	so	potent:	he	can	give	you	an	idea	and	it	is	going	to	become	a	reality.
You	 can	 find	 that	moment	 yourself	 and	 then	 you	 can	 start	 changing	 your	 life.
From	tonight	start	this:	plan	a	small	dream	of	five	minutes	but	everything	has	to
be	the	same	each	night.	You	can	write	the	story	and	the	drama	and	everything!
[A	seeker	says	his	heart	wants	to	take	sannyas	but	his	head	doesn't...	it	would	be
difficult	for	him	to	wear	orange	and	mala	in	his	work.]
Sometimes	it	is	good	to	choose	a	few	difficulties	in	life...	and	this	will	be	a	great
difficulty.	It	will	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
immensely	helpful:	it	will	make	you	an	individual	for	the	first	time.	It	will	look
mad	to	other	people	and	you	may	also	feel	embarrassed,	awkward.	That's	what
the	head	is	going	to	say	to	you	--	that	this	will	look	awkward	and	it	will	create
difficulties.	That	is	true,	the	head	is	right,	but	that	is	the	whole	purpose	of	it.	It
will	give	you	 integrity,	 it	will	give	you	 the	courage	 to	be	yourself.	Even	 if	 the
whole	 world	 calls	 you	 mad,	 if	 you	 can	 still	 stick	 to	 it,	 it	 will	 create	 great
integration	--	what	Gurdjieff	used	to	call	'crystallization'.
The	head	is	always	a	coward,	the	heart	 is	always	brave.	So	all	 that	 is	beautiful
happens	through	the	heart	and	all	that	is	business-like	happens	through	the	head.
Sannyas	is	through	the	heart.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	head;	one	has	to	by-
pass	it.	To	the	head	sannyas	is	a	kind	of	foolishness.	In	the	categories	of	the	head
it	is	foolishness.	Why	orange	and	why	a	mala?
For	 what?	 Everything	 is	 going	 perfectly	 well	 and	 conveniently	 --	 why	 create
trouble?	Why	become	the	laughing	stock?
But	this	is	the	same	head	that	will	not	allow	you	to	go	into	love	either,	because
that	 too	 is	mad.	 It	will	 not	 allow	you	 to	 do	 anything	 that	 goes	 against	 the	 so-
called	society,	that	goes	against	the	so-called	formalities.	It	will	never	allow	you
to	do	anything	which	is	individual.	The	heart	is	still	your	own.	That	is	the	only
hope	for	man	--	that	society	has	not	yet	been	able	to	corrupt	the	heart.	The	heart
is	still	pure	and	innocent.	The	heart	is	still	mad!	The	heart	can	still	go	into	things
into	which	the	head	will	never	go.
I	 think	 that	 you	 should	 have	 a	 little	 courage	 and	 take	 a	 jump.	 And	 see	 what
happens!	Everybody	has	to	face	this	problem;	this	is	not	new.	Everybody	more
or	less	has	to	face	it.	But	once	you	have	entered	you	will	see	something	arising
in	you:	distance	from	society	and	a	quality	of	individuality,	freedom.	And	that	is
the	whole	point	of	sannyas.	These	are	just	devices,	simple	devices	to	help	you	to
stick	to	your	own,	to	be	capable	of	feeling	that	even	if	the	whole	world	laughs,	it
is	okay.	You	are	going	on	your	own.	You	are	ready	to	risk	all	respectability	and
all	else	that	comes	by	it	and	through	it.
Once	 that	 standpoint	has	settled	many	more	 things	will	 start	 flowering	 in	your
being.	More	poetry	will	be	coming,	more	love	will	be	coming,	more	compassion
will	be	coming,	more	rebellion	will	be	coming.
Sannyas	is	 just	a	beginning;	it	 is	not	the	end.	It	 is	 just	 initiation	into	a	creative
world	where	many	things	go	on	happening.
You	have	a	great	capacity	to	be	creative	but	your	head	has	not	been	allowing	you
to	go	out.	It	has	become	a	confinement,	a	prison.
[The	 seeker	 says	 he	 planned	 to	 be	 in	 the	West	 for	 christmas	 but	 he	 feels	 so
wonderful	he	doesn't	want	to	go.	His	head	says	he	is	crazy.]
That's	true...	that	is	true.	Now	you	will	have	to	choose	between	these	two.	If	you
choose	the	head	you	wi]l	be	a	loser.	If	you	choose	the	heart	there	is	a	possibility
of	your	being	victorious	yet.	And	what	are	you	going	to	do	there?	Christmas	is
here!
[The	seeker	says	he	has	a	little	daughter	to	see.]
Rather	 than	 going	 there,	 you	 call	 her	 here!	 She	 will	 enjoy	 it	 more	 than	 you!
Otherwise,	next	time.	If	you	have	to	go,	go.	But	if	you	can	do	a	few	groups	your
joy	will	increase	very	much	and	your	insights	also.
[Osho	gives	him	several	groups	to	do.]
And	sannyas	is	going	to	happen.	Whenever	you...
So	should	I	give	you	a	push	right	now?...
[The	seeker	replies:	I	feel	like	a	lover	who	could	be	easily	pushed.]
Yes,	I	know.	I	can	also	see	it	--	it	is	there.	So	become	a	sannyasin!	Come	close,
close	your	eyes.	 Just	 listen	 to	your	heartbeat.	Be	 there	near	 the	heart;	descend
from	 the	head.	Let	 the	energy	come	down	 from	 the	head	and	 let	 it	 stand	 there
behind	the	heart,	 the	heartbeat.	For	a	moment	just	be	the	heart.	Let	me	contact
you	there.
Good!	You	have	suffered	long	from	the	head.	It	is	time	to	get	rid	of	it,	and	the
moment	 for	 that	has	come.	One	has	 to	wait	 for	 the	 time.	Nothing	can	be	done
before	 its	 time	 and	 nothing	 should	 be	 done	 before	 its	 time,	 otherwise	 things
remain	 incomplete,	 and	 incomplete	 things	hang	around.	But	you	have	suffered
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
enough	from	the	head....	Now	there	 is	no	need	for	 it;	 its	work	 is	 finished.	You
can	move	towards	the	heart....
Prem	 means	 love,	 pramada	 means	 joy.	 Let	 these	 two	 things	 be	 remembered
continuously:	love	and	joy.
Prem	 means	 love,	 svaha	 means	 hallelujah...	 the	 celebration	 of	 love,	 love
celebration	 --	 the	 ultimate	 celebration	 of	 love,	 and	 you	 can	 become	 that;	 you
have	the	quality.	You	can	laugh	your	way	to	God!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711105
ShortTitle:	OPENSE10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin	woman	 has	 her	 arm	 in	 a	 sling	 after	 being	 knocked	 down	 in	 the
street	by	some	hostile	Indians.	She	says	she	is	tired	of	violence	around	her	and
how	to	get	rid	of	it.	She	doesn't	want	to	die	right	now.	Should	she	go	back	to	the
West.	Should	she	do	a	group?
Osho	suggests	Tao	and	vipassana	groups.]
And	violence	is	there.	It	is	not	around	you;	it	is	around	everybody.	Man	has	lived
very	violently;	he	has	not	lost	his	inner	animality.	Man	is	still	wild	inside;	only
on	 the	surface	does	he	 look	civilized.	So	violence	 is	everywhere,	 the	whole	of
life	is	full	of	violence.	And	where	you	don't	see	violence	that	is	just	a	facade.	If
you	go	deep	 into	 it	you	will	 find	violence	 there	 too.	Even	behind	 the	name	of
love	there	is	violence,	so	what	to	say	about	other	things?	But	this	is	how	life	is!
And	 you	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 live	 without	 violence	 in	 such	 a	 violent	 world.	 It	 is
difficult	to	live	sanely	in	an	insane	world	but	that	is	the	only	life	there	is	and	one
has	to	find	one's	way	to	 live	through	it.	All	 that	we	can	do	is	 to	never	become
violent	 against	 violence,	 because	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help.	 Have	 deep
compassion.	 If	 one	 has	 to	 suffer,	 one	 should	 suffer	 through	 compassion.	 And
people	who	are	violent	are	completely	unaware;	they	don't	know	what	they	are
doing.	That's	what	 Jesus	has	 to	 say	 to	 the	people;	 it	 is	 his	 last	message	 to	 the
world.	He	asks	God	to	forgive	these	people	because	they	don't	know	what	they
are	doing.
So	one	can	pray,	one	can	love	and	one	can	have	compassion,	but	the	violence	is
there.	 And	 you	 cannot	 change	 it	 because	 the	 world	 is	 so	 big;	 how	 can	 you
change	it?	One	has	to	accept	it.	With	tears,	but	one	has	to	accept	it.	And	one	can
go	on	doing	whatsoever	one	can	do	on	one's	own	--	a	little	bit,	whatsoever	one
can	spread.	Spread	your	love.	The	world	is	like	a	desert	but	even	if	you	can	sow
a	single	seed	and	only	two	flowers	come	to	it,	even	that	is	something.	In	this	vast
desert	land	if	two	flowers	or	even	a	single	flower	comes	up,	that	too	is	good.
So	don't	be	too	concerned	about	it.	Just	be	concerned	about	one	thing:	how	you
can	love	people	who	are	violent	and	how	to	live	in	a	world	which	is	not	sane	at
all.	Find	ways.	And	this	is	the	whole	effort	here	--
through	meditation,	prayer,	groups.	These	are	ways	to	seek	and	search	for	some
secrets	so	that	you	can	go	unscratched,	uncontaminated	by	people's	violence.	But
it	 is	possible.	The	world	will	 remain	violent,	 you	can	become	non-violent	 .	 .	 .
and	that	is	all	that	can	be	done.	So	don't	be	worried	about	it.
After	Vipassana	remind	me	again,	mm?	And	be	here	a	little	more;	it	will	be	too
early	to	go.	I	will	tell	you	when	to	go.	Good.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[The	centering	group	is	present.	One	member	says	he	had	planned	to	 leave	for
Italy	but	is	feeling	less	centred	than	before!	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
You	can	go	--	no	problem	is	there	--	and	then	come	back,	mm?	And	the	feeling
that	has	come	to	you	of	being	uncentred	is	just	a	new	awareness	that	is	arising	in
you.	Everybody	is	uncentred	but	people	don't	know.	And	when	you	don't	know
you	think	you	are	centred.	When	you	start	knowing	what	centering	is,	when	you
start	feeling	what	centering	should	be,	then	the	problem	arises.	You	look	around
and	you	see	that	you	are	completely	uncentred.	This	is	a	good	indication	--	that
some	 criterion	 is	 born	 in	 you,	 that	 you	 have	 started	 feeling	 vaguely	 what
centering	is;	hence	you	can	see	your	uncentred	space.	This	is	perfectly	good.
It	is	almost	as	if	a	madman	starts	feeling	that	he	is	mad.	If	some	madman	comes
and	tells	you	that	he	is	feeling	mad,	what	will	you	say	to	him?	You	will	say	that
this	seems	to	be	the	beginning	of	sanity,	because	mad	people	never	see	that	they
are	mad.	 They	 fight!	 If	 you	 call	 them	mad	 they	 are	 ready	 to	 argue;	 they	will
prove	 that	 you	 are	mad.	No	madman	 accepts	 that	 he	 is	mad.	The	moment	 the
madman	accepts	that	he	is	mad,	he	is	coming	out	of	it	already.	Something	in	him
has	become	sane,	and	that	part	is	accepting	the	fact	of	madness.	It	is	as	if	a	dead
man	starts	feeling	that	he	is	dead.	That	simply	means	that	he	is	coming	alive,	he
is	 resurrected,	 otherwise	who	will	 feel	 death?	Only	 life	 can	 see,	 only	 life	 can
feel.
So	to	me	it	is	not	something	wrong.	It	is	something	very	beautiful	that	is	coming
to	you.	You	are	becoming	more	aware	of	how	uncentred	you	are,	how	dead	you
are,	how	mad	you	are.	No	need	to	get	worried	about	it.	Help	this	awareness	and
soon	things	will	start	settling	on	a	new	plane.	You	will	never	be	the	same	again,
that's	 true.	You	will	have	to	settle	on	a	different	altitude.	The	old	is	gone,	or	if
not	gone	 it	 is	going;	 that	house	 is	 falling.	Don't	 be	 concerned	 too	much	about
that	house.	Start	creating	the	new	house,	because	you	cannot	move	into	the	old
again:	it	is	finished.
You	are	still	looking	at	the	ruins.	Change	your	focus.	You	can	go	on	crying	and
weeping	for	the	ruins	but	that	is	not	going	to	help.	Don't	waste	time	and	energy;
start	making	a	new	house.	Even	if	it	is	a	small	cottage	it	will	do	rather	than	the
old	rotten	palace	that	has	fallen.	And	it	is	dangerous	to	go	into	it	because	it	can
destroy	you	too.
So	rather	than	thinking	about	the	uncentred	state	that	you	feel	around	you,	start
being	more	and	more	concerned	about	this	new	ray	of	light	that	is	making	you
feel	 uncentred,	 that	 is	making	 you	more	 aware	 of	 your	 situation.	 Pour	 energy
into	it!	Just	choose	one	meditation	and	continue.	You	can	choose	any,	and	then
come	back	after	a	few	months,	mm?	Good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711115
ShortTitle:	OPENSE11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Prem	means	love,	abhinaya	means	fire	--	love	fire.
Life	is	fire,	love	is	fire,	light	is	fire.	Fire	is	the	very	substratum	of	all,	hence	fire
worship	is	the	ancient-most	religion	in	the	world.	The	first	god	was	conceived	of
as	fire	and	modern	science	also	conceives	of	fire	--	or	electricity	--	as	being	the
basic	element.
So	meditate	over	it.	And	start	thinking	of	yourself	as	being	made	of	fire	--	not	of
bones,	not	of	flesh,	not	of	blood;	 they	are	secondary.	It	 is	not	blood	that	keeps
you	alive;	it	is	the	fire	in	the	blood.	It	is	not	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
breathing	 that	keeps	you	alive;	 it	 is	 the	fire	 in	 the	breathing.	 It	 is	not	 love	 that
one	longs	for;	it	is	fire	in	love.
It	is	not	food	that	you	are	hungry	for;	it	is	fire	in	food.
The	 trees	go	on	absorbing	 the	sun	fire,	 the	vegetables	go	on	absorbing	 the	sun
fire.	When	you	eat	a	fruit	you	are	eating	that	absorbed	fire,	hence	love	has	the
connotation	of	warmth.	Hatred	is	cold;	it	is	fireless.
Love	 is	 warm.	 Become	 a	 fire	 worshipper...	 and	 you	 will	 be	 immensely
benefitted!
Anand	means	bliss,	bavara	means	mad	--	blissfully	mad.	And	there	are	two	kinds
of	madness	in	the	world:	one	that	comes	when	you	fall	below	the	mind	and	one
that	comes	when	you	go	beyond	the	mind.	The	madness	that	is	below	the	mind	is
unhealthy,	pathological.	You	are	split,	torn	apart,	in	fragments,	falling;	you	have
lost	unity.	It	is	an	illness,	it	needs	treatment.
And	the	madness	that	comes	by	going	beyond	the	mind	is	abundance	of	health;	it
is	not	ill.	It	is	more	healthy	than	the	average	health;	it	is	overflowing	health.	And
beyond	 the	mind	 is	 the	 real	unity.	With	 the	mind	 the	unity	 is	 just	 so-so...	very
tentative.	A	small	thing	can	disturb	it,	anything	can	disturb	it.	Mm?
Everything	is	going	well	and	within	a	second	everything	can	go	wrong.	One	is
just	sitting	on	top	of	a	volcano.	The	ordinary	sanity	is	very	fragile;	it	is	not	much
of	 a	 sanity.	One	 is	 always	 on	 the	 verge:	 anything	 can	 push	you	 into	madness,
below	the	mind.	Your	business	fails,	your	wife	dies,	your	husband	drinks	--
anything	just	a	small	breeze	and	your	house	can	fall	because	the	house	is	made
of	playing	cards.	It	is	not	really	a	house,	just	a	pretension.
Our	whole	game	is	very	like	the	games	of	small	children	who	say	'Let's	pretend:
I	 will	 be	 the	 king	 and	 you	 will	 be	 this	 and	 you	 will	 be	 that.	 I	 will	 be	 the
policeman	and	you	will	be	the	thief.	Let's	pretend.'
Nobody	is	actually	a	thief	nor	is	anybody	a	policeman.
Grown-ups	also	go	on	playing	the	games;	so	ordinary	health	is	just	a	pretension,
very	fragile,	skin-deep.
Scratch	a	little	bit	and	you	will	find	the	madness	boiling	within.
The	second	madness,	the	madness	that	comes	by	going	beyond	the	mind,	is	real
health;	it	is	overflowing	health.	One	has	really	come	to	one's	self	and	being.	It	is
not	 a	 unity	 put	 together,	 no.	 A	 unity	 put	 together	 can	 always	 fall	 apart.	 It	 is
natural	unity,	not	put	together.	One	has	recognized	and	seen	that	one	is	one.	Not
that	one	believes	that	one	is	one,	not	that	one	is	pretending	that	one	is	one.	One
has	looked	into	one's	being	and	found	it.	Now	it	cannot	be	destroyed	or	anything.
There	is	no	way	to	go	back.	Nobody	can	fall	from	the	second	kind	of	madness.
He	 cannot	 fall	 into	 the	 first	 kind	 of	madness,	 impossible.	He	 cannot	 even	 fall
into	so-called	health.
That	is	blissful	madness,	so	in	the	East	we	have	called	saints	mad	people...	mad
in	God,	mad	with	God,	mad	for	God.
Anand	means	bliss,	geetam	means	a	song	--	a	small	song	of	bliss,	mm?	And	that
you	have	to	become.	If	you	start	from	this	moment,	it	is	possible.	One	becomes
more	and	more	entangled	in	difficulties	as	one	grows...
This	is	 the	right	 time	to	become	a	sannyasin	because	right	now	you	don't	have
any	poisons	in	your	system.	Right	now	is	the	appropriate	moment	for	the	song	to
be	born.	You	are	fresh,	innocent,	still	uncontaminated	by	the	society.	Soon	you
will	 be	 corrupted	 by	 society,	 soon	 people	 will	 teach	 you	 their	 ways.	 School,
college,	 university	 will	 come	 in	 and	 they	 will	 draw	 your	 energy	 towards	 the
head.	Right	now	it	is	in	the	heart.	You	are	fortunate!
So	here,	dance,	sing	and	enjoy	as	much	as	you	can...	to	the	full.	For	these	two,
three	months,	 be	 completely	 in	 paradise.	 There	 is	 no	worry	 for	 you.	You	 can
sing,	you	can	dance,	you	can	play	around,	you	can	meditate....
[An	 ashram	 resident,	 recently	 returned	 from	 the	 West,	 says	 she	 is	 confused
because	she	only	feels	to	be	friends	with	her	former	lover.	Just	be	friends!	says
Osho.	 Friendship	 is	 perfectly	 good.	 If	 love	 becomes	 friendship	 it	 is	 a	 great
achievement.	 Ordinarily	 it	 becomes	 hatred;	 ordinarily	 familiarity	 breeds
contempt.
She	says,	I	feel	confused	about	living	with	him.
Osho	tells	her,	You	may	have	to	for	only	two	more	months.	In	the	new	place	I
am	going	to	give	everybody	separate	rooms	so	there	will	be	no	problem!]
[A	sannyasin	says	he	has	been	postponing	doing	the	Encounter	group	because	he
has	a	kidney	stone	which	hurts	when	he	does	the	Kundalini.
Osho	 says	 that	 the	 Kundalini	 meditation	 could	 either	 help	 the	 problem	 by
encouraging	the	stone	to	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
expelled	or	 could	give	more	pain.	don't	 cancel	 the	group,	he	 suggests.	Do	one
thing:	for	a	week	be	a	German	and	drink	as	much	beer	as	you	can.	If	it	is	a	small
stone	 it	may	 come	 out.	 If	 it	 has	 gone,	 do	 the	 encounter	 group,	 otherwise	 not;
wait.	Beer	is	the	best	thing.]
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 he	 has	 some	 hormonal	 problem	 with	 his	 genitals	 and
physically	 he	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 sex	 but	 in	 his	 head	 he	 is.	 Osho	 checks	 his
energy.]
The	 situation	 is	 there,	 you	 are	 not	 creating	 it,	 but	 you	 are	 using	 it	 very
negatively.	 It	 can	be	 used	very	 positively:	 this	 deep	physical	 phenomenon	 can
become	a	base	to	go	easily	beyond	sex.	Even	in	your	head,	sex	is	not	very	vital;
it	is	just	lukewarm.	It	can	become	a	great	opportunity	to	go	beyond	sex.	And	my
approach	 is	 that	 rather	 than	 struggling	with	 situations,	use	 them.	Now	 this	can
become	a	blessing.
To	attain	to	this	state	a	man	will	have	to	fight	with	sex	for	at	least	thirty	years;
then	only	 can	he	 come	 to	 this	 point.	Now	you	can	 take	 it	 as	 a	blessing:	 those
thirty	years	are	not	needed	for	you.	You	are	saved	much	 trouble.	Sex	certainly
brings	 a	 few	 ecstasies...	 but	much	more	 agony.	And	when	you	 take	 the	whole
into	 account,	 those	 ecstasies	 are	 not	 worthwhile	 because	 the	 agonies	 are	 too
much.	But	one	has	to	pass	through	it.
My	observation	about	your	energy	is	 that	 in	your	past	 life	you	must	have	been
doing	much	Hatha	Yoga.
That	has	created	the	change	in	this	life,	the	physical	change.	It	happens	in	Hatha
Yoga	that	the	very	sexuality	is	burned	up,	the	seed	is	burned	up.	Once	the	seed	in
the	body	is	burned	it	is	very	easy	to	go	beyond	sex.	Many	Hatha	Yoga	exercises
and	postures	are	meant	only	for	this	purpose.
[The	sannyasin	answers:	I	was	doing	Hatha	Yoga	last	year.]
That's	very	good.	But	you	must	have	done	it	in	your	past	lives	too.	So	that	very
process	 has	 given	 you	 this	 opportunity	 in	 this	 life	 --	 that	 your	 body	 is	 not
producing	a	sexual	chemistry.	It	can	become	a	good	jump;	you	can	go	beyond	it.
Now	 you	 are	 creating	 the	 problem.	You	 are	 thinking	 that	 something	 is	wrong
because	you	are	not	interested	in	sex	and	you	should	be.	There	is	no	should!
This	is	as	foolish	as	a	monk	whose	body	is	creating	sex	chemistry	and	he	says,	'I
should	not	be	interested	in	sex.'	This	is	just	the	same	foolishness	in	the	reverse
order.	Your	body	is	not	creating	sexuality.
Your	body	is	the	body	of	a	monk,	as	the	monk's	body	should	be	--	or	as	he	hopes
it	 to	 be.	 You	 are	 a	 born	 monk!	 Now	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 create	 a	 problem	 for
yourself	--	that	you	should	be	interested	in	sex.	You	can't	be.	Your	interest	will
remain	very	very	superficial,	and	because	 it	will	be	superficial	 it	can	create	all
the	agonies	and	it	will	never	give	you	any	ecstasy.
Rather	than	going	into	sex,	use	this	natural	gift:	your	body	is	not	creating	sexual
hormones.	 Much	 turmoil	 is	 avoided.	 You	 can	 go	 into	 meditation	 very	 very
calmly	 and	 easily	 because	 there	will	 be	 no	 distraction.	 The	 only	 distraction	 is
sex;	 when	 one	 wants	 to	 go	 into	 meditation,	 sex	 distracts.	 It	 will	 not	 be	 a
distraction	for	you.
What	Hatha	Yogis	do	in	many	years	is	given	to	you.	You	must	have	done	Hatha
Yoga	in	a	past	life	and	that's	why	you	may	have	become	interested	in	it	again	in
this	life.
Ordinarily	people	don't	become	interested	in	Hatha	Yoga	--	it	is	out	of	date	--	but
it	 does	 have	 great	 powers	 to	 do	 things.	 It	 can	 change	 the	 body;	 it	 is	 body
technique,	it	is	body	work.	It	has	no	spirituality	in	it.
It	starts	from	the	gross.	Rather	than	changing	the	mind	or	the	soul,	it	changes	the
body.	And	you	have	succeeded	in	doing	that.
So	my	feeling	is:	accept	it	in	great	gratitude,	in	joy.	Forget	about	sex,	be	loving.
That	is	a	non-sexual	phenomenon.	And	if	sex	sometimes	happens	on	its	own,	it's
okay;	 I'm	 not	 saying	 be	 against	 it.	 I	 am	 saying	 be	 natural:	 if	 it	 sometimes
happens,	 good;	 if	 it	 doesn't	 happen	 for	 you,	 no	 need	 to	 think	 about	 it.	But	 be
loving,	be	friendly.
When	 sex	 hormones	 are	 not	 created	 in	 the	 body	 you	 can	 go	 into	 love	 and
friendship	because	love	has	nothing	to	do	with	sex	hormones.	Sex	is	created	in
the	 body;	 it	 is	 physical.	 Love	 is	 created	 in	 the	mind;	 it	 is	 psychological.	And
prayer	 is	created	 in	 the	soul;	 it	 is	 spiritual.	Start	with	 love.	You	have	only	one
step	to	go	into	prayer;	others	have	two	steps	to	go	into	prayer.	Think	of	it	as	a
blessing.	It	is	just	a	different	vision	and	different	attitude.	Within	a	few	days	you
will	start	feeling	very	very	happy.	Don't	think	that	something	is	missing;	nothing
is	missing.
It	 is	 just	 like	a	 rose	bush	without	 thorns.	The	rose	bush	can	become	very	very
sad	 because	 something	 is	missing:	 'Other	 rose	 bushes	 have	 thorns	 and	 I	 don't
have	thorns,	so	something	is	missing.'	Nothing	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
missing.	You	 don't	 have	 thorns.	 Flowers	 are	 there,	 but	 if	 you	 think	 too	much
about	the	thorns	you	will	go	on	missing	out	on	your	flowers.	For	one	month	try
my	approach,	for	one	month	be	loving,	be	friendly	and	for	one	month	drop	this
whole	idea	and	let	us	see	what	happens.
[The	sannyasin	says:	I	was	wondering	if	I	should	do	Tantra	(group)].
Tantra	I	will	give	you	later.	First	settle	with	this	approach,	mm?	--	otherwise	in
Tantra	your	mind	will	think	of	sex.	After	one	month	I	will	give	it	to	you.	When
you	have	 forgotten	about	 sex	Tantra	will	become	an	experience	of	 love	and	 in
love.	Right	now	do	these	groups:	First	do	Zazen,	Kyo	and	then	Hypnotherapy.
After	these	three	remind	me	again.	If	I	feel	that	now	you	are	ready	for	Tantra	I
will	send	you	to	it.	For	you	a	totally	different	group	is	needed.	We	don't	have	it
yet	 but	 if	many	more	 people	 like	 you	 come,	Hatha	Yogis,	 then	 I	will	 have	 to
make	one,	mm?	because	Tantra	is	meant	for	monks	--	to	destroy	their	monkhood.
But	your	monkhood	is	very	natural.	It	cannot	be	destroyed	and	it	should	not	be
destroyed.	First	these	three	and	then	I	will	see.	Good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711125
ShortTitle:	OPENSE12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Veet	means	 beyond,	manu	means	mind,	Osho	 is	 saying.	And	 all	 that	 is	 true,
good,	beautiful,	is	beyond	the	mind.	He	valiantly	continues....	]
The	mind	is	only	utilitarian.	It	is	useful	in	the	world	but	its	reach	is	very	limited.
And	 all	 that	 can	 become	 a	 contentment	 is	 beyond	 its	 reach.	 The	 mind	 is	 the
faculty	of	thinking,	the	process	of	thought.	But	when	you	are	full	of	thought,	too
occupied	with	thought,	you	don't	have	the	space,	the	receptivity,	that	is	needed	to
absorb	God	or	beauty	or	benediction.
When	you	are	empty,	only	then	does	something	become	possible.	With	the	world
the	mind	is	perfectly	adequate;	beyond	the	world	the	mind	is	the	hindrance.
So	use	it	in	the	world,	I	am	not	against	its	use,	but	don't	be	obsessed	by	it.	One
should	be	capable	of	putting	the	mind	aside.	That	is	what	meditation	is	all	about.
It	 is	 not	 against	 the	 mind;	 it	 is	 simply	 the	 capacity	 to	 put	 the	 mind	 aside
whenever	it	is	not	needed.
If	you	are	talking	to	someone	the	mind	is	needed,	otherwise	language	will	not	be
possible.	But	when	you	are	sitting	alone	it	is	not	needed;	it	is	mad	to	use	it	then.
It	 is	 as	 if	 a	man	 is	 sitting	 and	 continuously	moving	his	 legs.	This	 is	madness.
Because	when	you	are	walking	 the	movement	of	 the	 legs	 is	 absolutely	needed
but	when	you	are	 sitting	 this	movement	of	 the	 legs	 simply	shows	 that	you	are
insane.	But	that	is	happening	in	the	mind	continuously:	when	you	are	not	talking
you	 are	 talking	 inside.	 When	 thought	 is	 not	 needed	 you	 are	 continuously
thinking.	Even	while	asleep	one	goes	on	dreaming.
The	English	word	 'mind'	comes	from	the	Sanskrit	 root	 'manu';	and	 the	English
word	'man'	also	comes	from	the	same	root,	'manu'.	Man	has	become	completely
identified	with	 the	mind,	hence	man	and	mind	both	come	 from	 the	 same	 root.
That	is	not	 true	and	that	 is	not	right	either.	Man	is	far	more	than	the	mind;	the
mind	is	only	one	of	the	faculties	of	man.	Man	is	an	immensity.	The	mind	is	only
a	window	into	the	sky;	it	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	 the	 sky	 itself.	 The	 sky	 is	 far	 greater,	 but	 one	 has	 to	 come	 away	 from	 the
window	to	see	the	sky.	So	come	away	from	the	window	and	see	the	sky	!
[A	sannyasin	who	is	leaving	says	he	will	have	to	go	to	gaol	for	half	a	year.]
Use	the	opportunity.	Because	now	the	whole	world	is	so	crowded	that	 the	best
place	to	meditate	is	gaol.
You	cannot	find	a	better	place!
[The	sannyasin	says:	I've	been	to	gaol	before.]
Mm,	 that's	 very	 good;	 so	 you	 are	 experienced	 too!	 Use	 that	 opportunity	 for
meditation.	Don't	be	in	a	hurry	to	get	out	soon.	Rather	than	working,	meditate.
And	sometimes	curses	can	become	blessings;	 it	 all	depends	on	how	we	 take	a
thing,	how	we	interpret	it.	Rather	than	thinking	that	you	are	being	gaoled,	think
that	you	are	gaoling	the	whole	world	outside.	Nobody	will	be	disturbing	you	and
there	will	 be	 no	worry:	 no	 question	 of	 employment,	 no	 question	 of	 work,	 no
question	of	money.
So	 I	 would	 like	 to	 tell	 you	 three	 things:	 One,	 be	 utterly	 obedient;	 then	 your
meditation	will	not	be	disturbed	at	all.	Follow	the	rules	 to	 the	 letter.	Make	 it	a
point	as	if	it	is	a	discipline	for	you.	So	for	six	months	let	it	be	a	discipline.	And
not	 as	 if	 it	 is	 forced	 on	 you:	 once	 you	make	 it	 a	 discipline	 it	 is	 you	who	 are
willing	 it.	 So	 it	 is	 not	 somebody	 else	 imposing	 it	 on	 you,	 because	 when	 you
think	somebody	is	 imposing	 it	on	you	there	 is	natural	 rebellion.	But	when	you
think	that	you	are	accepting	it	for	your	own	sake	then	there	is	a	totally	different
quality	to	it.
And	for	six	months	be	utterly	in	tune	with	the	world	that	you	will	be	part	of	in
there.	 Become	 part	 of	 it,	 as	 if	 this	 is	 your	 life	 --	 with	 no	 resistance,	 with	 no
reluctance,	with	no	complaints,	with	no	grudge;	on	 the	contrary,	with	gratitude
that	God	has	given	you	an	opportunity	to	meditate	for	these	six	months.
Meditate,	pray	and	use	all	the	time	in	becoming	more	and	more	silent.	These	six
months	 will	 prove	 the	 best	 time	 in	 your	 life	 and	 you	 will	 never	 be	 the	 same
again.
So	go	happily;	nothing	 to	worry	 about.	Keep	 the	box	with	you.	And	 I	will	 be
there.	Whenever	 you	 need	me	 just	 put	 it	 on	 your	 heart	 and	 remember	me.	As
soon	as	you	are	free,	come	back,	mm?	This	is	some	work	that	I	am	giving	you:
these	six	months	have	to	become	absolutely	meditative,	so	don't	do	anything	that
becomes	a	distraction;	don't	do	anything	that	creates	any	tension	in	you.
Just	 relax...	 and	 things	 will	 go	 really	 as	 they	 should.	 You	 will	 come	 out
luminous!
[A	seeker	has	fallen	in	love	with	Osho	but	hesitates	to	take	sannyas	before	he	has
resolved	some	private	matters	which	he	does	not	want	to	talk	to	Osho	about	in
public.]
There	is	no	public...	there	is	no	public.	In	fact	bringing	things	out	will	make	the
resolving	easier.	The	privacy	may	be	one	of	the	things	that	may	not	allow	it	to
resolve	 itself.	Many	 things	 go	 on	 continuing	 because	we	 go	 on	 keeping	 them
secret.	 They	 have	 to	 be	 exposed.	 Exposure	 is	 always	 good	 and	 healthy;	 and
many	things	simply	disappear	by	exposure	--	just	the	fresh	air	and	the	light.	And
once	they	are	exposed	you	stop	clinging	to	them;	there	is	no	point.
This	 is	one	of	 the	 insights	of	psychoanalysis,	 that	 if	 a	person	goes	on	keeping
things	in	himself	it	is	very	difficult	to	get	rid	of	them.	If	he	exposes	them	to	the
psychoanalyst	it	becomes	easier.	But	the	psychoanalyst	is	a	single	person.	Group
therapy	goes	one	step	ahead:	one	has	to	expose	oneself	in	a	group.	Then	things
are-resolved	far	more	easily,	far	deeper	and	far	sooner.	That's	going	to	help.	Just
bring	it	out.
[The	 seeker	 says:	 I	was	 born	 a	Hassidic	 rabbi...	 and	 I	 have	 a	 strong	 sense	 of
betrayal.]
Not	at	all...	because	I	am	a	Hassid!
No,	nothing.	If	you	miss	me	you	will	miss	Hassidism	for	your	whole	 life.	You
will	not	find	any	Hassid	if	you	cannot	understand	me.
...	That	 feeling	 is	 just	a	defence	mechanism.	 In	 fact,	 if	you	are	 really	a	Hassid
there	 is	 no	way	 to	 betray	 it.	One	 cannot	 betray	 it.	Let	 this	 become	one	of	 the
most	 precious	 understandings	 in	 you:	 if	 you	 know	 something,	 if	 you	 love
something,	 there	 is	no	way	 to	betray	 it.	 If	you	 love	me	you	can	go	against	me
and	you	will	not	be	betraying;	your	love	will	protect	you.	Even	going	against	me
will	not	be	a	betrayal.	And	if	going	against	becomes	a	betrayal	then	even	if	you
are	with	me	the	betrayal	is	there.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	fear	simply	shows	that	you	have	not	understood	the	point....
[The	seeker	says:	I	don't	agree	that	Jesus	was	the	greatest	Jew.]
There	is	no	need	to	agree...	there	is	no	need	to	agree.	This	is	not	the	point	at	all.
You	need	not	agree	with	what	I	say;	you	can	only	agree	with	me	directly.	There
is	no	need	 to	 come	 through	what	 I	 say.	 I	 say	a	 thousand	and	one	 things	 and	 I
contradict	myself	every	day.	If	you	start	agreeing	with	me	you	will	go	mad!
You	can't	agree;	nobody	can	agree	with	what	 I	say.	You	can	only	agree	with	a
few	points	but	those	will	not	be	all	that	I	say.	Contradiction	is	my	method.	I	go
on	shattering.	I	go	on	shocking,	I	go	on	offending	people;	that's	my	method.	You
need	not	agree	-	with	what	I	say	and	still	you	can	agree	with	me...	and	that	is	a
totally	different	thing.
Sannyas	is	not	agreeing	with	my	statements.	Sannyas	is	agreeing	with	my	being,
with	my	love...	with	me!	 It	 is	direct	 --	as	 if	you	have	never	heard	what	 I	have
said	 and	 you	 have	 never	 read	what	 I	 have	 said,	 and-yoU	 look	 at	me	 and	 you
agree	with	me.	 It	 is	an	agreement	between	two	beings!	 t	 is	not	a	philosophical
agreement;	it	is	existential.
[The	seeker	says:	I	have	never	felt	the	kind	of	love	I	feel	for	you!]
I	 know	 it	 !	 And	 that's	 why	 I	 am	 insisting	 that	 if	 you	 miss	 me	 you	 will	 be
betraying	--	betraying	Hassidism!
...	So	that	something	has	to	be	resolved.	And	the	closer	you	come,	the	more	you
will	 understand	 what	 Hassidism	 is.	 Because	 these	 things	 are	 not	 dogmatic.
Hassidism	has	nothing	to	do	with	Judaism,	Hassidism	has	nothing	to	do	with	any
theology.	These	are	the	purest	approaches	towards	being.
Hassidism	is	the	very	heart	of	all	the	religions.	You	can	call	it	Sufism,	it	is	the
same;	 you	 can	 call	 it	 Zen,	 it	 is	 the	 same.	 These	 are	 just	 different	 languages
saying	the	same	thing....
[The	seeker	says:	Give	me	your	blessings	and	I'll	come	back.]
No,	my	 blessings	 are	with	 you...	 but	 you	will	 be	 in	 a	 great	 turmoil	 if	 you	 go
without	taking	sannyas.	You	will	be	in	much	misery.	If	you	want	to	choose	that	it
is	 perfectly	 okay;	 but	 you	 will	 be	 in	 a	 misery	 and	 you	 will	 carry	 a	 problem
inside.	It	 is	not	good	to	carry	a	problem	because	all	problems	dissipate	energy.
And	 you	 are	 carrying	 a	 problem	 for	 the	 wrong	 reasons.	 If	 it	 were	 for	 right
reasons	I	would	never	say	to	become	a	sannyasin.	If	I	had	felt,	even	for	a	single
moment,	 that	 this	would	be	a	kind	of	betrayal	for	you	then	I	would	be	 the	 last
man....	Because	I	would	not	help	anybody	betray	anything.
[The	seeker	says:	I	feel	I'm	a	sannyasin	but	I'm	just	not	ready	for	the	uniform.]
These	are	just	defences,	because	when	one	is	ready	for	sannyas	then	one	is	ready
for	everything	--
whatsoever	 comes	with	 it:	 the	whole	madness!	 These	 are	 our	 logical	ways	 of
protecting,	and	you	have	protected	yourself	long	enough.	The	time	is	ripe	!	I	can
wait,	I	am	not	in	a	hurry	but	you	will	be	in	a	constant	turmoil.	If	you	choose	it,
that's	okay....
Come	here!	This	(a	handkerchief	of	Osho's)	is	for	you.	Keep	this	with	you...	and
come	back!	Good.
[A	sannyasin	who	has	done	the	Vipassana	group	was	working	in	the	kitchen.	He
wonders	 if	 it	will	be	disturbing	 to	go	back	 to	 the	kitchen.	Osho	says	 it	will	be
helpful	 to	both	 continue	 an	hour's	Vipassana	meditation	 each	day	and	work	 in
the	kitchen.	The	two	will	provide	a	balance.	And	through	the	kitchen	many	have
become	enlightened!]
[A	sannyasin	says	he	has	a	block	in	his	hara	from	the	fear	that	he	is	holding	on
to.	He	feels	it	when	he	has	been	fasting.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
There	is	a	block	and	there	is	a	story	behind	the	block.	And	once	you	understand
the	whole	thing	of	what	is	behind	it	it	will	start	melting	and	disappear.	It	happens
only	 to	 people	 who	 have	 committed	 hara-kiri,	 who	 have	 committed	 suicide
through	the	hara	in	some	past	life.	Otherwise	this	type	of	block	ordinarily	never
happens.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	happens	only	if	the	knife	has	gone	into	the	hara	centre.	Then	only	does	this
kind	 of	 complex	 arise;	 this	 is	 just	 a	 protection.	 This	 time	 you	 cannot	 commit
hara-kiri:	 this	 is	 just	 a	 natural	 protection.	 In	 the	 past	 life	 somewhere	 you
committed	hara-kiri....
Hara-kiri	 is	 a	 special	 kind	of	 suicide;	 it	 is	 not	 an	ordinary	 suicide.	People	 can
only	 do	 it	 in	 Japan,	 nowhere	 else,	 because	 it	 needs	 a	 certain	 training	 to	 do	 it.
First	you	have	to	be	perfectly	aware	of	where	the	hara	is.	In	fact,	except	for	the
Japanese,	people	are	not	aware	of	it	because	no	other	people	have	worked	to	find
it.
It	 is	 out	 of	 the	hara	 that	 life	 arises.	The	 child	 is	 joined	with	 the	mother	 at	 the
navel	and	the	hara	is	just	below	the	navel,	two	inches	below.	Through	the	navel
the	child	 is	nourished	by	 the	mother.	All	 the	nursing	energy	goes	 into	 the	hara
and	through	the	hara	it	spreads	all	over	the	body.	So	if	the	knife	can	cut	the	hara
directly,	you	will	die	immediately	because	the	main	root	will	be	cut.
There	will	be	no	bloodshed	and	there	will	be	no	pain.	Before	your	head	comes	to
know	of	it	you	will	be	dead.	There	will	be	no	pain:	the	cutting	of	the	hara	creates
a	 painless	 suicide.	 If	 you	 commit	 suicide	 in	 any	 other	 way	 you	 will	 have	 to
suffer	pain.	To	cut	 the	hara	means	 to	cut	 the	main	 root	 through	which	you	are
joined	with	God	or	with	universal	energy.	Suddenly	it	is	broken:	you	are	thrown
apart.
Once	it	happens,	once	a	person	has	committed	hara-kiri,	then	in	the	next	life	this
block	arises.	This	block	 is	 just	 a	natural	protection	 so	 that	you	cannot	 commit
hara-kiri.	Now	this	time	you	cannot	commit	hara-kiri;	this	time	there	is	no	way.
In	Japan	they	use	it	to	feel	whether	a	man	has	committed	hara-kiri	some	time	in
the	past.
So	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	this	life,	one	thing;	but	it	does	have	something	to	do
with	 your	 past	 life	 and	 in	 that	way	 it	 can	 be	 used	 in	 a	 very	 positive	way.	 To
commit	 hara-kiri	 needs	 a	 certain	 training	 of	 the	 mind,	 the	 body,	 a	 certain
understanding	of	Zen.	That	understanding	is	there	from	your	past.	You	can	use	it
and	you	can	help	it	grow;	you	can	go	into	Zen	very	easily.
But	don't	be	worried	about	 it.	There	 is	no	need	 to	dissolve	 it	because	 it	 is	not
blocking	anything;	it	is	simply	a	protection,	that's	all.	But	you	can	feel	it	--	when
you	fast	you	can	feel	it.
Not	 at	 all!	 Don't	 be	 worried	 about	 it	 at	 all.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your
digestion,	with	your	body	or	anything.	You	can	completely	forget	about	it	but	it
can	be	used.	It	 is	 indicative	that	 in	your	past	 life	you	have	worked	in	a	certain
training,	 the	 Zen	 training.	 So	 study	more	 about	 Zen.	 Vipassana	will	 be	 good,
Zazen	 will	 be	 good.	 Any	 methods	 concerned	 with	 Zen	 will	 be	 very	 good,
because	 once	 you	 do	 those	methods	 suddenly	 your	 past	 life	 will	 start	 joining
with	them;	there	will	be	a	great	explosion.
[The	sannyasin	says:	I	had	a	good	time	with	Vipassana.]
It	will	be	very	helpful.
Continue	--	Vipassana,	Zazen,	or	anything	like	that.	Anything	silent,	awareness,
will	help.	And	this	is	nothing	to	do	with	your	body.	You	can	forget	about	it	and
you	 need	 not	 try	 to	 dissolve	 it.	 If	 you	 can	 go	 deep	 in	meditation,	 particularly
Vipassana,	 it	 will	 by	 and	 by	 dissolve.	 But	 you	 need	 not	 work	 to	 dissolve	 it
because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.	Meditation	will	help	and	it	will	go;	but	it
will	go	only	when	your	 life	energy	has	become	perfectly	certain	 that	now	you
cannot	commit	suicide;	otherwise	it	will	not	go.
And	that	understanding,	that	assurance,	can	come	only	through	deep	Vipassana.
Then	who	bothers	to	commit	suicide?	In	Vipassana	you	become	so	non-attached
to	 life,	 even	 life	 becomes	 so	 far	 away,	 so	 who	 bothers	 to	 commit	 suicide?
Suicide	indicates	a	great	attachment	to	life.	People	who	commit	suicide	are	very
much	attached	to	life.
Hara-kiri	 is	 committed	 because	 of	 honour,	 too	 much	 attachment	 to	 life	 and
honour.	For	example,	you	are	defeated	in	a	duel	or	in	some	fight	and	it	is	against
your	honour,	against	your	ego:	you	commit	hara-kiri.	But	this	is	deep	attachment
to	 life.	When	 your	 attachment	 to	 life	 disappears	 this	 block	 will	 automatically
dissolve.	And	because	it	is	not	hindering	anything	you	need	not	worry	about	it.
But	it	is	there....
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#13
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
13	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711135
ShortTitle:	OPENSE13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Deva	means	divine,	amarga	means	pathlessness	--	divine	pathlessness.	There	is
no	path	to	God;	all	paths	are	false.	In	the	very	nature	of	things	there	can	be	no
path	to	God	because	God	is	all	and	everywhere.	A	path	leads	somewhere.	God	is
not	somewhere:	God	is	everywhere.	A	path	is	needed	when	you	are	going	from
here	to	there.	But	God	is	here,	and	there	is	no	need	for	any	path	to	be	here.	So	all
paths	misguide,	 all	 paths	mislead,	 all	 paths	 take	you	 away	 from	 reality,	 not	 to
reality.
The	 path	 exists	 because	 of	 the	 desiring	 mind.	 The	 desiring	 mind	 is	 always
dreaming	of	somewhere	else.
It	is	never	in	the	moment	so	it	creates	the	path.	All	paths	are	mind	creations,	and
to	come	back	to	reality	one	has	to	renounce	all	paths.	All	paths	are	fabrications,
lies,	so	are	all	philosophies,	all	religions.
Jesus	has	not	given	a	path,	neither	has	Buddha;	the	path	is	invented	by	the	priest.
Jesus	simply	says	 'I	 am	 the	way'.	He	simply	 indicates	your	 innermost	core;	he
says	 that	 the	 kingdom	 of	God	 is	 within	 you.	 How	 can	 there	 be	 a	 path	 to	 the
kingdom	of	God	when	it	is	within	you,	when	it	is	already	the	case,	when	it	has
always	been	the	case,	when	it	has	never	been	otherwise?
Buddha	or	Zarathustra	or	Lao	Tzu	simply	remind	you	of	your	reality;	they	don't
give	you	any	path.	All	philosophies	are	tricks	of	the	mind	so	that	you	can	escape
from	reality	--	not	to	reality,	but	from	reality.	All	religions	are	lies,	lies	to	cover
up	your	misery,	lies	so	that	you	can	go	on	pretending,	lies	so	that	you	can	go	on
hoping	that	though	it	has	not	happened	today	it	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow	or
in	the	next	life	or	after	the	day	of	judgement.
[It	is]	one	of	the	most	significant	names	possible.	It	can	become	an	absolute	turn,
a	 one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	 turn,	 if	 you	 understand	 it...	 and	 it	 is	 only	 a
question	of	understanding,	a	matter	of	understanding.	God	is	herenow	--	in	you,
in	 me,	 in	 the	 people,	 in	 the	 trees	 and	 in	 the	 rocks.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go
anywhere.	One	has	to	relax	in	the	here,	in	the	now.	And	you	can	relax.	I	see	the
potential	there;	that's	why	the	name.
You	need	not	become	a	pilgrim.	You	can	simply	declare	that	you	have	arrived,
because	there	has	never	been	any	departure	in	the	first	place	!	Great	courage	is
needed	 to	 declare	 that	 one	 has	 arrived	 but	 with	 that	 courage	 things	 change,
transformations	happen.	So	don't	seek	any	path.
I	am	not	giving	you	any	path	--	I	give	you	the	reality	itself.	I	don't	give	you	any
means	by	which	to	attain	it;	I	simply	indicate	that	it	is	already	the	case.	You	are
in	it,	you	are	it.	So	never	listen	to	the	mind.
The	mind	 is	always	hankering	for	paths,	methods,	 techniques	 to	get	 there.	The
mind	goes	on	inventing	that	against	this.	The	mind	goes	on	inventing	a	separate
reality	against	this	reality.	If	that	exists	it	exists	only	in	this.	That	does	not	exist
opposite	 to	 this,	 against	 this.	 That	 exists	 in	 the	 very	 innermost	 core	 of	 this.
Perhaps	 this	 is	 the	 body	 of	 that	 and	 that	 is	 the	 soul	 of	 this,	 but	 that	 is	 not
somewhere	else.	Not	a	single	inch	exists	between	you	and	that.	To	realise	this	is
to	come	home.
One	 can	 go	 on	 searching	 and	 seeking....	 One	 never	 finds	 by	 searching	 and
seeking	because	the	very	search	and	the	very	seeking	go	on	creating	hindrances.
The	seeker	cannot	find	it.	Seek	and	you	will	go	on	missing	it.	Don't	seek,	just	be,
and	suddenly	 it	 is	 there.	Suddenly	 it	 impinges	on	you,	pounces	upon	you	from
everywhere.	Don't	seek,	and	then	there	is	no	need	for	any	path	and	no	need	for
any	method.	Then	one	starts	enjoying,	one	starts	rejoicing	in	small	things	of	life.
It	will	be	difficult	to	be	that	but	that	difficulty	also	exists	because	we	have	never
looked	 at	 reality	 in	 that	 way,	 because	 the	mind	 has	 always	 been	 desiring	 and
through	desire	goes	on	missing	 that	which	 is.	But	 that	 is	 the	whole	purpose	of
sannyas:	to	teach	you	a	new	language,	to	teach	you	a	new	style,	to	teach	you	a
new	way	of	being.
Deva	means	God,	 lokita	means	 observed	 by	 --	 observed	 by	God.	The	English
word	 'look'	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 word,	 lokita.	 And	 this	 has	 to	 become	 your
meditation	--	that	God	is	observing	you.	It	is	one	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
most	ancient	methods.	It	changes	life	altogether.	Once	this	idea	gets	very	deep-
rooted	--	that	God	is	watching	you	--	subtle	changes	start	happening.	Suddenly
there	are	a	few	things	you	cannot	do.	They	look	so	absurd	if	God	is	watching,
they	look	so	foolish	if	God	is	watching.	And	a	few	things	you	have	never	done
become	easier	because	God	is	watching.
It	 is	 just	 a	 technique	 to	 create	 a	 new	 situation	 in	 your	 being.	After	 just	 seven
days	you	will	start	realising	that	subtle	changes	have	started	happening:	you	are
walking	 differently,	 there	 is	 more	 elegance,	 more	 grace	 in	 it	 because	 God	 is
watching.	You	are	not	alone;	the	presence	of	God	is	always	following	you.	Just
think:	you	are	in	your	bathroom	and	you	suddenly	become	aware	that	your	child
is	looking	through	the	keyhole.
You	immediately	change:	you	are	no	more	the	same	person.	You	are	on	the	street
and	there	is	nobody	else;	it	is	early	morning	and	you	are	alone.	You	are	walking
a	 certain	 way;	 then	 suddenly	 a	 person	 appears	 at	 the	 corner	 and	 there	 is	 an
immediate	change.
When	 somebody	 is	 observing,	 you	 become	 more	 alert,	 more	 aware.	 When
somebody	 is	 watching	 you	 cannot	 remain	 lethargic,	 unconscious.	 And	 if	 this
feeling	 that	God	 is	watching	becomes	part	of	your	being	you	will	 find	a	great
awareness	arising	 in	you.	So	you	have	 to	be	alert	about	 it.	 Just	 sitting	silently,
close	your	eyes	and	feel	God	is	watching	from	everywhere.	Just	see	a	new	kind
of	awareness	arising	in	you	and	becoming	a	pillar	of	light.
Eating,	 talking,	 remember	 and	 you	will	 see	 that	 you	 are	 not	 talking	 nonsense.
You	will	see	that	your	talk	has	become	more	meaningful,	more	significant,	more
poetic,	 that	 there	 is	 a	kind	of	music	 in	 it	which	has	never	been	 there.	You	are
loving	a	friend	and	you	will	find	your	love	has	the	quality	of	prayer	in	it	because
God	is	watching.	Then	everything	has	to	become	an	offering;	it	was	to	be	worthy
of	God.
[She	answers:	I	feel	so	much.]
I	know!	You	will	be	feeling	more	and	more	every	day.	This	feeling	is	going	to
drown	you	completely.
So	don't	be	a	miser,	mm?	feel	as	much	as	it	comes.	Don't	hold	it,	don't	close	your
doors	 on	 it,	 because	 sometimes	 fear	 arises.	When	 the	 feeling	 comes	 too	much
one	 starts	 feeling	 'I	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 control	 it	 so	 I'd	better	 close	 the	doors.'
Then	 one	 shuts	 oneself	 off.	 That	 is	 very	 dangerous.	 That's	 how	 people	 have
become	almost	dead,	afraid	of	anything	that	can	possess	them...	and	feelings	do
possess.
Thoughts	 you	 can	 control,	 feelings	 you	 cannot	 control.	 That's	 why	 man	 has
chosen	in	favour	of	thoughts	and	has	gone	against	feeling.	Feelings	come	like	a
flood	 and	 simply	 take	 one	 away;	 one	 never	 knows	 to	 where,	 to	 what	 end.
Thoughts	are	very	 tiny	 things:	you	can	hold	 them	in	your	hand,	you	can	move
them	here	and	there,	you	can	manage,	manipulate,	control	them.	They	are	dead
things;	 they	 don't	 have	 energy.	 They	 don't	 have	God's	 backing.	 They	 are	 very
plastic	and	manageable.	They	are	not	wild:	very	civilized	people,	these	thoughts.
So	man	has	chosen	to	remain	with	thoughts	and	has	become	completely	closed
to	feeling.	But	once	you	are	closed	to	feelings	you	are	closed	to	life	and	love	and
light	and	all	that	is	significant.	God	comes	through	feeling	not	through	thoughts	-
-	that	is	not	his	entrance.	So	this	is	God	knocking!	Allow	these	feelings	and	be
utterly	possessed.	Even	 if	 they	kill	 you	 it	 is	worth	 it.	Even	 if	 you	die	 through
your	feelings	you	will	be	reborn	into	a	new	life.	Dying	through	feeling	is	the	art
of	resurrection.	One	can	die	many	times	and	one	will	be	born	again	and	again.
So	 don't	 be	 afraid	 of	 those	 feelings,	 be	 possessed	 by	 them.	 And	 if	 after	 two
weeks	you	 feel	 like	 staying	 a	 little	more,	 stay...	 but	 only	 if	 the	 feeling	 comes;
otherwise	you	may	feel	as	if	you	are	hanging	in	the	middle.
So	don't	 force	yourself	 to	 go;	 there	 is	 no	hurry.	The	 family	 can	wait	 one,	 two
weeks	more...	if	you	feel	like	it.	If	you	feel	that	everything	is	okay,	then	you	can
go.	Good!
[A	sannyasin,	who	is	leaving,	says:	I've	always	wanted	to	have	children	and	been
unable	to.	I	realise	that	I've	wanted	them	for	the	wrong	reasons...	]
People	 always	 want	 things	 for	 wrong	 reasons!	 And	 that's	 why	 they	 go	 on
multiplying	 their	misery.	 In	 fact	 all	 wanting	 is	 for	wrong	 reasons.	Wanting	 is
wrong.	Whatsoever	happens	one	should	accept	joyfully.
There	 should	 not	 be	wanting.	 If	God	wills	 that	 you	 have	 children,	 enjoy	 it;	 if
God	 wills	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 children,	 enjoy	 that.	 Both	 have	 their	 beauties.
Don't	make	any	imposition	on	existence.	Don't	demand	anything	from	existence
and	then	you	will	always	be	happy.	Demand	brings	frustration.	The	demanding
mind	is	a	wrong	mind.	When	you	demand	you	are	not	at	ease	with	the	cosmos.
There	 is	 some	 conflict,	 there	 is	 some	 complaint	 that	 things	 are	 not	 going
according	to	you,	the	way	you	would	like	them	to	go.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	is	tension	and	anxiety	and	a	feeling	of	being	defeated	by	existence.
All	wanting	is	wrong,	so	live	without	wanting	and	you	will	always	be	happy	and
the	happiness	will	go	on	increasing.	If	one	day	it	happens	that	a	child	comes	to
you,	receive	the	child	as	a	gift	of	God.	If	it	doesn't	happen,	then	receive	this	state
of	not	being	a	mother,	this	childless	state	as	a	gift	of	God.
For	whatsoever	comes,	 remain	grateful.	Then	 there	 is	peace,	 there	 is	harmony,
and	in	that	harmony	nothing	ever	goes	wrong,	cannot	go	wrong.	And	my	feeling
is	that	all	is	possible	if	one	is	in	harmony	with	existence.	Sometimes	it	happens
that	 the	very	wanting	may	create	 the	problem.	When	somebody	 is	wanting	 too
much,	that	very	wanting	creates	a	kind	of	tension	in	your	being,	in	your	body,	in
your	mind,	in	your	soul.	That	tension	may	be	a	barrier:	it	may	not	allow	you	to
become	a	mother	because	you	are	not	relaxed.
And	even	if	you	become	a	mother	when	you	are	not	relaxed,	you	will	receive	a
wrong	kind	of	soul	which	will	give	you	much	trouble.	Because	in	a	tense	womb
only	a	tense	soul	is	possible.	In	a	tense	womb	you	cannot	receive	a	Buddha	or	a
Jesus;	no,	 that	 is	not	possible.	You	will	 invite	 some	Adolf	Hitler	and	 then	you
will	suffer,	the	whole	world	will	suffer.
Be	relaxed...	and	if	motherhood	happens	then,	good.	If	it	doesn't	happen	there	is
no	 need	 for	 it;	 nothing	 is	 missing.	 People	 want	 children	 just	 to	 be	 occupied.
Because	 they	 are	miserable	 they	 think,	maybe,	 when	 children	 are	 there,	 there
will	be	less	misery.
That's	not	the	right	way	to	live.	The	right	way	to	live	is	to	live	relaxedly	in	the
hands	of	God.	Let	him	take	care!	If	he	feels	that	you	need	to	become	a	mother,	it
is	going	to	happen,	but	let	the	whole	decide;	don't	decide	from	the	part.	Anything
decided	from	the	part	is	going	to	be	wrong.	because	the	part	cannot	comprehend
the	whole.	The	whole	can	comprehend	the	part;	the	whole	can	look	into	the	part,
its	necessities,	its	needs.	But	the	part	cannot	look	at	the	whole;	the	part	can	at	the
most	 look	at	 itself	while	 the	whole	must	 remain	 incomprehensible;	 so	one	can
never	know	what	one	is	asking.
In	the	end,	when	you	think	about	your	life	you	will	be	surprised	that	if	all	 that
you	 had	 wanted	 was	 fulfilled	 you	 would	 have	 been	 in	 hell.	 But	 it	 is	 only
retrospectively	that	one	becomes	wise.	All	is	not	fulfilled	because	all	is	not	good
for	 you.	Only	 that	which	 is	 needed	 for	 your	 being,	 for	 your	 growth,	 for	 your
evolution,	is	fulfilled...	whether	you	ask	for	it	or	not.	If	it	is	not	needed	it	is	never
fulfilled.	And	don't	force	your	way.	Always	remember	that	his	will	has	to	remain
ultimate;	our	wills	have	to	be	sacrificed.
Motherhood	 is	 possible...	 but	 relax.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 relax	 to	 become	 a
mother	--	that	I	am	not	saying,	because	then	you	cannot	relax:	the	idea	is	there.
Simply	relax.
[A	sannyasin,	newly	arrived,	says	someone	told	her	her	name	was	very	spiritual.
I'm	not	very	spiritual,	she	says,	and	I	was	taken	aback!]
You	have	a	wrong	notion	about	spirituality	 .	 .	 I	have	a	 totally	new	meaning	of
spirituality.	It	is	not	against	matter,	it	is	not	against	the	body,	it	is	not	against	life.
It	is	the	deepest	way	of	living	life,	this	life.	To	me	spiritualism	is	a	higher	kind	of
hedonism,	that's	all.	And	you	are	perfectly	that;	there	is	no	problem	with	it.	You
are	my	kind	of	spiritual	person!
I	 am	not	 anti-life;	 I	 am	all	 for	 life.	God	has	 to	be	 searched	 for	 in	 life...	 in	 the
mundane	life,	in	the	ordinary	life.	Chopping	wood	and	drawing	water	from	the
well;	God	has	 to	be	searched	for	 there.	Cooking	food	and	cleaning	 the	floor	--
there.
Down	the	ages	people	have	created	a	rift	between	life	and	God.	My	whole	effort
here	is	to	bridge	that	rift.	Life	is	God.	You	can	even	drop	the	word	God;	nothing
is	 lost.	 You	 can	 forget	 about	 spirit	 and	 spiritualism:	 nothing	 is	 lost.	 Just	 live
totally	and	you	will	be	spiritual.
And	 that	 is	 the	meaning	of	Shivanetra.	 It	means	 the	 third	eye.	These	 two	eyes
represent	 duality.	 The	 third	 eye	 represents	 a	 unity	 where	 these	 two	 eyes
disappear	into	one.	When	all	dualism	disappears,	 the	third	eye	arises;	 it	 is	one,
unitary	vision.	Matter	and	spirit	are	one,	body	and	soul	are	one,	the	ordinary	and
the	 extraordinary	 are	 one,	 this	 world	 and	 that	 world	 are	 one.	 Then	 you	 have
attained	to	the	third	eye.	It	knows	no	division:	all	opposites	meet	and	mingle	and
disappear	into	each	other.	It	is	indivisible	unity.	That's	my	meaning.
And	 that	 third	 eye	has	 to	be	opened.	Don't	 be	worried	 about	what	people	 say,
mm?	Listen	to	me	what	I	say.	Good.
[The	Leela	 group	 are	 present.	One	member	 says:	 I	 felt	 a	 lot	 of	 sadness	 in	 the
group	 and	 since	 the	 group	 I've	 been	 feeling	very	 cut	 off	 from	people,	 a	 lot	 of
sadness	and	feeling	very	alone.	And	then	sometimes	I	feel	like	I'm	falling	apart]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Yes,	it	 is	happening...	so	fall	apart!	You	are	trying	to	hold	those	parts	together;
that	is	creating	the	trouble.	Then	you	start	working	against	yourself.
All	these	groups	are	to	shatter	you.	They	shatter	you	but	you	go	on	holding.	So
now	two	opposing	forces	start	working	in	you.	The	group	gives	you	an	insight	to
help	you	fall	apart.	That	which	is	going	to	fall	apart	is	not	really	you;	it	 is	just
the	structure	around	you.	It	is	your	mind,	your	ego,	your	personality.	The	group
hammers	on	the	personality	so	that	you	can	be	released	from	it;	the	personality	is
the	 prison.	 The	 group	 tries	 to	 hammer	 from	 everywhere,	 to	 find	 loop-holes
through	which	it	can	enter	you	and	destroy	the	personality.
But	you	go	on	holding	it.
One	piece	starts	falling;	you	hold	it,	you	clutch	it,	you	cling	to	it;	then	you	are	in
a	difficulty.	That's	why	you	are	feeling	sad,	that's	why	you	are	feeling	frightened
and	that's	why	you	are	feeling	cut	off.	Because	your	whole	energy	is	involved	in
holding	 those	 parts,	 how	 can	 you	 relate	 to	 people?	 You	 don't	 have	 any	more
energy	to	relate	with.	You	can	relate	only	when	you	are	at	ease	inside	yourself.
When	somebody's	house	is	on	fire,	how	can	he	relate?
Stop	holding	it.	Let	it	fall!	Once	it	falls	it	will	be	a	great	liberation.	Once	you	can
see	it	down	on	the	floor,	once	it	is	detached	from	you	and	you	can	see	yourself
aloof,	distant	 from	 it,	 that	will	be	a	great	 liberation.	And	 this	 is	very	close	by.
Those	 parts	 are	 ready	 to	 fall	 but	 you	 are	 using	 your	 energy	 as	 a	 glue	 to	 keep
them	together,	and	they	are	not	worth	anything!
...	[The	groups]	have	done	their	work;	you	cannot	hold	it	long.	It	is	better	to	stop
holding	it;	let	it	disappear.	You	will	not	be	a	loser,	you	will	gain,	because	once
this	so-called	personality	is	gone	you	will	have	a	fresh	being.	You	will	be	reborn,
you	will	be	new.	And	out	of	that	newness	one	really	lives.
With	 this	 old	 rotten	 personality	 --	 and	 everybody	 is	 keeping	 this	 rotten
personality:	dusty,	dull,	dead,	stale	--	one	cannot	live.	It	is	hampering	one	from
everywhere.	The	old	cannot	allow	you	to	be	alive.	The	old	has	to	go	for	life	to
happen,	the	old	has	to	cease	for	the	new	to	happen.
Be	courageous!	These	are	the	moments	when	courage	is	needed!	...	I	think	you
should	do	one	or	 two	groups,	and	 in	 these	groups	really	 let	go.	Forget	 that	 the
personality	is	falling.	Let	it	fall,	help	it	to	fall	and	immediately	you	will	be	out	of
it.	You	will	be	surprised	how	beautiful	it	is	to	get	rid	of	the	personality.
Do	Primal...	and	after	Primal	I	will	give	you	silent,	meditative	techniques.	But	in
the	Primal,	please,	let	this	structure	go!	I	can	give	you	Vipassana	right	now	but
this	will	not	be	right.	Just	a	little	bit	more	of	these	groups	and	then	you	can	do
Vipassana	 and	 Zazen.	 They	 will	 give	 you	 immense	 joy,	 but	 first	 drop	 this
personality.
You	are	coming	close...	just	a	little	while	more!
[Another	group	member	said	he	came	in	contact	with	a	witness,	and	at	the	same
time	he	feels	as	if	he's	falling	apart.]
That's	 natural;	 it	 has	 to	 come	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 Both	 are	 parts	 of	 one
phenomenon:	 if	 the	witness	arises	 then	the	ego	falls.	The	ego	cannot	allow	the
witness	and	the	witness	cannot	exist	with	the	ego.	Either	the	ego	or	the	witness
can	remain,	so	when	the	witness	comes	the	ego	has	to	go.	It	will	create	a	little
trouble.	 It	 will	 fight,	 it	 will	 not	 surrender	 easily;	 and	 then	 you've	 to	 be	 alert,
watchful.	 And	 give	 your	whole	 cooperation	 to	 the	witness.	 Always	 give	 your
cooperation	 to	 the	 new,	 to	 the	 unknown,	 to	 the	 strange.	 Never	 give	 your
cooperation	to	the	old.	You	have	lived	it,	you	have	known	it;	there	is	no	need.
The	 ordinary	 attitude	 is	 that	 people	 give	 support	 to	 the	 old	 because	 they	 are
familiar	with	it,	acquainted	with	it.	t	may	not	give	great	blessings	to	them,	it	may
even	give	miseries	but	at	least	it	is	acquainted,	known,	familiar.	They	don't	give
their	support	 to	 the	unknown,	 to	 the	unfamiliar,	 to	 the	strange...	and	that's	how
God	comes,	life	comes,	love	comes.
So	 let	 it	 become	an	absolute	understanding	 that	one	has	always	 to	 support	 the
new.	It	is	better	to	go	wrong	with	the	new	than	to	go	right	with	the	old	because	it
is	 better	 to	 commit	 errors	 and	 be	 alive	 than	 not	 to	 commit	 any	 errors	 and	 be
dead.	Always	choose	the	unknown	and	go	with	it.	That's	what	I	mean	when	I	say
to	live	dangerously,	live	in	adventure.	To	be	in	adventure	is	to	be	in	meditation,
continuous	meditation.
Just	support	the	new!
[Another	group	member	said	he	felt	like	all	his	tensions	and	blocks	disappeared.
Now	he	wants	to	find	a	new	way,	a	new	language	to	communicate	with.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	will	happen;	you	cannot	create	 it.	 If	you	create	 it	 it	will	be	old	because	you
will	create	with	the	help	of	the	old,	you	will	create	out	of	the	memory.	It	will	not
be	new;	it	will	be	modified	but	old.	Wait,	it	will	come.
When	new	insights	come,	new	languages	follow.	If	your	body	is	relaxed	and	the
blocks	 have	 disappeared	 and	 you	 are	 feeling	 non-tense,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 new
language	of	relating	arising	on	its	own	accord.
All	that	you	can	do	will	be	old.	So	you	need	not	do	anything;	just	wait.	Wait	with
great	hope,	walt	expectant,	 like	an	expectant	mother.	 It	will	come...	and	 it	will
come	when	it	comes.	It	is	not	predictable	either.	If	it	can	be	predicted	then	it	will
be	old.	It	is	not	going	to	come	through	you.	It	will	come	like	a	light	ray	striking
you	from	the	unknown.
It	will	enlighten	you	but	you	will	not	be	the	source.
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711145
ShortTitle:	OPENSE14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Deva	 means	 God,	 agata	 means	 arrival	 --	 arrival	 of	 God.	 And	 God	 is	 just
knocking	on	your	door.	God	is	always	close	by.	The	idea	that	God	is	far	away	in
the	heavens	 is	 just	stupidity.	He	 is	 in	your	very	breath...	he	 is	your	breath!	We
just	have	to	understand	who	we	are,	and	in	that	very	understanding	we	come	to
know	what	God	is.	And	except	for	that	there	is	no	other	way	to	know	God.
Understanding	 oneself	 becomes	 the	 knowledge	 of	 God.	 So	 the	 only	 religious
question	is	'Who	am	l?'
Never	ask	what	God	is;	 just	ask	 'Who	am	I?'	Search	for	 the	answer,	and	never
believe	in	the	answers	that	are	given	by	others.	No	borrowed	answer	can	be	of
any	help;	each	person	has	 to	come	 to	his	own	answer.	Each	person	 is	carrying
the	answer	within	him;	one	just	has	to	dig.	And	this	sannyas	will	become	your
digging....
[A	visitor	hesitates	to	take	sannyas	because	his	mind	is	in	a	turmoil.]
The	mind	is	not	going	to	leave	so	soon,	so	let	the	mind	be	there	and	become	a
sannyasin!...	Now	I	will	take	care	of	the	mind;	it	will	go!
Ananda	means	blissful,	prahas	means	loud	laughter:	blissful,	loud	laughter.	and
let	laughter	be	your	meditation.	So	whenever	you	have	time	and	energy,	laugh,
for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 That	 destroys	 the	mind	 very	 easily.	 There	 is	 nothing	 like
laughter;;	it	is	poison	for	the	mind.	That's	why	only	mad	people	can	really	laugh
beautifully.	Whenever	somebody	laughs,	in	that	moment	the	mind	disappears.
When	the	laughter	is	there	the	mind	cannot	be	there;	they	cannot	exist	together.
So	let	laughter	grow.
The	mind	goes	perfectly	well	with	logic,	and	laughter	is	so	illogical,	so	absurd,
so	mad,	that	the	mind	cannot	cope	with	it.
In	a	few	Zen	monasteries	the	monk	has	to	start	his	morning	with	loud	laughter...
for	no	reason	at	all,	just	like	prayer.	You	also	follow	that,	and	soon	you	will	start
enjoying	 it.	Then	you	will	not	 seek	any	 reason;	 there	 is	no	 reason.	Why	 try	 to
find	any	reason?	When	one	can	laugh	without	reason,	who	cares?
[A	sannyasin	who	is	leaving	says	she	is	still	in	her	head	and	her	heart	has	only
just	begun	to	open...	she	thinks	it	will	be	a	problem	in	the	West.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	go	on	acting	as	 if	 the	whole	world	 is	 the	ashram!	says	Osho.	At	 the	most
people	will	think	you	are	mad;	that	is	their	problem!]
[Osho	had	previously	told	a	sannyasin	woman	to	move	into	valley	sex.	Now	the
boyfriend	is	at	darshan	and	says	he	finds	it	boring:	like	having	a	Rolls	Royce	and
keeping	it	in	the	garage.]
But	 that's	 what	 people	 do	 with	 their	 Rolls	 Royces:	 they	 keep	 them	 in	 the
garage!...
Leave	things	as	they	are	for	one	month	--	no	change,	mm?	After	one	month	both
come	 together,	 so	 if	 something	has	 to	be	 changed	 then	 I	will	 see.	But	 for	 one
month	just	continue.	Things	are	really	going	well;	your	energy	is	settling.
You	may	be	feeling	that	nothing	sensational	is	happening	because	the	mind	seeks
sensation,	 but	 your	 energy	 is	 really	 harmonious	 and	 that	 is	 far	more	 valuable
than	 any	 sensation.	 Your	 energy	 is	 really	 in	 accord;	 it	 has	 a	 beautiful	 rhythm
right	now.
So	for	one	month	just	keep	it	as	it	is	and	enjoy	it	as	it	is.	Don't	allow	the	mind	to
distract	 you,	 because	 the	 mind	 will	 go	 on	 saying	 'What	 is	 there?'	 The	 mind
always	wants	you	to	go	into	some	feverish	activity...
and	 that	 is	 tiring,	 it	 is	 disrupting.	For	one	month	 enjoy	 this	 very	 silently,	 very
coolly,	 and	 after	 one	 month	 come	 together.	 Things	 are	 good.	 Keep	 the	 Rolls
Royce	in	the	garage!	Good!
[A	sannyasin	says	he	has	a	block	in	his	energy	which	shows	in	his	work	in	the
ashram	and	in	his	relationship	--	that	he	wants	to	do	things	that	suit	him	and	not
what	he	is	told	to.	Many	beautiful	things	are	happening	but	he	is	obsessed	with
this	block.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
Just	do	a	single	 thing:	surrender	 to	Asheesh	(his	work	coordinator),	absolutely,
with	no	conditions:	whatsoever	he	says,	do.	Just	drop	the	ego.	Things	are	going
well	but	the	ego	can	disrupt	everything.	It	is	the	only	enemy	that	one	has	to	be
very	very	aware	of.	It	comes	in	such	subtle	ways	and	with	such	logic	that	 it	 is
very	difficult	to	resist.	And	it	brings	great	rationalizations.
Just	surrender	 to	Asheesh	and	whatsoever	he	says,	you	do	 it	 --	even	 if	he	asks
something	 absurd.	 He	 may	 ask	 something	 absurd	 because	 that's	 why	 I	 make
these	people	leaders;	they	are	absurd!	Deeksha,	Asheesh...	they	have	something
in	them;	that's	why	they	are	there!	You	may	be	doing	something	and	just	in	the
middle	he	may	say	'Now	do	this!'	You	will	feel	'This	is	not	right'...	and	you	are
right;	still	you	have	to	surrender.
Surrender	 is	 only	when	 even	 if	 you	 are	 right,	 you	 can	 give	 in.	When	 you	 are
wrong	 then	 surrender	 has	 no	 meaning.	 Surrender	 has	 to	 be	 absolute....	 And
Asheesh	is	a	good	master	--	just	surrender	to	him,	mm?	--
just	listen	and	whatsoever	he	says	treat	it	as	if	he	is	right,	always	right	And	that
will	change	your	energy.
Nothing	is	wrong.	It	 is	 just	 that	 the	ego	is	 trying	to	 take	hold	of	you,	 trying	to
raise	its	head.	The	ego	is	feeling	that	things	are	going	too	far:	if	you	go	a	little
more	then	it	will	be	too	late.	That's	why	you	must	be	feeling	other	negativities
too.	But	first	settle	with	Asheesh,	and	then	you	will	see	that	ninety-nine	percent
of	negativity	has	disappeared.	After	one	month	see	me	again,	and	then	tell	me	if
something	is	left.
Nothing	to	be	worried	about;	things	are	really	going	well.	When	things	are	going
well,	then	only	does	trouble	arise.	Then	the	ego	becomes	afraid;	it	starts	giving
trouble.	 So	 immediately	 after	 darshan,	 find	 Asheesh,	 touch	 his	 feet	 and	 say,
'Master,	I	am	surrendered!'
[A	sannyasin	says:	In	my	sexual	life	things	are	sometimes	happening,	sometimes
not,	but	now	I	feel	orgasm	without	any	sort	of	relation.]
That's	beautiful!	Nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Don't	make	a	problem	out	of	sex,
never	make	a	problem	out	of	 sex.	 If	you	make	a	problem	out	of	 sex	you	 start
doing	something	to	it.	That's	what	it	means	to	make	a	problem:	you	start	doing
something.	 Once	 you	 start	 doing	 something	 you	 destroy	 the	 beauty,	 the
spontaneity,	the	naturalness	of	it.	When	it	is	there,	it	is	there;	when	it	is	not	there
it	is	not	there.	Accept	it;	its	presence,	its	absence,	both	have	to	be	accepted.
And	 this	 happens.	 When	 you	 really	 become	 orgasmic,	 this	 happens:	 even
without	 any	 genital	 sexuality	 you	 may	 feel	 orgasm	 happening.	 That's	 what
happens	 to	 small	 children.	 They	 are	 orgasmic,	 their	 whole	 body	 is	 orgasmic.
Their	 sexuality	 is	 not	 centred	 at	 the	 genitals;	 their	 whole	 body	 functions	 in	 a
sexual	way.
Freud	 has	 a	 particular	 name	 for	 it:	 'polymorphous	 perversity'.	 He	 has	 a
condemnation	 for	 it	without	even	knowing	what	 it	 is.	The	child	 functions	as	a
whole.	He	has	no	genital	sex	yet;	that	sexuality	is	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
developed.	 But	 his	 whole	 being	 is	 sexual.	 Sucking	 his	 thumb	 he	 attains	 to
orgasm.
And	that	happens	when	you	start	becoming	again	orgasmic.	Just	swaying	in	the
wind	you	can	have	orgasm,	just	dancing	and	you	can	have	orgasm,	just	listening
to	music	and	you	can	go	into	orgasm.	But	that	is	beautiful!	You	are	freed	from
genital	sexuality.	When	it	comes,	good;	when	it	doesn't	come,	no	need	to	worry.
And	don't	be	afraid	of	this	orgasmicness.	That's	what	ecstasy	is:	to	be	orgasmic
without	 any	 sex.	 By	 and	 by	 orgasm	 will	 become	 non-sexual.	 Then	 anything
gives	you	an	orgasm	and	you	can	have	as	much	orgasm	as	possible.	The	ultimate
state	 of	 orgasm	 is	 to	 live	 in	 it	 continuously;	 then	 each	 moment	 is	 orgasmic.
Eating,	there	is	orgasm,	taking	a	shower,	there	is	orgasm.	Moving,	looking	at	the
trees,	you	are	orgasmic.	That	is	the	goal	of	Tantra:	to	make	you	so	orgasmic	that
each	act	becomes	ecstatic	and	becomes	free	of	sex.
Something	immensely	valuable	is	by	the	corner.	Receive	it!
[A	visitor	reminds	Osho	of	a	letter	he	wrote	in	which	he	described	an	episode	of
what	seemed	to	be	madness	last	year	in	Holland.	Since	then	he	has	had	trouble	in
concentrating	 and	 in	 relating	with	 others.	On	 the	whole	 he	 is	 feeling	 peaceful
now.]
That's	very	good!	Mm	mm...	it	can	happen,	sometimes	it	can	happen:	a	madness
can	 become	 a	 breakthrough,	 a	 breakdown	 can	 become	 a	 breakthrough.	And	 it
seems	 that	 that	breakdown	became	a	breakthrough.	 It	has	not	been	a	 loss:	you
are	benefitted	by	 it.	You	 look	very	very	at	peace	deep	 inside.	So	 that	madness
was	not	really	madness.	To	call	it	madness	is	to	misname	it.
It	was	something	like	a	mini-satori.	But	in	the	West	there	is	no	understanding	of
mini-satoris	or	satoris.
So	 anything	 that	 goes	 beyond	 the	 normal	 is	 abnormal;	 it	 is	 thought	 that
something	 is	 wrong.	 The	 normal	 has	 become	 the	 norm	 in	 the	 West,	 and	 the
normal	 is	 a	 very	ordinary	phenomenon.	The	normal	man	 is	 not	 healthy,	 is	 not
whole,	 is	not	even	sane.	But	he	is	 the	norm,	so	if	you	are	different	 in	any	way
something	is	wrong	with	you.	But	Buddha	was	also	different	and	Christ	was	also
different	and	so	was	Saint	Francis.	In	this	age	they	would	have	been	thought	to
be	neurotic	had	they	been	in	the	West.	In	fact	that	is	what	psychoanalysts	go	on
writing	--	that	Francis	was	neurotic,	that	Jesus	was	neurotic.
Something	 beautiful	 has	 happened,	 and	 after	 such	 great	 happenings	 the	 mind
takes	a	long	time	to	settle	back	because	it	will	be	settling	on	a	higher	plane.	So
that	 is	 possible:	 your	 memory	 may	 suffer	 a	 little	 loss	 but	 it	 will	 disappear.
Nothing	to	be	worried	about.
[The	 visitor	 says:	 I	 wrote	 to	 you	 about	 people	 being	 cured	 when	 I	 touched
them...	things	like	that....	I	don't	know	how	to.]
Yes,	it	is	possible;	you	can	have	that	quality	and	you	should	use	it....
No,	 there	 is	no	how	 to	 it.	 Just	be	silent	and	 touch	 the	person.	 If	a	headache	 is
there	touch	the	head;	if	a	stomach	ache	then	touch	the	stomach.	If	it	is	something
which	 cannot	 be	 localized,	 then	 just	 tell	 the	 person	 to	 lie	 down	 and	 put	 your
hands	on	his	heart.	Become	completely	quiet	and	 just	 feel	you	are	a	vehicle,	a
passage,	and	God's	energy	is	passing	through	you.
You	 can	 become	 a	 good	 healer.	 That	madness	 was	 really	 good.	 And	 think	 of
sannyas...	because	that	will	be	a	higher	madness!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711155
ShortTitle:	OPENSE15
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Veet	Vidhan.	 It	means	 beyond	 discipline,	Osho	 explains,	 and	 truth	 is	 beyond
discipline	 because	 it	 cannot	 be	 manufactured	 by	 man.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 doing;	 man
cannot	do	it.	Man	can	only	be	it.	So	there	is	no	method,	no	discipline,	no	system,
that	can	help	you	to	attain	to	truth.
To	see	this	point	is	to	be	free	of	all	systems.	To	see	the	point:	that	how	can	you
attain	to	the	truth?...	The	I	is	the	barrier,	the	idea	of	attainment	is	the	barrier.]
All	 methods	 can	 help	 you	 to	 come	 to	 this	 recognition	 --	 that	 no	 method	 is
needed.	Yes,	that	they	can	do;	in	fact	that	is	their	work.	All	the	methods	that	we
use	here	are	not	goals,	all	the	growth	groups	that	we	use	here	are	not	the	goal	in
themselves.	 They	 slowly	 slowly	 bring	 you	 to	 a	 point	 where	 disillusionment
happens.
Suddenly	one	day	doing	many	things,	you	recognise	the	truth,	it	dawns	in	your
consciousness	--	that	no	truth	is	possible	through	method;	there	is	no	technique
for	 it.	 In	 that	 seeing	 something	 suddenly	 disappears	 from	 your	 being	 --	 the
doing.
[Osho	 suggests	 that	 he	 do	 some	 groups	 but	with	 this	 idea	 --	 that	 no	 group	 is
going	to	deliver	the	truth	to	him.	They	can	make	you	more	aware	of	the	lie,	Osho
continues.	They	can	bring	you	closer	and	closer	to	a	vision	of	the	lie	as	the	lie.
To	see	the	false	as	the	false	becomes	the	door	to	truth....	]
So	all	groups	and	all	meditations	and	all	masters	have	a	negative	function:	they
simply	 take	 away	 things	 from	you	which	 are	not	 needed.	They	 take	 away	 lies
from	you.	Nobody	can	give	you	truth	but	lies	can	be	taken	away,	and	once	the	lie
is	taken	away,	truth	is.
[A	sannyasin,	who	is	leaving,	says:	I	feel	as	if	I	have	everything	to	say	to	you	but
there's	nothing	as	well....	I	can't	put	it	in	words.
Osho	checks	his	energy	and	tells	him	that	it	really	beautiful.	He	advises	him	not
to	do	anything	that	can	disturb	it....	]
It	is	difficult	to	attain	to	a	beautiful	energy;	it	is	very	easy	to	lose	it.	It	is	always
so	with	higher	things:	very	difficult	to	reach	them	but	very	easy	to	fall.	Things
are	really	good.	You	should	be	happy:	now	you	have	something	that	can	be	lost.
Very	few	people	are	that	fortunate;	they	don't	have	anything	to	lose.	So	now	you
have	to	be	more	careful,	more	watchful.	Each	step	has	to	be	taken	very	carefully,
whatsoever	you	do	has	to	be	done	in	very	very	great	awareness.	And	these	three
months	 will	 prove	 of	 great	 importance	 if	 you	 remain	 watchful.	 Then	 coming
back	to	me	there	will	be	a	great	upsurge.	In	these	three	months	the	energy	will
become	 ready,	 will	 become	 accumulated,	 and	 then	 there	 can	 be	 a	 higher
explosion.
So	in	these	three	months	that	you	will	be	away	remain	more	alert.	While	you	are
here	 you	 can	 afford	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 unawareness,	 mm?	 --	 because	 the	 whole
atmosphere	 is	 charged	 with	 awareness.	 So	 many	 people	 meditating,	 so	 many
people	 loving...	 It	 is	 a	 tide,	 noontide;	 you	 can	 ride	 on	 it	 easily.	 There	 (in	 the
West)	you	will	be	alone;	you	will	miss	this	noontide.	You	will	have	to	create	the
whole	thing	on	your	own.	There	will	be	no	support;	in	fact,	there	will	be	every
negative	opportunity	to	destroy	it.
So	be	alert;	that	will	be	helpful.	If	you	can	be	alert	you	will	learn	much	and	you
will	learn	how	to	be	on	your	own;	that	has	to	be	learned.	One	cannot	depend	on
the	 commune	 for	 long.	One	has	 to	 create	one's	 own	energy.	And	 that	 is	 there,
you	 just	 have	 to	 keep	 helping	 it.	 Don't	 do	 anything	 that	 will	 destroy	 your
peacefulness,	don't	do	anything	that	will	become	a	distraction.	Even	if	you	have
started	 something	which	 you	 suddenly	 feel	 is	 becoming	 a	 distraction,	 stop!	 --
because	 this	 is	 the	most	 precious	 thing;	 nothing	 else	 is	more	 precious.	This	 is
more	precious	than	life	itself.
This	is	the	thing	for	which	life	exists	in	the	first	place:	to	create	this	energy.	Life
is	an	opportunity.	Life	in	itself	 is	not	the	goal	but	just	a	situation	in	which	this
energy	has	to	be	created.	If	one	creates	this	energy	then	life	has	meaning;	if	one
does	not	create	this	energy	then	life	remains	meaningless.	Then	it	has	no	logos.
Whenever	you	feel	you	need	me,	 just	remember	me.	Put	 the	box	on	your	third
eye	and	remember	me...
and	come	back!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[The	leader	of	the	Hypnotherapy	group	wrote	to	Osho	about	the	recent	group,	as
he'd	felt	uneasy	about	the	energy	of	one	of	the	participants.	Tonight	Osho	checks
the	participant's	energy.]
(To	 the	 therapist)	No,	 there	 is	nothing	negative,	 there	 is	nothing	evil.	 It	 is	 just
that	he	has	too	much	concentrated	energy	and	he	himself	does	not	know	what	to
do	with	it.	So	he	must	be	throwing	too	much	energy.	But	it	is	too	concentrated;	it
can	 hit	 one	 and	 it	 can	 be	 felt	 as	 something	 negative	 or	 evil,	 something
dangerous.	It	is	as	if	you	concentrate	sunrays:	they	can	become	very	fiery.	If	they
are	not	concentrated	they	are	simply	light,	warm;	you	can	enjoy	a	sun	bath.	But
if	 they	are	concentrated	 they	can	burn	you.	And	that's	how	he	 is:	his	energy	 is
very	concentrated.
In	his	past	life	he	must	have	done	some	concentration	method.	In	hypnosis	this
can	be	dangerous	because	hypnosis	 is	a	 totally	different	methodology.	 It	 is	not
really	concentration,	 it	 is	 relaxation.	He	has	a	different	kind	of	energy	 to	what
hypnosis	needs,	so	you	must	have	felt...	But	there's	nothing	evil;	he	is	a	perfectly
good	man,	a	saint!	Nothing	to	be	worried	about.
But	if	sometimes	you	feel	like	that	again	with	somebody...	It	can	happen	again
because	many	people	will	be	coming	here	who	have	worked	in	their	past	lives	on
certain	methods.	When	a	 fresh	man	comes	he	will	not	create	any	problem,	but
when	somebody	comes	who	has	a	past	of	 spiritual	growth	 then	he	may	not	 fit
with	 some	methods.	He	has	a	certain	methodology	of	his	own;	 if	he	goes	 into
that	kind	of	thing,	he	will	fit.	But	if	he	goes	into	some	other	method	then	he	will
not	fit	there.
So	 if	you	feel	next	 time	 that	something	 like	 this	 is	happening	you	should	do	a
small	 experiment.	Rather	 than	 taking	him	out	you	should	put	him	on	 the	 floor
and	 tell	 him	 to	 be	 as	 energyful	 as	 possible.	The	whole	 group	 should	 surround
him	and	touch	his	body	from	everywhere.	Tell	the	whole	group	to	take	as	much
energy	as	possible	from	him;	he	has	much!	He	will	be	relieved	and	everybody
will	be	benefitted.	He	will	be	benefitted	because	he	will	feel	very	relaxed	once
the	 energy	 has	 been	 taken.	 In	 fact	 he	wanted	 to	 give	 energy	 and	 nobody	was
ready	 to	 take	 it,	 so	 it	was	hitting	people	and	naturally	 it	was	hitting	you	more
because	you	will	be	more	aware	of	what	is	happening.
So	it	can	happen	again.	First:	never	think	of	evil	and	negativity.	That	is	so	rare
that	I	don't	think	you	will	come	across	it.	It	is	only	one	person	in	a	million	who
has	 really	negative	energy,	because	 to	 take	 the	negative	 form	a	 long	history	of
murder,	suicide,	robbery,	that	kind	of	thing,	is	needed.	And	if	that	kind	of	thing
has	happened	 in	 a	person's	 life	he	 is	not	going	 to	 come	here,	 no.	Adolf	Hitler
won't	come	here.	If	he	does	he	will	have	evil	energy,	but	a	person	who	comes	to
me...	The	very	 fact	 that	he	comes	 to	me,	 that	he	has	become	 interested	 in	me,
that	he	has	become	a	sannyasin,	is	enough	proof	that	he	has	no	negative	energy.
So	you	will	not	come	across	a	negative	person	here;	that	is	not	possible.	And	if	a
negative	person	comes,	before	I	send	him	to	you	I	will	put	him	right.	Only	then
will	I	send	him;	otherwise	he	can	be	very	destructive	to	people,	particularly	in	a
hypnosis	group.	If	I	sent	a	murderer	like	Genghis	Khan	or	Tamerlane	or	Adolf
Hitler	 to	 the	Hypnotherapy	group	where	everybody	is	relaxed	and	moving	into
silence	and	harmony,	he	could	 take	possession	of	all	He	could	give	everybody
ideas	of	murdering,	committing	suicide.
He	would	 throw	 your	 influence	 away;	 you	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 do	 anything
because	he	would	have	more	power,	 the	power	of	many	 lives.	He	could	create
murderers	 there	 immediately.	 In	 fact	 that's	 how	Hitler	was	 able	 to	 do	what	 he
did.
Some	 day	 or	 other	 people	 will	 study	 Hitler	 through	 hypnosis,	 just	 as	 in	 the
modern	times	people	have	started	thinking	through	psychoanalysis.	Gandhi	has
been	psychoanalysed	by	Erikson,	Luther	has	been	psychoanalysed	by	Erikson.
Freud	worked	on	Moses,	Leonardo	da	Vinci.	In	that	way	some	day	hypnosis	has
to	be	brought	 in	 to	study	people.	 If	you	bring	 in	hypnosis	 to	study	people	you
can	go	far	deeper	than	with	psychoanalysis.
If	Hitler	were	studied	through	hypnosis,	then	only	would	you	be	able	to	find	out
what	his	power	was.	He	had	immensely	hypnotic	eyes.	Just	to	look	at	him	for	a
few	moments	was	enough	to	hypnotize	people.	He	had	all	the	right	arrangements
and	knowingly,	unknowingly,	he	functioned	as	a	hypnotist.	He	would	stand	on	a
high	 dais	with	 the	whole	 hall	 completely	 in	 dark	 and	 searchlights	 focused	 on
him.	Nobody	would	 be	 able	 to	 see	 anybody	 else;	 everybody	would	 be	 seeing
him.	 He	 had	 a	 very	 very	 monotonous	 voice,	 sleepy,	 one	 which	 would	 help
people	 to	go	 into	 sleep.	And	his	eyes	were	 really	hypnotic,	very	magnetic.	He
would	speak	for	hours,	sometimes	four	hours.	He	would	go	on	hammering	 the
same	thing	again	and	again,	 in	the	same	monotonous	voice.	After	a	few	hours,
people	would	start	falling	into	hypnosis...	and	that's	how	he	converted	the	whole
country	into	murderers.	Just	his	presence	was	enough	to	convert	another	person
into	 a	murderer.	 In	 the	Nuremberg	 trials	 all	 the	 people	who	worked	with	 him
confessed	that	they	didn't	know	how	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
they	could	do	it.	They	were	under	the	influence	of	an	immense	power;	that	man
had	a	grip	over	them.
So	 if	 a	murderer	or	an	evil	person	comes	 to	a	hypnosis	group	and	 if	you	start
hypnotizing	people	and	he	is	sitting	there,	just	his	sitting	there	is	enough.	He	is
constantly	broadcasting	evil	 thoughts;	 they	will	 fall	upon	everybody.	That	will
be	 the	best	moment	 for	 those	arrows	 to	penetrate	 the	heart	because	everybody
will	be	vulnerable.
So	 remember,	 I	 will	 never	 send	 a	 person	 who	 is	 evil	 not	 at	 least	 to	 the
Hypnotherapy	group.	I	can	send	him	to	the	Encounter	(chuckling)	but	not	to	the
Hypnotherapy	group.	If	something	like	this	happens	always	keep	in	mind	that	it
is	some	concentrated	energy.	Concentrated	energy	will	go	against	hypnosis.	He
has	 beautiful	 energy	 but	 too	 much	 of	 it	 and	 it	 is	 focused.	 It	 needs	 to	 be
defocused,	it	needs	to	be	unconcentrated.
[The	therapist	says:	He's	going	to	be	doing	be	Deep	Hypnotherapy	group	too.]
Yes,	let	him	do	it.	And	this	time	if	you	again	feel	the	same	phenomenon,	just	use
him	 as	 a	 reservoir.	 He	 has	 beautiful	 energy.	 Tell	 everybody	 to	 drink	 as	much
energy	out	of	him	as	possible,	mm?	So	from	everywhere,	drink	out	of	him.
[The	participant	 asks	 for	 direction,	 and	 says	he	has	 booked	 for	 several	 groups
and	Osho	suggests	more.]
And	then	I	will	see	what	else.	And	after	Leela	remind	me	about	your	meditation.
By	that	time	things	will	be	flowing	perfectly.	You	have	really	great	energy.	Once
it	is	released	you	will	simply	move	into	another	world.	So	be	happy!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711165
ShortTitle:	OPENSE16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Deva	means	divine,	parivartan	means	change	--	a	divine	change.	I	am	giving	you
this	name	for	a	specific	purpose:	from	this	moment	start	accepting	change.	And
the	more	you	 accept	 change,	 the	 less	will	 be	 your	misery,	 the	 less	will	 be	 the
pain.	Once	you	have	understood	the	secret	of	it	and	the	acceptance	has	become
total,	pain	simply	disappears	as	if	it	had	never	existed.
We	create	our	misery	and	our	hell.	Life	will	change	into	death;	one	has	to	accept
it.	To	accept	it	is	courage,	to	welcome	it	is	bravery.	To	live	as	life	changes,	with
it,	not	against,	in	a	let-go,	is	the	whole	art	of	life.
So	 never	 think	 for	 a	 single	 moment	 that	 anything	 is	 going	 to	 be	 permanent.
Nothing	is	going	to	be	permanent.	And	it	is	good	that	nothing	can	be	permanent;
hence	 things	 are	 fresh,	 young.	 Through	 death	 life	 rejuvenates	 itself;	 through
change	life	goes	on	renewing	itself.	It	is	renewable.
Buddha	emphasises	 this	 flux-like	quality	of	 life	very	much.	He	 says	 that	 even
your	soul	 is	not	permanent.	Heraclitus	 says	 that	you	cannot	 step	 into	 the	same
river	twice	because	the	river	is	changing.
Buddha	says	that	you	cannot	step	twice	into	the	river	because	you	are	changing!
His	 penetration	 goes	 deeper	 than	 Heraclitus';	 Heraclitus	 looks	 at	 the	 outward
change.	Buddha	says,	'What	are	you	talking	about?
--	 because	 the	 next	 time	 you	 step	 in	 the	 river	 you	 will	 not	 be	 the	 same,	 you
cannot	be	the	same;	you	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
changing	 each	 moment.	 Something	 is	 disappearing,	 something	 new	 is	 being
added	to	you.'
The	metaphor	that	Buddha	liked	very	much	is	of	a	flame:	it	looks	the	same	but	it
is	constantly	changing.
You	kindle	a	lamp	in	the	evening	and	when	you	blow	it	out	in	the	morning	you
will	think	it	is	the	same	flame.	Then	you	are	wrong.	It	is	not	the	same	flame	that
the	lamp	started	with.	That	disappeared	long	ago.
Every	 moment	 the	 flame	 is	 disappearing	 into	 the	 smoke	 and	 a	 new	 flame	 is
taking	its	place.	But	the	change	when	one	flame	goes	out	and	another	comes	in	is
so	fast	that	you	cannot	see	the	gap;	the	change	is	so	fast.
By	the	morning	when	you	blow	out	the	lamp	it	is	not	the	same	flame.	Millions	of
flames	were	born	and	have	disappeared.	Yes,	it	is	the	same	continuity	but	not	the
same	flame.
So	 even	 your	 innermost	 being	 is	 not	 a	 permanent	 thing.	 Once	 this	 vision
becomes	 clear	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 expectations	 of	 life.	 You	 don't	 hold	 onto
things,	 you	 don't	 cling;	 you	 don't	 become	 possessive,	 because	 nothing	 can	 be
possessed.	Where	 everything	 is	 a	 flux	 how	 can	 you	 possess	 anything?	By	 the
moment	you	possess	it,	it	will	be	gone.	By	the	moment	you	close	your	fist	it	will
not	be	there,	it	will	not	be	the	same.
I	would	like	you	to	go	deep	into	this	insight.
[Osho	gives	sannyas	to	someone.]
Raise	your	hands	and	close	your	eyes,	and	feel	that	you	are	a	bird	flying	into	the
sky.	Get	into	the	feel	of	it.	These	are	your	wings	and	you	are	going	higher	and
higher.	If	the	body	starts	moving	upwards	and	you	start	feeling	like	standing	on
your	knees	or	on	your	feet,	allow	it.	Just	feel	that	you	are	a	bird:	you	can	fly!	If
your	hands	start	moving	like	wings,	allow	them,	cooperate	with	them.
Agni	means	 fire,	 deva	means	 god	 --	 god	 of	 fire.	And	many	 things	 have	 to	 be
understood	about	it,	mm?
The	first	thing:	fire	is	the	very	substance	of	life,	life	exists	through	fire.	It	may	be
in	 the	 form	of	 sun	energy,	 it	may	be	 in	 the	 form	of	 love	energy	but	 life	exists
through	fire.
When	you	eat	food	you	are	simply	eating	condensed	fire.	The	trees	and	the	fruits
you	eat	go	on	absorbing	 the	 sun.	 It	 is	 fire	made	 ready	 for	you	 to	 absorb.	And
when	you	hanker	for	the	warmth	of	a	woman's	body,	you	are	hankering	for	fire.
Life	cannot	exist	without	fire	because	basically	life	is	fire.	But	fire	can	have	two
forms:	it	can	become	destructive,	it	can	become	creative.	The	fire	can	burn	your
home	and	 can	warm	 it	 too.	So	one	has	 to	be	very	very	 alert	 conscious,	 aware
about	 using	 fire	 in	 the	 right	 direction,	 in	 the	 right	 way;	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very
mindful.
Ordinarily	people	are	destroyed	by	their	own	fire.	Sex	is	fire.	If	it	doesn't	change
into	 love	 it	can	become	destructive.	 It	can	keep	you	at	 the	 lowest	point,	at	 the
lowest	 rung	 of	 your	 being;	 then	 you	 remain	 tethered	 to	 the	 earth.	You	 cannot
become	 a	 bird	 and	 you	 cannot	 go	 into	 the	 sky.	 You	 cannot	 be	 free.	 Sex	 can
become	a	bondage.	You	can	go	on	overeating,	that	too	is	fire,	but	then	you	are
obsessed	with	food	and	it	is	destructive.
Buddha	has	said	that	there	are	three	forms	of	fire	which	are	destructive:	desire,
anger	 and	greed.	Desire	 always	hankers	 for	 something	more	 and	 it	 drives	 you
crazy	with	ambition,	with	plans	for	the	future;	it	never	allows	you	to	be	herenow.
Fire	has	gone	wrong:	 it	has	moved	into	dream.	If	your	desires	are	not	 fulfilled
then	anger	arises.	Or	if	your	desires	are	hindered,	obstructed,	then	anger	arises.
Obstructed	desire	becomes	anger.	If	somebody	comes	in	your	way,	you	are	full
of	rage,	violence;	aggression	arises.	Then	fire	has	become	even	more	dangerous.
If	you	are	successful	in	your	desire	and	you	had	not	been	obstructed	then	your
fire	 becomes	 greed.	Whatsoever	 you	 attain	 you	 hoard;	 you	 become	 a	 hoarder,
you	go	on	hoarding.
These	 three	wrong	uses	of	 fire	create	 the	ego.	The	more	desires	you	have,	 the
more	you	can	possess,	the	more	anger	you	have,	the	more	egoistic	you	are.
Buddha	says	this	is	how	people	are	always	destroyed	by	their	own	energy.	He	is
reported	to	have	said	that	everybody's	house	is	on	fire.	He	has	said	that	for	his
whole	life	he	has	been	shouting	to	people	that	their	house	is	on	fire.	They	should
escape	from	it,	get	out	of	it,	otherwise	they	will	be	burned.	He	is	talking	about
these	three	fires.
These	 three	 fires	 can	become	creative	 too.	 If	 desire	becomes	desirelessness,	 if
the	dreaming	mind	stops	and	you	don't	move	into	the	future,	you	start	enjoying
life	in	the	present	and	you	don't	think	of	the	morrow
--	 you	 become	 the	 lilies	 in	 the	 field,	 as	 Jesus	 says	 --	 then	 the	 fire	 is	 no	more
going	outwards.
So	when	there	is	no	desire	there	is	no	possibility	of	anger	or	greed.	Your	whole
fire	turns	inwards	and	it	burns	the	ego,	it	consumes	the	ego.	That	is	the	creative
use	of	 fire	 --	 that	 it	 should	consume	your	ego.	When	 the	ego	 is	consumed	and
fire	has	been	absorbed	inside	it	becomes	love	and	at	the	highest	point	it	becomes
prayer.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	meditate	on	fire.	Think	of	its	creative	ways	and	avoid	the	destructive	way.	It
is	 the	same	energy	that	creates	hell	or	heaven.	The	energy	is	not	different;	 it	 is
the	same	energy	that	makes	an	Adolf	Hitler	or	a	Gautam	Buddha.	Adolf	Hitler	is
as	much	capable	of	becoming	a	Gautam	Buddha	as	Gautam	Buddha	is	capable
of	 becoming	 an	 Adolf	 Hitler.	 The	 sinner	 and	 the	 saint	 are	 not	 really	 two
phenomena;	it	is	the	one	energy	rightly	used	or	wrongly	used.	And	we	have	been
given	the	same	amount	of	energy.	Life	is	very	impartial;	the	only	difference	that
happens	later	on	is	our	choice.
And	this	orange	is	the	colour	of	fire....
Prem	means	love,	vihanga	means	a	bird	--	a	love	bird.	And	become	one.	Let	love
be	 your	whole	 climate,	 let	 love	 be	 your	 sky.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 god,	 there	 has
never	 been:	 love	 is	 the	 only	 god.	 All	 other	 gods	 are	 born	 and	 die,	 only	 love
remains.	And	that's	why	in	this	century	they	say	that	God	is	dead,	because	love
has	not	 taken	another	 incarnation.	 It	cannot	 take	another	 incarnation	unless	we
invite	it.
That's	what	I	am	doing	here,	that	is	my	whole	purpose	and	work	here:	to	create
people	who	can	invite	love	into	life	again,	who	can	live	in	love	and	take	all	the
risks	that	come	with	it,	who	can	live	dangerously....
Because	 to	be	 loving	 is	 to	 live	 in	danger,	 to	be	 loving	 is	 to	 live	 in	 continuous
risk.	A	lover	 is	a	gambler	and	is	always	staking	his	whole.	A	lover	knows	that
there	is	something	higher	and	more	valuable	than	life	itself.	Only	lovers	know	it,
and	 that's	 what	 God	 is:	 something	 more	 valuable	 than	 life.	 Even	 life	 can	 be
sacrificed	for	it.
[A	sannyasin,	who	is	leaving,	refers	to	a	letter	she	had	written	earlier:	I	asked	if	I
could	 have	 a	 baby	 and	 you	 said	 I	 could.	 Then	 I	 began	 to	 think	 that	 Osho	 is
putting	a	responsibility	on	me	and	was	I	ready	for	it.]
If	you	can	avoid	 it	 that	 is	very	good.	When	people	ask,	 they	create	 trouble	for
me.	If	I	say	no	then	it	feels	as	if	I	am	hurting	your	motherhood.	If	I	say	yes	then
certainly	there	are	going	to	be	troubles	and	responsibilities	and	you	may	get	into
a	mess.	The	best	 thing	is	 to	remain	alone	a	 little	 longer.	First	 finish	your	work
upon	 yourself.	When	 you	 have	 come	 to	 a	 certain	 state	 where	 you	 know	 now
nothing	can	disturb	you,	then	it	is	perfectly	good	to	have	children.	Then	you	will
be	able	to	help	them	also:	you	will	be	really	mothering	them.
Right	now	you	yourself	need	mothering	and	you	will	be	simply	giving	them	all
the	diseases	 that	you're	carrying.	One	psychoanalyst	has	called	 the	disease	 that
parents	 give	 to	 children	 'NDD'	 --	 neurosis,	 disease,	 depression.	 That's	 what
people	 are	going	 to	give.	You	don't	 have	 anything	 else	 to	give!	Wait,	 you	 can
wait	it	will	be	far	better.
[She	adds:	Doctors	say	I	sbouldn't	have	a	baby	because	of	my	epilepsy...	because
the	child	may	carry	the	epilepsy.]
Mm	mm,	that	is	just	a	possibility;	that	is	not	much...	epilepsy	is	not	hereditary,
no.	That	is	not	the	big	problem;	but	neurosis	and	all	the	confusion	of	your	mind,
that	is	the	problem.	You	will	be	bringing	up	the	child	and	you	will	pour	all	that
you	have	into	the	child.	First,	become	a	little	more	blissful.	And	you	are	on	the
right	 track;	 things	 are	 happening.	You	 are	moving	 into	 it	 slowly,	 step	by	 step.
You	will	become	very	very	cheerful;	just	a	little	patience	is	needed.
Epilepsy	is	not	that	much	of	a	problem.	If	you	can	really	love	the	child	without
possessiveness,	if	you	can	give	the	child	total	freedom	without	neglecting	him,	if
you	can	understand	that	the	child	comes	through	you	but	does	not	belong	to	you
--	that	it	is	God's	gift	--	if	you	can	be	respectful	to	the	child,	then	it	is	perfectly
good...	no	problem.
But	if	you	can	wait	a	little	it	is	good.	If	I	say	no	then	people	feel	hurt;	if	I	say	yes
they	start	feeling	that	I	am	putting	some	responsibility	on	them.	They	don't	leave
any	alternative	for	me.
If	you	leave	an	alternative	for	me	then	I	will	say	no,	wait	two,	three	years	more;
there	is	no	hurry.	Either	the	desire	will	disappear,	that	is	the	best	thing,	or	if	the
desire	persists,	by	that	time	you	will	be	ready,	mm?
[A	visitor	asks	which	groups	to	do,	but	hesitates	to	take	sannyas:	I'm	afraid	I	will
have	a	new	belief	system.]
It	 is	not	a	belief	system	at	all,	because	I	go	on	contradicting	myself	every	day,
every	moment.	You	cannot	create	any	belief	system	around	me;	it	is	impossible.
A	belief	system	can	be	created	only	if	I	am	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
consistent.	 That's	 why	 I	 am	 not	 consistent,	 because	 I	 am	 against	 all	 belief
systems.	But	 I	go	on	contradicting:	one	day	 I	 say	one	 thing;	another	day	I	 say
just	 the	 opposite.	 How	 can	 you	 create	 a	 belief	 system?	 By	 and	 by	 you	 will
understand	the	whole	point	of	my	talking.	Talking	is	not	really	the	main	thing;
something	else	is	important.	Talking	is	just	to	keep	your	mind	occupied	so	that	I
can	work	and	your	mind	does	not	disturb	you.
While	I	am	talking	to	you	that	is	just	the	outside	of	my	work;	I	am	continuously
working	on	your	heart.
And	 when	 your	mind	 is	 engaged	 in	 listening,	 your	 heart	 is	 available.	 If	 your
mind	 is	 not	 engaged	 it	 does	 not	 allow	 anybody	 to	 approach	 your	 heart.	 It
protects,	it	defends,	it	guards.	I	am	not	a	philosopher;	I	am	not	trying	to	create	a
philosophy.	And	I	am	not	a	theologian	either.	So	I	don't	have	any	belief	system.
You	 can	believe	 in	God;	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good.	 If	 you	don't	 believe	 in	God	 it	 is
perfectly	good.	If	you	believe	in	the	soul,	okay;	if	you	don't	believe	in	the	soul,
okay.	All	types	of	people	are	here	and	everybody	is	acceptable	to	me.	I	make	no
conditions	because	I	know	the	real	work	has	nothing	to	do	with	belief.
In	 fact	 all	 beliefs	 are	 poisonous.	 And	 all	 beliefs	 kill	 your	 consciousness	 and
destroy	your	awareness.
A	 belief	 system	 is	 a	 consolation.	 It	 is	 a	 lie	 but	 very	 sweet,	 consoling,
comfortable,	convenient,	gives	you	security.	Belief	is	not	truth,	never	truth.	Truth
arises	only	when	all	beliefs	are	shattered.
So	don't	be	afraid,	for	that	reason	don't	be	afraid.	If	some	other	reason	is	there,
find	 it;	 otherwise	 for	 that	 reason	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 being	 afraid.	 And
becoming	a	 sannyasin	will	help	your	groups	and	your	work	here	because	 then
you	will	be	 intimate,	close;	otherwise	you	will	 remain	an	outsider.	Things	will
happen	but	it	will	take	a	longer	time.
But	think	about	it.	If	you	want	to	think	about	it,	think	about	it.	In	fact	there	is	no
need	to	think	about	it	because	thinking	can	only	lead	you	to	a	belief	system.	It	is
only	non-thinking	that	can	lead	you	beyond	belief	systems.	What	will	you	think?
You	will	 think	about	what	 I	 am	saying...	 and	 if	 it	 appeals	 to	you	 it	becomes	a
belief.	 And	 that's	 what	 you	 are	 saying	 --	 that	 what	 I	 say	 is	 beautiful.	 That	 is
dangerous.	 Don't	 listen	 to	 what	 I	 say!	 Just	 listen	 to	me...	 the	 unsaid	me,	 that
which	cannot	be	said.	And	sannyas	is	an	opening	for	that	which	cannot	be	said.
Those	who	are	not	 sannyasins	will	only	 listen	 to	my	words	and	 those	who	are
sannyasins	will	listen	to	my	being.	Because	it	is	a	love	affair	and	only	in	a	love
affair	 can	 being	 be	 transferred.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 will	 remain	 a
student	 here.	 Mm?	 you	 will	 learn	 many	 things,	 you	 will	 become	 more
knowledgeable	but	you	will	miss	 the	 real	 thing.	You	will	 simply	be	 collecting
crumbs	which	have	fallen	from	the	table	but	you	will	not	be	a	guest.	A	disciple
becomes	a	guest.	He	is	not	worried	about	words;	his	whole	concern	is	with	the
being.	And	what	I	say,	that	I	am	not.	What	I	say	is	just	a	device.
When	people	have	become	ready	I	will	stop	saying	anything.	When	it	is	possible
to	have	sannyasins	who	can	listen	to	my	silence	then	I	will	be	just	sitting	with
them	in	silence.	I	am	using	words	just	to	prepare	ground	for	that	silence.	So	don't
be	worried	 about	my	words	 --	whether	 they	 are	 beautiful,	 logical	 or	 illogical.
Don't	be	worried	about	them;	they	are	non-essential.
So	what	 should	 I	 do?	 Should	 I	make	 you	 a	 sannyasin	 right	 now?	Mm?	Close
your	eyes!
Prem	means	 love,	 asmitam	means	 being	 --	 love	 being.	And	 everything	 else	 is
secondary,	 superficial,	 because	 nothing	 else	 can	 touch	 your	 innermost	 core.
Nothing	else	except	love	can	stir	your	being;	only	love	penetrates.	Love	is	like
an	x-ray.	Everything	else	remains	outside	you.	So	love	has	to	become	your	very
style.	Sit	in	love,	walk	in	love,	talk	in	love,	listen	in	love,	look	in	love;	in	short,
be	in	love.
Asmitam	means	 exactly	 what	 'am-ness'	 means.	When	 you	 say	 'I	 am',	 you	 are
using	two	words.	'I'	is	the	ego,	and	'am'	is	your	real	being.	Ordinarily	the	'I'	has
become	more	 important	 and	 the	 'am'	 has	 become	 the	 shadow.	The	 I	 has	 to	 be
dropped	so	that	the	am	becomes	your	totality.
The	English	word	'am'	comes	from	asmi:	that	is	the	Sanskrit	root.	Love	leads	to
being,	love	is	the	door	to	being...	And	this	is	the	beginning	of	a	great	love.	After
this	 moment	 you	 will	 immediately	 find	 a	 different	 attitude	 --	 in	 yourself,	 in
others.	 You	 will	 become	 an	 insider,	 and	 things	 will	 flow	 easily,	 move	 easily,
bloom	easily.
[A	visitor	asks:	I	don't	know	if	you	can	tell	me	that	I	am	on	my	way.	Maybe	you
can	agree;	I	don't	know.]
There	 is	 no	way!	 The	 very	 idea	 of	 being	 on	 a	way	 is	 false.	 There	 is	 no	way
because	we	are	not	going	anywhere:	we	are	 just	here.	The	very	concept	of	 the
way	means	that	truth	is	distant	and	we	have	to	go	there	so	the	way	has	to	connect
with	us.	You	are	already	there,	everybody	is	there;	just	a	recognition	is	needed,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	 a	 journey.	One	has	 simply	 to	 see	 it	 --	 that	one	 is	God,	not	 that	one	has	 to
become	God.	All	becoming	 is	misery,	because	when	you	are	 trying	 to	become
you	are	always	struggling.	Whenever	you	are	 trying	 to	become	something	 that
means	 that	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 become	 something	 that	 you	 are	 not,	 so	 there	 is
tension,	conflict.	It	creates	neurosis,	it	creates	schizophrenia;	man	becomes	split.
So	people	who	are	on	the	way	are	all	split	and	schizophrenic.	Please	don't	be	on
any	way.	Just	be!	That	is	more	than	enough.	Just	enjoy	and	be.	God	is	available
herenow.
So	the	first	thing	is:	there	is	no	way	to	he	on.	And	the	second	thing	--	which	is
far	more	important:	 there	 is	nobody	to	be	on	the	way.	That	 is	 just	egoistic,	 the
very	 idea	 of	 'I'.	 So	 let	 the	way	 disappear	 and	 the	wayfarer	 too	 and	 then	 all	 is
available.	When	you	are	not,	God	is.
You	cannot	come	to	that	point	of	disappearing	by	effort,	by	travelling,	by	trying;
trying	 itself	 is	 the	 problem.	 If	 we	 can	 leave	 trying	 and	 just	 be,	 paradise	 is
herenow.
And	it	 is	 time	now!	Leave	all	ways	and	everything	and	just	delight	moment	to
moment.	Everything	is	so	eternally	beautiful.	Where	are	you	going	and	for	what?
Going	always	creates	the	future,	so	you	live	in	tomorrow.	Today	goes	on	slipping
by	and	tomorrow	never	comes.
So	next	time	you	come	here...	come	so	that	we	can	take	all	away	from	you,	the
way	 and	 the	 wayfarer	 both.	 And	 when	 everything	 has	 disappeared,	 there	 is
immense	delight.	Come	again	and	be	here	for	a	few	more	days.
...	 So	 enjoy	 dances,	 meditations,	 and	 my	 orange	 people.	 These	 are	 the	 most
beautiful	people	on	the	earth.	Enjoy	them!...
But	they	are	not	on	the	way.	I	distract	people	from	their	ways!
[A	sannyasin	describes	an	experience	in	a	group:	We	were	doing	an	exercise	to
feel	 the	 chakras.	 The	 leader	 asked	 us	 to	 say	 'yes	 '	 with	 the	 whole	 body	 and
suddenly	I	felt	a	sensation	here	(indicating	the	sex	centre).	It	was	like	a	fountain,
a	great	energy	flowing.
Osho	checks	his	energy.]
It	 is	 there,	and	something	beautiful	 is	 ready	to	explode,	so	when	it	comes	next
time	go	completely	into	it.	Only	something	like	madness	will	be	helpful.	If	you
think	about	it,	you	rationalize	it,	you	will	repress	it.
All	rationalization	is	a	kind	of	repression;	reason	is	repression.	Be	thrilled	by	it,
be	shaken	by	it,	let	the	whole	body	be	possessed	by	it.	Drop	control	and	allow	it
to	become	your	control:	it	controls	you.
But	something	really	good	has	started.	Don't	become	afraid,	don't	be	frightened
because	if	you	become	frightened	it	will	be	stopped.
...	Good.	But	if	it	comes	sometimes,	just	allow	it....
Mm	mm,	it	is	exactly	electricity.	Go	into	it,	mm?	It	will	cleanse	you,	purify	you.
It	is	fire,	but	fire	purifies	and	one	becomes	real,	pure	gold.	Go	into	it.
[A	visitor	says:	About	sannyas...	I	have	no	idea.	I'm	completely	confused	about	it
--	inside	and	out!]
I	have	never	seen	a	person	who	is	completely	confused...	because	nothing	is	ever
complete!
Mm,	 just	 confused.	 That	 will	 disappear...	 and	 sannyas	 will	 help	 to	 make	 it
disappear.
[She	 answers:	 I	 feel	 a	 lot	 of	 blackness	 about	 me...	 a	 lot	 of	 blackness	 and
negativity.]
Nothing	to	be	worried	about;	they	are	natural.	They	are	there	and	sannyas	is	the
method	 to	bring	you	out	of	 them.	So	don't	wait	and	 think	 that	when	confusion
and	 blackness	 and	 negativity	 are	 gone,	 then	 you	will	 take	 sannyas;	 then	 there
will	be	no	need.
It	is	as	if	a	person	goes	to	the	doctor	and	says,	'Right	now	I	am	ill	so	I	will	not
take	the	medicine.'...
When	one	takes	the	medicine	one	knows!...	This	is	a	really	big	dose!
Prem	means	love,	puja	means	worship	--	love	is	worship....	If	you	love	you	are
worshipping	 God,	 and	 to	 whomsoever	 you	 give	 love,	 it	 always	 goes	 to	 God.
Love	reaches	him:	pour	it	anywhere	and	it	reaches	him.
There	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	temple	or	to	the	church	or	to	the	mosque.	Wherever
your	heart	is	full	of	love	and	you	are	pouring	it	out,	it	reaches	to	God;	it	cannot
go	anywhere	else.
Just	 as	 rivers	go	on	 floating,	moving	 towards	 the	ocean,	 love	goes	on	moving
towards	God	because	God	is	the	source	of	love	and	everything	moves	back	to	its
source.	So	it	is	love	that	joins	you,	bridges	you	with	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
God....
Good!	 And	 it	 will	 happen...	 tomorrow	 morning	 you	 will	 see!	 (laughter)	The
Open	Secret
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711175
ShortTitle:	OPENSE17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	sannyasin	had	been	practicing	Vipassana	every	day	in	the	West	and	began	to
have	sensations	of	dissolving	in	the	top	of	his	head.	He	became	scared	of	going
crazy.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
It	 is	 not	 anything	 like	 craziness	but	 it	will	 appear	 like	 craziness.	Something	 is
opening	 up,	 something	 is	 dropping,	 something	 is	 changing,	 and	 the	 energy	 is
moving	 in	 the	 right	direction.	There	 is	nothing	 to	be	afraid	of,	but	 in	 the	West
there	 can	 be	 some	 trouble	 because	 you	 will	 be	 alone	 and	 you	 need	 a	 very
supportive	atmosphere	at	this	moment....
But	continue	meditating;	it	will	settle.	Meditate	some	time	in	the	night	and	then
go	 to	 sleep	 so	 by	 the	 morning	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 anything.	 But	 stopping
meditation	 won't	 be	 good;	 you	 will	 miss	 some	 great	 opportunity,	 and	 such
opportunities	 come	 only	 once	 in	 a	while.	 If	 you	miss	 it	 this	 time	 it	may	 take
years	for	you	to	come	back	to	it.	It	is	not	good	to	miss	it.
You	can	meditate	in	the	night	and	then	go	to	sleep.	After	meditation	take	a	good
shower	and	then	go	to	sleep.	By	the	morning	you	will	not	feel	anything,	you	will
be	absolutely	normal.	And	it	is	not	anything	that	is	bad,	no.	It	is	really	beautiful
but	it	is	dangerous	in	a	way,	mm?	because	you	will	be	changing	so	fast	that	you
will	not	be	able	to	cope	with	it;	the	change	will	be	too	much.	Sometimes	it	can
be	in	such	jumps	and	leaps	that	you	cannot	cope	with	it.
That	 is	 the	 whole	 purpose	 here:	 to	 create	 a	 commune,	 to	 create	 a	 supportive
atmosphere,	 to	 create	 thousands	 of	 sannyasins,	 to	 create	 an	 alternative	 world
where	these	things	will	be	accepted	as	not	being	crazy.	But	if	you	are	somewhere
where	people	are	not	alert	about	what	is	happening	to	you,	if	something	happens
and	a	psychiatrist	 is	called,	he	will	say	you	are	 insane	or	you	are	going	 insane
and	that	you	need	immediate	hospitalization.
So	 if	 some	 problem	 arises	 come	 back	 immediately	 rather	 than	 finding	 any
solution	 there.	 You	will	 not	 find	 any	 solution.	 The	Western	 psychiatry	 is	 still
unaware	of	meditative	spaces.	It	has	not	yet	grown	up	that	much;	it	is	very	very
immature.	It	knows	only	the	normal	man	and	the	below	normal.	In	fact	it	does
not	know	even	 the	absolutely	normal	man;	 it	knows	more	 the	below	normal	 --
the	 insane,	 the	 crazy,	 the	 split,	 the	 schizophrenic.	 It	 knows	 the	 pathological
possibilities.
The	normal	man	it	can	understand	but	beyond	the	normal	 is	 incomprehensible.
For	 the	 beyond	 they	 have	 no	 word.	 They	 call	 the	 madman	 and	 the	 saint
abnormal;	 they	 are	 put	 into	 the	 same	 category.	 Jesus	 is	 as	 abnormal	 as	 mad
people,	because	mad	people	hear	voices	and	Jesus	also	hears	voices,	so	both	are
in	the	same	category.
If	you	feel	 that	 something	 is	becoming	 too	much	and	you	cannot	cope	with	 it,
come	back.	But	continue	to	meditate;	it	is	not	right	to	stop.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[The	sannyasin	says:	Certainly,	 the	way	 it	was	before,	 in	 the	moments	when	 it
came	 too	much	 I	couldn't	have	done	anything.	 It	was	all	 I	 could	do	 to	 sit	 in	a
chair.]
Yes,	you	can	sit	in	a	chair	or	lie	down.	And	you	will	always	find	it	good	if	you
lie	 down	 in	 a	 tub	 bath,	 mm?	 --	 that	 will	 be	 very	 helpful.	 Just	 lie	 down	 in
lukewarm	water.	It	will	be	relaxing,	and	it	will	be	good.
But	nothing	to	be	afraid	of,	mm?	Good!
[Osho	 suggests	 the	 tantra	 group	 to	 a	 sannyasin	 newly	 arrived.	 She	 says	 she
doesn't	want	to	do	it	because	her	present	relationship	is	 important	 to	her	and	it
may	interfere	with	that.]
It	would	be	very	helpful	and	liberating	but	if	you	feel	that	some	conflict	or	some
problem	will	arise,	mm?...	then	don't	do	it.	..But	some	time	think	of	doing	it;	it
will	be	of	great	help.	Because	so	much	fear	about	the	relationship	is	not	good...
Because	that	means	the	relationship	is	not	really	deep,	otherwise	why	fear?	Fear
arises	only	because	 the	 relationship	 is	 so-so;	 there	 is	 always	danger	 that	 small
things	may	disturb	it.
[She	says:	To	have	sex	with	other	people	is	small?]
That	 is	 not	 the	 question...	 that	 is	 not	 the	 question.	 Just	 the	mind	 attitude,	 the
possessive	 attitude.	 We	 go	 on	 limiting	 ourselves	 to	 persons	 and	 that	 creates
thousands	of	difficulties.	One	should	be	more	and	more	relaxed.	One	should	be
in	 love	always	but	should	not	be	attached	 too	much	to	persons;	otherwise	 love
will	create	misery	rather	than	blissfulness.
[Osho	 goes	 on	 to	 say	 that	 a	 monogamous	 relationship	 without	 a	 few	 casual
encounters	here	and	there	is	boring.
The	sannyasin	says:	Well,	I'm	not	bored!]
Everybody	 says	 that!	 If	 you	 aks	 anybody,	 nobody	 will	 say	 that	 he	 is	 bored,
because	to	say	that	you	are	bored	will	start	creating	the	difficulty;	 the	husband
will	take	revenge:	you	are	saying	you	are	bored?	And	he	is	also	not	saying	that
he	is	bored.	I	am	not	saying	that	you	are....	This	is	how	it	goes	on.
No	marriage	remains	a	fantastic	experience	beyond	a	few	days.	It	becomes	dull,
becomes	 settled.	 The	 honeymoon	 is	 finished	 sooner	 or	 later;	 then	 it	 is	 just	 a
security,	 a	 comfort,	 a	 convenience.	 It	 is	 a	 thousand	 things	 but	 not	 the	 far-out
experience.
And	I	am	not	saying	to	drop	out	of	the	relationship;	what	I	am	saying	is	that	the
way	you	are	taking	it,	it	cannot	continue	for	long.	In	fact	I	can	help	it	to	continue
for	a	 long	time	but	my	approach	is	 that	one	should	be	flowing	and	at	ease	and
one	should	not	be	so	obsessed.	One	should	not	say	'I	will	breathe	only	when	I	am
with	you.'	You	have	to	breathe	even	when	you	are	not	with	your	lover	and	you
have	to	be	loving	even	when	you	are	not	with	your	lover.
If	you	feel	things	are	going	well,	just	continue,	mm?	but	before	you	leave	if	you
can	gather	courage,	both	of	you,	it	will	be	of	great	experience.	But	right	now	no
need	to	do	it.
[A	sannyasin	says	 that	 since	he	started	 to	meditate,	 the	 inner	eye	has	changed.
He	 finds	 that	 it	 judges	him	a	 lot,	 and	he	asks	what	 is	happening	 in	him.	Osho
checks	his	energy.]
Good,	the	energy	is	changing;	don't	be	afraid.	within	one	month	everything	will
settle....	Your	eyes	are	going	in	the	right	direction.	They	are	moving	upwards	and
that's	how	they	need	to	move.
Your	mini-satori	is	very	close,	so	get	ready	for	it!
[A	 visitor	 says:	 Everything	 seems	 so	 difficult	 sometimes	 --	 relationships,	 my
health,	my	path	in	life.]
Become	a	sannyasin	and	things	will	change!	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	will
die	to	your	old	past.
There	is	no	need	to	carry	it;	you	can	start	afresh.	Why	not	start	your	life	anew,
from	 ABC?	 This	 loaded	 life	 is	 not	 good.	 Erase	 it	 completely,	 make	 it
discontinuous	with	the	past.	Let	this	be	your	birthday	and	start	again.	It	is	always
good	to	start	afresh.
What	you	have	been	doing	up	to	now	is	just	trying	to	renovate	the	old	ruin.	It	is
better	to	demolish	it	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
start	 a	new	building.	Renovation	never	helps	much:	 it	 is	 just	patching	up	here
and	there,	making	one	support	on	this	side	and	another	support	on	another	side.
The	whole	time	one	is	engaged	in	supporting	an	old	building.
I	 don't	 think	 that	 you	 have	 anything	 wrong	 that	 is	 unique	 to	 you;	 everybody
passes	through	trouble.
[The	visitor	 says:	 I	 read	your	 articles	on	homosexuality....	 I	 feel	 separate	 from
you	because	of	that...	I	felt	the	article	condemned	me.]
So	be	a	homosexual.	Nothing	is	a	problem!...
I	never	condemn	anybody.	But	homosexuality	creates	a	few	troubles;	those	you
have	 to	 face.	 That's	 all	 I	 say.	 Condemnation	 is	 not	 the	 question.	 If	 somebody
wants	to	run	on	only	one	leg	I	am	perfectly	happy:	walk	on	one	leg!	But	it	will
be	 difficult,	 you	will	 have	 to	 suffer	 some	 difficulties.	 Then	 don't	 say	why	 are
difficulties	there.
Homosexuality	will	have	its	own	kinds	of	difficulties.	I	am	not	saying	that	there
are	no	difficulties	in	heterosexuality.	It	has	its	own	kind	of	difficulties	but	they
are	far	better;	it	has	far	better	difficulties.
But	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 to	 become	 a	 heterosexual	 or	 anything.	 am	 not	 at	 all
interested	 in	 your	 sex.	 That	 is	 your	 private	 thing:	 you	 can	 be	whatsoever	 you
want	 to	be.	But	 then	remember	 that	with	every	packet	a	 few	difficulties	come.
Homosexuality	brings	a	few	difficulties.	It	 is	not	natural...	or	do	you	think	it	 is
natural?
Mm?	you	think	it	is	natural?	Then	your	difficulties	are	natural.	Why	do	you	want
to	 get	 out	 of	 difficulties	 they	 are	 natural!	 Homosexuality	 is	 not	 natural.	 It	 is
unproductive,	uncreative,	and	it	is	a	meeting	of	the	same	kind	of	energies.
When	the	same	kind	of	energies	meet,	 the	meeting	cannot	be	very	deep.	These
are	the	problems.	I	am	not	condemning	it	at	all	but	if	somebody	wants	to	know
about	it	then	the	problems	are	there.
I	simply	show	what	the	problems	are.	If	you	want	to	through	the	wall,	I	am	not
against	it.	I	say,	'I	bless	you,	go.'	But	if	you	are	hit	it	is	your	responsibility.	If	you
break	you	head	don't	ask	why	I	blessed	you.
Just	to	make	you	alert	I	say	what	the	problems	are.	There	are	many	homosexuals
amongst	my	sannyasins.	They	have	decided	to	be	homosexual;	then	it	is	okay.	If
they	choose	that	difficulty	it	is	perfectly	good.	It	is	not	my	problem;	why	should
I	condemn	it?	Who	am	I	to	condemn	and	for	what?	It	is	your	problem.
If	somebody	wants	 to	stand	on	his	head	 it	 is	his	problem!	But	you	will	have	a
few	difficulties	 if	you	stand	o	your	head.	Sooner	or	 later	 the	delicate	tissues	in
the	brain	will	be	destroyed;	you	will	become	stupid.
You	will	 not	 find	 any	 yogi	 very	 intelligent.	A	man	who	 stands	 on	 his	 head	 is
sooner	or	later	going	to	become	stupid	because	too	much	blood	will	be	passing
through	the	brain;	the	brain	cannot	tolerate	that	much	of	a	flood.	That's	why	you
need	a	pillow	in	the	night.	Without	a	pillow	you	cannot	sleep	because	too	much
blood	 is	 passing	 through	 the	 head;	 it	 will	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 rest	 and	 relax.	 A
pillow	 is	 needed	 so	 that	 not	 too	much	 blood	 goes	 to	 the	 head.	 If	 you	want	 to
sleep	 without	 a	 pillow	 I	 am	 not	 condemning	 you,	 but	 you	 will	 have	 some
difficulties	in	your	sleep;	you	will	have	nightmares.
I	simply	make	you	aware.	It	is	for	you	to	choose	to	be	homosexual	or	not.	But
then	who	is	going	to	suffer	the	difficulties	that	will	come?
And	 you	 ask	me	why	 you	 have	 suffered	 so	many	 difficulties.	Why	 have	 you
asked	why	your	relationships	are	not	good?	Now	you	are	the	cause	of	it.	And	not
only	that:	you	are	very	stubborn	it	seems.
You	think	that	you	already	know	everything:	you	know	what	is	right	and	what	is
wrong;	 then	 you	 will	 suffer!	 You	 are	 too	 knowledgeable.	 You	 are	 not	 even
humble	enough	to	learn	anything.	Then	it	is	your	choice;	you	will	be	miserable,
you	will	create	hell	in	your	life....	And	I	can	bless	you	even	for	that!	Create	hell,
create	it	skilfully	so	you	have	a	bigger	hell	than	anybody	else.	But	that	is	your
choice.
Always	remember	that	I	am	not	condemning	anything.	I	simply	say	that	this	is
the	situation:	if	you	choose	it	this	will	be	the	consequence.	If	you	are	ready	for
the	consequence	then	it	is	perfectly	good:	you	can	remain	homosexual.
Or	if	you	are	even	more	adventurous	you	can	have	sex	with	animals;	that	too	is
natural!
But	then	you	will	have	problems.	A	man	who	has	sex	with	buffaloes	will	have
problems:	he	will	become	a	buffalo	sooner	or	later.	But	if	somebody	wants	to	be
a	buffalo,	I	am	not	against	buffaloes;	they	are	good	people.
Do	a	few	groups	first.	I	will	not	give	you	sannyas.
Even	 if	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 take	 it	 I	 will	 not	 give	 it	 to	 you	 right	 now	 because
stubborn	people	I	don't	like	very	much....
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[The	visitor	says:	I	really	do	want	to	trust	you...	]
It	will	 happen!	 Just	wait	 a	 little,	mm?	 --	 it	will	 happen.	 It	 is	 going	 to	happen,
that's	why	I	am	so	hard	on	you.	When	I	love	a	person,	I	am	hard.	I	would	like	to
help	you	in	every	way.	Just	wait;	do	a	few	groups,	mm?	Good.
[The	 tantra	 group	 are	 present.	 The	 leader	 had	 written	 to	 Osho	 about	 a	 dark
energy	that	kept	pulling	the	group	down.	Osho	checks	the	energy	of	one	group
member.]
No,	no,	nothing	is	 the	problem	with	her;	she	has	nothing	to	do	with	it,	mm?	It
can	be	collective;	there	is	more	possibility	of	its	being	collective.	Sometimes	it
can	happen	-	not	that	anybody	is	doing	anything....
For	example,	it	can	happen	only	if	all	the	people	have	the	same	kind	of	energy;
then	it	can	happen.	A	polarity	is	needed,	two	types	of	people	are	needed	to	keep
the	group	going	high,	mm?	because	 it	 is	 a	very	dialectical	process.	The	group
was	of	a	homosexual	energy,	that's	why	it	happened.	People	were	not	very	polar
opposite;	 they	were	all	 alike.	So	you	 tried	 to	make	 the	energy	but	 it	dispersed
because	it	needed	the	opposite	to	support	it.
There	was	no	black	hole	and	there	was	no	evil	force,	nothing	spooky.	It	was	just
one	kind	of	energy.	It	is	just	as	you	make	an	arch	on	the	doorway:	you	put	half
the	bricks	against	the	other	half.	Then	they	support	each	other,	they	become	very
strong.	If	all	the	bricks	are	put	in	one	way,	in	one	direction,	the	building	will	fall.
So	you	had	a	group	--	accidentally,	because	sometimes	it	will	happen...	It	is	very
difficult	to	arrange	it,	but	sometimes	it	will	happen,	once	in	a	while,	that	people
will	be	of	the	same	kind	of	energy.	So	you	can	force,	you	can	create	something,
but	by	the	time	it	is	created	it	will	simply	flop,	it	will	simply	disappear.
The	 opposite	 is	 needed	 to	 keep	 it	 alive	 and	 to	 keep	 it	 going.	 That's	 why	 the
whole	of	life	depends	on	opposites.	Electricity	depends	on	negative	and	positive,
human	energy	on	men	and	women.	Even	a	country,	 to	remain	alive,	needs	 two
political	parties	opposed	to	each	other;	then	it	remains	alive.	If	there	is	only	one
political	 party	 the	 country	 become	 dull	 and	 monotonous;	 it	 loses	 all	 joy,	 it
becomes	grey.
So	 nothing	 was	 wrong.	 And	 always	 remember:	 it	 will	 never	 happen	 that
somebody	is	there	who	is	evil;	there	is	nothing	like	a	black	hole	or	anything,	so
forget	about	these	things.	I	will	never	send	anybody	who	is	evil,	mm?	--	that	is
not	 possible.	But	 this	 can	 happen	 sometimes	 --	 that	 people	 are	 of	 one	 kind	 of
energy.
Then	you	need	to	do	one	thing....	What	did	you	try?	What	did	you	do	to	bring	it
up?
[She	answers,	some	of	 the	usual	structures...	 it	seemed	like	 there	was	a	ceiling
nobody	could	get	past.]
If	 it	 happens	 next	 time	 and	 you	 feel	 it	 is	 going	 that	way,	 before	 you	 start	 the
group	put	all	 the	women	on	one	side	and	all	 the	men	on	 the	other	side	and	 let
them	have	a	good	fight.	That's	what	couples	do	every	day:	before	they	make	love
they	have	a	good	fight.	They	nag	each	other	and	fight	and	then	they	make	love.
Then	love	comes	up	because	the	fight	takes	them	away,	puts	them	as	far	away	as
possible.	 The	 wife	 starts	 thinking	 to	 leave	 this	 man	 and	 the	 husband	 starts
thinking	 about	 how	 to	 kill	 this	 woman.	 They	 are	 as	 far	 away	 as	 possible,
antagonistic.	They	become	positive	and	negative	again;	then	love	is	beautiful,	a
higher	peak	of	love	is	possible.
Otherwise	husbands	and	wives	tend	to	become	similar;	you	will	have	observed
it:	 if	a	person	has	 lived	with	a	woman	for	 thirty	years	you	will	 find	 they	have
become	 alike.	 They	 become	more	 like	 brother	 and	 sister	 rather	 than	wife	 and
husband.	You	can	even	see	that	their	gestures	have	become	similar,	their	voices
have	become	similar,	their	expressions	have	become	similar.	Whenever	you	see
a	wife	and	a	husband	looking	like	sister	and	brother	you	can	be	certain	they	are
bored	 to	 death...	 because	 who	 can	 love	 one's	 own	 sister?	When	 they	 are	 too
much	 alike	 all	 joy	 disappears	 because	 the	 polarity	 has	 gone	 dead;	 they	 need
some	conflict.	If	some	conflict	arises	they	become	alive	again.
If	 the	 husband	 starts	 looking	 at	 some	 woman	 they	 become	 alive.	 Again	 the
woman	is	back...	no	more	dull,	no	more	sleepy.	So	next	time	allow	half	an	hour's
good	fight.	Then	you	will	see	that	the	energy	comes	up	very	easily.	Try	it!	Good!
[A	sannyasin	describes	some	strange	experiences:	she	felt	as	if	she	was	another
sannyasin;	as	if	she	was	Osho;	as	if	she	saw	Jesus...	]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	 very	 good...	 beautiful	 experiences.	 Many	 more	 things	 will	 be	 coming,
mm?	Enjoy	them	and	don't	think	about	them;	thinking	can	stop	them.	Don't	think
about	 them,	 enjoy	 them.	 Thinking,	 analysing	 what	 they	 are,	 why	 they	 are
coming,	for	what,	what	is	the	meaning,	purpose,	will	destroy	the	whole	beauty.
Let	 them	come.	They	will	 come	and	 they	will	disappear.	And	when	 they	have
come	and	they	have	all	disappeared	you	will	become	conscious	for	the	first	time.
This	 is	 your	 unconscious	 throwing	 itself	 out,	 this	 is	 your	 unconscious
unburdening	 itself.	 These	 are	 beautiful	 experiences	 coming	 from	 the	 deep
unconscious.	But	don't	analyse	them	and	don't	talk	about	them,	otherwise	people
will	give	explanations	and	if	you	have	explanations	you	will	stop	them.	Accept
them	as	they	are;	there	is	no	need	to	find	any	reason	for	them.
Somebody	asked	Picasso,	 'What	 is	 the	meaning	of	 this	painting?'	And	he	said,
'But	nobody	asks	the	rose	flower	what	is	its	meaning,	and	nobody	asks	the	river
what	is	its	meaning,	so	why	am	I	supposed	to	answer?'	And	I	think	he	is	right.	If
a	rosebush	is	free	to	create	a	rose	flower	and	there	is	no	need	to	give	any	answer
to	anybody,	a	Picasso	should	be	free.	His	painting	is	his	rose	flower.
These	are	your	roses	that	are	coming	to	you.	Just	enjoy	them,	dance	with	them,
sing	 them,	 but	 don't	 analyse	 them,	 don't	 bring	 the	 head	 in,	 because	 these	 are
heart	things.	Once	the	head	comes	in,	it	is	very	destructive.	Logic	is	murderous.
Something	beautiful	 is	happening.	These	 things	will	 come	and	will	 come	with
more	force.	Mm?	sometimes	you	will	be	completely	gone,	you	will	not	be	there:
you	will	become	that	which	is	there.	But	this	is	beautiful,	 this	is	what	is	called
empathy.	If	you	love	a	person	you	can	become	that	person	in	a	deep	moment,	in
a	deep	space.
Help,	cooperate	with	these	experiences.	By	and	by	they	will	disappear,	and	when
they	have	gone	you	will	 find	a	very	great	clarity,	a	crystal	clarity.	You	can	see
into	 your	 own	 depth,	 you	 can	 see	 to	 the	 very	 bottom,	 because	 once	 all	 these
things	are	released	there	will	be	nothing	like	a	hindrance,	an	obstruction.
This	 is	good:	 it	 is	 a	process	of	purification.	 Just	 allow	 these	 things	 to	happen.
Good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711185
ShortTitle:	OPENSE18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	new	sannyasin	says	that	he	felt	he	needed	to	take	a	new	step	which	he	could
not	do	 in	his	home	environment,	 so	he	came	 to	Osho	 in	 the	hope	he	can	do	 it
here.]
Yes,	it	is	going	to	happen.	You	cannot	do	it;	it	can	only	happen.	Just	as	you	have
left	your	family	behind,	leave	yourself	behind	too...	because	you	are	your	family.
You	have	been	put	 together	by	your	family:	 the	mother,	 the	father,	 the	brother,
the	sister,	the	teacher	--	the	whole	milieu.	It	is	very	easy	to	leave	the	milieu	but
you	are	put	together	by	the	milieu	itself,	so	in	a	subtle	way	you	go	on	carrying	it.
You	cannot	do	 that	 step;	 that	 step	happens.	When	you	are	not	 then	 it	happens.
This	is	the	greatest	secret	to	understand.	I	call	it	the	open	secret.	It	is	there,	very
obvious,	yet	people	don't	see	it,	so	I	call	it	open	and	secret.
Whatsoever	you	do	will	be	done	by	the	past.	You	are	your	past	and	whatsoever	is
done	by	the	past	will	be	a	continuity	of	the	past.	It	can	never	be	new,	it	will	be
always	old.	 It	will	never	be	original.	 It	will	always	remain	dusty,	dull,	dead,	 it
will	come	out	of	 the	dead;	 it	cannot	be	alive.	And	the	new	happens	only	when
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	have	understood	this	that	you	cannot	do	anything	because	you	are	your	past.
So	all	that	you	can	do	is	only	negative.	By	negative	I	mean	don't	hinder	it	when
it	happens.	That	much	you	can	do,	that's	all	that	a	man	can	do:	not	hinder	when	it
happens.	When	 it	 is	 coming	 don't	 close	 your	 doors.	When	 it	 is	 coming	 let	 it
come,	when	it	is	happening	let	it	happen.
And	you	have	done	right	in	coming	here.	It	will	be	easier	to	accept	here,	it	will
be	easier	to	allow.	And	after	sannyas	things	start	changing	because	then	you	are
not	alone;	am	also	involved	with	you.	That	is	the	meaning	of	sannyas:	I	become
involved	with	your	life	energy;	your	hand	is	in	my	hand.	Sometimes	when	you
want	to	escape	you	cannot,	sometimes	when	you	would	like	to	go	to	the	past	you
cannot;	 I	am	holding	your	hand.	Sometimes	when	 the	fear	of	 the	future	arises,
because	 the	 new	 always	 creates	 fear,	 I	 can	 give	 you	 a	 little	 push.	 Or	 maybe
because	you	are	with	me	you	can	bear	a	little	more.
That's	why	a	master	is	needed	--	to	go	on	protecting	you...	against	yourself!	You
have	 to	 be	 protected	 against	 yourself.	 Your	 future	 has	 to	 be	 protected	 against
your	past,	your	life	has	to	be	protected	against	all	that	has	gone	dead	in	you.	That
step	is	somewhere	close	by;	just	get	involved	in	things	here.
And	forget	about	that	step.	Don't	ponder	over	it,	don't	brood,	don't	think	about	it.
Now	that	is	my	business!	Start	flowing	with	things	here.	Be	like	a	child.	That's
why	I	have	said	'Be	like	an	Adam	--	with	no	morality,	with	no	creed,	no	religion,
no	dogma...	 just	as	if	you	have	never	heard	anything	of	these.	You	are	the	first
person	 on	 the	 earth:	 you	 don't	 know	what	morality	 is,	 what	 virtue	 is,	 what	 is
good	and	what	is	bad;	you	don't	know	anything.'	Act	out	of	that	not-knowing	and
things	start	happening.
There	is	a	very	famous	Zen	story	about	a	samurai.	Find	the	story	and	read	it....
'There	was	once	a	swordsman	called	Shoken	who	was	very	much	annoyed	by	a
furious	rat	in	his	house.	The	rat	was	bold	enough	to	come	out	of	its	hiding	place
even	 in	 the	 daytime,	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	mischief.	 Shoken	made	 his	 pet	 cat	 go
after	it	but	she	was	not	its	equal	and	being	bitten	by	it,	she	ran	away	screaming.
The	 swordsman	 now	hired	 some	 of	 the	 neighbouring	 cats	 noted	 for	 their	 skill
and	courage	in	catching	rats.	They	were	let	loose	against	the	rat.	Crouching	in	a
corner,	 it	 watched	 the	 cats	 approach	 it	 and	 furiously	 attacked	 them	 one	 after
another.	The	cats	were	terrified	and	all	beat	a	retreat.
'The	master	 became	 desperate	 and	 tried	 to	 kill	 the	 rat	 himself.	 Taking	 up	 his
wooden	sword	he	approached	it,	but	every	effort	of	the	experienced	swordsman
proved	ineffectual	for	the	rat	dodged	his	sword	so	skilfully	that	it	seemed	to	be
flying	through	the	air	like	a	bird	or	even	lightning.	Before	Shoken	could	follow
its	 movement	 it	 had	 already	 made	 a	 successful	 leap	 at	 his	 head.	 He	 was
perspiring	heavily	and	finally	decided	 to	give	up	 the	chase.	As	a	 last	 resort	he
sent	for	the	neighbouring	cat	widely	known	for	her	mysterious	virtue	as	the	most
able	rat-catcher.	The	cat	did	not	look	in	any	way	especially	different	from	other
cats	 that	 had	 been	 invited	 to	 fight	 the	 rat.	 In	 fact,	 she	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most
ordinary.	The	swordsman	did	not	think	very	much	of	her	but	let	her	go	into	the
room	where	 the	 rat	was	 located.	 The	 cat	went	 in	 quietly	 and	 slowly	 as	 if	 she
were	 not	 cognizant	 of	 any	 unusual	 scene	 in	 the	 room.	 The	 rat,	 however,	 was
extremely	terrified	at	the	sight	of	the	approaching	object	and	stayed	motionless,
almost	stupefied,	in	the	corner.	The	cat	almost	nonchalantly	went	for	the	rat	and
came	out	carrying	it	by	the	neck.
'In	the	evening,	all	the	cats	who	had	participated	in	the	rat-catching	had	a	grand
session	at	Shoken's	house	and	respectfully	asked	the	great	cat	to	take	the	seat	of
honour.	They	made	 profound	bows	before	 her	 and	 said:	 "We	 are	 all	 noted	 for
valour	and	cunning	but	never	realized	that	there	was	such	an	extraordinary	rat	in
the	world.	None	of	us	was	able	to	do	anything	with	it	until	you	came;	and	how
easily	 you	 carried	 the	 day	 !	We	 all	 wish	 you	 to	 divulge	 your	 secrets	 for	 our
benefit	but	before	that	let	us	see	how	much	we	all	know	about	the	art	of	fighting
rats."
'The	black	cat	came	forward	and	said:	"I	was	born	in	a	family	reputed	for	its	skill
in	the	art.	Since	my	kitten	days	I	have	trained	myself	with	a	view	to	becoming	a
great	 rat-catcher.	 I	am	able	 to	 leap	over	a	screen	as	high	as	seven	feet;	 I	know
how	 to	 squeeze	 myself	 through	 a	 tiny	 hole	 which	 allows	 a	 rat	 only.	 I	 am
proficient	 in	performing	all	kinds	of	acrobatics.	 I	am	also	clever	at	making	the
rats	 think	 that	 I	am	sound	asleep,	but	 I	know	how	to	strike	at	 them	as	soon	as
they	 come	within	my	 reach.	Even	 those	 running	 over	 the	 beam	 cannot	 escape
me.	It	is	really	a	shame	that	I	had	to	retreat	before	that	old	rat	today.
'The	great	veteran	cat	said:	"What	you	have	learned	is	the	technique	of	the	art.
Your	 mind	 is	 ever	 conscious	 of	 planning	 how	 to	 combat	 the	 opponent.	 The
reason	why	the	ancient	masters	devised	the	technique	is	to	acquaint	us	with	the
proper	method	of	 accomplishing	 the	work,	 and	 the	method	 is	 naturally	 simple
and	effective,	simplifying	all	the	essential	points	of	the	art.	Those	who	follow	the
master	 fail	 to	 grasp	 his	 principle	 and	 are	 too	 busily	 occupied	with	 improving
their	technical	cleverness	and	manipulatory	skill.
The	end	is	achieved	and	cleverness	attains	its	highest	efficiency,	but	what	does	it
all	amount	to?	Cleverness	is	an	activity	of	the	mind,	no	doubt,	but	it	must	be	in
accordance	with	the	way.	When	the	latter	is	neglected	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	mere	cleverness	is	aimed	at,	it	diverges	and	is	apt	to	be	abused.	This	is	to	be
remembered	well	in	the	art	of	fighting."
'The	tiger	cat	stepped	forward	and	expressed	his	view	thus:	"To	my	mind,	what
is	 important	 in	 the	art	of	 fighting	 is	 the	spirit	 (ki;	ch'i	 in	Chinese);	 I	have	 long
trained	myself	in	its	cultivation	and	development.	I	am	now	in	possession	of	the
strongest	 spirit	which	 fills	up	heaven	and	earth.	 -When	 I	 face	an	opponent	my
overawing	spirit	is	already	on	him	and	victory	is	on	my	side	even	prior	to	actual
combat.	I	have	no	conscious	scheme	as	to	the	use	of	technical	skill	but	it	comes
out	 spontaneously	 according	 to	 change	of	 situation.	 If	 a	 rat	 should	be	 running
over	a	beam,	I	would	just	gaze	at	him	intensely	with	all	my	spiritual	strength	and
he	 is	 sure	 to	 fall	 by	 himself	 from	 the	 height	 and	 be	my	prisoner.	But	 that	 old
mysterious	rat	moved	along	without	leaving	any	shadow.	The	reason	is	beyond
me."
'The	grand	old	cat's	 reply	was	 this:	 "You	know	how	 to	make	 the	most	of	your
psychic	powers	but	the	very	fact	of	your	being	conscious	of	it	works	against	you;
your	strong	psyche	stands	opposed	to	the	opponents,	and	you	can	never	be	sure
of	 yours	 being	 stronger	 than	 his,	 for	 there	 is	 always	 a	 possibility	 of	 its	 being
surpassed.	 You	 may	 feel	 as	 if	 your	 active	 vigorous	 psyche	 were	 filling	 the
universe,	but	 it	 is	not	 the	 spirit	 itself,	 it	 is	no	more	 than	 its	 shadowy	 image.	 It
may	 resemble	Mencius'	 Kozen	 no	 ki	 (haojan	 chi	 ch'i),	 but	 in	 reality	 it	 is	 not.
Mencius'	ch'i	(spirit),	as	we	know,	is	bright	and	illuminating,	and	for	this	reason
full	of	vigour,	whereas	yours	gains	vigour	owing	to	conditions.	Because	of	this
difference	 in	 origin,	 there	 is	 a	 difference	 in	 its	 operation.	 The	 one	 great	 river
incessantly	 flowing,	 and	 the	 other	 is	 a	 temporary	 flood	 after	 a	 heavy	 rainfall,
soon	 exhausted	 when	 it	 encounters	 a	 mightier	 onrush.	 A	 desperate	 rat	 often
proves	stronger	 than	an	attacking	cat.	 It	has	been	cornered,	 the	 fight	 is	 for	 life
and	 death,	 and	 the	 desperate	 victim	 harbours	 no	 desire	 to	 escape	 unhurt.	 Its
mental	attitude	defies	every	possible	danger	which	may	come	upon	it.	Its	whole
being	incarnates	the	fighting	ch'i	(spirit	or	psyche)	and	no	cats	can	withstand	its
steellike	resistance."
'The	grey	cat	now	advanced	quietly	and	said:	"As	you	tell	us,	a	psyche	however
strong	 is	 always	 accompanied	 by	 its	 shadow,	 and	 the	 enemy	 is	 sure	 to	 take
advantage	of	 this	 shadow,	 though	 it	may	be	 the	 faintest	one.	 I	have	 for	a	 long
time	 disciplined	myself	 in	 this	way:	 not	 to	 overawe	 the	 enemy,	 not	 to	 force	 a
fight,	but	to	assume	a	yielding	and	conciliatory	attitude.	When	the	enemy	proves
strong,	 I	 just	 look	 yielding	 and	 simply	 follow	 up	 his	movements.	 I	 act	 like	 a
curtain	surrendering	itself	to	the	pressure	of	a	stone	thrown	at	it.	Even	a	strong
rat	 finds	no	means	 to	 fight	me.	But	 the	one	we	had	 to	deal	with	 today	had	no
parallel,	it	refused	to	submit	to	my	psychical	overpowering,	and	was	not	tempted
by	my	manifestation	of	a	yielding	psyche.	It	was	a	most	mysterious	creature	--
the	like	of	which	I	have	never	seen	in	my	life."
'The	grand	old	cat	answered:	"What	you	call	a	yielding	psyche	is	not	in	harmony
with	 nature:	 it	 is	man	made,	 it	 is	 a	 contrivance	worked	 out	 in	 your	 conscious
mind.	 When	 you	 try	 by	 means	 of	 this	 to	 crush	 the	 opponents	 positive
impassioned	attacking	psyche,	he	is	quick	enough	to	detect	any	sign	of	psychic
wavering	 which	 may	 go	 on	 in	 your	 mind,	 which	 is	 sure	 to	 interfere	 with
acuteness	 of	 perception	 and	 agility	 of	 action,	 for	 then	 nature	 feels	 impeded	 in
pursuing	 its	 original	 and	 spontaneous	 course	 of	 movement.	 To	 make	 nature
display	its	mysterious	way	of-achieving	things	is	to	do	away	with	all	your	own
thinking,	contriving,	and	acting.	Let	nature	have	her	own	way,	 let	her	act	as	 it
feels	in	you,	and	there	will	be	no	shadows,	no	signs,	no	traces	whereby	you	can
be	 caught;	 you	 have	 then	 no	 foes	 who	 can	 successfully	 resist	 you.	 I	 am	 not,
however,	going	to	say	that	all	the	discipline	you	have	each	so	far	gone	through
has	been	to	no	purpose.
After	 all,	 the	 way	 expresses	 itself	 through	 its	 vessels.	 Technical	 contrivances
hold	the	reason	(ri,	li)	in	them,	the	spiritual	power	is	operative	in	the	body,	and
when	 it	 is	 in	harmony	with	nature	 it	acts	 in	perfect	accord	with	environmental
changes.	When	the	yielding	psyche	is	thus	upheld	it	gives	a	stop	to	fighting	on
the	physical	plane	of	force	and	is	able	to	stand	even	against	rocks.	But	there	is
one	 most	 essential	 consideration	 which	 when	 neglected	 is	 sure	 to	 upset
everything.	This	is:	not	to	cherish	even	a	speck	of	self-conscious	thought.	When
this	 is	 present	 in	 your	mind	 all	 your	 acts	 become	 self-willed,	 human-designed
tricks,	 and	 are	not	 in	 conformity	with	 the	way.	 It	 is	 then	 that	 people	 refuse	 to
yield	to	your	approach	and	come	to	set	up	a	psyche	of	antagonism	on	their	part.
When	you	are	in	the	state	of	mind	known	as	'mindlessness'	(mushin),	you	act	in
unison	with	 nature	without	 resorting	 at	 all	 to	 artificial	 contrivances.	 The	way,
however,	 is	 above	 all	 limitations,	 and	 all	 this	 talk	 of	 mine	 is	 far	 from	 being
exhaustive	as	far	as	the	way	is	concerned.
'Some	time	ago	there	was	in	my	neighbourhood	a	cat	who	passed	all	her	time	in
sleeping,	showing	no	sign	of	spiritual-animal	power,	and	looking	like	a	wooden
image.	People	never	saw	her	catch	a	single	rat,	but	wherever	she	roamed	about
no	rats	ever	dared	to	appear	in	her	presence.	I	once	visited	her	and	asked	for	the
reason.	She	gave	no	answer.	 I	 repeated	my	query	 four	 times	but	 she	 remained
silent.	It	was	not	that	she	was	unwilling	to	answer	but	in	truth	she	did	not	know
how	to	answer.	So	we	note	 that	one	who	knows,	speaks	not	a	word,	while	one
who	 speaks,	 knows	 not.	 That	 old	 cat	was	 forgetful	 not	 only	 of	 herself	 but	 all
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
things	about	her;	 she	was	 in	 the	highest	 spiritual	 state	of	purposelessness.	She
was	 the	 one	 who	 realised	 divine	 warriorship	 and	 killed	 not.	 I	 am	 not	 to	 be
compared	 to	 her.	 But	 even	 though	 she	 did	 not	 say	 a	 single	 word	 to	 me	 I
understood	her	open	secret.	I	could	feel	in	her	presence	the	simple	phenomenon
that	she	was	extraordinarily	ordinary.	Nothing	else	was	needed.	If	one	lives	one's
ordinary	reality	one	lives	tao	and	everything	is	possible.	Since	then	I	have	lived
very	ordinarily.	I	have	forgotten	all	that	I	had	learnt.	In	fact,	I	am	disappearing	as
an	entity	and	nature	has	started	to	function	without	any	interference.	This	is	what
is	called	wei-wu-wei	--	action	through	inaction	and	this	is	my	secret."'
This	 Zen	 people	 call	 the	 open	 secret.	 It	 is	 your	 nature	 to	 become	 God,	 it	 is
everybody's	nature	to	become	God.	If	we	are	missing	we	are	missing	because	we
are	 preparing	 for	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 natural,	 spontaneous	 phenomenon.	 And	my	whole
approach	 is	 to	 help	 you	 understand	 that	 it	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be	 done:	 it	 is
something	to	be	just	open	to.	And	you	will	be	able	to	catch	the	rat!
[A	sannyasin,	who	is	 leaving,	says	he	has	much	internal	conflict	about	what	 to
do,	etc.]
The	 problem	 arises	 because	 we	 think	 things	 are	 very	 very	 significant	 or
important;	they	are	not.	Whether	you	do	or	you	don't	do,	it	simply	matters	not.
But	we	think	that	it	is	very	important,	and	the	more	important	you	think	it	is,	the
more	you	will	be	in	conflict	and	in	trouble.	It	is	all	the	same	!	One	day	we	will
not	be	here	and	the	world	will	continue	perfectly	well...	it	will	not	miss	us!
So	why	bother?	How	does	it	matter?	Whether	[you	have]	done	a	few	groups	or
not	doesn't	matter	really.
Whether	[you	have]	been	or	not	does	not	matter.	Once	you	see	the	insignificance
of	 things	 then	 all	 conflict	 disappears.	 Then	 it	 is	 good	 if	 you	 feel	 like	 doing
something.	If	you	don't	feel	like	doing	then	it	is	perfectly	good	not	to	do	it.
You	have	to	loosen	a	little	bit,	you	have	to	drop	your	seriousness	about	things.
But	that	seriousness	is	very	very	deep-rooted	in	everybody.	It	seems	as	if	without
us,	 without	 us	 doing	 great	 things,	 the	 world	 will	 simply	 stop.	 Just	 see	 the
insignificance	 of	 all	 that	 we	 can	 do	 and	 then	 suddenly	 there	 is	 freedom;
playfulness	arises.	You	have	 to	enter	 into	a	kind	of	playfulness,	otherwise	you
will	remain	burdened.	Take	things	non-seriously.
And	both	are	good.	You	have	a	deep-rooted	habit	of	thinking	in	either/or.	Start
thinking	in	terms	of	both-and.	Either/or	is	always	anxiety	creating.	And	there	is
no	way	to	decide.	Logically,	argumentatively	there	is	no	way	to	decide.	Both	are
equally	 valid	 or	 equally	 invalid.	 So	 the	 problem	 cannot	 be	 solved	 on	 those
grounds.
If	one	chooses	whether	to	believe	in	God	or	not	to	believe	in	God,	both	the	sides
have	equivalent	proofs,	equal	arguments	and	there	is	no	way	to	decide.	That	 is
how	it	 is	about	everything.	 If	you	want	 to	decide,	you	will	be	 in	 trouble.	Start
living	 in	 indecisiveness.	 And	 if	 this	 happens,	 perfectly	 good;	 if	 that	 happens
perfectly	good.	Then	you	don't	have	much	choice,	and	when	there	is	no	choice
all	is	good.
You	have	to	imbibe	that	spirit	of	non-seriousness,	playfulness.	Have	this	attitude
in	every	situation.
Because	 you	 have	 the	 attitude	 you	 have	 in	 everything	 you	 do:	 your	 mind
immediately	gives	either/or.	This	is	the	habit,	the	Aristotelian	habit.	Everything
has	to	be	either	black	or	white.	In	fact	life	is	grey.	And	with	grey	everything	goes
well!...
Life	is	so	beautiful	--	don't	destroy	it	on	mind	games!
[A	sannyasin	says	that	he	may	have	difficulty	in	wearing	orange	all	the	time	in
the	West	because	of	his	work	(he	is	a	mechanical	engineer).
Do	they	have	some	rule	against	orange?	asks	Osho.	They	won't	be	able	to	take
you	to	court	for	not	wearing	orange.	If	white	is	allowed	and	blue	is	allowed	and
green	is	allowed,	how	is	it	they	are	against	orange?	Orange	is	such	an	innocent
colour!	We	laugh,	and	I	see	the	wisdom	of	Osho's	words	as	he	tells	him	not	to	be
bothered	about	others'	opinions,	not	to	be	swayed	by	small	things,	otherwise	he
will	never	become	integrated.	Take	the	risk!	Osho	says,	even	if	it	means	losing
your	job.	Become	a	beggar!	One	should	try	to	be	oneself	without	compromise.
And	you	can	invite	sannyasins	to	your	office!]
[Osho	invites	a	sannyasin's	mother	to	take	sannyas,	but	she	says	she	still	doesn't
understand	it.]
Nobody	 does	 and	 people	 still	 become	 sannyasins!	 This	 si	 not	 a	 thing	 to	 be
understood.	This	is	a	kind	of	love	affair:	one	simply	falls	into	it	and	disappears.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711195
ShortTitle:	OPENSE19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin,	who	 is	 leaving,	 says	 he	 feels	 afraid	 to	 leave	 and	more	 afraid	 to
stay...	he	feels	far	away.
Osho	checks	his	energy.]
Just	come	close	to	me.	Let	me	see	how	far	away	you	are!
It	is	strange	but	it	is	beautiful.	It	is	not	a	confused	state	at	all;	it	is	very	clear.	You
are	 feeling	 confusion	 because	 it	 is	 beyond	 your	 expectations.	 It	 is
incomprehensible	to	you,	that's	why	you	are	feeling	confused.
You	 cannot	 figure	 it	 out	 because	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 past	 experience	 of	 this
space.	But	it	is	not	confusion:	it	is	something	new.
Whenever	something	new	happens	it	takes	time	to	settle	with	you	and	you	take
time	to	settle	with	it.	It	is	just	a	settling	confusion.	But	it	is	not	at	all	harmful	or
negative;	it	is	very	positive	and	very	creative.	You	are	feeling	far	away	from	here
and	far	away	from	there	because	for	the	first	time	you	are	falling	into	your	being
.	.	.	which	is	far	away	from	everywhere.	For	the	first	time	you	are	attaining	to	a
kind	of	centering,	for	the	first	time	you	are	becoming	a	soul.	These	are	the	first
glimpses	of	it.
Don't	call	it	confusion,	because	to	label	it	confusion	is	to	name	it	wrongly.	And
whenever	you	name	something	wrongly	you	start	reacting	to	it	according	to	your
labelling.	If	you	call	it	confusion	then	it	is	something	bad,	something	which	has
to	be	got	rid	of.	If	you	call	it	creative	chaos	then	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried
about	it.	One	has	to	go	into	it!	One	has	to	be	happy	about	it:	it	is	creative	chaos,
it	is	not	confusion.
And	language	sometimes	can	create	trouble.	One	has	to	be	really	very	particular
about	 using	words	when	one	 starts	moving	 inwards.	 Just	 a	 small	word	 can	do
much	harm.	Call	it	confusion	and	then	it	is	ill,	then	you	are	not	in	a	state	of	well-
being.	Something	is	wrong	and	the	wrong	has	to	be	put	right.
You	have	made	 a	 problem	 just	 by	giving	 this	 experience	 a	 name.	 If	 you	don't
know	what	it	is,	it	is	better	to	keep	quiet	about	it.	Don't	use	any	words;	it	is	better
to	be	silent	about	it.	Let	it	reveal	itself	to	you,	because	whatsoever	you	name	it
will	be	wrong.	It	will	come	from	the	past.	And	you	don't	know	what	it	is.
You	are	ignorant	about	it,	hence	you	are	feeling	confused.	Your	knowledge	is	of
no	use	for	this	space,	your	knowledge	is	absolutely	inadequate.	It	has	no	way	to
say	 anything	 about	 this	 space,	 hence	 your	 knowledgeable	 mind	 is	 feeling
confused	and	you	are	mistaking	 it	 for	your	confusion.	You	are	not	your	mind,
you	are	not	your	knowledge,	you	are	not	your	past.	You	are	far	bigger	than	that.
They	 are	 only	 small	 fragments	 in	 your	 being;	 don't	 think	 that	 they	 are	 your
whole	being.
So	 my	 suggestion	 is:	 firstly,	 call	 it	 creative	 chaos,	 call	 it	 a	 state	 of
transformation.	It	is	as	if	you	change	your	house,	mm?	--	you	go	from	one	house
to	another	house.	Everything	goes	 topsy-turvy.	You	are	 just	on	 the	 truck	 in	 the
middle	of	moving.	Everything	packed	and	you	are	sitting	on	your	suitcases.	The
new	 house	 has	 not	 arrived	 yet,	 the	 old	 has	 been	 left;	 you	 are	 on	 the	 road.
Naturally,	you	will	be	in	a	confusion.	If	you	need	something	you	cannot	find	it.
Even	when	you	have	arrived	at	 the	new	house	for	a	few	days	you	will	need	to
settle	with	the	house,	with	its	vibe,	with	its	space.
Psychologists	say	that	it	takes	at	least	three	days	for	a	person	to	fall	deeply	into
sleep	 in	 a	new	place	and	 twenty-one	days	 to	be	 really	part	of	 that	 space.	This
must	have	been	known	to	Buddha	somehow,	because	he	has	said	that	his	monks
should	not	stay	more	than	three	days	in	one	house,	because	after	three	days	you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
start	feeling	it	 is	your	house.	He	said	they	should	leave	before	that	idea,	 that	 it
was	theirs,	arose.	They	should	not	live	in	one	town	more	than	twenty-one	days
because	 then	 they	would	 start	 feeling	 that	 they	 are	 part	 of	 the	 town.	A	monk
should	be	a	wanderer:	he	should	not	belong	anywhere	and	nothing	should	belong
to	him.
Buddha	 must	 have	 somehow	 come	 across	 this	 line	 --	 three	 days,	 twenty-one
days.	Modern	psychology	has	done	much	research	into	how	the	mind	functions
in	a	new	place.
So	it	will	take	a	few	days;	it	depends	on	you	how	many.	If	you	accept	it	totally
then	soon	it	will	be	settled.	If	you	reject	it	will	take	a	little	longer	time;	if	you	go
on	 fighting	 with	 it	 then	 still	 longer.	 It	 can	 take	 months	 and	 years.	 Accept	 it
whole-heartedly.	 And	 whether	 you	 are	 here	 or	 there	 will	 not	 make	 any
difference:	accept	it.	It	 is	a	great	guest	 that	has	knocked	on	your	door.	It	 is	 the
guest	 for	 which	 you	 have	 been	 waiting	 for	 many	 lives.	 Now	 be	 a	 host,	 now
receive	this	guest!	Something	really	beautiful	is	there.
[A	sannyasin,	newly	arrived,	says	she	works	as	a	psychologist	in	a	prison....	]
That's	very	good!	Introduce	meditations	and	many	things	there....
Because	 criminals	 can	 be	 helped	 immensely;	 you	 have	 just	 to	 make	 a	 few
approaches.	You	can	start	with	a	small	group:	first	with	the	staff	if	they	feel,	then
with	a	 few	prisoners.	 It	 can	be	of	 immense	help	because	prisoners	 really	need
some	 catharsis.	 They	 have	 become	 criminals	 because	 life	 and	 society	 did	 not
allow	them	catharsis.
If	you	have	violence	and	there	is	no	outlet	for	it,	one	day	or	other	it	will	explode
and	you	will	be	possessed	by	it.	You	will	do	something	for	which	you	will	suffer
unnecessarily.	 And	 the	 violence	 can	 be	 released	 very	 easily	 with	 Dynamic
Meditation...	 very	 easily.	 A	 person	 can	 become	 absolutely	 peaceful	 and	 non-
violent.
If	 the	 world	moves	 towards	meditation	 a	 little	more	 almost	 ninety	 percent	 of
crimes	 will	 simply	 evaporate.	 Only	 ten	 percent	 of	 crimes	 will	 not	 evaporate
through	meditation	because	those	are	the	crimes	which	are	done	in	cold	blood.
Those	are	the	crimes	which	are	more	political	than	psychological;	psychological
crimes	can	disappear	very	easily.
Much	can	be	done;	start	a	little	bit.	It	can	become	a	great	pioneering	work.
Prem	means	love,	and	samya	means	equanimity,	equilibrium,	balance.
'Sam'	is	one	of	the	most	important	roots	in	Sanskrit;	samadhi	comes	from	'sam'.
It	means	ultimate	equilibrium,	where	all	the	problems	have	disappeared.	Samya
is	 the	 first	 step	 towards	 samadhi.	 One	 starts	 balancing	 oneself,	 just	 as	 the
tightrope	walker	balances	himself	--	sometimes	leaning	to	the	left	and	sometimes
leaning	 to	 the	 right,	 continuously	 leaning	 this	way	and	 that	way.	Whenever	he
feels	that	some	imbalance	is	coming	he	immediately	puts	it	right.	And	that's	how
he	walks	just	in	the	middle,	although	when	you	watch	him	you	continuously	see
him	leaning	to	the	left,	leaning	to	the	right.	He	goes	on	leaning	with	the	help	of	a
stick,	 a	 staff,	 but	 his	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 keep	 in	 the	 middle,	 just	 to	 be	 in	 the
middle.
Samya	means	just	to	be	in	the	middle.	Even	if	sometimes	you	have	to	lean,	you
have	to	keep	in	mind	that	 the	leaning	is	 in	service	of	being	in	the	middle.	One
should	 avoid	 extremes	 because	 all	 extremes	 create	 neurosis.	 It	 is	 only	 in	 the
middle	that	one	is	whole	and	healthy...	and	that	applies	to	everything.	It	is	very
easy	for	the	mind	to	go	from	one	extreme	to	the	other;	the	mind	is	an	extremist.
It	is	easy	for	the	mind	to	eat	too	much	and	it	is	easy	for	the	mind	to	go	on	a	fast.
The	difficult	thing	is	to	remain	in	the	middle	and	to	eat	only	that	much	which	is
necessary,	neither	less	or	more.	That	is	a	difficult	thing	for	the	mind,	and	to	do
that	difficult	thing	helps	you	to	go	beyond	mind...	in	everything.
Avoid	 the	 extreme,	 that	 is	 my	 message	 for	 you,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 immensely
benefited.	At	every	step	you	will	be	surprised	at	how	much	joy	is	possible	if	you
can	keep	in	the	middle.
[The	tantra	group	was	present	and	the	leader	said	that	some	personal	experiences
of	catharsis,	and	of	 regression	 to	 the	womb	happened	 to	her.	She	was	not	sure
whether	to	go	into	them	in	front	of	the	group	when	she	was	the	leader.	She	did
go	into	it	and	the	group	energy	was	very	strong	after.]
If	something	like	this	happens	sometimes	you	have	to	go	into	it.	If	you	repress	it
you	will	not	be	flowing	with	your	energy,	and	if	you	are	not	flowing	with	your
energy	you	cannot	flow	with	the	group	and	the	group	cannot	flow	with	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	even	if	sometimes	it	is	silly	and	stupid	there	is	no	way	to	avoid	it;	you	have	to
go	into	it,	rather	than	pretending....	Because	that	will	be	a	pretension	--	that	you
are	the	leader	so	how	can	you	go	into	some	silly	thing?	But	the	whole	purpose
here	is	to	drop	the	distinction	between	silliness	and	wisdom.
A	really	wise	man	is	one	who	can	sometimes,	when	needed,	be	silly.	A	wise	man
who	 can	 never	 be	 silly	 is	 absolutely	 stupid	 because	 he	 will	 not	 have
contradictions	 and	 the	meeting	of	 contradictions	 in	 him.	He	will	 not	 have	 any
flavour.	 The	 flavour	 comes	 only	 when	 contradictions	 meet	 in	 you,	 when
polarities	come	and	meet	in	you.
So	a	wise	man	who	is	just	wise	and	nothing	else	is	not	very	wise.	A	really	wise
man	allows	foolishness	also	to	have	its	say;	he	is	unafraid	of	foolishness.	He	can
absorb	foolishness	too,	he	can	use	foolishness	too.
That	wise	man	has	a	richer	being.
So	don't	be	worried:	if	sometimes	you	feel	something	is	happening	just	sit	in	the
middle	of	the	group	and	tell	everybody	that	this	is	happening	and	you	are	going
into	it	and	ask	that	they	all	please	bless	you!
Let	them	bless	you	and	go	into	it.	They	will	be	closer	to	you	after	that	because
they	will	 see	 that	you	are	not	 super-human,	 that	you	are	not	 some	holier-than-
thou,	mm?	--	that	you	are	as	stupid	as	everybody	else.
So	next	time	it	happens	you	just	go	into	it	and	let	everybody	surround	you	and
let	them	bless	you,	and	after	that	they	will	be	really	flowing	with	you.	It	is	good;
nothing	to	be	worried	about.
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711205
ShortTitle:	OPENSE20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Prem	means	love,	sukavi	means	a	poet	-	a	poet	of	love.	And	everybody	is	born
with	 the	 intrinsic	 quality	of	 being	 a	poet	 of	 love.	Not	 everybody	 is	 a	 poet	 but
everybody	 is	destined	 to	become	a	 love	poet.	By	a	 love	poet	 I	don't	mean	 that
you	have	to	compose	poetry	or	you	have	to	write	poetry.	By	a	love	poet	I	mean
that	you	have	to	become	poetry.
It	 is	possible	 that	a	man	is	a	poet	because	he	composes	poetry	and	yet	he	may
not	 be	 a	 poet	 because	 the	 poetry	 does	 not	 exist	 in	 his	 life.	 His	 life	 may	 be
absolutely	 prose,	 his	 life	may	 not	 have	 that	 climate	 of	 being	 poetic.	And	 vice
versa	 is	also	possible:	a	man	may	never	write	a	poem	and	may	be	a	poet.	The
way	he	walks,	the	way	he	lives,	the	way	he	loves,	the	way	he	relates,	the	way	he
exists,	the	way	he	is	may	be	poetry	in	itself,	and	that	is	great	poetry;	that	is	real
poetry.
If	ordinary	poetry	comes	out	of	his	life,	then	it	is	authentic.	If	life	itself	is	not	a
poem	and	you	go	on	composing	poetry,	it	is	artificial,	it	is	synthetic,	it	is	plastic.
It	does	not	grow	in	you.	So	I	call	Buddha	a	poet	although	he	never	wrote	a	single
poem	 and	 I	 call	 Jesus	 a	 poet	 also	 although	 he	was	 not	 a	 poet	 in	 the	 ordinary
sense	of	the	term.	But	he	was	poetic,	his	whole	life	is	a	great	poetry.	His	whole
life	has	a	great	rhythm,	a	great	accord,	a	great	harmony.	So	become	a	poet	in	that
sense.
Love	brings	that	poetry	into	existence:	be	loving	and	you	become	a	poet.	When
love	is	not	in	life	then	life	is	just	prose,	logic,	mathematics,	calculating,	cunning.
All	poetry	is	of	the	heart	and	all	calculation	is	of	the	head.
In	giving	you	this	name	I	am	simply	giving	you	a	hint	--	to	disappear	from	the
head	and	to	start	appearing	in	the	heart.	Live	more	in	feelings	than	in	thought	....
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[Osho	gives	sannyasin	to	someone.]
Come	here!	Close	your	eyes.	And	become	a	 small	 child	 inside,	not	more	 than
three	years	old.	Just	feel	like	a	small	child,	and	whatsoever	happens	in	the	body
allow	it.	If	the	body	starts	swaying,	trembling,	you	allow	it;	if	the	body	even	falls
on	the	floor	you	allow	it.	Simply	collapse	as	you	are	and	become	a	child.
Prem	 means	 love,	 bala	 means	 a	 child.	 Bala	 means	 the	 quality	 of	 childhood,
primal	innocence	uncorrupted	by	the	world,	fresh,	yet	not	aware	of	the	ways	of
the	 world.	 And	 love	 always	 make	 a	 person	 a	 child;	 that's	 why	 people	 who
become	 too	 clever,	 calculating,	 lose	 the	 quality	 of	 love.	 Love	 is	 childish,	 it	 is
never	 adultish.	Once	you	 start	 thinking	 about	 yourself	 as	 an	 adult,	 you	 cannot
love;	you	become	closed.
Only	a	child	can	love,	because	the	child	is	a	kind	of	openness.	Only	a	child	can
love	because	only	a	child	can	wonder,	only	a	child	can	be	surprised.	Only	a	child
feels	the	mystery,	and	love	is	the	greatest	mystery	there	is.
Flowers	 are	 mysterious	 but	 nothing	 compared	 with	 the	 flower	 of	 love.	 Birds
flying	in	the	sky	are	mysterious	but	nothing	compared	to	the	bird	of	love.	There
is	 nothing	 more	 mysterious	 than	 love.	 It	 should	 not	 happen	 really	 in	 such	 a
mundane	world	but	it	does.	It	has	no	reason	to	happen,	no	cause	to	happen	--	still
it	happens;	hence	the	mystery.	It	is	a	penetration	from	the	beyond.	It	is	not	of	this
world:	love	comes	from	some	other	dimension.	It	passes	through	this	world	but
does	not	belong	to	it.	That's	why	lovers	start	living	in	a	separate	reality,	they	are
no	more	existing	here.	Physically	they	are	here,	spiritually	there	are	somewhere
else,	in	a	totally	different	kind	of	universe.	Love	takes	you	into	God.	It	takes	you
away	from	the	mundane,	it	takes	you	to	the	sacred.
So	to	love	one	has	to	become	a	child	again;	and	the	second	childhood	is	far	more
significant	 than	 the	 first,	 because	 the	 first	 childhood	 was	 going	 to	 be	 lost.
Nobody	can	retain	it;	in	its	very	nature	it	has	to	be	lost.	It	is	like	the	first	teeth;
they	have	 to	 go,	 then	 the	 second	 row	of	 teeth	will	 appear.	But	 in	 life	 the	 first
kind	of	childhood	disappears	and	the	second	never	appears.	We	never	allow	it	to
appear,	so	we	become	hooked	with	the	mundane,	the	ordinary,	the	meaningless.
Become	a	child	again!	My	sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	a	second	childhood.
[A	sannyasin	couple	are	present.	The	man	says,	pointing	to	his	own	chest,	there
is	a	serious	guy	sitting	here.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
It	will	disappear	--	don't	be	worried	about	it.	Mm?	it	is	nothing	much:	just	a	very
small	 guy!	 Nothing	 to	 worry	 about.	 don't	 pay	 much	 attention	 to	 it;	 neglect,
ignore	 it.	 Ignoring	 is	 the	 best	 thing	 to	 do.	When	 you	 pay	 attention	 you	 go	 on
nourishing	it.	It	is	the	last	fragment	of	your	seriousness.	There	were	many	others
which	have	gone	by	and	by;	this	was	the	last,	and	naturally	it	will	cling	a	little
longer	 because	 the	 last	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 most	 deep-rooted.	 But	 it	 is	 a	 small
fragment,	just	a	lump.
(To	 the	 girlfriend)	 And	 you	 help	 him.	 Don't	 make	 him	 serious;	 help	 him	 to
laugh!	Don't	create	a	fight,	mm?	Good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711215
ShortTitle:	OPENSE21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Deva	 means	 divine,	 darshan	 means	 vision	 --	 divine	 vision,	 divine	 insight,	 or
divine	eyes,	 that	capacity	which	can	make	it	possible	for	you	to	see	God.	That
capacity	is	darshan.
And	 always	 remember,	 we	 can	 see	 only	 that	 for	 which	 we	 have	 adequate
instruments	 to	 see	 with;	 we	 can	 feel	 only	 that	 for	 which	 we	 have	 the	 right
instrument.	For	example	a	blind	man	cannot	see	light.	Not	that	the	light	is	not;
light	is	there	but	the	blind	man	cannot	see	it,	he	doesn't	have	adequate	means	to
see	it.	A	deaf	person	cannot	hear	music.	It	is	there	but	for	him	it	is	not.
So	is	the	case	with	God.	People	go	on	asking	where	God	is;	that	is	not	the	right
question.	 They	 should	 ask:	 'Where	 is	 the	 capacity	 in	me	 to	 see	God?	How	 to
develop	that	capacity	to	see	God?'	To	ask	whether	God	exists	or	not	is	stupid.	It
is	as	stupid	as	a	blind	man	asking	whether	light	exists	or	not.
God	will	need	a	special	capacity	in	you;	only	then	can	you	see.	The	Tibetan,	the
Chinese,	 the	Indian,	all	 the	old	eastern	philosophies	are	not	philosophies	in	the
western	sense;	they	are	called	darshanas.	They	don't	think	about	God,	they	try	to
see	God.	And	what	is	one	supposed	to	do?	One	has	to	develop	a	certain	vision	in
oneself,	 a	 certain	 grounding,	 centering,	 a	 certain	 clarity	 in	 oneself.	When	 the
clarity	 is	 there,	 suddenly	 you	 start	 seeing	 things	 which	 you	 have	 never	 seen
before.	The	world	is	no	more	the	same	because	you	are	no	more	the	same.
In	the	ancient	western	tradition	there	is	a	word	for	it,	'adecacio'	--	adequateness.
You	 can	 see	 only	 that	 for	which	 you	 have	 adequate	 capacity.	 There	 are	many
things	in	existence	of	which	we	are	not	aware	at	all.
Each	according	to	his	capacity....	The	rock	knows	only	a	little	bit.	When	it	rains
maybe	it	feels	a	little	bit;	when	it	is	hot,	maybe....	The	tree	feels	more,	the	animal
feels	 still	 more,	 man	 feels	 still	 more,	 but	 even	 man	 as	 he	 exists	 ordinarily,
naturally,	 is	 not	 adequate	 enough,	 has	 not	 that	 'adecacio'	 to	 know	God.	A	 few
more	 capacities	 have	 to	 be	 developed,	 and	 they	 are	 lying	 there	 dormant.
Everybody	has	come	with	the	capacity	but	it	is	not	actual	yet;	it	is	just	potential.
It	has	to	be	developed.
So	start	becoming	more	and	more	alert,	more	and	more	aware,	more	and	more
inner-oriented.	The	rock	has	no	inner	being,	it	has	no	soul.	It	just	exists	like	an
object,	mm?	--	that	is	the	mineral	kingdom.	The	tree	has	a	little	bit	of	feeling.	It
gropes,	 searches	 for	 water	 through	 the	 roots,	 it	 gropes	 for	 the	 light.	 If	 it	 is
surrounded	by	many	 trees,	 it	 tries	 to	 reach	higher.	That's	why	African	 trees	go
the	highest,	otherwise	 they	will	not	survive.	They	have	to	go	higher	 than	other
trees	 to	 absorb	 light,	 sunrays.	 A	 little	 effort	 is	 there,	 a	 little	 interiority	 has
happened	in	the	tree,	in	the	vegetable	kingdom.
The	animal	is	far	more	inner	than	the	tree;	it	has	a	kind	of	rudimentary	soul.	It
reacts,	responds,	remembers,	maybe	also	thinks	a	little	bit,	ponders	over	things,
dreams.	You	can	sometimes	see	a	dog	sitting	and	dreaming	or	a	cat	dreaming.
You	can	feel	that	the	dog	is	dreaming	because	sometimes	in	his	dream	he	shakes
himself	 or	 suddenly	 becomes	 alert	 or	 tries	 to	 catch	 a	 fly	which	may	 be	 just	 a
dream	fly.	A	little	bit	of	interiority	is	happening	in	the	animal	kingdom.	Then	in
the	 human	 kingdom	 a	 little	 bit	 more,	 but	 even	 human	 beings	 are	 not	 really
interior.	The	subjectivity	 is	not	yet	grown	up	perfectly,	 that's	why	 they	are	not
aware	of	God;	more	awareness	is	needed.
The	mineral	kingdom	is	simply	existence,	the	vegetable	is	existence	plus	life,	the
animal	kingdom	is	existence	plus	life	plus	consciousness.	The	human	kingdom	is
existence	 plus	 life	 plus	 consciousness,	 plus	 self-consciousness...	 but	 even	 self-
consciousness	is	not	enough.	Witnessing	has	to	be	grown;	that	will	be	the	fifth
and	the	final	stage	of	growth.	That's	what	happens	in	a	Buddha,	in	a	Christ.	Call
it	Christ	consciousness	or	call	it	Buddha	consciousness;	it	is	the	same.	One	goes
beyond	 self	 and	 the	 ego,	 one	 becomes	 purely	 conscious.	 The	 rock	 is	 purely
object,	Christ	is	purely	subject,	and	we	are	somewhere	in	between.	One	has	to	go
from	the	rock	to	the	Christ.
When	you	are	 in	 that	state	of	witnessing,	awareness,	observation,	mindfulness,
then	you	have	the	adequate	means	by	which	to	know	what	God	is.	That	is	called
darshana,	the	vision....
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#22
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
22	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711225
ShortTitle:	OPENSE22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	sannyasin,	recently	arrived,	wishes	to	say	something	but	has	not	words.]
Then	just	raise	your	hands	and	close	your	eyes.	Feel	the	energy,	and	if	it	starts
shaking	you,	makes	you	quake,	go	with	it.	If	it	starts	swaying	you,	sway	with	it.
Be	completely	loose	so	the	energy	can	start	moving	you.
Good!	It	is	there,	mm?	--	something	is	there	that	you	cannot	catch	hold	of.	It	is
not	 only	 that	 you	 cannot	 say	 it,	 you	 cannot	 verbalize	 it	 even	within	 yourself,
because	that	which	can	be	verbalized	within	can	be	said	too;	whether	you	say	it
inside	 or	 you	 say	 it	 outside	 makes	 not	 much	 difference.	 But	 there	 are	 things
which	 are	 beyond	 the	 grasp	 of	 the	mind.	You	 can	 only	 feel	 them,	 you	 cannot
think	them.
You	have	a	kind	of	consciousness	that	they	are	there,	but	it	is	very	vague,	a	great
mist	surrounds	it.	It	is	as	if	the	morning	sun	has	not	risen	yet	and	it	is	all	misty.
You	cannot	 see	but	 still	you	can	 see	a	 little	bit;	 it	 is	not	completely	dark.	You
cannot	say	that	you	cannot	see	and	you	cannot	say	what	it	is	that	you	are	seeing;
it	is	just	in	the	middle.	It	is	not	in	the	head,	it	is	not	in	the	heart,	it	is	just	in	the
middle.	So	the	head	can	have	a	kind	of	consciousness	about	 it.	 It	 is	 lurking	on
the	boundaries	of	the	head	but	it	cannot	pinpoint	it,	it	cannot	figure	it	out.
Soon	 it	will	 become	possible.	Help	 it:	whenever	 you	 are	 sitting	 silently,	 think
about	it,	about	what	it	is.
Allow	your	heart	to	have	a	dialogue	with	your	head.	That	will	bridge	your	head
and	heart,	and	if	they	can	be	bridged	it	is	immensely	enriching.
It	is	very	easy	to	live	in	the	head.	Millions	of	people	are	living	there;	that	is	the
only	kind	of	space	they	know.	It	is	very	difficult	to	live	in	the	heart	because	the
heart	does	not	pay.	But	though	it	is	difficult,	it	is	possible.	A	few	people	live	in
the	 heart	 --	 the	 poets,	 the	 lovers,	 the	 painters,	 the	 artists.	But	 the	 real	 and	 the
greatest	 thing	 is	 to	bridge	both	and	 to	 live	 in	such	a	way	 that	neither	 the	head
interferes	with	the	heart	nor	the	heart	interferes	with	the	head.
Then	 you	 attain	 to	 a	 third	 centre	 which	 is	 in	 control	 of	 both.	 You	 become	 a
triangle,	you	become	a	trinity,	and	when	you	become	a	trinity	and	the	third	point
has	arisen,	in	the	East	we	call	it	witnessing.	One	is	thinking	--	the	head	--	another
is	feeling	--	the	heart	--	and	the	third	is	witnessing	--	awareness	of	both	with	no
choice.	One	is	not	choosing	the	heart	against	 the	head,	one	is	not	choosing	the
head	against	the	heart	at	the	cost	of	the	heart.	One	is	not	choosing	at	all;	one	is
simply	watchful,	aware	of	both.	In	that	watchfulness	both	meet	and	a	new	centre
arises	in	your	being;	that's	really	the	soul.	To	go	beyond	the	heart	and	the	head	is
to	enter	into	the	soul.
So	try	to	understand	it.	The	message	from	the	heart	is	there;	it	has	not	penetrated
the	head	yet.	Only	the	head	can	have	a	kind	of	understanding	about	it.	The	heart
is	dumb,	the	head	is	vocal.	There	are	people	who	go	on	talking	without	exactly
knowing	what	they	are	talking	about;	the	head	is	vocal.	The	heart	feels.	It	knows
what	it	is	that	is	worth	saying	but	it	has	no	language.
You	must	have	heard	 an	old	 ancient	 fable....	 In	 a	 forest	 there	used	 to	 live	 two
men,	 two	beggars	--	one	was	blind,	another	was	lame.	They	were	friends,	 they
needed	each	other	because	the	blind	could	not	see	and	the	lame	could	not	walk.
So	 this	 was	 the	 arrangement	 between	 them,	 a	 synthesis,	 that	 the	 blind	 would
carry	 the	 lame	on	his	shoulders	so	 that	 the	 lame	could	see	and	 the	blind	could
walk.	It	was	going	perfectly	well.
One	day	the	forest	caught	fire	and	each	started	trying	to	escape	without	the	help
of	the	other.	They	forgot	for	a	moment;	the	danger	was	so	much	that	they	forgot
their	partnership	and	that	it	was	essential	for	their	existence.	Soon	they	realised
their	mistake.	Both	were	in	danger,	both	could	have	been	killed	by	the	fire.	But
just	 in	 time	 they	 recognised	 that	 alone,	 separate,	 there	was	no	way	 to	 survive.
They	searched	for	each	other,	helped	each	other	and	escaped	from	the	forest.
That	is	the	situation	of	the	heart	and	the	head.	If	they	are	together	you	can	come
out	of	this	life	that	is	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
forest	 on	 fire.	So	whenever	 you	 are	 sitting	 silently	 just	 listen	 to	 the	heart.	Let
heart	 and	 head	 have	 a	 dialogue	 and	 soon	 you	 will	 see	 that	 they	 are	 coming
closer,	becoming	more	friendly.	Once	they	are	close	enough	things	start	jumping
from	the	heart	into	the	head.	The	head	is	vocal:	it	knows	the	language,	the	logic
of	how	to	say	a	thing.	Once	the	heart	has	released	its	energy	to	the	head,	the	head
can	express	it.
Let	that	synthesis	happen.	Once	it	happens	you	will	be	immensely	blessed.	For
the	first	time	you	will	find	you	have	become	a	unity	and	great	joy	arises	out	of
unity.	Great	misery	 is	 there	when	a	person	 is	split,	and	everybody	is	split.	The
feelings	go	on	going	in	one	direction	and	the	thinking	goes	on	going	in	another
direction	and	 they	don't	have	any	kind	of	understanding	about	each	other.	The
man	 starts	 falling	 apart,	 into	 pieces,	 becomes	 fragmentary,	 loses	 all	 kind	 of
centering.	So	become	a	witness	 to	both	thinking	and	feeling	and	centering	will
arise...	it	has	to	arise.	That	is	your	work	here.
And	whenever	you	can	manage	 to	do	groups,	enquire	--	 then	I	will	give	you	a
few	groups,	mm?	Good!
[A	 sannyasin	 has	 just	 completed	 some	 groups	 and	 describes	 an	 amazing	 high
space	he	is	in.	Then	says	he	is	very	inquisitive	to	know	what	it	is.]
Please	 don't	 try	 to	 understand	 it!	 Understanding	 will	 become	 a	 barrier;
understanding	 is	 not	 necessarily	 always	 a	 help.	 When	 something	 beyond	 the
mind	is	happening	it	is	better	to	let	the	mind	remain	quiet.
Understanding	 or	 the	 effort	 to	 understand	 it	 disturbs	 the	mind,	 stirs	 the	mind;
thoughts	 start	 revolving,	doubts	 start	arising.	 It	 is	better	not	 to	 stir	 the	mind	at
this	moment,	 otherwise	 once	 the	mind	 becomes	 very	 active	 the	 energy	 that	 is
moving	you	higher	and	higher	will	disappear;	the	mind	will	drag	it	down.
It	is	better	to	leave	the	curiosity	as	it	is.	What	is	happening	is	good,	it	is	really
beautiful.	You	 need	 not	 analyse	 it.	Always	 remember:	 if	 you	 are	 ill	 go	 to	 the
doctor	 and	 let	 it	 be	 diagnosed	 but	 if	 you	 are	 feeling	 healthy	 don't	 go	 to	 the
doctor.	Illness	has	to	be	diagnosed,	not	health.	If	you	diagnose	health	you	will	be
in	trouble,	you	will	disturb	it.	When	you	are	feeling	bad,	miserable,	something
needs	to	be	done.
When	something	needs	to	be	done,	understanding	is	needed.	Understanding	is	a
tool	for	doing	something,	otherwise	it	is	meaningless.	When	something	is	going
beautifully	 nothing	 needs	 to	 be	 done;	 understanding	 is	 not	 needed.	 Try	 to
understand	a	thing	when	you	want	to	do	something;	then	it	is	a	must.
But	when	nothing	is	needed	to	be	done	you	are	just	to	float	with	it.	No	effort	is
needed	but	a	kind	of	surrender.	Then	understanding	is	dangerous.
If	 you	 try	 to	understand	 it	 --	 you	 start	 conceptualizing,	 you	 start	 labelling	 and
categorizing	and	you	say
'This	 is	 this	 and	 that	 is	 that,	 and	 this	 is	 happening'...	 you	will	 stop	 the	whole
process	because	the	energy	will	start	moving	into	the	mind.	It	is	the	same	energy.
Either	 it	 can	 take	you	higher	 and	higher	or	 it	will	 take	you	deeper	 and	deeper
into	analysis.	It	is	the	same	energy	and	you	won't	have	enough	energy	for	both.
That's	 why	 the	 people	 who	 are	 in	 the	 mind	 too	 much	 cannot	 go	 high;	 their
energy	is	involved,	occupied.
Sometimes	innocent	people,	peasants	and	villagers,	easily	start	going	higher.
It	is	not	just	a	coincidence	that	all	Jesus'	disciples	were	uneducated,	uncultured,
innocent,	except	Judas.
He	was	 the	 only	man	with	 a	 head...	 and	 he	 betrayed	 Jesus.	 The	 other	 eleven
disciples	were	simply	very	very	ordinary	people,	with	no	 idea	about	what	was
happening;	 they	 simply	 trusted	 Jesus.	 Judas	 betrayed.	 He	 was	 a	 scholar,	 a
logician,	 an	 intellectual;	 he	 belonged	 to	 the	 intelligentsia.	 He	 could	 not	move
with	 Jesus,	 he	 could	 not	 participate	 in	 his	 prayers,	 he	 could	 not	 fly	 high	with
him.	It	was	difficult	for	him	to	be	turned	on.
He	was	 always	 thinking,	 analysing,	 conceptualizing	 and	philosophizing;	 hence
he	missed!
These	moments	are	of	immense	value.	The	mind	has	nothing	to	say	about	it.	The
mind	 has	 to	 be	 utterly	 quiet,	 in	 awe,	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 wonder...	 just	 silent.	When
something	 greater	 than	 the	 mind	 is	 happening,	 the	 mind	 has	 to	 be	 silent.	 Be
completely	silent.	I	understand:	curiosity	is	natural,	but	don't	be	carried	along	by
it.
Let	 it	 be	 there	 but	 don't	 cooperate	 with	 it	 and	 don't	 ask;	 just	 go	 deeper	 and
deeper.
A	 different	 kind	 of	 understanding	 will	 arise	 one	 day	 through	 experience,	 not
through	 intellect;	 it	 will	 be	 existential.	 It	 will	 not	 be	 analytical,	 it	 will	 be
existential.	 And	 there	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 analysis	 and	 when	 you
understand	something	existentially.	You	can	take	a	flower	to	a	chemist;	he	will
understand	it	analytically.
Analysis	reduces	everything	to	'nothing	but'.	If	you	take	a	child,	an	alive	child,	to
a	 chemical	 analyst,	 he	 will	 analyse	 the	 child:	 eighty	 percent	 water,	 twenty
percent	 this...	The	blood	and	the	bones	and	 the	marrow	and	everything	will	be
accounted	for;	only	the	soul	of	the	child	will	be	missing	in	it.	Aliveness	will	be
missed	--	and	that's	what	the	real	thing	was.	Everything	else	was	just	a	vehicle
for	 that	 aliveness,	 for	 the	 soul;	 everything	 was	 just	 a	 support	 for	 it	 to	 exist
herenow.	The	child	was	anchored	 in	 the	body	but	was	not	 the	body	 itself.	The
child	was	more	than	the	body,	more	than	the	sum	total	of	its	parts,	but	that	more
cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
be	understood	analytically.
That	more	is	very	close	by.	Don't	analyse;	simply	go	with	it,	go	with	it	headlong.
Let	it	take	you	wherever	it	wants	to.	There	is	no	need	to	direct,	there	is	no	need
to	 figure	 out	 anything;	 go	 into	 the	 unknown	 with	 it.	 And	 yes,	 a	 kind	 of
understanding	will	arise.	That	understanding	will	be	of	the	poetic	approach,	not
of	the	analytic.	It	will	be	synthetical,	not	analytical;	it	will	be	existential.
Something	beautiful	is	on	the	way.	Be	thrilled,	be	in	celebration!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711235
ShortTitle:	OPENSE23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Osho	explains	 the	meaning	of	Prem	(love)	Chintan	 (meditation).	Contemplate
on	love	and	you	will	become	love.	Don't	think	of	love	as	a	relationship	but	as	a
quality	of	your	inner	being.	Love	has	to	become	like	breathing.	What	breathing
is	to	the	body,	love	is	to	the	soul.]
Satya	means	 truth,	and	sonam	means	golden	 --	golden	 truth.	And	only	 truth	 is
god;	all	else	is	rubbish.
Only	truth	is	precious.
That	 has	 to	 be	 attained,	 and	 it	 can	 be	 attained;	 you	 have	 the	 heart	 for	 it.	And
don't	feel	sorry	about	the	tears	--	they	are	beautiful!
[The	new	sannyasin	says	she	will	be	returning	to	Iran.]
Now	you	will	have	to	work	for	me	there!	Many	people	will	be	coming	to	you;
you	have	to	become	a	passage	for	me.
[She	replies:	They	are	stupid	people	in	our	country.]
They	are	everywhere!	I	know...	I	understand	--	they	are	everywhere.	Stupidity	is
so	much	on	the	earth,	everywhere	more	or	less,	but	a	few	people	are	everywhere
who	will	understand.	And	those	who	can	understand	are	the	real	people.	Others
can	be	ignored;	feel	compassion	for	them,	don't	feel	angry.	They	are	stupid	but
what	can	they	do?
[A	new	sannyasin	says	he	 is	very	afraid	of	 sexual	 relationships	here.	He	has	a
deep	 relationship	 in	 the	 West,	 and	 his	 mind	 tells	 him	 they	 should	 not	 be
possessive,	but	his	heart	is	frightened.]
It	is	not	the	heart	that	is	frightened;	it	is	the	mind.	The	heart	knows	no	fear;	it	is
always	the	mind	that	thinks	of	safety,	security,	this	and	that.	You	are	misplacing
the	whole	thing:	you	are	thinking	that	 the	mind	is	saying	okay	and	the	heart	 is
afraid.	No,	that	is	not	possible,	that	never	happens;	it	cannot	happen	in	the	very
nature	of	things.	The	heart	is	always	ready	to	explore;	it	is	childlike.	The	mind	is
always	 afraid.	 It	 clings	 to	 the	 old,	 to	 the	 past;	 it	 is	 afraid	 something	may	 get
disturbed.
And	in	fact,	if	you	love	a	woman	or	a	man	or	anybody,	all	other	love	experiences
are	going	to	enhance	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	 love.	 How	 can	 it	 be	 against	 it?	 If	 you	 paint	 one	 picture	 and	 only	 one
picture,	it	can't	be	much	of	a	masterpiece.	But	if	you	paint	thousands	of	pictures
and	 then	you	come	back	 to	 the	old	picture	and	paint	 it	again	or	 just	add	a	few
touches	 here	 and	 there,	 it	 can	 become	 a	 masterpiece...	 because	 everything
becomes	enriched	by	experience.
No,	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 the	heart	 is	 afraid.	The	heart	 is	 never	 afraid	because	 the
heart	never	knows	of	the	past	and	never	thinks	of	the	future;	it	has	no	time	sense.
The	more	 you	 go	 to	 the	 primitive	 people	 you	will	 see	 that	 they	 have	 no	 time
sense.
In	 India	 it	happens....	Somebody	says	 'I	 am	coming	 tomorrow'	and	he	will	not
turn	 up	 for	 three,	 four	 days.	 Then	 he	 suddenly	 comes	 and	 you	 say,	 'What
happened?'	But	by	tomorrow	he	never	meant	exactly	tomorrow.	If	he	says	'I	am
coming	 at	 four	 o'clock'	 he	 can	 come	 at	 three,	 he	 can	 come	 at	 five.	 It	 is	 very
loose,	the	time	sense	is	not	very	fixed.
Time	 is	 a	 new	 phenomenon.	My	 feeling	 is	 that	 if	 the	West	 had	 not	 invented
watches	the	East	would	never	have	used	them.	For	what	There	is	no	reason.	The
heart	knows	no	time.	It	still	 lives	in	eternity:	 it	 lives	moment	to	moment,	from
one	moment	to	another.
It	is	your	mind,	your	calculating	mind,	which	is	calculating.	Maybe	the	woman
comes	 to	 know	 and	 then	 something	 gets	 disturbed	 or	 maybe	 you	 really	 get
involved	 in	 another	woman	 and	 then	what?	Maybe	 you	 really	 come	 to	 feel	 a
deeper	 love,	 then	 what?	 Maybe	 you	 really	 get	 hooked	 into	 some	 other
relationship,	then	what?	What	will	happen	to	the	past	and	your	commitments	and
your	involvement	and	your	promises	and	all	that?
It	 is	 the	mind,	 the	 calculating	mind,	 which	 says	 to	 you,	 'Wait,	 calculate	 first;
don't	jump	into	anything.'
And	 this	mind	 is	 the	problem.	Remember,	 if	 you	 somehow	manage	not	 to	get
involved	with	anybody	else,	back	home	 there	will	be	 trouble	because	you	will
take	revenge	on	the	woman.	You	will	make	her	feel	guilty:	it	is	because	of	her!
In	 fact	 that	 may	 shatter	 your	 relationship	 because	 you	 will	 feel	 a	 kind	 of
prisoner.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 this	woman....	There	were	 so	many	opportunities,	 so
many	 beautiful	 people	 all	 around,	 a	 kind	 of	 availability	 and	 space	which	 you
could	 not	 enjoy	 and	 could	 not	 enter	 because	 of	 this	woman.	 It	may	 not	 be	 so
conscious	but	unconsciously	you	may	start	taking	revenge	on	her.
But	if	you	can	have	a	few	experiences	easily,	naturally,	spontaneously....	There	is
no	need	to	force	them;	if	they	happen	on	the	way	it	is	perfectly	good.	It	is	not	a
betrayal	 at	 all,	 because	 how	 can	 love	 betray?	 Love	 cannot	 betray.	 It	 is	 not	 a
betrayal...	because	love	will	be	enhanced,	so	how	can	it	be	a	betrayal?	This	is	my
approach;	it	is	against	the	whole	tradition.
Love	can	never	betray.	I	don't	mean	that	love	cannot	love	somebody	else,	but	in
the	very	nature	of	love	there	is	no	possibility	of	betrayal.	Each	love	experience
goes	 on	 enhancing	your	 love	 affair	 so	 it	 is	 always	 enriching.	How	can	 it	 be	 a
betrayal?	 That	 language	 of	 betrayal	 is	 of	 jealousy,	 of	 making	 a	 person	 a
commodity,	property	to	be	possessed,	reducing	the	person	to	a	thing.	And	when
you	reduce	the	person	to	a	thing	you	are	also	reduced	to	a	thing.	It	never	happens
on	one	side	only;	it	is	a	double-edged	sword.	You	reduce	the	woman	to	a	thing
and	the	woman	reduces	you	to	a	 thing.	She	becomes	a	wife	and	you	become	a
husband,	and	both	are	dead.
Just	remain	open,	available	and	float	with	things.	Here	there	is	no	involvement,
nothing.	 Nobody	 here	 is	 interested	 in	 involvement.	 People	 simply	 want	 to
explore	all	kinds	of	experiences,	and	the	more	they	explore,	the	more	they	find
freedom	 necessary,	 because	 exploration	 is	 possible	 only	 with	 freedom,	 in
freedom.	So	nobody	is	trying	to	hold	or	possess.	Here	people	are	meeting	each
other	just	for	the	meeting's	sake.	Even	if	it	is	only	for	one	moment	it	is	beautiful.
Sometimes	 a	 one-moment	 affair	 can	 go	 deeper	 than	 a	whole	 life-long	 affair...
because	it	is	not	a	question	of	time.
Time	is	horizontal	and	this	moment-to-moment	living	is	vertical.	And	when	you
are	in	a	vertical	relationship	it	can	go	very	deep	because	there	is	no	involvement,
nothing,	 there	 is	no	 fear...	 no	past,	 no	 future.	Sometimes,	being	 in	 love	with	 a
stranger	can	be	of	infinite	value	because	there	are	no	expectations.
It	is	not	a	business,	a	bargain;	it	is	a	pure	sharing,	it	is	pure	poetry.	Remain	open!
And	it	is	not	the	heart.	Never	condemn	the	heart.	This	is	very	tricky,	the	mind	is
very	tricky:	it	can	condemn	the	heart,	can	say	that	it	is	in	the	heart....	Good!
[A	 sannyasin	 couple	 come	 to	 see	 Osho	 about	 their	 relationship,	 because	 the
woman	has	become	involved	with	another	man,	but	still	loves	her	boyfriend.	She
is	confused.]
The	mind	is	always	hankering	for	something	or	other.	The	mind	is	a	hankering.
It	can	never	be	satisfied.
With	 the	mind	 there	 is	 no	 satisfaction,	 never!	 It	 is	 dissatisfaction.	 So	 you	 can
have	the	other	man	and	then	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sooner	 or	 later	 you	 will	 be	 unsatisfied	 again.	 Then	 you	 will	 start	 thinking	 of
somebody	else	because	that	keeps	one	occupied,	that	keeps	one's	hope	alive.
One	 becomes	 mature	 only	 when	 one	 drops	 all	 hopes	 and	 starts	 living	 in	 the
moment	with	no	hope;	 that	 is	 the	real	courage.	Then	whatsoever	is,	one	makes
the	best	out	of	it.
Right	now,	if	you	think	of	the	other	person	you	will	not	be	making	the	best	of	the
situation	with	Amitabh.	Mm?	just	think	of	it:	it	can't	be	the	best	that	it	could	be
because	your	mind	is	divided.	When	your	mind	is	divided,	his	mind	is	disturbed.
When	 you	 are	 thinking	 of	 somebody	 he	 is	 constantly	 worried	 about	 what	 is
going	to	happen.	He	cannot	be	with	you	totally	because	you	are	not	totally	with
him.	There	will	 be	 a	 kind	 of	 depression	between	you	both,	 a	 kind	 of	 sadness,
something	which	has	not	to	be	mentioned	but	which	is	 there,	something	which
has	 not	 to	 be	 brought	 into	 the	 open	 but	which	 is	 there	 and	which	 both	 know
about.	Even	Lying	 together	 you	will	 find	 there	 is	 distance,	 so	 you	will	 not	 be
able	to	make	the	best	of	it.
And	you	love	[your	boyfriend],	but	just	saying	that	you	love	him	or	feeling	it	is
not	 enough.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 actualized,	 and	 actualization	 is	 possible	 only	 in	 the
present	moment.	Now	you	are	 thinking	of	 the	other....	 If	you	get	 the	other	you
will	start	thinking	of	Amitabh	and	then	you	will	not	be	able	to	make	the	best	of
that	either.	This	is	how	life	becomes	a	mess.
While	you	have	[your	boyfriend]	make	 the	best	of	 it,	and	 if	one	day	you	don't
have	[him]	and	the	other	person	is	available,	then	make	the	best	of	that.	But	don't
swing	like	a	pendulum	in	the	mind,	otherwise	you	will	never	be	happy...	and	you
will	be	responsible	for	it!	Always	remember:	it	is	not	a	question	of	persons;	it	is
really	a	question	basically	about	you,	whether	you	can	be	happy	or	not.	 If	you
can	 be	 happy,	 you	 can	 be	 happy	 with	 anybody.	 If	 you	 cannot	 be	 happy,	 you
cannot	be	happy	with	 anyone.	Whomsoever	you	are	with	will	 not	make	much
difference	 because	 the	 mind	 and	 its	 working	 and	 functioning	 will	 remain	 the
same.
Be	one	hundred	percent	wherever	you	are,	and	there	is	one	thing	very	beautiful
about	being	one	hundred	percent....	If	you	are	one	hundred	percent	in	something
you	 can	 be	 one	 hundred	 percent	 out	 of	 it	 too	That	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 being	 one
hundred	percent.	You	learn	how	to	be	a	hundred	percent:	either	you	are	with	or
not	with,	but	you	are	always	one	hundred	percent.
So	 if	 a	 person	 who	 lives	 totally	 in	 the	 moment	 leaves	 one	 day,	 he	 leaves
completely.	 There	 is	 nothing	 holding	 him;	 he	 never	 looks	 back,	 he	 burns	 the
bridges.	There	is	no	point	in	looking	back.	One	has	lived	totally;	it	is	finished!
And	you	are	not	finished	with	Amitabh.	How	can	you	be	finished?	You	have	not
even	lived	totally	with	him!	You	can	be	with	the	other	person	and	again	you	will
be	half-half.	You	will	be	carrying	the	same	load.
It	will	become	bigger	and	bigger	and	you	will	be	weighed	down	with	it;	then	you
will	feel	guilty.	Now	you	are	feeling	guilty	about	what	[your	boyfriend]	thinks.
There	you	will	start	thinking	that	you	have	betrayed
[him].	Maybe	for	a	few	days	you	may	not	be	too	worried.	When	the	honeymoon
is	over	you	will	start	thinking	about	what	you	have	done	for	this	childish	thing.
Now	it	is	finished.	Where	does	one	go	from	here?
Now	it	looks	ugly	to	go	back	to	[your	boyfriend];	it	goes	against	one's	ego.	Now
there	is	no	point	being	with	this	man	any	more,	so	find	somebody	else.	This	goes
on	and	on....
It	 is	 time	 now	 to	 become	 a	 little	 more	mature.	 That's	 what	 I	 have	 told	 [your
boyfriend]	--	that	[you	are]
childish.	 Become	 a	 little	 more	 mature.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 to	 live	 with	 Amitabh
forever,	because	who	can	say	 that	and	how	can	one	say	 that?	 It	can	happen,	 it
may	not	happen;	that	is	not	the	point.
The	point	is,	while	you	are	with	him	be	totally	with	him.	And	even	if	this	idea...
I	 know	 --	what	 can	 you	 do	 if	 the	 idea	 lurks	 there?	 Let	 it	 lurk	 there	 but	 don't
cooperate	with	it.	It	will	die	by	itself.	But	live	totally.
Either	 way	 it	 will	 be	 decisive:	 either	 that	 idea	 dies	 or	 you	 are	 finished	 with
[him],	but	things	will	be	complete	and	clear	and	you	can	move	with	clarity.	You
can	 say	 good-bye	 to	 [him],	 can	 say	 that	 it	 is	 finished.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 finished
because	it	is	not	total.
Anything	total	either	goes	on	and	on	because	it	is	so	beautiful	or	it	becomes	ripe
and	is	finished	!	One	cannot	predict	what	will	happen...	but	either	way	it	is	good:
one	comes	out	of	it	unscratched.	Love	him	totally	so	either	it	becomes	very	very
deep,	 it	becomes	your	contentment,	or	you	are	 finished	with	 it	 so	you	can	slip
out	of	it.	But	this	lukewarm	state	is	very	bad.
That	 idea	 is	 there	 I	know,	and	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 this	person.	Mm?	you
have	always	been	having	some	ideas	--	whether	it	 is	a,	b,	c,	 it	 is	not	 the	point.
You	cannot	live	with	the	real,	you	cannot	live	without	the	fantasy;	you	live	with
the	imaginary.	The	imaginary	is	always	good...	because	it	looks	beautiful	and	it
is	your	imagination;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	real	person.	You	can	decorate	it
the	way	you	want,	you	can	interpret	it	the	way	you	want:	you	are	utterly	free.
With	the	real	person	there	are	problems;	with	the	unreal	person	there	are	never
any	problems.	That's	why	when	you	are	in	love	with	somebody	only	in	the	mind
is	it	always	great.	There	are	never	lows,	it	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
always	high...	because	it	is	your	imagination!
Have	you	heard	about	one	story?	A	woman	dreamt	that	Prince	Charming	came
on	his	horse	and	took	her	up	on	the	horse.	They	galloped	off	together	and	went
far	away,	far	away.	The	woman	asked,	'Where	are	we	going?'	The	prince	said,	'It
is	your	dream	--	how	am	I	supposed	to	know?	You	tell	me!'
When	it	is	your	dream	you	can	manage	it	any	way	you	want.	That's	how	reality
is	always	very	very	hard	and	harder	on	people	who	live	in	fantasies.	When	they
come	against	the	real	person	they	are	surprised:	this	is	not	the	person	they	have
been	thinking	about,	this	is	not	the	situation	they	have	been	hankering	for,	this	is
not	the	affair	that	they	were	dreaming	of;	this	is	something	else.	It	falls	too	low
beneath	their	idea...	and	again	there	is	dissatisfaction.
You	decide.	If	you	want	to	be	with	[your	boyfriend],	then	be	with	him	totally.	If
you	don't	want	 to	be	with	Amitabh	 then	have	courage,	come	out	of	 it,	but	 that
too	will	be	possible	if	you	give	a	chance	for	your	love	to	come	to	a	fulfilment.	It
is	just	lingering....
You	don't	 allow	him	 to	be	 totally	 in	 it.	He	can	be:	he	has	no	other	 idea	 in	his
mind.	You	are	fortunate	in	that	way.	He	has	no	other	woman	in	his	mind	so	it	is
possible	for	the	love	to	become	total.
And	this	always	happens	to	one	partner	or	the	other:	mm?	if	the	man	has	some
woman	in	his	mind	then	you	will	drop	this	man	from	your	mind.	You	will	start
clinging	 to	Amitabh	 like	 a	 creeper	because	 then	you	will	 become	afraid.	Now
you	are	very	at	ease,	very	comfortable:	you	know	you	can	always	fall	back	on
Amitabh,	he	is	there,	he	is	your	shelter.	Now	you	can	roam	around	a	little	bit.	If
he	starts	looking	for	some	other	woman	(chuckling)	--	and	if	you	don't	listen	to
me,	I	will	make	him	--	 then	you	start	clinging	 to	him,	you	will	become	afraid.
You	will	not	think	of	the	imaginary,	you	will	think	of	the	real,	because	this	too	is
going	to	become	imaginary	soon.
But	he	loves	you	totally,	he	has	no	other	mind...	hence	he	feels	hurt.	And	his	hurt
is	 not	 of	 possessiveness,	 remember.	 He	 feels	 hurt	 because	 he	 feels	 that	 he	 is
guilty,	he	is	preventing	you;	 it	 is	because	of	him	that	you	are	not	able	 to	go	to
somebody	you	would	 like	 to.	Deep	down	he	 loves	you	so	much	 that	he	would
like	to	give	you	all	freedom.	It	is	not	possessiveness,	he	is	not	angry	with	you.
He	understands	--
what	can	you	do?	He	feels	great	compassion	 for	you,	he	would	 like	 to	help	 in
every	way:	even	if	it	creates	suffering	for	him	he	would	like	to	help	you.
So	 it	 is	basically	your	problem,	and	my	suggestion	 is	 try	 total	 love	for	at	 least
two,	 three	months.	Be	utterly	 in	 it,	 explore	 all	 nooks	 and	 corners	 of	 it	 and	 all
possibilities.	Either	you	will	go	into	it	very	very	deeply	and	will	become	centred
and	these	fantasies	will	disappear,	or	you	will	be	finished	with	it.	You	will	say,
'This	is	not	for	me.'	Then	you	will	not	say	'I	love	Amitabh.'	You	will	be	ready	to
move	with	somebody	else.	And	I	am	not	against	anything:	if	you	want	to	move
with	somebody	else	I	am	not	against	it.	What	I	am	against	is	this	being	partial,
this	being	non-total.
Try!	Just	 tell	 [your	boyfriend]	 'For	 two	months	I	will	 love	you	totally.'-And	be
really	in	a	kind	of	mad	love.	In	the	beginning	it	will	look	a	little	foolish	too,	but
you	 can	manage!	Be	 in	 love	 again,	 be	 on	 a	 honeymoon	 again,	 as	 if	 you	 have
found	Amitabh	for	the	first	time.	And	in	fact	everybody	is	so	new	every	day	that
it	 is	 just	 nonsense	 to	 think	 'This	 is	 old	 --	 I	 know	 him'....	 Nobody	 knows:
everybody	is	changing	so	fast.	Just	tell	him	that	for	two	months	you	are	going;	to
love	him	totally.	For	two	months	be	really	in	it.
Those	 two	 months	 will	 be	 very	 decisive:	 they	 will	 make	 you	 mature,	 more
understanding.	 And	 anything	 that	 comes	 out	 of	 that	 total	 experiment	 will	 be
good.	Either	you	stay	with	[him]	or	we	invite	the	other	person...	but	two	months,
mm?	Good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
25	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711255
ShortTitle:	OPENSE24
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Gypsy	 means	 a	 vagabond.	 Do	 you	 know	 that	 Gypsies	 originally	 belonged	 to
India?	They	are	Indians	but	they	reached	Europe	through	Egypt,	hence	the	name
Gypsy,	from	'Egypt'.	They	were	coming	from	Egypt	so	they	started	being	called
'Gypsy'	but	their	original	land	is	India.
The	 language	 they	 speak	 is	 almost	 fifty	 percent	 Hindu.	 They	 don't	 call
themselves	Gypsies;	they	call	themselves	'Roma'.	It	comes	from	the	Indian	word
'Rama'.	Roma	means	the	people	of	Rama.	They	are	beautiful	people.	They	have
never	 settled	 and	 that	 is	 their	 beauty.	 They	 are	 sannyasins!	 They	 live	 in
insecurity,	and	to	live	in	insecurity	is	the	only	way	to	live.
The	moment	you	settle	for	comfort,	convenience,	security,	you	die.	So	always	be
on	the	go	then	the	whole	earth	is	yours.	The	Gypsies	now	belong	to	no	country,
to	no	race;	the	whole	earth	is	their	home!	They	are	the	only	international	people.
And	their	whole	philosophy	of	life	is	insecurity.
When	one	 is	 insecure	 there	 is	 constant	 challenge	 and	 that	 challenge	keeps	 life
energies	 burning.	 There	 is	 always	 something	 unknown	 lurking	 around.
Tomorrow	 is	 never	 predictable;	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 nobody	 knows.	 And
when	life	is	unpredictable,	it	is	alive.	So	...	become	a	Gypsy!
[A	sannyasin	newly	arrived,	shows	Osho	some	photos	of	his	children	and	gives
Osho	a	drawing	his	eight-year-old	daughter	made.]
This	is	really	beautiful	--	she	can	grow	into	an	artist.	These	lines	are	really	very
very	 dynamic,	 very	 mobile.	 Help	 her	 to	 understand	 more	 about	 drawing,
painting;	she	has	something.	Good!	Blessings	for	them.
[Osho	checks	the	sannyasin's	energy	saying:]
Just	come	close	to	me.	Close	your	eyes	and	just	start	feeling	as	if	you	are	behind
the	navel,	 the	solar	plexus.	Just	be	 there,	be	concentratedly	 there,	as	 if	 there	 is
the	 centre	 of	 your	 being.	 Go	 into	 it,	 be	 utterly	 there.	 If	 something	 starts
happening	in	the	body,	allow	it	--	anything,	shaking,	trembling,	swaying.	Crying
or	laughter,	whatsoever	comes,	just	go	into	it	but	go	on	keeping	yourself	centred
in	the	solar	plexus.
A	few	things	to	be	understood	about	you....
It	 is	very	rare	in	modern	times	to	have	such	an	alive	solar	plexus	as	you	have.
Man	has	lost	contact	with	the	solar	plexus	because	of	the	fear	of	sex,	because	of
the	repression	of	sex,	because	of	life-negation.
The	solar	plexus	is	the	centre	of	life	and	death	both.	That's	why	Japanese	call	it
'hara';	hara	means	death.
And	 the	 Indians	 call	 it	 manipura.	 Manipura	 means	 the	 diamond,	 the	 most
precious	 diamond,	 because	 life	 comes	 from	 there.	 In	 the	 solar	 plexus	 is	 your
seed.	 It	 is	 the	 first	 thing	 that	 is	 created	 in	 the	 womb	 of	 the	 mother;	 then
everything	else	grows	around	it.
In	 the	 solar	plexus	your	 father's	 seed	and	your	mother's	 seed	are	both	present.
The	life	cell	from	the	father	and	the	life	cell	from	the	mother	create	your	solar
plexus.	That	is	your	first	blueprint;	from	there	everything	grows	and	it	remains
the	centre	forever	and	ever.	You	can	forget	about	it,	you	can	become	oblivious	of
it,	you	can	repress,	you	can	start	hanging	in	the	head	but	 it	remains	the	centre.
You	just	become	less	and	less	alive.	The	farther	away	you	go,	the	less	and	less
alive	you	become	and	the	farther	you	are	from	the	solar	plexus.	You	live	more	on
the	periphery;	you	lose	centering,	you	lose	grounding.	It	is	very	alive.
Start	living	more	and	more.
That	is	the	primitive	mind,	the	most	primal	mind.	The	Primal	therapists	are	not
yet	 aware	 that	 the	 Primal	 scream	 comes	 from	 the	 solar	 plexus.	 It	 is	 the	 first
mind.	Then	the	second	mind	arises	--	the	heart,	feeling.
Then	the	third	mind	arises	--	the	head,	thinking.
Solar	plexus	is	being,	heart	is	feeling,	head	is	thinking.	Thinking	is	the	farthest,
feeling	is	just	in	the	middle;	that's	why	when	you	feel	you	are	more	alive,	just	a
little	 more	 alive	 than	 when	 you	 think.	 Thoughts	 are	 dead	 things;	 they	 are
corpses:	 they	 don't	 breathe.	 Feelings	 breathe,	 feelings	 have	 a	 pulsation	 but
nothing	to	be	compared	with	the	first,	primal	mind.	If	you	reach	the	solar	plexus
and	be	there	and	live	from	there,	you	will	have	a	totally	different	kind	of	life	--
the	real	life.
The	few	moments	you	feel	that	you	are	real	are	the	moments	when	you	are	at	the
solar	 plexus.	 That's	 why	 sometimes	 people	 seek	 danger,	 they	 go	 mountain
climbing,	because	when	danger	is	very	real	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
simply	go	 into	 the	 solar	plexus.	That's	why	whenever	you	are	 in	a	 shock	your
solar	plexus	has	the	first	pulsation.	In	a	shock	you	cannot	think,	you	cannot	feel:
you	can	only	be.
If	 you	 are	driving	 and	 suddenly	you	 feel	 an	 accident	 is	 going	 to	happen,	 your
solar	plexus	 is	hit.	That's	 the	 reason	why	people	 like	speed	 in	driving,	and	 the
speedier	 your	 car	 becomes,	 the	more	 alive	 you	 feel,	 thrilled.	 You	 are	 coming
closer	to	the	solar	plexus.	That's	why	there	is	such	attraction	in	war.	People	go	to
the	cinema	to	see	a	murder	story.	It	is	creating	a	situation	in	which	you	can	feel
your	solar	plexus	again.
People	 read	detective	novels	 and	when	 the	 story	 really	 comes	 to	 its	 peak	 they
cannot	think,	they	cannot	feel:	they	are!
Try	 to	 understand	 it.	 All	 meditations	 lead	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 your	 elan	 vital,	 it	 is	 the
source	of	your	vitality.	Go	into	it,	and	you	can	go	easily,	that's	why	I	am	saying
to	go	into	it.	Whenever	you	are	sitting	silently,	be	there.	Forget	the	head,	forget
the	heart,	forget	the	body:	just	be	a	throb	behind	the	navel.
If	you	go	deeper	 into	 it	 it	will	become	possible	 for	you	 to	understand	 the	 real
concept	of	trinity	--
because	your	father	is	there,	your	mother	is	there.	If	you	are	also	there,	the	trinity
arises.	That	is	the	basic	idea	of	the	trinity	--	not	God	and	the	Son	and	the	Holy
Ghost.	If	you	are	there,	then	the	trinity,	a	triangle.
The	father	and	mother	are	already	there.	If	you	are	also	there	then	the	Christ	is
born,	the	Son	is	born.	And	when	the	Son	is	born	there	is	real	unity.
Two	 cannot	 meet:	 the	 third	 is	 needed	 to	 bridge	 the	 two.	 So	 your	 father	 and
mother	are	there,	consummated	but	not	consumed,	in	a	kind	of	union	but	not	yet
a	unity.	The	feminine	and	the	masculine	are	there	but	still	not	bridged,	and	that	is
the	whole	trouble	of	man,	the	whole	conflict	--	that	he	is	two,	dual.	He	is	bound
to	be	two:	something	has	been	given	by	the	father	and	something	has	been	given
by	the	mother.
They	are	both	there,	flowing	together	like	two	currents	but	still	there	is	a	subtle
separation.
If	your	presence	reaches	there,	if	you	become	more	and	more	aware	of	it,	your
very	awareness	will	become	the	catalytic	agent:	the	two	will	disappear	and	there
will	be	oneness.	That	oneness	is	called	'Christ	consciousness'.	It	does	not	happen
outside,	it	happens	within	your	being.
So	 watch,	 and	 many	 things	 will	 be	 revealed	 through	 that	 observation.	 If	 you
come	across	something	which	you	feel	you	would	like	to	say	to	me,	just	write.
After	one	month	you	have	to	tell	me	how	you	are	feeling.	This	very	observation
will	bring	subtle	changes	in	your	life:	you	will	not	need	to	do	anything	else.
So	meditate,	do	the	groups,	but	this	is	your	meditation,	this	is	especially	for	you.
[A	 visitor	 says	 that	 he	 comes	 to	 Osho	 as	 a	 patient	 to	 a	 doctor	 and	 wants	 a
diagnosis.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
There	 is	 no	 specific	 problem	 --	 just	 the	 universal	 problem	 of	 being	 a	 human
being.	 There	 is	 no	 specific	 problem	 particularly,	 individually,	 but	 just	 to	 be	 a
human	being	 is	a	great	problem.	 It	 is	not	specific	 to	you,	 it	 is	 so	of	all	human
beings,	 and	 that	 is	 the	most	 fundamental	 thing	 to	 understand	 --	 that	 a	 human
being	is	just	a	passage	between	the	animal	and	the	divine.	You	cannot	make	your
house	on	the	bridge,	you	should	not	make	your	house	on	the	bridge.	The	bridge
has	to	be	passed.
Man	 is	 just	 like	 a	bridge,	 between	 two	 shores,	 just	 a	 link	between	animal	 and
divine.
[Man	is	not	at	ease	until	he	has	surpassed	himself,	Osho	continues.	A	dog	cannot
be	doggier	but	man	has	a	notion,	albeit	very	vague,	of	what	he	can	become,	how
high	he	can	rise.]
Physical	 problems	 are	 different.	 Psychological	 problems	 are	 not	 so	 different.
Spiritual	problems	are	not	different	at	all.	The	deeper	you	go,	the	closer	does	the
universal	come.	On	the	periphery	there	are	differences:	you	have	a	different	kind
of	 body,	 somebody	 has	 a	 different	 kind	 of	 body...	 he	 may	 have	 some	 other
problems,	you	may	have	 some	other	problems,	or	may	not	have,	but	 there	 are
differences.
In	the	psychological,	lesser	differences;	in	the	spiritual	no	differences.
You	don't	have	any	physical	or	psychological	problem	as	such,	but	the	spiritual
problem	is	there.	And	when	there	is	no	physical	and	no	psychological	problem
then	only	does	the	spiritual	problem	become	very	predominant.	There	is	a	kind
of	hierarchy:	the	physical	needs,	the	psychological	needs,	the	spiritual	needs.
The	lowest	are	physical	needs,	the	highest	are	spiritual	needs,	in	the	middle	are
psychological	needs.
Become	more	consciously	a	seeker.	Become	more	and	more	alert	of	the	situation
in	 which	 you	 are,	 and	 use	 the	 Situation	 to	 create	 more	 awareness,	 more
consciousness.	If	you	look,	then	the	whole	evolution	is	nothing	but	an	effort	of
consciousness	to	become	more	and	more.	The	rocks	have	no	consciousness,	not
at	 all;	 they	 are	 completely	 asleep.	 The	 trees	 have	 a	 little	 bit,	 a	 very	 little	 bit.
Animals	have	a	little	more;	man	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
has	a	 little	more	 than	 the	animals.	And	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ	goes	higher	 than
ordinary	 human	 beings.	 They	 have	 more	 concentrated	 awareness,	 they	 are
awareness.	They	are	the	highest	evolved	points.
Unless	you	become	 that	 --	 and	everybody	becomes	 that	 --	misery	will	 remain.
One	can	be	lost	in	comfort,	luxury,	pleasures,	but	again	and	again	one	is	thrown
back	to	the	basic	problem.
While	you	are	here	I	will	suggest	you	do	a	few	groups.	They	will	give	you	some
taste	of	more	consciousness....
[A	visitor	who	 spent	 a	year	 in	 a	Thai	monastery	doing	vipassana,	 says	 that	he
relates	strongly	to	Krishnamurti.	He	tries	to	use	thought	a	lot.	He	has	a	tension
on	the	right	side	of	his	head.]
Krishnamurti	himself	suffers	from	headache	too	much!	For	years,	his	whole	life,
he	 has	 been	 suffering	 very	 severe	 headaches...	 because	 the	whole	 approach	 is
just	reason.	Yes,	there	is	a	possibility	that	somebody	can	enter	from	that	door	but
it	is	very	rare:	it	is	not	a	well-trodden	path.	Once	in	a	while	a	Krishnamurti,	an
Astravakra,	people	like	that,	have	entered	through	that	door.
You	will	get	into	trouble,	and	unnecessarily.	It	is	better	to	move	through	the	heart
than	through	the	head.
It	is	more	fun,	more	joy,	and	the	goal	is	closer	from	there.	You	can	go	dancing;
why	go	with	a	headache?	If	you	go	with	a	headache	even	God	will	avoid	you!
(laughter)	You	can	go	singing,	dancing.
Krishnamurti	is	desert-like.	I'm	not	condemning	him;	what	can	he	do?	There	are
deserts	too	and	they	have	a	kind	of	beauty	of	their	own.	A	desert	has	a	beauty	--
the	vastness,	the	silence,	the	infinity	of	it.	Yes,	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own	but	it	is
better	if	you	don't	make	a	house	there.	Once	in	a	while	it	is	good	to	go	and	see	a
desert	but	it	is	better	not	to	make	a	house	there.	When	one	can	live	with	trees	and
with	roses	why	unnecessarily	choose	something	arduous?
Yes,	there	are	people	for	whom	that	is	the	only	way;	for	them	it	is	perfectly	okay.
They	cannot	do	anything	else,	they	have	to	go	through	that.	But	I	don't	think	that
you	have	to	go	through	that.	That	may	be	causing	your	headache:	you	may	not
be	the	type	for	that.	But	it	is	difficult	to	leave	once	you	get	hooked	because	each
logic	has	its	own	persistence	and	once	a	certain	logic	appeals	to	you,	it	 is	very
difficult	to	get	out	of	it;	it	is	a	kind	of	imprisonment.
If	you	can	be	here	for	a	few	months	I	will	destroy	it,	because	here	we	don't	have
any	 logic.	 It	 is	 the	most	absurd	place	you	can	find,	and	 the	more	 it	grows,	 the
more	absurd	it	will	become!
But	when	 logic	no	more	has	 a	 grip	on	you,	 you	 can	 relax,	 your	headache	 can
disappear	 very	 easily.	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 it	 has	 anything	 to	 do	 with	 your
physiology.	It	is	just	too	much	tension	in	the	head,	too	much	thinking.	Thinking
is	 dry,	 barren.	 There	 is	 no	 juice	 in	 thoughts,	 feelings	 are	 juicy.	 And	 my
suggestion	 is	 that	 rather	 than	 moving	 to	 Buddhism,	 move	 to	 Sufism.	 Your
headache	will	go	and	finally	you	will	see	one	day	that	your	head	has	also	gone.
And	that	is	the	most	beautiful	space	--	when	suddenly	one	day	you	look	into	the
mirror	and	you	cannot	see	your	head!	It	can	be	possible....	Just	be	here	for	a	few
days	and	see....
Be	here	 for	a	while	and	get	 into	 things:	dance	and	sing.	 In	 the	beginning	 they
will	 look	 very	 absurd	 because	 they	will	 not	 have	 any	 appeal	 to	 your	 thought.
Mm?	what	is	the	point	of	dancing?	What	is	the	point	of	singing?	In	fact	there	is
no	point,	they	are	pointless.	But	life	is	pointless	and	God	is	pointless.	Existence
as	such	is	not	going	anywhere.	It	is	utterly	lacking	in	purpose.	It	is	a	play,	a	leela,
and	 it	 is	 for	 those	 who	 can	 be	 playful.	 Krishnamurti	 is	 not	 playful	 --	 very
serious!	 If	he	enjoys	 it	 is	perfectly	good	 for	him	but	people	who	cannot	enjoy
become	 serious	with	 him.	 Then	 they	 have	 headaches	 and	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
difficulties	arise;	they	get	many	knots	in	their	being.	Rather	than	relaxation	they
become	more	and	more	tense.	Have	you	done	any	groups	before?	(he	shakes	his
head)	Then	do	a	few:	they	will	help,	mm?
[Start	 with	 Shraddha,	 says	 Osho.	 It	 means	 trust;	 it	 is	 absolutely	 anti-
Krishnamurti!	He	goes	on	to	recommend	two	other	groups....	]
And	don't	think	of	sannyas,	mm?	Become	a	sannyasin.	But	don't	think	about	it,
mm?...	That	headache	will	go;	don't	be	worried	about	it.
Anand	means	 bliss,	 leela	means	 play,	 dhar	means	 god:	 god	 of	 bliss	 and	 play.
Leeladhar	is	one	of	the	names	of	Krishna.	He	is	the	most	playful	god,	the	most
non-serious;	 there	 is	 no	 comparison	 to	 him.	 He	 was	 totally	 into	 life,	 into	 all
dimensions	of	 life,	and	he	enjoyed	everything	 --	 from	 love	 to	war,	everything;
there	is	no	denial	in	him.	He	can	be	good,	he	can	be	bad;	he	can	be	truthful,	he
can	 be	 deceitful.	 He	 can	 sacrifice	 himself,	 he	 can	 cheat	 you.	 He	 is	 very
spontaneous,	without	any	ideals	and	without	any	ideology...	just	a	man	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
living	from	moment	to	moment,	responding,	not	with	any	a	priori	idea.	He	has
no	idea	of	how	things	should	be.	He	functions	out	of	his	totality,	and	whatsoever
happens	out	of	that	totality	is	good.	He	has	no	definition	of	goodness	other	than
that.
And	there	is	a	way	when	your	totality	can	function.	Then	there	is	no	tension	in
your	being.	It	is	as	when	a	child	is	born	and	immediately	starts	groping	for	the
mother's	 breast	 and	 not	 knowing	what	 he	 is	 doing	 because	 he	 has	 never	 seen
mother's	breast.	He	starts	opening	his	mouth,	and	the	moment	he	comes	close	to
the	nipple	he	starts	sucking.	It	is	a	total	act.	It	is	a	spontaneous	act	with	no	prior
knowledge;	it	is	an	existential	act.	And	if	one	trusts	life	by	and	by	one's	whole
life	becomes	like	that.	Krishna	lived	like	that.
Contemplate	on	Krishna	--	his	dances	with	the	cowherd	girls,	his	songs,	his	flute.
Forget	Krishnamurti,	remember	Krishna	and	it	will	be	easier	for	you!
Things	are	going	to	happen	--	just	cooperate	with	me!
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 his	 head	 is	working	 overtime	 trying	 to	make	 decisions,	 eg.
whether	to	go	to	Goa	or	not.]
No,	 your	 problem	 is	 something	 else.	 You	 need	 some	 work,	 you	 cannot	 be
without	work.	You	need	some	work	that	challenges	you,	otherwise	you	will	feel
this	confusion	about	what	to	do,	what	not	to	do,	where	to	go.	Those	are	not	real
problems;	 the	 real	 problem	 is	 that	 you	 need	 challenge	 so	 you	 can	 sharpen
yourself	against	it.
When	there	is	challenge	everything	is	good	with	you.	When	there	is	no	challenge
you	start	dissipating	and	falling	into	fragments	and	pieces.	That's	why	it	happens
that	you	want	to	put	something	together	and	when	you	have	succeeded	there	is
no	joy	in	it,	because	your	joy	is	in	the	travelling	not	in	arriving.	Once	you	arrive
then	 again	 the	 mind	 starts	 thinking,	 'What	 to	 do	 now?'	 Then	 again	 it	 starts
moving	towards	another	goal.
So	success	is	not	your	goal	--	succeeding	is	your	goal.	Once	you	have	attained
something	you	are	finished	with	it;	you	want	something	else.	Just	understand	it:
it	is	a	creative	energy.	If	you	use	it	rightly	you	can	become	very	very	blissful.	If
you	 don't	 use	 it	 rightly	 it	 can	 kill	 you,	 it	will	 be	 destructive;	 the	 same	 energy
becomes	destructive.	It	is	the	same	energy,	creative	or	destructive.	Put	rightly	it
is	creative;	if	something	goes	wrong	it	is	destructive.	My	suggestion	is	that	you
can	go	on	this	way	continuously	your	whole	life.	You	will	be	thrilled	only	for	a
few	days	when	you	are	reaching	for	something.	The	moment	it	becomes	easier,
the	moment	 you	 see	 that	 now	 it	 is	within	 grasp,	 you	will	 lose	 interest;	 this	 is
your	characteristic.
When	people	used	to	go	to	Gurdjieff,	the	first	thing	he	always	enquired	of	them
was	'What	is	your	chief	characteristic?'	This	is	your	chief	characteristic,	and	you
have	to	cope	with	it,	you	have	to	encounter	it	and	you	have	to	work	it	out.	You
have	to	get	out	of	this	trap	of	your	mind.
Your	mind	can	be	used	very	creatively.	Two	are	the	possibilities:	one	is	that	you
put	your	total	energy	into	the	commune,	forget	yourself.	Put	your	total	energies
into	the	commune,	work	for	the	commune.	There	is	much	work	and	much	has	to
be	 done;	 there	 is	 no	 end	 to	 it.	 You	 will	 never	 be	 without	 something	 like	 a
challenge;	 it	 will	 always	 be	 there.	 But	 for	 that	 you	 will	 need	 a	 complete
identification	with	 the	 commune.	 If	 you	 remain	 separate,	 if	 you	 start	 thinking
that	you	are	separate	--	you	are	here	but	you	remain	separate	--
then	 the	 commune's	 problems,	 challenges,	 will	 not	 be	 yours.	 One	 way	 is	 to
surrender	totally	to	the	commune	and	to	become	part	of	it,	start	working	for	it,
start	solving	its	problems....	And	you	will	be	unburdened	and	your	energies	will
start	moving	creatively.	This	is	one	way.
If	 you	 feel	 that	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 for	you	 then	 choose	 some	work	 individually,
personally,	 but	 work	 that	 has	 some	 challenge.	 The	 second	 path	 will	 give	 you
only	temporary	relief:	again	and	again	you	will	be	in	trouble.	If	you	can	become
part	of	the	commune,	you	disappear;	then	you	don't	have	any	problems.	And	this
is	 a	 beautiful	 phenomenon:	 when	 you	 don't	 have	 your	 problems	 and	 the
problems	are	of	the	whole	group,	you	work,	you	work	hard,	but	still	you	remain
out	of	it.	It	doesn't	create	any	tension,	any	anguish,	any	anxiety.	It	is	a	joy,	it	is	a
game,	because	you	can	remain	like	an	observer,	you	can	be	very	objective	about
it.
You	need	not	be	subjectively	troubled	by	it.
Think	about	these	two	things.
[The	sannyasin	says	he	was	hoping	for	a	breakthrough	with	this	problem.]
Right	now	you	are	not	at	 the	point	where	a	breakthrough	 is	possible.	You	will
need	greater	challenges,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
more	anxiety....	 It	will	 come	one	day,	 it	will	 come	one	day.	A	breakthrough	 is
possible	only	when	you	are	close	to	a	breakdown,	never	before	it.	And	you	are
not	close	to	a	breakdown.	You	are	going	to	Goa	--
nothing	to	be....	It	is	not	a	breakdown	.
If	you	can	surrender	to	the	commune	things	will	change.	There	will	be	no	need
for	 breakdown	 or	 breakthrough:	 you	 will	 simply	 start	 looking	 at	 things	 in	 a
different	light.
[The	 sannyasin	 says	 one	 way	 for	 him	 to	 surrender	 would	 be	 to	 leave,	 as	 a
challenge,	to	do	something	outside.]
If	you	surrender	that	is	not	your	problem;	then	it	is	up	to	me.	If	I	send	you,	go;	if
I	 don't	 send	you,	 don't	 go.	 If	 you	don't	 surrender	 then	 it	 is	 your	problem;	you
have	to	decide	what	to	do.	If	you	surrender	then	it	is	not	a	problem	at	all	for	you;
all	your	problems	disappear.	If	I	say	'...	just	clean	the	floors	in	the	ashram,'	you
clean	the	floors!	Then	it	 is	none	of	your	business:	you	can	just	be	a	witness	 to
whatsoever	is	happening.	If	I	send	you	out,	you	go	out	--	whatsoever	is	the	need
--	but	that	is	not	a	question	for	you	to	decide.	That	is	the	meaning	of	surrender	--
that	you	will	never	be	decisive	again,	 that	decisiveness	will	not	be	 required	of
you.
This	is	a	challenge,	this	can	become	your	last	challenge,	because	after	this	you
will	 not	 be	 deciding	 anything.	 So	 face	 this	 challenge,	 think	 it	 over.	 Let	 this
challenge	 be	 there;	 it	 is	 the	 greatest	 challenge.	 It	may	 become	 a	 breakthrough
also	 because	 it	 will	 be	 the	 most	 difficult	 thing	 for	 you	 --	 to	 surrender.	 Other
challenges	will	be	just	small	hillocks.	They	should	be	like	Everest!
Think	it	over.
[The	 sannyasin	 then	 asks:	 If	 the	 physical	 body	 doesn't	 receive	 nourishment	 it
dies.	Does	the	spiritual	body	die	if	it	doesn't	receive	love?]
No,	it	is	not	born.	If	the	physical	body	does	not	get	nourishment	it	dies...	because
it	is	already	born.	If	the	spiritual	being	does	not	get	nourishment	it	is	not	born	at
all.	People	live	without	souls;	the	soul	is	not	existent	for	everybody.	They	have
only	 heard	 the	 word;	 they	 don't	 know	 what	 it	 means.	 They	 have	 never
experienced	anything	like	the	soul;	it	is	just	a	verbal	expression.
Do	 you	 know	 what	 the	 soul	 is?	 You	 can	 define	 it	 because	 you	 have	 heard
definitions	 but	 you	 don't	 know	 anything	 by	 your	 own	 experience.	 You	 know
your	body,	you	know	your	mind,	but	you	don't	know	your	soul	and	what	it	is	all
about.
If	love	becomes	the	nourishment	then	by	and	by	the	soul	is	born.	There	are	a	few
things....	First,	if	the	body	does	not	get	nourishment	it	will	die.	If	the	soul	does
not	get	nourishment	it	will	not	be	born,	one	thing.
The	second	thing:	if	the	body	goes	on	getting	the	nourishment	it	will	still	die	one
day.	Once	the	soul	is	born	it	never	dies.	So	the	problem	with	the	soul	is	how	to
bring	it	into	existence.	It	is	just	a	potentiality,	not	an	actuality.	It	is	just	a	seed:	if
you	don't	give	it	water	and	sunrays	and	manure,	it	will	not	become	a	sprout.
Once	it	is	born	it	never	dies.	Once	it	is	born	its	very	existence	attracts	love,	its
very	existence	showers	 love	on	others.	So	 love	becomes	 just	a	 triggering	point
for	the	soul	to	be	born.
And	remember,	millions	of	people	don't	have	any	souls.	When	I	say	they	don't
have	any	souls	I	don't	mean	that	they	can't	have.	They	can	but	they	are	not	yet
born.	They	exist	only	as	the	body,	at	the	most	as	the	mind...	but	not	as	the	soul.	A
soul	is	a	rare	phenomenon,	and	whenever	you	come	across	a	man	who	has	a	soul
you	are	immensely	attracted,	there	is	a	great	magnetic	force.
About	this,	later	on....	First	think	about	the	first	thing,	mm?	Good!
[A	 sannyasin	 describes	 an	 explosion	 of	 energy	 which	 made	 her	 feel	 out	 of
control,	so	she	stayed	isolated	from	everyone	for	eight	days...	]
There	is	no	need	to	control....
There	is	no	need	to	do	anything;	simply	be	in	it....
There	is	no	need	to	stay	isolated:	be	with	people	and	remain	alone	inside....
It	 has	 been	 perfectly	 good,	 but	 next	 time	 if	 it	 happens	 you	 need	 not	 go	 into
isolation.	Just	remain	with	people	and	remain	alone;	it	will	go	deeper.	This	time
it	 is	 okay,	 you	 have	 been	 in	 isolation,	 but	 next	 time	 don't	 be.	 Continue	 your
work,	 continue	 meeting	 people,	 continue	 meditating,	 and	 keep	 it	 inside.	 It	 is
there,	but	don't	escape	into	isolation;	then	it	will	be	richer.
Things	are	richer	when	they	are	with	their	polar	opposite.	When	man	and	woman
meet	they	are	richer.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	aloneness	and	communication	are	together	they	are	richer.	Otherwise	ten
days,	 then	 twenty	 days,	 then	months,	 then	 years...	 One	 becomes	 a	monk	 or	 a
nun,	and	that	is	a	kind	of	suicide!	For	a	few	days	it	is	okay,	nothing	to	be	worried
about,	 but	 next	 time	 if	 it	 happens	 you	 need	 not	 go	 into	 isolation,	 mm?	 And
things	are	good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
26	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711265
ShortTitle:	OPENSE25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Learn	 something	 from	 Francis.	 He	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 saints	 in
Christianity,	in	fact	the	next	after	Jesus.	He	brings	something	new	to	the	world.
Imbibe	that	spirit.	He	brings	this	spirit,	that	he	is	deeply	in	love	with	nature,	to
the	world.	Christianity	has	been	against	nature;	 that	 is	Francis'	 rebellion.	He	 is
the	first	man	in	the	West	to	call	rivers	sisters	and	mountains	brothers...	but	he	has
not	been	listened	to.
He	is	more	a	Taoist	than	a	Christian;	he	has	the	same	spirit	as	Lao	Tzu,	a	kind	of
great	rapport	with	nature.	That	is	his	message.	So	start	talking	to	trees	and	rivers
and	mountains.	They	are	your	sisters	and	brothers	because	we	all	come	from	the
same	source.
A	dialogue	with	nature	will	give	you	great	insight	into	your	being	because	to	talk
to	a	tree	is	to	talk	to	your	own	unconscious,	and	to	talk	to	a	rock	is	to	talk	to	your
own	 body.	Man	 has	 these	 four	 bodies.	 The	 first	 body	 is	 just	 like	minerals;	 it
consists	of	the	mineral	world.	The	second	body	is	like	the	vegetable	world,	the
third	body	is	like	the	animal	world	and	the	fourth	body	is	the	human	body.	The
fifth,	the	divine	body,	is	still	a	promise;	it	has	to	be	attained.
So	when	you	are	in	a	deep	dialogue	with	a	tree	you	are	in	a	deep	dialogue	with
your	own	vegetable	layer	and	when	you	talk	to	animals	you	are	talking	to	your
own	animal	past.	When	you	look	into	the	eyes	of	a	dog	or	a	cat	or	a	cow,	you	are
looking	 into	 your	 own	 past	 and	 it	 has	 great	messages	 for	 you.	 It	 is	 your	 own
unconscious...
Anand	 means	 bliss,	 and	 nirvanam	 means	 the	 ultimate	 dissolution.	 One	 is
completely	lost,	just	like	a	river	loses	itself	into	the	ocean.
In	English	there	is	only	one	word	which	can	become	close	to	it	in	its	root	sense;
that	is	the	word
'absolute'.	 It	 comes	 from	 a	 Latin	 root	 which	 means	 dissolution,	 utter
dissolution...	 when	 one	 is	 not	 separate,	 when	 one	 has	 become	 one	 with	 the
whole.	The	latin	word	'absolutum'	(absolute)	is	the	past	participle	of
'absolvere'	which	means	to	loosen,	dissolve.	That	is	the	meaning	of	nirvanam:	a
blissful	dissolution.	And	bliss	is	only	when	you	are	not;	misery	is	there	if	you	are
there.	Misery	is	another	name	for	the	ego;	bliss	is	another	name	for	egolessness.
So	one	can	never	say	'I	am	blissful,'	no.	Linguistically	it	is	possible,	existentially
it	is	not.	One	cannot	say	existentially	'I	am	blissful!'	'I	am'	is	always	miserable;	'I'
is	misery.	When	one	is	blissful	one	feels
'Blissfulness	is.	Where	am	I?'	Then	blissfulness	is	found	and	the	'I'	is	not	found
at	 all.	You	 can	 go	 on	 searching	 for	 it	 but	 you	will	 not	 find	 a	 trace	 of	 it.	That
dissolution	is	nirvanam.	So	get	lost	in	bliss...	Or	get	lost	and	you	will	be	blissful!
[A	sannyasin	says	he	has	sadistic	fantasies	of	beating	women,	but	has	not	acted
them	out.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	you	can	find	a	masochistic	woman...	And	if	you	cannot	find	just	tell	me;	I
know	one!
But	 that	won't	help.	Even	if	you	can	find	a	woman,	 that	won't	help;	 it	will	not
bring	you	out	of	it.	It	has	something	to	do	with	your	unconscious;	just	beating	a
woman	 won't	 help.	 You	 can	 go	 on	 beating	 women	 your	 whole	 life.	 It	 may
become	even	more	strengthened;	acting	out	won't	help.	There	is	some	complex
inside	which	has	to	be	loosened.
You	are	angry	with	your	mother,	you	have	not	been	able	to	forgive	her	yet;	that
is	causing	the	fantasy.
Beating	 another	 woman	 will	 not	 help;	 that	 will	 be	 a	 substitute.	 You	 will	 be
beating	your	mother	in	the	form	of	the	woman	but	you	know	that	she	is	not	your
mother.	And	the	fantasy	does	not	stop	at	beating:	it	really	wants	to	kill.	Beating
is	 just	 the	beginning.	Once	you	have	 started	beating	 then	 the	 fantasy	will	 start
coming,
'Now	kill	her!'
And	 this	happens.	 It	 is	 very	difficult	 to	be	brought	up	 rightly,	 it	 seems	almost
impossible.	Not	only	 today,	 it	has	been	so	always,	and	I	don't	 see	a	possibility
that	it	will	ever	be	much	different	because	in	the	very	nature	of	things	the	child
has	to	become	angry	with	the	parents,	and	the	parents	have	to	go	into	situations
where	they	create	the	anger.
[Out	 of	 necessity	 parents	 have	 to	 prevent	 children	 from	 doing	 things	 that	 are
harmful	 for	 them,	Osho	 continues,	 but	 the	 child	 in	 his	 unawareness	 just	 hears
what	 seems	 like	 a	 perpetual	 'no'...	 and	 he	 begins	 to	 build	 up	 anger	 and
resentment.]
This	has	to	be	worked	out.	By	beating	a	woman	nothing	will	be	of...
[The	 sannyasin	 says:	During	Primal	 and	Encounter	 I	 didn't	 contact	 any	of	 this
anger.]
It	 is	 there,	 otherwise	 that	 sadistic	 tendency	 cannot	 arise.	 There	 are	 other
possibilities	also;	I'm	coming	to	them.	First	there	is	a	very	very	hidden	layer	of
anger.	You	have	not	been	able	yet	to	forgive	your	mother	in	particular.	And	the
problem	becomes	more	complicated	because	we	are	taught	to	respect	the	mother
and	the	father,	so	we	repress	such	ideas.	We	don't	allow	them	to	come	in	front	of
our	consciousness;	we	go	on	putting	them	away.	A	great	barrier	has	to	be	created
so	the	idea	and	the	guilt	about	it	never	cross	the	boundary.	You	never	go	into	the
basement,	 nobody	 ever	 does.	Unless	 one	goes	 very	 very	 deep	 into	meditation,
one	never	goes	 into	 the	basement.	Things	want	 to	come	up	from	the	basement
but	we	create	barriers	so	they	don't	cross.	They	can	cross	only	in	a	camouflage.
This	is	a	camouflage.	They	cannot	come	directly	as	they	are,	naked	as	they	are;
they	can	come	only	with	masks.
The	idea	comes,	the	fantasy	comes	that	beating	a	woman	will	be	beautiful.	Now
this	is	a	mask	idea;	this	can	pass.	Killing	the	mother	or	beating	the	mother	will
not	be	allowed	by	your	 censors,	by	your	guards.	 It	won't	 come	 in,	 so	 the	 idea
takes	a	new	form,	takes	a	new	shape,	wears	a	mask	and	then	crosses	the	barrier:
it	comes	as	a	sadistic	tendency.
It	 will	 look	 absurd,	 because	 why?	 It	 has	 to	 have	 some	 meaning,	 some
explanation	why:	it	becomes	sexual,	beating	becomes	a	sexual	activity.	Then	the
repressed	 idea	 to	beat	 the	mother	or	kill	 the	mother	 joins	hands	with	repressed
sexuality.	They	are	both	in	the	basement.	They	join	hands,	they	join	their	forces
so	both	can	hide	in	each	other.	This	 is	 the	complex,	 this	 is	how	complexes	are
created.	A	few	repressed	ideas	join	hands	together.	They	start	conspiring	against
you	--	they	have	to:	they	have	never	been	accepted	and	they	have	been	always
rejected.	 They	 want	 to	 take	 revenge	 so	 your	 repressed	 sexuality	 and	 the
repressed	 idea	 to	 beat	 or	 kill	 the	mother	 have	 joined	 hands.	 Now	 the	 idea	 of
beating	a	woman	has	a	sexual	tinge	to	it.
Many	people	enjoy	beating	women	--	not	only	enjoy,	they	get	sexually	aroused
only	 when	 they	 beat.	 If	 they	 can	 beat,	 they	 suddenly	 become	 very	 sexually
interested	in	the	woman.	So	sadism	is	never	a	pure	sadism;	it	is	always	sexual.
Now	that	too	is	joined	with	the	mother.	Each	boy,	some	day	or	other	has	wanted
to	 make	 love	 to	 the	 mother	 and	 has	 thought,	 fantasized	 about	 replacing	 the
father.	 That	 too	 has	 been	 thrown	 into	 the	 basement,	 mm?	 That	 is	 very	 ugly,
obscene,	criminal,	a	sin...	even	to	think	like	that	All	these	things	are	there.	They
conspire	 and	 they	 create	 a	 new	 thing	 which	 your	 consciousness	 cannot
recognise:	one	part	from	one	thing,	another	part	from	another	thing.	It	is	a	new
shape,	it	is	a	new	mechanism:	it	comes	as	sadism.
You	will	have	to	unveil	your	unconscious.	You	will	have	to	go	there	and	you	will
have	 to	 face	 the	 naked	 truth.	 So	 don't	 judge	 and	 don't	 condemn:	 allow	 your
unconscious	 total	 freedom	 to	 say	what	 it	wants	 to.	 If	 the	 idea	 comes	 that	 you
wanted	 to	make	 love	 to	your	mother,	 don't	 say,	 'No	 !	That	 is	 stupid	 --	 I	 never
wanted	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to.'	Then	you	will	be	repressing.	Don't	say	'This	is	bad	!',	otherwise	you	will	be
judgemental	and	again	you	will	 throw	it	back.	 It	 is	perfectly	okay.	Every	child
has	thought	that,	felt	that.	They	may	not	be	alert	about	it	but	it	has	been	there.
Sadism	 is	 not	 a	 single	 disease.	 It	 is	 many	 diseases	 together	 and	 that's	 why	 it
cannot	be	tackled	directly...
because	 it	 has	 such	 complexity.	 You	 cannot	 tackle	 it	 from	 one	 aspect;	 all	 the
aspects	have	to	be	understood.
It	has	to	be	analysed	in	its	separate	aspects,	watched,	observed,	and	in	that	very
observation	you	will	find	the	complex	is	disappearing.	That	day	you	will	become
for	the	first	time	mature,	that	day	you	will	become	for	the	first	time	free	of	your
parents.	That	day	you	are	no	more	your	'mother's	good	boy';	that	day	you	are	on
your	own.	That	is	the	second	birth.
So	just	allow	it.	Actually	going	into	it	 is	not	going	to	help;	 it	may	create	more
problems.	But	next	 time	you	come,	 if	 it	 is	difficult	 for	you	 to	allow	it,	we	can
make	some	arrangements,	mm?	It	has	to	be	dissolved,	but	first	you	try	on	your
own:	just	allow	it,	just	go	into	it	very	lovingly,	with	no	judgement.	And	by	and
by	 the	 unconscious	 will	 start	 whispering,	 first	 in	 very	 very	 small	 whispers
because	it	is	afraid	of	you,	mm?	--
you	have	been	so	much	against	it.
Once	 it	becomes	courageous	and	knows	you	are	not	 rejecting	any	more	 it	will
gain	 courage,	voice.	 It	will	 become	 strong,	 it	will	 start	 talking	more	 clearly,	 it
will	become	more	articulate.	And	it	has	great	mysteries	to	reveal	to	you:	it	has
all	 the	 keys	 of	 your	 transformation.	Once	 the	 basement	 is	 vacated	 completely,
once	 the	 basement	 is	 no	more	 full	 of	 all	 repressed	 things,	 once	 they	 have	 all
evaporated	 from	 there,	 great	 freedom	 and	 great	 purity	 comes	 --	 the	 purity	 of
emptiness.	A	very	austere	beauty	arises	inside.
During	these	six	months,	whenever	you	have	time	just	sit	silently	and	allow	the
unconscious.	Go	with	it	totally,	let	it	have	its	say,	persuade	it	to	say	whatsoever	it
wants	 to	 say.	 Tell	 it	 constantly	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 hide,	 no	 need	 to	wear
masks,	 no	 need	 to	 come	 in	 different	 forms.	 It	 can	 come	 directly;	 there	 is	 no
condemnation	on	your	part.	Say	it	again	and	again.	By	and	by	the	unconscious
will	gather	courage,	will	come	closer.
It	is	almost	like	a	bird;	it	is	so	afraid	that	it	remains	away.	If	you	allow	it	a	little
bit	 it	comes	closer;	 if	you	give	 it	 food	then	it	starts	coming	closer	but	watches
you.	Who	knows?	this	food	may	be	a	trick:	you	may	be	just	trying	to	trap	or	kill.
But	by	and	by	the	bird	starts	learning	that	you	are	not	an	enemy,	you	are	a	friend;
it	comes	closer.	One	day	suddenly	it	is	hopping	on	your	shoulder.	That's	how	the
unconscious	 has	 to	 be	 persuaded	 by	 and	 by.	 You	 do	 this,	 and	 if	 it	 has	 not
happened,	then	when	you	come	back.	Good.
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 there	 is	 a	 little	 girl	 in	 her	 who	 doesn't	 want	 to	 grow	 up	 --
perhaps	because	her	parents	split	up	when	she	was	ten.	Also	she	is	very	clinging
in	relationship.	Osho	checks	her	energy.]
Nothing	 to	be	worried	about;	 it	 is	not	much	of	a	problem.	 Just	 a	 small	 energy
block	 is	 there.	 It	 is	not	very	complicated,	 it	can	simply	dissolve.	These	groups
will	do	much;	and	 then	remind	me	about	how	you	are	feeling	when	you	go.	 If
something	 is	needed	 then	 I	will	give	you	a	 technique	 so	you	can	work;	 it	will
simply	be	gone.
It	 is	 there:	 just	a	small	 lump,	 just	 some	energy	has	become	hard	 there.	 It	must
have	happened	as	a	survival	measure.
When	one	feels	that	survival	is	at	stake	the	heart	becomes	a	little	hard,	otherwise
you	cannot	protect	yourself.	You	cannot	remain	vulnerable:	you	close	a	little	bit
just	to	become	a	little	strong,	just	to	resist	and	fight.	That's	what	has	happened.
Some	day	in	your	past	you	must	have	felt	that	your	survival	was	at	stake,	mm?
that's	 why.	 So	 just	 as	 a	 measure	 to	 protect	 you,	 your	 energy	 has	 coiled	 upon
itself.	But	when	it	happens	it	 is	difficult	 to	go	deep	in	love,	because	it	goes	on
protecting	even	then,	so	it	simply....	Now	there	is	no	need....
The	 first	 group	 I	 have	 given	 you	 is	 trust,	 mm?	 Just	 do...	 groups	 and	 be	 here
totally	available,	open,	vulnerable	and	absorb	as	much	energy	as	you	can	from
me.
It	will	dissolve.	If	it	has	not	dissolved	then	tell	me	when	you	go.	I	will	give	you	a
method	and	it	will	be	gone.	It	is	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	We	are	dissolving
mountains	--	it	is	just	a	small,	tiny	molehill!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
27	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711275
ShortTitle:	OPENSE26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Osho	explains	 the	meaning	of	deva	vasant.	Deva	means	divine,	vasant	means
spring	 --	 divine	 spring.	 If	 one	knows	how	 to	 live	 rightly,	Osho	 continues,	 one
constantly	 lives	 in	 the	spring.	 In	 the	 inner	world	 it	 is	always	spring,	 things	are
always	blooming;	it	is	never	otherwise.]
The	change	is	only	on	the	outside,	on	the	periphery.	The	seasons	change	on	the
periphery	but	at	the	centre	it	is	always	spring.	There	nothing	ever	changes.	It	is
eternal:	 no	 past,	 no	 present,	 no	 future.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 timelessness.	 In	 that
timelessness	 man	 blooms.	 All	 that	 one	 needs	 to	 do	 is	 look	 inwards,	 to	 fall
inwards.
At	least	for	a	few	moments	every	day,	at	least	once	in	a	while,	one	should	simply
drop	out	of	 the	world	 into	one's	own	being.	It	 is	rejuvenating:	one	comes	back
alive,	 again	 young,	 again	 fresh.	 One	 comes	 back	 again	 with	 gusto	 and	 zest.
There	is	again	enthusiasm	and	significance	and	love.	Again	one	can	see	with	the
eyes	of	wonder,	 like	 a	 child.	Each	 time	you	go	 inside	yourself	 you	 attain	 to	 a
new	childhood,	because	there	inside	nothing	ever	grows	old;	it	is	pure	childhood.
That's	 why	 Jesus	 says,	 'Unless	 you	 are	 like	 a	 child	 you	 will	 not	 enter	 my
kingdom	of	God'.	The	child	lives	there...	but	we	forget.	Sooner	or	later	the	world
becomes	heavy	and	it	is	constantly	dragging	you	out	of	your	being.
It	is	for	that	purpose	that	the	schools	and	the	colleges	and	the	universities	exist.
They	exist	so	that	you	are	not	allowed	to	be	yourself,	they	exist	to	distract.	They
exist	to	take	you	away	from	your	innermost	core,	they	exist	to	falsify	you.	The
whole	 work	 of	 all	 the	 politicians	 and	 the	 priests	 and	 the	 pedagogues	 and	 the
professors	and	the	pundits	is	how	not	to	allow	people	their	inner	being,	how	to
prevent	 their	 inward	journey,	because	whenever	a	man	goes	inside	he	becomes
unconditioned	again	and	that	is	very	dangerous	for	the	society.
The	 society	 lives	 on	 your	 conditioning.	 It	 has	 made	 you	 a	 Hindu,	 a
Mohammedan,	a	Christian,	this	and	that,	and	it	depends	on	that	conditioning,	it
relies	 on	 that	 conditioning.	The	moment	you	go	 in,	when	you	 really	 reach	 the
centre,	you	lose	all	conditioning.	You	come	back	clean.	There	is	nothing	written
on	 you	 so	 all	 the	 effort	 of	 the	 society	 is	 washed	 away.	 Society	 has	 a	 vested
interest	 in	seeing	that	nobody	can	meditate,	or	even	if	people	want	 to	meditate
they	should	be	supplied	false	meditations	--	just	toys	so	they	can	play	around:	a
Christian	prayer	or	something	like	a	tranquillizer.	Repeat	a	mantra,	TM....	These
are	 strategies	 of	 the	 society.	 First	 you	 should	 not	 become	 interested	 in
meditation:	it	is	foolish.	The	whole	attitude	of	the	society	is	that	it	is	foolish,	it	is
mad.	 If	 you	 talk	 about	meditation	 you	 are	 eccentric,	 crazy,	mm?	 -	 everybody
becomes	suspicious	of	you.
If	you	go	on	persisting	 then	 the	society	has	evolved	false	substitutes	down	 the
ages.	It	says,	'Okay,	then	do	TM',	because	with	TM	the	society	is	not	in	danger
because	 TM	 does	 not	 make	 you	 rebellious.	 In	 fact,	 if	 you	 were	 rebellious	 it
would	 cool	 you	 down.	 It	 is	 a	 conspiracy	 of	 the	 establishment;	 it	 helps	 the
establishment	 just	 as	 do	 other	 tranquillizers.	 It	 gives	 you	 a	 false	 kind	 of
consolation.	Yes,	it	gives	a	kind	of	silence	but	that	silence	is	not	alive.	It	is	not
like	a	glacier	coming	down	from	the	mountaintop,	 it	 is	not	 like	a	river	moving
towards	 the	 ocean.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 man-created	 swimming	 pool...	 going	 nowhere,
having	 no	 movement;	 it	 is	 man-made.	 It	 is	 not	 accidental	 that	 the	 American
establishment	is	favouring	TM	and	things	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
like	 that;	 even	 schools,	 colleges	 and	universities	 are	becoming	 interested	 in	 it.
They	 hope	 that	 people	 can	 be	 tranquillized	 through	 it,	 then	 they	 will	 be	 less
rebellious.
To	me	the	real	religious	person	is	pure	rebellion:	rebellion	is	his	very	soul.	That
rebellion	comes	when	you	go	into	your	deepest	being.	Whenever	you	come	back
from	there	you	are	a	new	man,	a	new	woman,	a	new	being.	You	don't	belong	to
this	society,	to	this	church,	to	this	book	you	don't	belong	to	anybody.	You	belong
more	to	the	trees	and	to	the	rocks	and	to	the	stars;	you	belong	to	the	eternal.	This
whole	universe	is	your	home.
If	you	can	find	a	home	within	yourself	you	will	find	that	the	whole	universe	is
your	home.
[A	sannyasin	says	he	feels	something	is	about	to	happen	to	him.	Osho	checks	his
energy.]
That	point	is	close	by.	Be	conscious	of	it	but	don't	be	frightened	of	it.	It	is	around
the	corner.	Be	in	a	kind	of	deep	welcome	to	 it,	a	receptivity,	an	openness.	The
more	open	you	are,	the	closer	it	will	come.	You	don't	know	what	it	is;	there	is	no
need	to	know	what	it	is.	How	can	you	know	what	it	is	unless	it	happens?
So	simply	be	open,	whatsoever	it	is.	For	the	first	time	one	has	to	take	that	risk.
Next	time	it	will	not	be	so	risky	because	you	will	know	what	it	is.	This	time	it	is
risky:	 it	may	be	good,	 it	may	be	bad,	 it	may	be	 the	friend,	or	 the	enemy.	Who
knows?	 --	God	or	 devil.	Maybe	 it	will	 take	 you	 to	 some	 lighted	 peaks,	 sunny
peaks	or	maybe	it	will	drag	you	into	the	darkness	and	depth	of	the	valley.	One	is
not	certain.
So	both	 things	happen	in	such	a	state:	one	hankers	for	 it	and	one	stops	 it	also.
There	is	a	kind	of	ambiguity:	one	part	of	you	will	like	to	go	into	it	and	one	part
will	say:	'Be	alert,	beware.	It	may	be	dangerous;	yoU	may	repent	later	on.'	If	you
become	divided	this	point	will	be	missed.
So	don't	be	divided,	this	is	not	the	time	to	be	divided;	you	can't	afford	division	in
this	moment.	Simply	welcome	it	whatsoever	it	is;	call	it	'x'.
[A	sannyasin	asks:	The	point	is	more	to	watch	it	or...	pour	more	energy?]
No,	no,	no,	don't	watch	it;	pour	energy.	Watching	will	keep	you	distant,	watching
always	 keeps	 you	 distant.	 When	 you	 want	 to	 remain	 away	 from	 something,
watch	it.	If	you	go	on	watching	that	watching	will	keep	you	away.	For	example,
watch	anger	and	you	will	never	be	angry;	but	don't	watch	love,	otherwise	 love
will	 disappear.	 Watch	 the	 negative;	 never	 watch	 the	 positive.	 Otherwise,
whatsoever	 you	watch	will	 go	 away	 from	you,	 because	 the	watcher	 cannot	 be
one	with	the	watched,	the	observer	cannot	be	the	observed.
How	can	you	be	both,	mm?	the	observed	remains	 there	 like	an	object	and	you
remain	 here	 like	 a	 subject;	 there	 is	 a	 distance.	The	more	 you	watch,	 the	more
subjective	 you	 become	 and	 the	more	 the	 thing	 becomes	 an	 object.	 That	won't
help.
Get	drunk	with	it;	don't	become	a	watcher:	be	absorbed.	And	that's	what	energy
wants	--	it	wants	to	become	drunk.	Just	go	headlong,	mm?	This	moment	is	not
the	moment	to	be	wise	but	to	be	an	utter	fool.
Mm?	only	 fools	can	go	 into	 it,	only	mad	people	can	go	 into	 it.	But	something
beautiful	is	around	the	corner.
Just	be	drunk	with	it,	grope	for	it,	go	into	it,	search	for	it.	Let	it	be	a	search	from
the	 heart	 and	 not	 from	 the	 head.	 If	 you	 watch	 it	 becomes	 a	 head	 thing;	 the
watcher	is	in	the	head.	The	lover	is	never	a	watcher.	The	lover	abandons	himself,
loses	himself.
[A	 sannyasin	 has	 written	 to	 Osho	 about	 her	 mother's	 visit.	 She	 is	 disturbed
because	her	mother	is	not	interested	in	Osho.]
It	 is	 nothing...	 it	 is	 nothing.	 Mm?	 it	 is	 just	 that	 your	 mother's	 presence	 is
disturbing	you	too	much,	that's	all.	Just	accept	your	mother's	presence.	What	can
she	do?	Whatsoever	she	is,	she	is.	Don't	expect	that	she	can	change	easily;	there
is	no	need.	You	both	have	the	same	kind	of	expectations:	she	thinks	that	you	will
change	and	that	she	will	be	able	to	change	you;	you	think	that	she	will	change
and	 that	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 change	 her.	 You	 are	 working	 exactly	 like	 her
daughter!
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 change	 either	 yourself	 or	 her;	 nobody	 need	 change.	 She
remains	herself,	you	remain	yourself.	And	don't	get	disturbed,	mm?	--	make	her
stay	as	cheerful	as	possible.	There	is	no	need	to	be	cold
--	 be	warm.	Don't	 be	worried	 because	 she	 is	 not	with	me	 or	 against	me;	 that
doesn't	matter.	That	is	her	standpoint,	that	is	her	choice.	You	need	not	in	any	way
punish	 her,	 knowingly	 or	 unknowingly.	 f	 you	 become	 cold	 that	 is	 a	 kind	 of
punishment.
Remain	 warm	 and	 flowing.	 This	 thing	 should	 not	 come	 between	 your
relationship.	Your	being	my	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sannyasin	should	not	come	in	between	you	and	your	mother;	that	is	not	the	point
at	all.	Simply	accept	and	just	tell	her	 'There	is	no	need	to	be	worried;	I	am	not
going	to	convert	you	or	change	you....	Then	she	will	feel	more	open.
And	let	her	try:	if	she	wants	to	change	you,	let	her	try.	It	is	a	good	chance	for	you
to	 see	whether	anybody	can	change	you	or	not...	 a	good	opportunity	 !	But,	be
loving	towards	her	and	be	warm,	and	there	is	no	problem.
But	 be	 warm	 to	 her	 and	 help	 her	 and	 make	 her	 happy.	 She	 must	 be	 feeling
lonely,	and	so	many	orange	people....
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 that	 during	 the	 Zazen	 group	 he	 felt	 sensations	 of	 heat	 and
cold,	 of	 energy	 rushes	 to	 his	 head	 and	 felt	 separate	 from	 everything,	 from	his
feelings.]
Zazen	can	do	it.	If	it	really	happens,	feeling	can	disappear	completely,	because	it
is	not	a	feeling	method;	it	is	a	method	of	awareness.	t	is	not	of	the	heart,	it	is	not
of	love	--	it	is	of	awareness.	So	it	can	happen.	It	has	been	good:	it	indicates	that
it	has	been	really	good.	You	went	 into	 it.	Now	don't	start	creating	a	conflict	 in
yourself.	Wait.	The	feeling	will	come	back	and	will	come	back	very	very	fresh,
but	 you	 will	 have	 to	 wait	 a	 little.	 And	 don't	 miss	 these	 days	 through	 feeling
miserable	because	the	feeling	is	not	there.
Enjoy	awareness	while	these	days	last	and	when	feeling	comes	enjoy	feeling	too.
And	then	one	can	move	between	these	polarities.
When	you	are	alone,	just	move	into	a	zazen	space.	Forget	all	feeling,	all	love,	all
emotions,	all	sentiments	--	just	remain	a	pure	kind	of	awareness.	And	when	you
are	with	people,	move	into	love,	feeling,	and	forget	that	pure	kind	of	awareness;
attain	to	a	pure	kind	of	love	and	relating.	I	see	the	possibility.
That's	why	you	were	 feeling	hot	 and	cold	both.	To	a	 few	people	 it	 happens	 --
both	hot	and	cold,	otherwise	either	it	is	hot	or	it	is	cold.	If	it	is	cold,	then	the	man
is	meant	to	walk	on	the	path	of	awareness.	If	it	is	hot	he	is	meant	to	walk	on	the
path	 of	 love.	 But	 if	 both	 happen	 that	 means	 that	 the	 man	 can	 easily	 move
between	the	both.	Then	the	man	has	to	become	a	river	and	these	two,	love	and
awareness,	have	to	become	like	two	banks.
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
28	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711285
ShortTitle:	OPENSE27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Anand	means	bliss,	chandan	means	sandalwood.	Sandalwood	 is	very	symbolic
in	 the	East	because	when	one	 reaches	one's	 innermost	core	a	certain	 fragrance
arises	 in	one's	own	being	which	 is	very	similar	 to	sandalwood,	not	exactly	 the
same	 but	 almost.	 So	 sandalwood	 became	 sacred.	 It	 resembles	 this	 inner
fragrance.
Remember	 that	 all	 that	 is	 available	 is	 also	available	 inside.	All	 the	 five	 senses
that	open	outwardly	can	also	open	inwards.	Man	stands	just	on	the	threshold	of
both,	just	in	the	middle	of	both	spaces	--	the	outer	and	the	inner,	the	within	and
without.	Man	can	 turn	either	way.	 If	you	 turn	outwards	you	become	a	worldly
man;	 if	 you	 turn	 inwards	 you	 become	other-worldly,	 spiritual.	You	 remain	 the
same	on	the	surface	but	your	vision	changes.	Just	as	one	can	see	outside,	one	can
see	inside	and	just	as	one	can	hear	outside,	one	can	hear	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	 inside	 too.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 as	 there	 are	 smells	 outside,	 there	 are	 smells
inside	too.	All	the	experience	of	the	five	senses	are	available	from	within.
Once	 you	 have	 known	 the	 experience	 from	 within	 then	 everything	 outside
simply	 pales,	 its	 significance	 disappears.	 If	 you	 have	 seen	 the	 inner	 world	 of
colour	then	all	rainbows	are	very	faint	compared	to	that,	because	those	colours
are	 alive:	 they	 throb,	 they	 have	 a	 heartbeat	 to	 them.	Once	 you	 have	 seen	 the
inner	 light,	 the	outer	 light	 looks	almost	 like	darkness	 in	comparison.	Once	you
have	heard	.	the	inner	sound	then	all	music	that	is	created	by	man	is	just	noise.
So	start	looking	for	the	inner:	see,	hear,	smell,	taste,	touch.	Whenever	you	have
time	just	close	your	eyes	and	try	to	see	withinwards.	Try	to	listen,	try	to	smell,
try	to	taste	and	try	to	touch;	from	all	the	five	senses	start	searching	inwards.	It	is
a	 rich	world	 inside,	 far	 richer,	 and	once	 the	 inner	 richness	 is	known,	 the	outer
world	for	the	first	time	becomes	illusory,	dreamlike.
It	is	just	as	somebody	wakes	in	the	morning	and	sees	the	sun	rising,	and	the	sun
of	 his	 dream	 simply	 pales,	 becomes	 insignificant,	 becomes	 illusory,	 just	 an
hallucination.	In	the	same	way	when	one	awakes	to	the	inner,	the	outer	becomes
an	 illusion.	Hence	 in	 the	 East	we	 call	 it	 'maya'.	Maya	means	 the	 illusion,	 the
hallucination;	it	is	not	real....
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 she	 would	 like	 to	 do	 the	 tantra	 and	 hypnotherapy	 groups.
Osho	suggests	she	do	other	groups	in	preparation	first.]
Tantra	should	be	 like	a	climax,	 then	much	more	happens	out	of	 it.	Much	more
important	than	the	group	is	the	space	in	which	you	are	when	you	participate.	You
can	participate	in	a	group	which	can	take	you	far	away,	but	if	you	are	not	ready
to	go	far	away	nothing	can	be	done.	You	may	not	participate	in	it,	you	may	be
there	as	a	participant	but	the	inner	participation	will	be	missing.
We	 have	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 inhibitions.	 To	 be	 in	 a	 Tantra	 group,	 really	 and
totally,	 one	 needs	 to	 shed	 all	 the	 inhibitions.	 One	 needs	 a	 very	 very	 clean
unconscious,	 then	 Tantra	 can	 become	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 experiences	 of	 life.
Otherwise	 it	will	be	at	 the	most	a	kind	of	 indulgence	in	sex	and	even	that	will
not	be	very	deep	because	those	inhibitions	will	go	on	dragging	you	away.
So	Tantra	can	either	be	just	a	licentiousness...	because	man	is	so	repressed	and
one	wants	to	go	against	that	repression;	it	 is	too	heavy.	Licentiousness	is	just	a
reaction	to	repression.	Once	the	repression	is	 too	much	and	you	cannot	bear	it,
the	 pendulum	 swings	 to	 the	 other	 extreme.	 That's	 what	 has	 happened	 in	 the
West:	two	thousand	years	of	Christian	repression,	two	thousand	years	of	stupid
morality,	unscientific,	unnatural,	 inhuman,	has	created	the	whole	 licentiousness
in	the	modern	mind.	It	is	a	revolt,	but	revolts	which	arise	out	of	reaction	are	not
very	 revolutionary.	They	remain	 tethered	 to	 the	very	same	 thing	against	which
they	 are	 reacting.	 The	 puritan	 can	 become	 licentious,	 very	 easily,	 and	 the
licentious	person	 can	become	 the	puritan	 again	very	 easily.	The	mind	goes	on
moving,	it	swings.
So	 Tantra	 can	 either	 be	 just	 licentiousness	 or	 it	 can	 become	 a	 great	 love
experience.	If	there	is	no	inhibition,	no	repression,	no	attitude	about	sex	--	good
or	bad	--	if	one	is	just	primitive	about	it,	pagan,	uncivilized,	unprejudiced	for	or
against,	 then	 Tantra	 can	 become	 a	 great	 experience	 of	 love,	 or	 Tantra	 can
become	a	great	experience	of	prayer	too.
If	 the	 unconscious	 is	 completely	 unburdened	 and	 one	 is	 like	 a	 child,	 neither
seeking	for	sex	nor	seeking	for	love	even	--	one	is	not	seeking	for	anything,	one
is	 simply	 empty,	 with	 no	 desire,	 with	 no	 motive,	 just	 open	 to	 whatsoever
happens,	 thrilled	 by	 the	 unknown....	 Because	 whenever	 you	 are	 seeking
something	you	are	seeking	your	past	experience	again	in	some	way	or	other.	The
new	 cannot	 be	 sought,	 only	 the	 old	 can	 be	 sought.	 Modified,	 a	 little	 bit
decorated,	a	little	bit	different,	but	it	is	always	the	same	old	that	can	be	sought.
How	can	the	mind	think	of	the	new?	The	new	has	not	been	known	yet;	the	mind
is	 always	 tethered	 to	 the	 past.	 So	 you	 have	 known	 some	 experiences	 of	 love,
some	 experiences	 of	 sex,	 and	 you	would	 like	 them	 to	 become	 a	 little	 deeper,
more	far-reaching,	but	still	they	are	the	old.
The	 third	 state	 of	 prayer	 is	 possible	 through	Tantra	when	 you	 are	 not	 seeking
anything	at	all,	when	there	is	no	desire,	when	there	is	a	quality	of	desirelessness,
unmotivated	presence...	just	a	presence,	empty,	not	going	anywhere,	when	there
is	no	dimension	to	your	consciousness,	no	direction	to	your	consciousness.
Then	Tantra	 takes	you	 really	 far-out.	No	drug	and	no	meditation	can	 take	you
that	 far	because	Tantra	works	on	 the	very	 substantial	 energy	 in	you.	The	most
profound	energy	is	the	sex	energy	and	Tantra	works	on	that.
When	you	think,	you	think	only	from	the	top	layer	of	the	head.	When	people	are
making	love	they	remain	almost	always	in	the	head.	It	is	a	head	trip;	their	sex	is
cerebral;	 then	 it	 cannot	 go	 very	 deep.	 If	 you	 go	 a	 little	 deeper	 then	 the	 heart
starts	functioning:	sex	is	no	more	so	it	becomes	love.	If	you	go	a	little	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
deeper,	to	the	very	root	of	your	being,	to	your	very	guts,	to	the	very	foundation,
then	Tantra	becomes	prayer.
So	wait!	A	little	work,	and	then	when	you	are	ready	I	will	send	you	to	Tantra	and
Hypnosis	also.	Good!
[A	sannyasin	asks	about	relationships,	about	being	in	 the	heart	and	then	sexual
desire	arises;	wanting	to	be	total	in	relationship...	]
I	 understand.	 First,	 there	 are	 relationships.	 and	 relationships,	 and	 one	 should
enjoy	 all	 kinds	 of	 relationships.	 Nothing	 is	 wrong:	 even	 the	 relationship	 that
happens	 only	 in	 the	 head	 has	 its	 own	 beauty.	 The	 relationship	 that	 happens
through	the	heart	has	its	own	beauty	and	the	relationship	that	happens	just	as	a
sexual	thing,	that	also	has	its	own	beauty.
You	may	be	 attracted	 to	 someone	only	 sexually.	Now	you	 create	 a	 problem	 if
you	want	to	make	it	a	love	affair	also.	You	create	something	artificial,	you	force,
and	then	the	problem	arises;	otherwise	there	is	no	problem.	That	relationship	has
to	exist	on	that	level;	nothing	is	wrong	in	that	level.	And	by	total...	you	have	a
wrong	concept	of	totality.	You	mean	by	totality	that	your	thought,	your	feeling,
your	sex,	should	all	be	involved	in	it.	That	will	not	be	possible	right	now.	That
will	 be	 possible	 only	 later	 on	when	you	have	 lived	 a	 different	 kind	 of	 totality
first.
When	you	have	learned	how	to	live	in	a	relationship	physically,	how	to	live	in	a
relationship	 psychologically,	 how	 to	 live	 in	 a	 relationship	 intellectually,	 when
you	have	worked	on	all	levels	and	each	level	has	been	total	then	the	second	kind
of	totality	will	become	possible.	Then	a	relationship	is	possible	which	becomes
total	on	all	three	levels	together,	simultaneously.
But	 before	 that	 it	 is	 not	 possible.	You	 are	 creating	 the	 problem.	Don't	 ask	 too
much,	otherwise	you	will	be	miserable.	Whatsoever	is	available,	use	it,	go	into
it.	And	nothing	is	wrong,	nothing	is	ever	wrong	except	when	you	start	asking	for
too	much	 and	 your	 life	 energy	 is	 not	 ready	 for	 that	 jump.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 one	 goes
swimming:	 if	you	can	swim	only	 in	 shallow	water	 then	 there	 is	no	need	 to	go
into	the	deep	water	right	now.
It	will	be	dangerous,	you	will	not	enjoy	 it;	you	will	be	constantly	afraid.	How
can	 you	 enjoy	 it	 when	 you	 are	 afraid	 that	 death	 is	 possible	 if	 you	 go	 a	 little
further?
First	swim	in	the	shallow	water,	learn	swimming	in	the	shallow	water;	once	you
have	 learned	 then	 go	 into	 the	 deeper	 water.	 Once	 you	 know	 how	 to	 swim	 it
doesn't	 matter,	 the	 depth	 of	 the	 water	 doesn't	 matter,	 because	 swimming	 is
possible	anywhere.
This	is	your	problem:	you	have	not	learned	to	be	total	on	one	level	and	you	want
all	the	levels	to	come	together.	These	are	three	dimensions	of	love	--	the	genitals:
the	lowest	but	the	most	substantial;	then	the	heart:	not	so	low,	higher,	very	much
higher	but	more	fragile	naturally.	The	higher	a	thing	becomes,	the	more	fragile	it
becomes.	The	roots	are	the	most	strong	thing	in	the	tree	and	the	flowers	are	the
most	fragile.
If	a	tree	starts	asking	for	the	flowers	without	creating	roots	then	the	tree	will	be
confused.	That's	how	you	are	confused	 --	 the	 tree	 first	has	 to	go	deep	 into	 the
ground,	has	to	become	rooted,	has	to	find	nourishment,	water.	When	everything
is	available	 the	 tree	 starts	growing;	 then	 there	 is	no	problem.	Then	 leaves	will
come	and	foliage	and	branches	and	one	day,	flowers.
Still	you	can	move	a	 little	higher,	 to	 intelligence.	That	 too	has	 its	own	beauty.
Ordinarily	when	 people	 say	 that	 they	 are	 related	 through	 the	 head,	 they	 don't
mean	 what	 I	 mean	 when	 I	 say	 intelligence;	 that's	 why	 I	 am	 using	 the	 word
'intelligence'.	There	is	a	kind	of	relationship	which	is	higher	than	the	feeling.	It	is
of	 intelligence,	 more	 fragile,	 very	 fragile.	 It	 can	 disappear	 any	 moment.	 It	 is
almost	like	a	whisper:	you	have	to	pay	much	attention,	only	then	do	you	feel	it.
It	is	more	like	a	friendship.
For	 example,	 you	 love	 me	 and	 somebody	 else	 loves	 me.	 You	 are	 full	 of	 my
thoughts	and	he	is	full	of	my	thoughts.	Then	a	relationship	grows	between	you
two	because	 of	 this	 affinity.	You	 are	meditating,	 somebody	 else	 is	meditating.
Your	meditative	energies	meet	and	you	are	thrilled	by	each	other's	presence.
Or	you	love	Beethoven	and	somebody	else	also	loves	Beethoven;	there	is	a	kind
of	rapport	through	music	and	you	feel	deeply	in	love	with	each	other.	Beethoven
becomes	a	bridge.	Now	this	is	not	of	the	heart,	this	is	not	of	the	genitals.	This	is
of	intelligence,	but	this	will	be	very	fragile,	as	fragile	as	Beethoven's	music.
First	start	from	the	lowest,	because	the	lowest	is	the	most	substantial,	it	is	your
roots.	So	when	you	are	in	relationship	with	a	person,	just	don't	condemn	yourself
because	you	think	'This	is	just	genital,	this	is	just	sexual.'	It	is	beautiful.	Grow	in
roots.	 Enjoy	 this	 relationship	 as	 deeply,	 as	 totally	 as	 possible,	 and	 again
remember,	 by	 total	 I	mean,	 in	 this	 dimension.	 I	 don't	mean	 a	 totality	 of	 three
dimensions	altogether.	That	will	come	later	on,	 that	will	come	in	 its	own	time.
Everything	has	its	own	time,	its	own	season.
In	the	beginning	it	will	happen	this	way,	that	you	may	be	related	to	one	person
sexually,	you	may	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
related	 through	 the	 heart	with	 another	 person	 and	you	may	be	 related	 through
your	intelligence	to	somebody	else.	It	may	not	all	happen	with	one	person	in	the
beginning;	there	is	no	necessity.	That's	why	I'm	all	for	free	love,	otherwise	love
becomes	crippled.	You	are	 interested	 in	one	person	sexually	and	 then	he	starts
possessing	 you	 and	 says	 'Now	 you	 cannot	 relate	 to	 anybody	 else.'	 This	 is
poisonous.	 You	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 him	 through	 your	 heart	 so	 only	 two
possibilities	 are	 left:	 either	 you	 be	 with	 him	 and	 let	 your	 heart	 die,	 let	 it
suffocate,	 let	 it	 starve....	 And	 you	 are	 not	 related	 at	 the	 third	 dimension	 of
intelligence	either.
It	 almost	 always	 happens	 that	when	you	 are	 sexually	 attracted	 to	 a	 person	 the
person	 is	more	 animal-like;	 that's	why	 you	 are	 sexually	 attracted	 to	 him.	 It	 is
very	 rare	 that	 this	 animal-like	 person	 will	 have	 some	 qualities	 like	 Buddha...
very	rare.
He	may	be	just	an	animal	--	alive,	full	of	juice,	but	on	the	lowest	level.	He	may
give	you	great	sexual	delight	but	you	should	not	ask	anything	more.	You	should
not	discuss	Socrates	with	him,	mm?	he	will	hit	your	head!	(laughter)	You	should
not	bring	Beethoven	records	with	you.	He	will	throw	them;	he	will	say
'This	is	all	nonsense!	Let's	make	love!'	He	knows	only	one	dimension.
And	 the	 other	 thing	 is	 also	 possible:	 you	 may	 be	 interested	 in	 a	 person
intellectually,	intelligently,	mm?
He	 talks	 so	 beautifully,	 he	 stands	 and	weaves	 theories	 so	 beautifully,	 he	 takes
you	 into	deeper	 realms	of	being	and	existence,	but	he	may	be	 fragile.	He	may
not	 have	 any	 animality	 left.	 His	 whole	 animal	 may	 have	 become	 sublimated,
transformed;	 you	may	 not	 be	 attracted	 to	 him	 sexually.	Hence	 I	 say	 that	 love
should	be	free	and	people	should	be	related	in	many	kinds	of	relationships.	The
world	does	not	allow	it,	 that's	why	people	are	so	miserable.	You	get	hooked	in
one	kind	of	relationship	then	your	other	two	dimensions	die,	and	because	of	that
your	soul	is	only	partly	alive.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	this	opportunity	available.	I	would	like	my	sannyasins
to	be	absolutely	non-possessive.	They	should	help	each	other	to	be	related	in	as
many	ways	as	possible	so	that	their	whole	being	is	fulfilled.	Then	one	day	that
too	is	possible:	when	your	whole	being	is	fulfilled	and	you	have	lived	all	kinds
of	 love	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 relationship,	 and	 each	 relationship	 totally	 on	 its	 own
level,	then	the	higher	kind	of	totality,	the	three	dimensional	totality,	arises.	When
you	are	total	that	way	you	will	be	able	to	find	a	person	who	is	also	total	that	way.
You	 can	 get	 only	 that	which	 you	 deserve.	More	 than	 that	 is	 not	 possible	 and
more	than	that	should	not	be	possible.
So	don't	create	unnecessary	problems;	these	are	created	problems.	Start	looking
into	things	and	be	whatsoever	is	practical	Don't	bring	impractical	and	impossible
ideals	into	the	mind.
Listening	to	me	can	sometimes	be	very	dangerous	because	I	go	on	talking	about
impossible	things,	impossible	at	your	level.	I	have	to	talk	because	only	then	can	I
drag	you	beyond	your	levels,	pull	you	up.
But	 that	 creates	 trouble	 also.	 You	 start	 thinking	 'Now	 this	 is	 the	way	 to	 live:
totally,	 be	 total,	 be	 spontaneous,	 be	 this	 and	 that.'	 Always	 listen	 to	 me	 and
translate	it	at	your	level.	Be	practical.
Remember	 it,	what	 I	 have	 said,	 but	 always	 see	 how	much	 you	 can	 do	 at	 this
moment;	do	only	that.	Keep	the	goal	in	your	consciousness	but	don't	start	pulling
that	goal	into	your	being	right	now.	You	will	not	be	able	to:	you	will	be	split	that
way,	you	will	become	crazy.	Yes,	even	great	ideals	can	create	craziness	so	keep
your	common	sense	intact.	And	start	living.	Whatsoever	relationship	happens,	be
total	on	that	level	and	report	to	me	after	one	month	how	you	feel,	mm?	Good!
[A	sannyasin	says	she	does	not	feel	anger	but	in	groups	she	is	told	she	has	anger.
How	 to	 tell	 if	 she	 is	 repressing	 when	 she	 doesn't	 feel	 it?	 Osho	 checks	 her
energy.]
There	is	not	anything	like	anger	but	there	is	something	else	that	may	have	been
thought	by	the	group-leaders	to	be	anger.	It	is	not	anger	but	something	which	can
give	the	feeling	of	anger	--	a	kind	of	pride.	You	are	a	proud	woman	deep	inside,
very	 self-confident,	 assertive.	 That	 very	 feeling	 of	 pride	 and	 assertion,
confidence,	 can	 give	 the	 idea	 to	 other	 people	 that	 you	 are	 carrying	 great
repressed	anger.	But	this	is	a	totally	different	thing.	One	should	be	self-confident
and	one	should	be	proud	of	oneself	--	not	against	anybody,	not	in	comparison	to
anybody	but	just	because	one	is	oneself.	You	have	to	be	loving	towards	yourself
and	you	have	to	be	proud	that	you	are	yourself,	that	God	has	made	you	you.	If	a
person	 is	 not	 proud	 about	 himself	 he	 will	 hate	 himself,	 he	 will	 be	 self-
destructive,	he	will	have	a	kind	of	inferiority	complex.
Pride	as	ego	is	bad;	pride	as	self-love	is	perfectly	good.	Pride	in	terms	of	being
higher	than	others	is	wrong	but	pride	as	an	expression	of	your	being	is	perfectly
okay.	 Trees	 are	 proud...	 See	 a	 peacock	 --	 so	 proud!	 Or	 a	 snake,	 or	 a	 tiger...
everything	in	existence	is	proud.	It	should	be	so	because	God	has	chosen	you	as
an	abode,	but	this	pride	should	not	be	comparative:	you	should	not	think	that	you
are	 higher	 than	 others;	 then	 it	 becomes	 aggression,	 assertion	 becomes
aggression.	Assertion	is	good,	aggression	is	bad.	Pride	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
becomes	ego.
Pride	is	just	natural,	ego	is	illness,	pathological,	but	they	are	very	close	and	they
can	give	the	feeling	of	being	the	same.	So	they	are	not	absolutely	wrong,	mm?	--
they	have	felt	something	of	that	around	you	so	they	thought	it	is	repressed	anger.
It	 is	not	 repressed	anger;	you	need	not	 throw	your	anger.	That	will	not	help,	 it
will	simply	exhaust	you	because	it	is	not	there.	And	don't	create	a	problem.
Just	remember	this,	that	pride	is	not	to	become	egotism,	that	assertion	has	not	to
become	aggression.
These	are	perfectly	good	qualities,	 everybody	should	have	 them,	but	 in	a	non-
relative,	non-comparative	sense.	As	a	joy	in	your	whole	being	pride	is	good.	You
accept	yourself,	you	love	yourself,	pride	is	good.
Nothing	to	be	worried	about!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
29	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711295
ShortTitle:	OPENSE28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	new	sannyasin	asks	for	a	mantra.	He	was	initiated	by	Ananda	Marga	with	the
mantra	'baba'.	Osho	checks	his	energy,	telling	him	to	chant	this	mantra.]
Continue	 it;	 that's	 no	 problem.	 It	will	 suit	 you.	And	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with
Ananda	Marga,	mm?
Baba	 is	one	of	 the	most	ancient	mantras.	 It	 simply	means	 'father'...	what	 Jesus
used	to	call	'abba'.	That	was	his	mantra;	his	whole	prayer	consisted	of	repeating
'abba'.	Baba	is	even	better	because	it	is	very	balanced.	Mm?	just	one	ba,	another
ba,	and	both	are	similar,	of	equal	potential;	it	is	very	balancing.	You	can	continue
it;	it's	perfectly	good.
[A	 couple	 are	 present.	 The	 man	 asks	 about	 smoking	 pot.	 He	 has	 very	 good
insights	on	it;	he	talks	to	plants;	it	gives	him	hope	for	the	future;	but	also	he	gets
a	pressure	in	the	head.]
It	is	just	illusory,	it	is	not	a	real	hope.	The	whole	thing	is	just	a	chemical	illusion
and	 the	 chemical	 change	may	 be	 giving	 you	 pressure	 in	 the	 head	 because	 the
whole	thing	happens	in	your	nervous	system.	It	can	give	you	a	pressure;	that	is	a
simple	 indication	 to	 stop	 it.	 It	 can	 be	 dangerous	 later	 on:	 it	 can	 destroy	 some
necessary	 nerves	 in	 the	 brain.	 It	 is	 destructive,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 costly	 dream.	 It	 is
beautiful	but	even	if	a	dream	is	beautiful	it	is	a	dream,	and	by	the	morning	you
are	again	back	in	the	reality.	And	it	costs	much.
If	you	go	on	taking	it	for	a	long	time	it	will	make	your	intelligence	deteriorate.
People	 who	 take	 pot	 or	 things	 like	 that	 for	 long	 become	 idiotic.	 Their
intelligence	loses	sharpness,	because	having	the	chemical	pressure	on	the	nerves
every	day	is	harmful.	And	you	are	not	getting	anything!	I	am	not	worried	about
the	cost:	if	something	real	is	attained	then	at	whatsoever	cost	it	is,	it	is	good.	But
you	are	not	getting	anything	in	return	--	just	an	illusion.
When	you	 take	pot	and	you	know	who	you	are,	 that	 is	not	of	any	 importance.
You	 have	 to	 know	 it	 when	 you	 are	 alert,	 aware,	 completely	 natural,	 with	 no
chemical	pressure	creating	things	in	you.	Then	you	have	to	know	who	you	are.
One	 has	 to	 become	 enlightened	 in	 a	 very	 very	 ordinary	 way,	 only	 then	 is
enlightenment	 true.	 One	 can	 find	 short-cuts	 but	 all	 short-cuts	 are	 false.	 There
exist	no	short-cuts	for	realisation.	Short-cuts	only	create	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
small	circuits	within	you	and	release	dreams,	release	imagination.	It	is	not	good
for	you,	 it	 is	 not	good	 for	 anybody.	But	 it	 is	 simply	 indicating	 that	 it	 is	 going
deep	into	your	brain	cells;	it	is	better	to	stop	as	soon	as	possible.
To	create	an	experience	which	is	not	your	natural	state	is	of	no	use.	It	does	not
give	 you	hope.	 It	 simply	 destroys	 your	 life	 and	 destroys	 your	 opportunities	 to
become	alert,	aware	of	 the	reality	as	 it	 is.	There	 is	no	need	 to	seek	God	in	 the
trees.	If	you	can	only	see	the	trees	as	they	are,	all	is	realised.	Why	impose	God?
You	need	not	see	God	in	anybody.	If	you	can	only	see	the	real	person	standing
there,	 that's	 enough!	 God	 simply	 means	 reality,	 the	 ordinary	 reality	 that
surrounds	you.
When	I	say	that	God	is	in	the	trees,	I	don't	mean	that	you	will	have	to	see	God	in
the	trees	--	that	a	head	will	start	blooming	in	the	tree,	then	somebody	will	look	at
you	and	you	will	have	an	encounter	and	a	dialogue	and	he	will	say	'hello!'	When
I	say	see	God	in	the	trees	I	simply	mean	to	see	the	tree	as	it	is	without	any	idea
on	your	part.	See	the	truth	of	the	tree.	That	is	the	God	of	the	tree	--	the	greenness
of	it,	the	flower,	the	joy,	the	rootedness	of	it,	the	strength,	and	the	fragility.	See
the	truth	of	it	with	no	notions	in	the	head.
Now	God	is	your	notion.	You	cannot	see	ordinarily	because	you	are	not	a	fool;
how	can	you	befool	yourself?	How	can	you	see	God	in	the	tree?	A	tree	is	a	tree!
How	can	you	see	God	in	a	tree?	You	cannot	befool	yourself,	but	when	you	take
pot	 you	 become	 a	 fool;	 then	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 befool.	 You	 can	 see	God	 or	 a
buffalo	 or	 anything	 in	 the	 tree.	 You	 have	 simply	 to	 keep	 that	 notion	 in	 your
mind.	When	the	pot	starts	working	and	starts	changing	your	chemistry,	you	have
to	be	constantly	remembering	one	thing	--	that	the	tree	is	this:	God...	or	the	devil.
One	day	try	looking	for	the	devil	and	you	will	see	him	!
So	it	is	not	in	the	tree	--	it	is	just	in	your	mind;	you	have	projected	onto	the	tree.
The	 tree	begins	 to	 function	as	a	 screen.	Now,	ordinarily	you	don't	 see	 the	 tree
because	to	see	the	tree	you	have	to	be	very	sensitive,	alert,	watchful	and	utterly
herenow,	because	the	tree	is	not	in	the	past	and	the	tree	is	not	in	the	future.	If	you
are	in	the	past	or	in	the	future	you	will	never	meet	the	tree.	You	may	by-pass	it
but	you	will	never	meet	it.	The	tree	is	always	herenow;	to	meet	the	tree	you	have
to	be	herenow.
Now,	ordinarily	you	don't	 see	God.	 It's	perfectly	good:	 the	problem	 is	not	 that
one	should	see	the	God;	ordinarily	you	don't	see	the	tree	either;	you	just	by-pass
it.	 It	 is	 there;	 there	 is	no	meeting.	Then	you	 take	pot	and	you	have	 these	great
ideas	that	God	is	everywhere.	With	these	ideas	you	go	into	it.	That's	why	guides
are	needed	for	acid	trips.	A	guide	can	give	you	ideas.	When	you	are	falling	into
the	chemical	change,	the	guide	can	say,	'Look,	God	is	everywhere!	It	is	here...'.
Whatsoever	idea	he	suggests	will	start	working	and	you	will	start	projecting.
So	it	has	happened	that	people	who	are	against	drugs	have	taken	drugs	and	have
known	only	hell	 and	people	who	are	 for	drugs	have	 taken	 the	 same	drugs	and
have	known	heaven.	 It	depends	on	you.	The'	drug	does	not	give	you	anything.
The	drug	simply	makes	you	a	fool.	You	relapse	into	a	kind	of	childishness,	you
relapse	into	imagination,	you	relapse	into	your	dreaming	faculty;	that's	what	the
drug	does.	Now	it	is	up	to	you	to	release	the	dream.	Whatsoever	dream	you	want
to	release,	you	can	release.	If	you	want	to	see	monsters	and	dragons	and	devils
all	jumping	on	you	and	trying	to	kill	you,	you	can	have	that;	it	is	your	choice.	Or
you	can	have	God	and	angels	dancing	around	and	singing	and	Jesus	and	all	the
apostles	sitting	by	the	side.	It	is	up	to	you,	it	is	your	dream.
Drugs	can	only	help	your	dream	faculty	to	function	totally.	It	is	as	if	you	run	a
projector.	The	 film	has	 to	 be	 provided	 by	 you.	The	 electricity	 in	 the	 projector
cannot	 create	 the	 film;	 the	electricity	 running	 in	 the	projector	 can	only	project
the	film	of	whatsoever	you	provide.	The	film	has	to	be	provided	by	you	and	the
projector	is	there:	it	starts	projecting.	If	you	want	to	see	hell,	you	can	have	a	film
of	hell	or	 if	you	wanted	a	film	of	heaven	you	will	see	it	on	the	screen.	That	 is
exactly	what	a	drug	does:	it	simply	releases	your	dream	faculty;	the	dream	starts
functioning.	But	it	is	just	wasting	time...	and	at	a	very	great	cost.
Come	out	of	it.	And	don't	look	for	God	in	the	trees	or	in	the	rocks;	that	is	stupid!
Just	look	for	the	tree	in	the	trees	and	for	the	rock	in	the	rocks.	Just	see	the	truth
of	it,	the	presence	of	it.	Let	the	presence	be	revealed	and	in	that	revelation	you
will	see	that	all	is	one.
And	 it	 is	not	only	 that	one	can	project	 through	drugs.	You	can	project	without
drugs;	 then	 you	 need	 something	 else	which	 can	 drug	 you.	 For	 example,	 great
will	--	that	can	become	a	drug.	You	can	will	that	you	will	see	God	in	a	tree.	You
can	go	on	looking,	you	go	on	looking	and	you	say,	'I	will	not	eat,	I	will	not	move
from	here	unless	I	see	God.'	You	can	force	your	will	and	what	the	drug	does,	will
can	do.	It	will	take	a	little	longer....
So	the	people	in	the	Himalayan	caves	seeing	God	are	the	same!	It	 is	not	much
different.	It	is	just	that	they	have	not	taken	the	chemical	from	the	outside;	they
have	created	a	chemical	inside.	You	can	create	it	by	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
yoga	postures	because	yoga	postures	change	your	body	chemistry.	You	can-	do	it
by	fasting	because	fasting	changes	your	body	chemistry.	Anything	that	changes
your	body	chemistry	in	some	way	can	be	used	as	a	drug.
To	see	reality	one	has	to	be	completely	ordinary,	not	using	anything	--	no	will,
no	fasting,	no	postures;	one	has	to	be	simply	as	one	is.	It	will	take	a	long	time	to
see	the	truth	of	the	tree,	but	that	time	is	not	wasted.
So	don't	be	in	a	hurry	and	don't	speed.	Yes,	drugs	give	speed,	but	don't	speed	and
don't	be	 in	a	hurry.	Be	patient	and	allow	things	 to	grow	slowly.	All	real	 things
grow	slowly:	they	take	their	own	time.	Something	has	to	mature	in	you.
And	be	satisfied	and	contented	with	whatsoever	is	available	right	now;	don't	ask
for	more.	And	 I	 know	 that	 once	 you	 have	 been	 on	 any	 drug,	 it	 becomes	 very
difficult	because	the	drug	attracts	you.	Without	any	effort	on	your	part	something
starts	happening,	so	why	bother	with	anything	else?	Why	meditate	and	why	be
aware	when	the	drug	can	trigger	the	process	immediately?
It	 has	 been	 used	 down	 the	 ages;	 it	 is	 not	 anything	 new.	 In	 the	 West	 it	 is
something	new	but	 in	 the	East	 it	 is	 one	of	 the	most	 ancient	 practices.	But	 the
people	who	have	taken	drugs	for	centuries	have	never	reached	anywhere.
If	you	really	want	to	see	what	is	there	you	have	to	stop	all	kinds	of	projection.	It
will	look	dull	in	the	beginning.	It	will	not	be	so	enchanting,	it	will	not	have	that
allurement,	 that	 fascination.	 But	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 fascination,	 allurement;
there	is	no	need.	One	should	be	satisfied	with	the	ordinary	reality.	What	is	wrong
with	the	trees	as	trees	and	man	as	man	and	woman	as	woman?
If	you	can	do	 it	 for	 six	months	without	 the	drug,	 just	 living	with	 the	ordinary,
with	no	desire	for	the	extraordinary,	sooner	or	later	you	will	start	seeing	the	truth
of	ordinary	things.	And	in	the	very	ordinary,	the	extraordinary	is	hidden.	But	you
have	 to	 approach	 it	 through	 the	 ordinary.	 The	 ordinary	 is	 the	 door	 to	 the
extraordinary.	My	suggestion	is	that	you	drop	it,	mm?	completely	stop	it.
[The	woman	says	she	has	a	problem	in	the	relationship,	not	to	get	pulled	into	her
partner's	moods.]
That's	very	natural;	you	should	not	desire	the	opposite.	It	is	very	natural:	when
you	love	a	person	your	spaces	start	overlapping.	That's	what	love	is.	So	it	is	very
natural	 that	when	 the	 other	 is	 happy	 you	 are	 happy;.	when	 you	 are	 happy	 the
other	 is	happy.	Wen	the	other	 is	sad	you	feel	sad.	That	simply	shows	that	your
spaces	are	not	distinct;	they	are	overlapping.	It	is	very	natural.
The	only	way	to	stop	it	is	to	create	a	distance.	That	you	will	not	like.	Then	love
disappears	and	you	can	be	at	the	most	friends.	That	will	be	destructive	to	love.	I
would	not	like	that.	I	would	like	you	to	come	even	more	close.	Why	should	you
not	be	sad	when	he	is	sad?
Lose	identities.	It	 is	perfectly	good.	If	he	is	sad	why	should	you	not	be	sad?	--
nothing	is	wrong	in	it.	and	if	you	can	really	be	sad	when	he	is	sad,	you	will	share
his	sadness	and	you	will	help	him	to	come	out	of	it	because	that	shared	sadness
will	become	thin.	You	understand?	--	there	is	an	inner	working	in	it.	If	you	can
really	share	his	sadness,	immediately	he	will	feel	uplifted	from	it,	because	a	lot
of	the	burden	has	been	taken	by	you....	And	that's	the	whole	purpose	of	love!	It
works	 just	 the	same	with	 joy	but	 then	 in	a	very	different	way.	That's	how	it	 is
decided	what	 is	negative	 and	what	 is	positive.	 If	 he	 is	happy	and	you	become
happy	 and	 elated	with	 it,	 a	 euphoria	 surrounds	 you	 both,	 his	 joy	will	 become
double.	 If	 he	 is	 sad	 and	 you	 become	 one	 with	 his	 sadness,	 his	 sadness	 will
become	half.
So	 this	 is	 my	 definition	 of	 a	 positive	 emotion:	 if	 by	 sharing	 it	 grows,	 it	 is
positive;	if	by	sharing	it	is	diminished,	it	is	negative.	But	one	has	to	share	both.
And	when	you	share	his	sadnesses,	his	joys,	he	will	share	your	sadnesses,	your
joy.	So	nobody	is	at	a	loss.	It	is	not	only	one	way	--	that	when	he	is	sad	you	have
to	be	sad	with	him	and	when	you	are	sad	you	have	to	be	sad	alone.	It	is	not	one
way:	he	will	be	sad	with	you.	The	more	you	participate	in	each	other's	being,	the
more	you	will	find	your	sadness	becomes	less	and	less.	The	total	result	will	be
very	very	great.	The	sadness	will	become	less	and	less	and	less	and	one	day	you
will	see	 that	sadness	has	disappeared	or	 is	only	just	on	the	margin,	somewhere
distant.	The	joy	will	go	on	increasing	and	you	will	become	bigger	and	bigger.	f
you	stop	sharing	sadness	you	will	stop	sharing	joy	too.
It	is	not	possible	to	share	only	the	positive;	that	is	not	possible.	They	both	have
to	be	either	shared	or	not	shared;	 they	are	both	together.	How	can	you	become
happy	when	he	is	happy	if	you	don't	become	unhappy	when	he	is	unhappy?	It	is
impossible!
But	nothing	is	wrong	in	what	you	are	experiencing.	That	very	desire	to	stop	it	is
selfish.	Drop	it.	Be	really	sad	when	he	is	sad.	If	you	start	crying	you	will	see	that
he	is	coming	out	of	it,	suddenly	he	is	coming	out	of	the	cloud.	When	somebody
is	there	to	share	so	much	how	can	he	create	your	sadness?	He	will	start	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
coming	up	and	when	he	starts	coming	you	can	come	up.
And	this	is	true	from	the	other	side	also.	Share	each	other's	joy,	sadnesses.	Share
with	each	other	whatsoever	is	available	at	the	moment.	Yes,	sometimes	it	is	dark
but	 that	 is	part	of	 the	game	of	 love.	 In	 fact	one	 should	be	happy	 that	one	was
present	when	the	friend	was	unhappy.	The	burden	has	been	shared.	We	owe	it	to
each	other	when	we	love.	So	try	this:	share	the	burden	totally.	Very	few	people
share	it	totally	because	a	kind	of	reluctance	is	there,	mm?	He	is	sad	so	that	is	his
problem;	why	should	you	bother?	You	have	your	own	problems,	you	have	your
own	sadnesses	--	enough!	And	why	should	you	share	his?
In	fact	if	you	are	not	ready	to	share	when	he	is	sad,	you	will	feel	a	kind	of	anger
arising	in	you.	Why	is	he	sad?	Why	does	he	create	this	situation	again	and	again
of	being	sad	and	making	you	feel	guilty?	If	you	don't	feel	sad	you	feel	guilty;	if
you	feel	sad	that	looks	foolish.	You	will	be	angry	if	you	don't	share;	it	is	better	to
share.	With	 sharing	 there	 is	no	guilt,	 no	 anger,	 and	 sharing	 is	 always	bringing
you	closer	and	closer.	What	you	share	does	not	matter:	sharing	brings	you	closer
and	closer.
And	it	happens	sometimes...	in	the	beginning	it	is	a	kind	of	sympathy,	but	by	and
by	it	becomes	empathy	if	you	go	on	sharing.	It	has	happened	sometimes	between
lovers	that	if	one	is	ill	the	illness	is	transferred.
Suddenly	 you	 take	 it	 --	 that	 is	 empathy.	 Suddenly	 the	 other	 is	 healthy.	 And
naturally,	 if	 you	 can	 take	 the	 other's	 illness	 it	will	 disappear	 sooner	 from	 you
because	 it	will	 not	 find	any	background	 in	 the	body.	He	 is	 ill	 because	 there	 is
some	cause	for	the	illness	in	his	body.	If	you	can	share	totally	and	his	illness	is
transferred	 to	 you,	 if	 you	 take	 it	 upon	 yourself,	 it	 will	 disappear	 very	 soon
because	you	will	not	have	any	cause	for	it.
In	 the	ancient	days	 lovers	knew	 that	 art	very	deeply;	 that's	why	 love	has	been
called	a	healing	energy.
This	 is	 the	 way	 love	 heals.	 If	 the	 illness	 remains	 with	 him	 it	 may	 take	 three
months	or	two	months	or	a	year	to	get	rid	of	it,	because	he	has	physical	reasons
for	his	illnesses.	If	it	can	be	taken	by	somebody	who	has	no	physical	reasons	for
it	 to	 exist,	 it	 will	 disappear	 within	 hours	 or	 minutes	 even	 It	 depends	 on	 how
intensely	you	have	taken	it	in.	It	can	be	burned	in	a	single	moment	and	he	can	be
healed.
So	don't	be	too	selfish.	Relax	into	each	other.	Problems	are	there.	Every	human
being	has	problems	and	 they	are	good	because	 through	 them	one	grows.	Mm?
first	try	sympathy	and	go	deeper	into	empathy.	One	day	you	will	be	surprised	at
what	a	great	secret	has	become	available	 to	you.	There	are	many	stories	 in	 the
East....
There	was	a	great	musician	in	South	India.	He	was	one	hundred	years	old	and	all
his	 disciples	 had	 gathered	 to	 celebrate	 his	 last	 birthday	 because	 they	were	 not
expecting	him	to	survive	any	longer:	one	hundred	is	too	much.	All	the	disciples
had	brought	gifts.	There	were	many	kings	who	were	his	disciples;	he	was	one	of
the	most	 famous	musicians.	 There	were	 rich	 people....	 Thousands	 of	 disciples
had	gathered	and	everybody	had	brought	precious	gifts	--	diamonds	and	money
and	things	like	that.
One	beggar	who	was	also	his	disciple	came	there	empty-handed.	When	he	was
bowing	 down	 to	 the	master,	 somebody	who	was	 standing	 there	 said,	 'Empty-
handed?	 You	 have	 not	 brought	 anything?	 Couldn't	 you	 even	 get	 a	 flower?'...
because	in	the	East	it	seems	to	be	unmannerly,	mm?	anything,	even	a	leaf	from	a
tree	will	do.	 It	 is	not	 that	 it	has	 to	be	valuable	or	anything...	anything,	but	one
should	not	go	empty-handed.
The	beggar	stood	up	and	he	said,	'Yes,	I	have	brought	something.	I	have	brought
my	life	--	I	give	my	life	to	you!'	And	he	died	then	and	there.	He	was	only	thirty
years,	perfectly	healthy	and	young	as	only	a	beggar	can	be!	He	immediately	died
then	and	there,	and	the	master	 lived	forty	years	more.	Maybe	that	was	his	age,
seventy	years.
This	 is	 absolute	 empathy.	 This	 is	 possible	 through	 love.	Miracles	 are	 possible
through	love.	The	impossible	can	become	possible	through	love.
[A	 seeker	 says	 that	 recently	 he	 began	 to	 feel	 a	 futility	 about	 life;	 hence	 the
attraction	 of	 the	 ashram.	 Now	 he	 feels	 there	 are	 forces	 that	 make	 his	 taking
sannyas	almost	inevitable,	yet	there	is	resistance	on	his	part.
He	doesn't	feel	ready	for	it	because	he	wants	to	lead	his	life	his	way.
Osho	says	 that	he	only	helps	one	 to	go	on	whatever	path	one	 is	spontaneously
moving.
Sannyas	does	not	 interfere	with	your	 life,	 he	 says.	 It	 enhances	 it.	 It	 gives	 you
freedom,	freedom	to	be	yourself.	Sannyas	is	just	an	availability	to	me	and	to	the
energy	 that	 is	 happening	here.	 I	 am	not	giving	you	knowledge;	 I	 am	 trying	 to
participate	in	your	being.
He	then	says	this	sense	of	life's	meaninglessness	is	significant;	it	can	be	a	turning
point	--	suicide	or	transformation	are	open	to	one.]
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 he	 feels	 stuck	 because	 he	 never	 really	 goes	 into	 anything
totally;	never	finishes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
anything.]
Nothing	is	the	problem,	mm?	Your	energy	is	perfectly	okay;	there	is	no	problem.
It	just	must	be	that	you	have	some	idea,	an	idea	of	becoming	too	happy,	joyful,
this	and	that.	You	ask	too	much	it	seems.
What	 is	 happening	 is	 perfectly	 good,	 but	 if	 you	 ask	 too	 much,	 then	 in
comparison	it	is	not	always	as	it	should	be:	it	falls	short.	Your	energy	is	flowing
perfectly.	You	are	not	defensive	or	anything;	it	is	just	that	you	have	some	ideas
that	 one	 should	 be	 greatly	 euphoric,	 ecstatic,	 this	 and	 that.	 And	 everything
happens	only	when	you	are	ready	for	it,	so	just	accept	yourself	as	you	are.
And	 closing	 is	 not	 always	 wrong.	 Sometimes	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good,	 because
sometimes	the	person	who	comes	has	such	energy	that	it	is	better	to	close	than	to
remain	open.	Opening	in	itself	is	not	virtue,	neither	is	closing	in	itself	a	sin.	But
that's	how	people	work:	they	start	making	virtue	and	sin	out	of	everything.
What	is	needed	is	flexibility	--	neither	openness	nor	closedness,	just	flexibility.
When	something	is	there	which	has	to	be	received,	one	should	be	able	to	open,
and	when	there	is	something	which	has	not	to	be	received,	one	should	be	capable
of	 closing.	 And	 people	 want	 to	 get	 fixed:	 either	 they	 want	 to	 be	 fixed	 with
closedness....	So	they	are	always	closed.	It	goes	on	raining	--	not	a	single	drop	of
water	reaches	them....	Or	they	are	open,	so	even	if	poison	is	coming	they	cannot
close,	they	cannot	defend	themselves.
To	me,	the	quality	that	is	needed	is	flexibility:	neither	openness	nor	closedness.
One	should	be	able	to	move	from	this	to	that	easily,	spontaneously.
Simply	continue	as	you	are	and	start	being	more	accepting	of	your	spaces:	 the
closed	 space,	 the	 open	 space,	 the	 joyous,	 the	 sad,	 the	 creative,	 the	 uncreative.
Accept	 all:	 all	 are	 part	 of	 you!	And	 one	 should	 not	make	 too	many	 demands,
otherwise	one	becomes	tense.	Now	you	become	interested	and	you	start	creating
a	thing	and	then	you	become	disinterested,	so	keep	it	away!	Who	is	forcing	you
and	why	should	you	force	yourself?
When	Coleridge	died	he	left	thousands	of	poems	incomplete,	thousands,	exactly
forty	thousand.	For	his	whole	life	people	were	saying	'Why	don't	you	complete
them?'	Sometimes	only	one	line	was	missing,	but	he	would	say,	 'The	poem	has
to	complete	 itself.	 It	 flowed	up	 to	 this	point	and	 then	 it	 stopped.	Who	am	I	 to
complete	it?'	He	said,	'I	have	tried	--	it	is	not	that	I	have	not	tried:	I	have	tried.	I
have	managed	to	put	in	one	line	of	my	own	but	it	never	fits.	Something	is	wrong.
Those	 other	 lines	 are	 spontaneous;	 this	 line	 is	 just	made,	manufactured.	 They
don't	 meet,	 they	 are	 poles	 apart	 and	my	 line	 hangs	 there	 very	 ugly.	 Ordinary
people	will	not	understand	it	but	whenever	a	poet	reads	my	poem	he	will	see	that
have	been	trying	to	deceive	people!'
And	I'm	completely	 in	agreement	with	Coleridge.	He	was	really	a	poet	and	he
had	 the	 sensibility,	 the	 aesthetic	 sense,	 that	 one	 should	 not	 force	 anything.	He
completed	 only	 very	 few	 poems,	 exactly	 seven.	 But	 he	 became	 one	 of	 the
greatest	poets;	even	those	seven	are	great.
Just	do	whatsoever	is	happening.	If	it	has	stopped	then	nothing....	God	does	not
want	it	to	be	completed.
And	 all	 complete	 things	 are	 not	 beautiful,	 remember;	 sometimes	 incomplete
things	have	immense	beauty.
Musicians	 say	 that	 incomplete	 symphonies	 are	 the	 greatest	 because	 when
something	is	complete	it	is	dead	too.	There	are	many	places	in	India	which	have
never	 been	 completed,	 something	 has	 been	 left	 incomplete,	 because	 when	 a
thing	is	complete	it	is	dead,	there	is	no	growth	in	it.	Something	unfinished	keeps
a	thing	alive.	Something	unfinished	keeps	energy	flowing.	Something	unfinished
gives	you	space	to	think,	to	imagine.
Have	you	observed	this	fact?	If	a	woman	is	standing	naked,	utterly	naked,	soon
you	 become	 disinterested	 in	 her.	What	 is	 the	 message?	Why	 do	 you	 become
disinterested	 in	 a	 naked	woman?	 If	 she	 is	wearing	 some	 clothes,	 just	 a	 bikini,
that	will	do	to	keep	you	interested.	Everything	is	complete	in	her	nakedness	and
your	imagination	cannot	go	on	flowing.	How	long	can	you	look?	That	nakedness
is	complete	and	there	is	no	point	anywhere	about	which	you	can	imagine.
People	think	that	clothes	were	invented	to	hide	nakedness;	that's	not	my	opinion.
Clothes	were	invented	to	enhance	nakedness,	to	enhance	curiosity.	Clothes	were
invented	to	create	beauty.	A	hidden	thing	is	always	inviting	because	you	would
like	to	explore	it,	to	see	it,	and	you	will	see	this:	an	Eastern	woman	seems	to	be
more	inviting	than	a	Western	woman.	An	Eastern	woman	hiding	in	her	sari	and
very	very	shy	seems	more	attractive.	A	Western	woman	is	more	natural,	simple,
open.	You	can	see	her	naked,	 that's	not	much	of	a	difficulty,	but	 then	she	does
not	create	imagination	and	dream	in	you.
My	 observation	 is	 that	 the	 Eastern	 woman	 knows	much	more	 about	 how	 the
mind	functions	than	the	Western	woman.	Things	incomplete,	unfinished,	hidden,
always	 keep	 you	 alive.	Don't	 be	worried:	 if	 something	 comes...	 and	 creativity
always	 comes	 like	 a	 breeze.	 One	 moment	 it	 is	 there,	 then	 it	 is	 gone.	 When
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it	 is	gone,	 it	 is	gone;	you	 start	doing	 something	else.	Enjoy	yourself	 and	don't
demand.	Good!
[A	sannyasin	says:	For	 the	 last	 two	days	 I've	been	going	 through	a	 lot	of	very
strong	feelings,	feeling	as	if	a	part	of	me	is	dying.	I	wanted	to	come	and	ask	your
help	for	this.
Osho	checks	her	energy.]
Nothing	to	be	worried;	it	 is	something	to	be	happy	about.	It	 is	the	dead	part	in
you	that	is	dying.
Everybody	 carries	many	 dead	 things,	 and	wh	 those	 dead	 things	 start	 dropping
you	 feel	 as	 if	 something	 in	you	 is	dying.	Really,	 something	dead	 is	dying	and
once	 it	 is	dead	 the	new,	 the	fresh,	will	start	growing.	It	 is	something	beautiful.
Allow	it	to	die;	say	good-bye	to	it.
Everybody	is	carrying	many	dead	things,	always	remember.	We	are	burdened	by
dead	things,	they	are	hanging	all	around.	But	we	have	always	been	thinking	that
they	 are	 part	 of	 our	 being,	 so	when	 one	 thing	 starts	 falling	 the	mind	wants	 to
cling	 to	 it.	The	mind	becomes	afraid,	 as	 if	 something	 is	being	 lost.	Nothing	 is
being	lost.
If	all	these	dead	things	disappear,	for	the	first	time	you	will	become	totally	alive.
Death	is	the	way	of	resurrection	and	dead	things	should	be	allowed	to	die.	Jesus
says	to	let	the	dead	bury	their	dead	--	he	means	exactly	this.	So	life	abundant	can
become	available.
Simply	let	it	drop	with	no	fuss,	no	clinging.	Good!
The	Open	Secret
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
30	November	1977	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7711305
ShortTitle:	OPENSE29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin	 says	 all	 his	 money	 has	 gone	 to	 his	 wife,	 from	 whom	 he	 has
separated,	so	now	he	is	unable	to	stay	in	Poona,	and	does	not	know	what	to	do....
he	feels	very	happy	here	and	would	like	to	stay...	but	doesn't	really	care.]
....	If	you	want	to	stay,	you	can	do	something	in	the	ashram	and	be	here.	But	if
you	don't	care,	that	won't	help;	you	will	not	be	a	part.	You	have	to	care,	because
I	don't	like	people	around	me	who	don't	care;	they	prove	useless.	You	cannot	do
anything	beautifully	if	you	don't	care....
If	 you	want	 to	 be	 here,	 something	 can	 be	 done.	 If	 the	money	 is	 gone	 and	 the
wife,	it	is	good,	mm?
something	 can	 be	 done;	 you	 can	 do	 something	 here.	But	 then	 you	 have	 to	 be
caring.	You	have	to	love	the	work,	you	have	to	love	what	is	happening	here	and
you	have	to	be	really	involved	in	it;	then	there	is	no	problem.	We	will	see.	Keep
this	(a	box)	with	you.	Good.
[A	 sannyasin	 says:	 I'm	 having	 a	 very	 simple	 life,	 going	 from	 place	 to	 place,
eating,	drinking,	walking,	being	 in	 the	ashram.	I've	been	following	this	 life	for
one	year	already....	It	feels	beautiful.]
Then	continue,	mm?	That's	perfectly	good.	If	you	can	afford	 to	be	a	vagabond
then	there	is	nothing	like	it,	mm?	--	it	is	perfectly	good.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	sannyasin	says	that	he	has	been	crying	almost	every	day.	He	is	afraid	it	might
become	a	habit.]
No,	it's	perfectly	okay;	not	only	okay,	it	will	be	helpful.	you	can	cry	every	day	it
is	a	kind	of	unburdening.	t	is	a	kind	of	cleansing....
We	gather	dust	and	if	you	really	cry,	all	dust	is	washed	away....
No,	no,	nothing...	nothing.	And	even	if	it	does,	it	is	a	good	habit!	Nothing	to	be
worried	about.	If	a	man	can	cry	every	day	this	is	prayer.	And	if	you	can	cry	for
no	reason	at	all	it	has	a	tremendous	beauty	to	it;	it	is	sheer	joy!	--	it	has	nothing
to	do	with	misery.	When	you	cry	because	of	a	certain	reason	there	is	misery,	but
if	it	is	just	a	purifying	process,	then	it	is	good.	Continue....
[The	sannyasin	asks	if	the	crying	is	part	of	the	path	of	prayer	Osho	spoke	about
in	his	discourses	on	the	Hassids.]
You	cry!	I	am	your	zaddik.	Be	a	Hassid!
[A	 visiting	 doctor	 says	 that	 a	 few	 years	 ago	 he	 left	medicine	 and	moved	 into
leading	groups	to	help	people	go	deeper.	He	had	an	experience	where	everything
dissolved	 and	 he	 became	 terrified.	 He	 tried	 the	 Shraddha	 group	 here	 but	 was
unable	to	express	himself	in	it.	Osho	checks	his	energy.]
That	type	of	group	is	not	needed;	you	need	a	different	kind	of	work.	Your	energy
is	 there	 and	 in	 a	 very	beautiful	 space.	No	need	 for	 any	 catharsis.	You	have	 to
move	more	 creatively	 rather	 than	 in	 catharsis.	You	 have	 to	 give	 this	 energy	 a
creative	dimension.
All	that	has	happened	has	been	good.	That	disappearance	was	also	very	good.	It
will	happen	many	times,	and	each	 time	it	happens	 it	will	shake	you	more	 than
the	previous;	you	will	become	more	frightened.
So	learn	not	to	be	frightened.	Because	when	energy	starts	moving	it	passes	seven
layers	and	as	 it	passes	each	 layer	 it	disappears	 for	a	period.	Naturally,	because
you	have	known	it	on	one	level.	When	it	moves	into	another	level,	you	don't	find
it	 on	 the	 first	 level	 any	 more;	 suddenly	 you	 are	 frightened.	 And	 you	 cannot
become	aware	of	the	second	layer	immediately:	it	will	take	a	little	time.	When	it
becomes	 available	 on	 the	 second	 layer,	 when	 your	 consciousness	 reaches	 the
second,	 then....	 There	 will	 be	 a	 gap	 between	 the	 energy	 movement	 and	 the
consciousness	reaching	it.	In	that	gap	you	will	always	feel	very	much	frightened,
as	if	a	kind	of	death	is	happening.	You	have	become	empty,	all	is	gone	and	you
are	utterly	exhausted.	There	seems	to	be	no	way	out	of	it;	you	are	stuck	in	a	kind
of	emptiness.
It	is	frightening,	it	is	a	death;	on	one	level	you	have	died.	On	another	level	you
will	be	 reborn	but	 there	will	be	a	 small	gap.	 If	you	become	 too	 frightened	 the
gap	will	take	a	longer	time.	If	you	are	not	frightened,	if	you	can	remain	a	silent
witness,	undisturbed,	unperturbed,	then	the	gap	will	be	of	a	very	small	period.
After	 three,	 four	crossings,	 the	gap	will	be	almost	 immediate	because	you	will
know;	 then	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	But	 for	 the	 first	 time	 it	 always	 happens;	 one
becomes	scared.
The	 energy	 has	moved	 from	 the	 first	 level	 to	 the	 second	 and	 this	way	 it	 will
move	up	to	the	seventh.
Those	 are	 the	 seven	 chakras	 in	 eastern	 psychology.	 They	 are	 not	 physical
phenomena	so	you	cannot	find	them	in	the	body.	They	are	not	part	of	the	body,
they	are	part	of	the	subtle	body,	they	are	part	of	your	energy-body.
You	have	come	in	a	very	very	right	moment.	Do	a	few	things	here....	Don't	do
any	cathartic	method	--
Dynamic	Meditation,	no.	Do	Sufi	Dancing;	that	will	be	good.	Do	chanting;	that
will	be	good.	Do	the	Music	group	in	the	night	and	then	the	camp	is	coming.	In
the	 camp	 do	 Nadabrahma;	 a	 humming	 meditation	 will	 be	 there.	 Nataraj,	 a
dancing	 meditation	 will	 be	 there.	 You	 have	 to	 look	 around	 at	 whatsoever	 is
available	here.
Do	the	non-cathartic	ones.	And	I	will	suggest	that	you	do	a	few	groups	after	the
[camp].	The	first	group	you	do	is	Zazen,	the	second	group	is	Rebirthing,	and	the
third	group	is	Leela,	these	three	groups.
Just	 remain	 available,	 open	 and	 much	 is	 going	 to	 happen.	 But	 you	 need	 not
enforce	it.	It	will	come	in	a	kind	of	effortlessness....	So	don't	force	it	in	any	way.
If	 you	 force	 it	 you	 will	 be	 preventing	 it.	 When	 something	 is	 happening
spontaneously,	on	its	own,	just	remain	available	to	it.	Be	in	a	pregnant	awaiting,
thrilled,	 welcoming,	 but	 not	 making	 any	 deliberate	 effort	 for	 it	 to	 happen,
because	that	deliberate	effort	is	ego	effort	and	it	will	prevent	your	process.
Deliberate	 effort	 is	 helpful	when	 the	 energy	 is	 not	moving.	 Then	 it	 has	 to	 be
moved.	Once	it	starts	moving,	once	the	river	has	started	flowing,	you	can	flow
with	it.	And	it	is	better	not	to	push:	let	things	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
happen	in	their	own	time,	in	their	own	season.	This	is	what	trust	is,	and	the	more
you	 trust,	 the	more	 they	will	 be	 happening,	 because	 you	 become	 a	 channel,	 a
receptivity.
What	 I	 mean	 in	 short	 is	 that	 you	 become	 feminine....	 Male	 means	 effort,
aggressive,	 an	 effort	 to	 conquer,	 an	 effort	 to	 prove;	 feminine	means	 receptive,
passive,	no	effort	to	prove,	no	effort	to	go	anywhere...	just	waiting,	a	womb.	And
become	a	sannyasin!
[The	visitor	answers:	I	shall	see.]
If	you	shall	see	then	I	will	not	give	you	sannyas...	because	you	seeing	will	be	a
disturbance.	Just	wait	don't	see....
Just	wait;	 it	will	 happen	 one	 day	 and	 then	 don't	 prevent	 it.	That's	 all	 that	 you
have	to	see	--	that	you	don't	prevent	it.
[The	visitor	 says:	 I	 think	 I	 already	am	a	 sannyasin,	 except	 in	 this	moment	 I'm
not!]
Even	that	 idea	will	become	a	prevention	--	 that	you	are	already	a	sannyasin	so
what	is	the	need	to	become	a	sannyasin?	Mm?	that	can	be	a	trick,	a	strategy	of
the	very	cunning	mind:	'I	am	already,	so	then	there	is	no	problem!'
No,	you	are	not!	Keep	it	in	mind	that	you	are	not	yet.	Only	then	can	you	become,
otherwise	how	will	you	become?	And	when	 it	happens,	 just	 see	 that	you	don't
prevent	 it.	Then	don't	 find	explanations	and	rationalizations:	simply	come	here
and	become	one.	Good.
[A	visitor,	who	has	been	meditating	and	attending	discourses	 in	 the	ashram	for
three	months,	says	he	is	finally	breaking	out	of	his	shell...
Osho	recommends	a	group	for	him,	and	checks	his	energy.]
Mm!	That's	right.	Good!	The	shell	is	breaking.	There	are	cracks,	and	soon	it	can
fall	and	you	can	be	reborn.	You	will	have	to	remember	a	few	things.	One	is,	start
praying	 every	 night	 and	 that	 will	 be	 very	 very	 helpful.	 Don't	 do	 any	 formal
prayer	--	just	whatsoever	happens	in	the	moment,	just	a	small	chitchat	with	God,
whosoever	he	is.	Put	the	lights	off,	sit	in	your	bed,	and	just	have	a	little	dialogue
with	the	universe	--
call	it	God	or	existence.	It	is	not	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular.
And	you	have	to	be	spontaneous.	Just	sometimes	saying	'hello'	will	do,	or	'how
are	 you?'	 or	 anything	 that	 comes	 in	 that	moment	 that	 you	would	 like	 to	 share
with	existence.	As	 if	 existence	were	a	person,	 share	 in	 the	 same	way.	Assume
that	existence	 is	a	person	 just	 standing	 there	 in	 the	darkness	of	your	 room	and
have	a	little	chitchat.	That	will	help	you	very	much:	it	will	give	you	courage,	it
will	give	you	trust	and	it	will	give	you	a	kind	of	protection.
The	 problem	 arises	when	 the	 shell	 starts	 breaking	 and	 becomes	 afraid,	 shaky,
mm?	because	the	known	is	disappearing,	the	familiar	is	falling	apart	and	one	is
moving	into	the	unknown	and	the	uncharted.	One	never	knows	what	is	going	to
happen	 so	 naturally	 one	 clings	 to	 the	 familiar.	 It	 seems	 like	 a	 shelter	 and	 a
security	and	it	looks	convenient.
Prayer	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 things	 in	 such	moments,	 so	 every	 night	 be	 in	 a
prayerful	 mood.	 I'm	 not	 suggesting	 any	 prayer	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,	 or
Mohammedan,	but	anything	that	happens.	Sometimes	you	will	be	laughing	and
sometimes	you	will	be	crying;	 everything	 is	good!	But	go	 into	 that	 trust.	That
trust	bridges	you	with	existence.	One	becomes	more	courageous,	daring,	and	that
daring	is	needed	now.
And	 the	second	 thing:	be	more	 loving.	That	will	 support	your	prayer,	 that	will
become	a	base	for	prayer.
Be	more	 loving	because	 love	 is	 closest	 to	prayer.	And	a	man	who	 is	 loving	 is
always	more	 courageous	 than	 the	man	 who	 is	 not	 loving,	 because	 the	 loving
person	feels	a	kind	of	 friendliness	surrounding	him.	The	unloving	person	 feels
alone,	the	unloving	person	feels	that	everybody	is	the	enemy	and	he	is	insecure.
The	loving	person	feels	secure.	So	love	as	much	as	you	can!
These	are	just	general	indications....	And	then	come	back.	Much	is	possible	but
come	for	a	longer	time,	mm?	And	then	on	the	eleventh	be	totally	open.	Good.
[A	 seeker	 asks	 if	 his	 sannyasin	 girlfriend	 can	 sit	 next	 to	 him	 while	 he	 takes
sannyas.]
Prem	means	love,	vandan	means	prayer.	Become	a	love	prayer.	Those	so-called
religious	prayers	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
verbal.	A	 love	prayer	 is	 existential.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 can	do	 in	 the
church,	in	the	temple.	It	is	something	that	you	have	to	do	twenty-four	hours,	IN
LIfe.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 loving.	 That	 becomes	 your	 prayer.	 And	 you	 have	 to	 be
loving	 to	everybody	and	all	 --	even	sometimes	when	you	don't	 like	a	person.	 I
cannot	tell	you	to	like	him,	because	what	can	you	do?	If	you	don't	like	him,	you
don't	like	him,	but	still	you	can	love,	and	that	is	a	totally	different	thing.
You	 don't	 like	 the	 person,	 you	 know	 that	 you	 don't	 like	 the	 person,	 but	 he	 is
God's	creation	and	God	exists	in	him	as	much	as	in	you.	Your	personal	opinion
does	 not	matter	 --	whether	 you	 like	 him	or	 not.	You	 owe	 that	much,	 that	 you
have	to	love	him.	That	is	the	meaning	when	Jesus	says,	'Love	your	enemies'...
because	they	belong	to	God	as	much	as	you	do.	In	this	particular	situation	they
function	 against	 you	 and	 you	 are	 against	 them	 but	 that	 doesn't	 matter.	 The
ultimate	remains	true.	Likings,	dislikings,	come	and	change;	love	remains.	So	be
in	an	existential	love	prayer.
Ordinary	 prayer	 is	 limited:	 you	 do	 it	 once	 a	 day	 and	 then	 your	 whole	 life	 is
against	 it.	 For	 half	 an	 hour	 you	 are	 prayerful	 and	 for	 twenty-three	 and	 a	 half
hours	 you	 are	 anti-prayer.	Now	 how	 is	 your	 prayer	 going	 to	 have	 any	 effect?
What	you	do	in	half	an	hour	you	destroy	in	twenty-three	hours.	It	is	not	possible:
the	palace	will	never	be	created.
Love	has	to	be	something	like	a	quality	of	your	life	--	that	each	moment	you	are
prayerful.	 You	 see	 the	 rock	 and	 you	 are	 loving,	 you	 see	 the	 tree	 and	 you	 are
loving,	you	see	people	and	you	are	loving.	There	is	no	need	even	to	say	to	them
that	you	 love;	 that	 is	not	needed.	You	may	not	know	 the	person,	you	may	not
even	 see	his	 face	 --	you	have	 just	been	 looking	at	him	 from	behind,	you	have
been	walking	behind	him	--	but	you	can	be	loving!	This	love	is	the	real	prayer
and	only	this	prayer	is	ever	fulfilled;	all	other	prayers	simply	go	down	the	drain.
[A	visitor	has	come	to	visit	his	wife	who	is	a	sannyasin	here.	He	says	it	was	good
to	 see	her	 again...	 the	 first	 day	he	did	not	 notice	 a	 change,	 but	 each	day	he	 is
discovering	new	things.]
The	first	day	she	was	not	changed	because	it	always	happens	that	when	you	meet
somebody	with	whom	you	have	been	related	for	a	long	time,	you	fall	into	the	old
trap	 immediately.	One	 relapses	 very	 easily.	That	may	have	 caused	 it	 and	 your
idea	'How	can	one	change?	One	is	not	supposed	to	change.'
People	 have	 a	 kind	 of	 tacit	 belief	 that	 nobody	 ever	 changes;	 all	 remains	 the
same.	This	tacit	belief	is	there	because	it	helps	you	not	to	bother	about	changing.
It	 doesn't	 happen	 so	 why	 bother?	 Why	 hanker	 for	 something	 which	 is	 not
possible?	It	keeps	millions	of	people	untransformed,	this	idea	--	that	nobody	ever
changes.
So	people	are	very	reluctant	 to	believe	 that	somebody	has	changed.	People	are
very	 reluctant,	 very	 resistant,	 and	 even	 if	 you	 say	 that	 somebody	has	 changed
they	will	find	ways	and	means	to	prove	that	no,	nothing	has	changed.	This	is	a
kind	 of	 self-defence.	 They	 are	 saying	 'If	 [the	wife]	 can	 change	 then	 I	 am	 left
behind.	 I	 feel	a	 little	 inferior.	No,	 it	cannot	be	possible:	she	must	be	deceiving
me	or	must	have	been	deceived.	She	has	become	hypnotized	or	she	has	become
auto-hypnotized.	She	only	thinks,	believes,	that	she	has	changed.'
Ordinarily	we	try	to	find	ways,	excuses,	reasons,	to	prove,	'Look,	here	you	are	--
just	the	same	as	you	have	always	been'.	That	relaxes	us;	then	we	are	relieved	of	a
burden	--	that	neither	she	nor	anybody	else	has	changed	so	we	can	enjoy	being
as	we	are.	That	also,	and	this	too	-that	seeing	you,	she	will	relapse...
unconsciously.
It	happens	that	if	you	have	not	met	for	ten	months	the	meeting	has	to	start	again
from	 the	 point	 where	 you	 left	 off.	 That	 ten	month	 gap	 has	 to	 be	 bridged.	 So
when	you	first	saw	her	and	she	first	saw	you,	you	saw	her	the	way	you	had	seen
her	ten	months	ago,	because	it	is	from	there	it	will	begin.	And	that	is	natural.
That's	why	when	people	meet	they	talk	about	past	days	and	reminiscences,	and
memories,	 mm?	 That	 is	 a	 way	 to	 settle	 the	 gap	 in	 between	 so	 that	 they	 can
become	contemporaries	 again.	First	 they	have	 to	go	 into	 the	past.	Two	 friends
meeting	after	five	years	will	have	to	first	have	a	long	talk	overnight	about	things
which	 are	 no	more	meaningful	 but	which	 have	 a	 certain	 relevance.	Mm?	 then
those	five	years	are	accounted	for;	they	can	start	from	there.
So	that	must	have	caused...	Otherwise	she	has	changed,	and	you	are	also	going
to	change!	It	is	better	to	believe	that	people	change,	that	helps	you	to	change.	It
is	always	good	to	believe	that	change	is	possible.
Then	it	becomes	possible	because	sooner	or	later	thoughts	turn	into	things.	But	it
is	good	that	it	lasted	only	one	day	and	then	you	started	seeing
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(to	the	wife)	Help	him	to	see	more	and	don't	behave	in	any	way	in	the	past.	Mm?
that's	your	duty	 towards	him.	Even	 if	 sometimes	he	provokes	you,	knowingly,
unknowingly	into	something	past,	don't	get	hooked.	Just	remain	as	you	are	now.
Don't	go	back	into	the	past.	That	will	be	a	great	help	for	him	because	he	is	also
seeking	something,	he	is	also	groping.	Help	him!
Anand	means	bliss,	 deepak	means	 a	 small	 lamp	 --	 a	 small	 lamp	of	 bliss.	And
sannyas	is	a	beginning	of	a	small,	small	flame.	But	soon	it	becomes	a	great	fire,
a	wild	 fire.	Hence	 the	colour	orange	has	been	chosen	 for	 it:	 it	 is	 the	colour	of
fire.	It	burns	you	totally	and	out	of	the	ashes,	the	phoenix,	the	rebirth.	The	new
arises	out	of	the	death	of	the	old....
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
