
Yoga:	The	Science	of	the	Soul,	Vol.1
The	Path	of	Yoga
	
Discovering	the	Essence	and	Origin	of	Yoga
	
The	Yoga	Sutras	of	Patanjali
	
	
OSHO
	
Copyright	©	1973,	2013	OSHO	International	Foundation
www.osho.com/copyrights
	
Images	and	cover	design	©	OSHO	International	Foundation
	
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	or	transmitted	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,
electronic	or	mechanical,	including	photocopying,	recording,	or	by	any	information	storage	and	retrieval
system,	without	prior	written	permission	from	the	publisher.
	
OSHO	is	a	registered	trademark	of	OSHO	International	Foundation
www.osho.com/trademarks
	
Previously	published	as	Yoga:	The	Alpha	and	the	Omega,	Vol.	1
	
The	Path	of	Yoga		is	from	the	series	Yoga:	The	Science	of	the	Soul,	Vol.1.	It	is	also	available	as	a	print
edition	ISBN-13:	978-0-918963-09-3
	
This	book	is	a	series	of	original	talks	by	Osho,	given	to	a	live	audience.	All	of	Osho’s	talks	have	been
published	in	full	as	books,	and	are	also	available	as	original	audio	recordings.	Audio	recordings	and	the
complete	text	archive	can	be	found	via	the	online	OSHO	Library	at
www.osho.com/library
	
Original	sutras	from	The	Yoga	Sutras	of	Patanjali	translated	from	Sanskrit	by	Yoga	Chinmaya,	Copyright	©
1973	OSHO	International	Foundation.
	
OSHO	MEDIA	INTERNATIONAL
is	an	imprint	of
OSHO	INTERNATIONAL
New	York	–	Zurich	–	Mumbai
www.osho.com/oshointernational
	
	
Library	of	Congress	Catalog-In-Publication	Data	is	available
	
ISBN-13:	978-0-88050-291-7
	
Preface
	
Mind	is	not	a	thing,	but	an	event.	A	thing	has	substance	in	it;	an	event	is	just
a	process.	A	 thing	 is	 like	a	 rock;	an	event	 is	 like	a	wave:	 it	exists,	but	 is	not
substantial.	It	 is	 just	 the	event	between	the	wind	and	the	ocean	–	a	process,	a
phenomenon.
This	is	the	first	thing	to	be	understood:	that	mind	is	a	process,	like	a	wave	or
like	a	river,	but	it	has	no	substance	in	it.	If	it	has	substance,	then	it	cannot	be
dissolved.	If	it	has	no	substance,	it	can	disappear	without	leaving	a	single	trace
behind.	When	a	wave	disappears	into	the	ocean	what	is	left	behind?	–	nothing,
not	even	a	trace.	So	those	who	have	known	say	mind	is	like	a	bird	flying	into
the	 sky	 –	 no	 footprints	 are	 left	 behind,	 not	 even	 a	 trace.	 The	 bird	 flies	 but
leaves	no	path,	no	footprints.
The	 mind	 is	 just	 a	 process.	 In	 fact,	 mind	 doesn’t	 exist,	 only	 thoughts	 –
thoughts	moving	so	fast	that	you	think	and	feel	that	something	exists	there	in
continuity.	One	 thought	 comes,	 another	 thought	 comes,	 another,	 and	 they	 go
on.	The	gap	between	one	thought	and	another	is	so	small	you	cannot	see	it.	So
two	 thoughts	 become	 joined,	 they	 become	 a	 continuity,	 and	 because	 of	 that
continuity	you	think	there	is	a	mind.	There	are	thoughts	–	no	mind;	just	as	there
are	electrons	–	no	matter.	Thoughts	are	 the	electrons	of	 the	mind.	 Just	 like	a
crowd…	A	crowd	exists	 in	a	sense,	doesn’t	exist	 in	another.	Only	individuals
exist,	but	many	individuals	together	give	the	feeling	as	if	they	are	one.	A	nation
exists	and	exists	not;	there	are	only	individuals.	Individuals	are	the	electrons	of
a	nation,	of	a	community,	of	a	crowd.
Thoughts	exist,	mind	doesn’t	exist.	Mind	is	just	the	appearance.	And	when
you	look	deeper	into	the	mind,	it	disappears.	Then	there	are	thoughts,	but	when
the	 mind	 has	 disappeared	 and	 individual	 thoughts	 exist,	 many	 things	 are
immediately	solved.	First	thing:	immediately	you	come	to	know	that	thoughts
are	 like	 clouds.	They	 come	 and	 go	 –	 and	 you	 are	 the	 sky.	When	 there	 is	 no
mind,	immediately	the	perception	comes	that	you	are	no	longer	involved	in	the
thoughts.	Thoughts	are	there,	passing	through	you	like	clouds	passing	through
the	 sky,	 or	 the	wind	passing	 through	 the	 trees.	Thoughts	 are	passing	 through
you,	and	they	can	pass	through	because	you	are	a	vast	emptiness.	There	is	no
hindrance,	no	obstacle.	No	wall	exists	to	prevent	them.
You	 are	 not	 a	 walled	 phenomenon.	 Your	 sky	 is	 infinitely	 open;	 thoughts
come	and	go.	And	once	you	start	 feeling	 that	 thoughts	come	and	go	and	you
are	the	watcher,	the	witness,	the	mind	is	in	control…
	
Osho
Yoga:	The	Mystery	beyond	Mind
	
Chapter	1:	Introduction	to	the	Path	of	Yoga
	
We	live	in	a	deep	illusion	–	an	illusion	of	hope,	of	future,	of	tomorrow.	As
man	is,	he	cannot	exist	without	self-deception.
Nietzsche	 says	 somewhere	 that	 man	 cannot	 live	 with	 the	 true:	 he	 needs
dreams,	he	needs	 illusions,	 he	needs	 lies	 to	 exist.	And	Nietzsche	 is	 right.	As
man	is,	he	cannot	exist	with	the	truth.	This	has	to	be	understood	very	deeply,
because	 without	 understanding	 this,	 there	 can	 be	 no	 entry	 into	 the	 inquiry
which	is	called	Yoga.
The	mind	has	to	be	understood	deeply	–	the	mind	which	needs	lies,	the	mind
which	 needs	 illusions,	 the	 mind	 which	 cannot	 exist	 with	 the	 real,	 the	 mind
which	needs	dreams.	You	are	not	only	dreaming	in	the	night;	even	while	awake
you	 are	 continuously	 dreaming.	 You	 may	 be	 looking	 at	 me,	 you	 may	 be
listening	to	me,	but	a	dream	current	continuously	goes	on	within	you.	The	mind
is	creating	dreams,	images,	fantasies.
Now	 scientists	 say	 that	 a	 man	 can	 live	 without	 sleep	 but	 he	 cannot	 live
without	dreams.	 In	 the	old	days	 it	was	understood	 that	sleep	was	a	necessity,
but	now	modern	research	says	sleep	 is	not	 really	a	necessity;	sleep	 is	needed
only	so	 that	you	can	dream.	Dreaming	 is	 the	necessity.	 If	you	are	allowed	 to
sleep	but	not	allowed	to	dream,	you	will	not	feel	fresh,	alive,	in	the	morning.
You	will	feel	tired,	as	if	you	have	not	been	able	to	sleep	at	all.
In	the	night	there	are	periods	for	deep	sleep	and	periods	for	dreaming.	There
is	a	rhythm,	just	like	day	and	night.	There	is	a	rhythm:	in	the	beginning	you	fall
into	 deep	 sleep	 for	 nearabout	 forty,	 forty-five	minutes,	 then	 the	 dream	phase
comes	 in;	 then	you	dream;	 then	 again	 dreamless	 sleep,	 then	 again	 dreaming.
This	goes	on	the	whole	night.	If	your	sleep	is	disturbed	while	you	are	deeply
asleep	without	dreaming,	when	you	wake	in	the	morning	you	will	not	feel	that
you	 have	 missed	 anything.	 But	 if	 your	 dream	 is	 disturbed	 while	 you	 are
dreaming,	in	the	morning	you	will	feel	completely	tired,	exhausted.
Now	this	can	be	observed	from	the	outside.	If	someone	is	sleeping	you	can
judge	 whether	 he	 is	 dreaming	 or	 asleep.	 If	 he	 is	 dreaming	 his	 eyes	 will	 be
continuously	moving,	as	if	he	is	seeing	something	with	closed	eyes.	When	he	is
fast	asleep	the	eyes	will	not	move;	they	will	remain	steady.	So	if	your	sleep	is
disturbed	while	your	eyes	are	moving,	in	the	morning	you	will	feel	tired.	While
your	eyes	are	not	moving	sleep	can	be	disturbed;	in	the	morning	you	will	not
feel	anything	is	missing.
Many	 researchers	 have	 proved	 that	 the	 human	 mind	 feeds	 on	 dreams;
dreaming	is	a	necessity,	and	dreaming	is	total	auto-deception.	And	this	is	so	not
only	in	the	night:	while	awake	also	the	same	pattern	follows.	Even	in	the	day
you	 can	 notice	 that	 sometimes	 there	 will	 be	 dreams	 floating	 in	 the	 mind,
sometimes	there	will	be	no	dreams.
When	there	are	dreams	you	will	be	doing	something	but	you	will	be	absent.
Inside	 you	 are	 occupied.	For	 example,	 you	 are	 here.	 If	 your	mind	 is	 passing
through	 a	 dream-state	 you	will	 listen	 to	me	without	 listening	 at	 all,	 because
your	mind	will	be	occupied	within.	You	can	only	listen	to	me	if	you	are	not	in	a
dreaming	state.
Day	and	night,	mind	goes	on	moving	 from	no-dream	 to	dream,	 then	 from
dream	 to	 no-dream	 again.	 This	 is	 an	 inner	 rhythm.	 Not	 only	 do	 we
continuously	dream,	in	life	also	we	project	hopes	into	the	future.
The	present	is	almost	always	a	hell:	you	can	endure	this	hell	only	because	of
the	hope	that	you	have	projected	into	the	future.	You	can	live	today	because	of
tomorrow.	You	are	hoping	something	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow	–	the	doors
of	paradise	will	open	 tomorrow.	They	never	open	 today,	and	when	 tomorrow
comes	 it	will	 not	 come	 as	 tomorrow,	 it	will	 come	 as	 today,	 but	 by	 that	 time
your	mind	has	moved	again.	You	go	on	moving	ahead	of	yourself:	this	is	what
dreaming	means.	You	are	not	one	with	the	real,	that	which	is	nearby,	that	which
is	here	and	now,	you	are	somewhere	else,	moving	ahead,	jumping	ahead.
You	have	named	that	tomorrow,	that	future,	in	many	ways.	Some	people	call
it	heaven,	some	people	call	it	moksha,	but	it	is	always	in	the	future.	Somebody
is	thinking	in	terms	of	wealth,	but	that	wealth	is	going	to	be	in	the	future.	And
somebody	is	thinking	in	terms	of	paradise,	and	that	paradise	is	going	to	be	after
you	are	dead,	far	away	in	the	future.	You	waste	your	present	for	that	which	is
not:	 this	 is	what	dreaming	means.	You	cannot	be	here	and	now.	To	be	 just	 in
the	moment	seems	to	be	arduous.
You	 can	 be	 in	 the	 past,	 because	 again	 that	 is	 dreaming	 –	 memories,
remembrance	of	things	which	are	no	more	–	or	you	can	be	in	the	future,	which
is	projection,	which	again	is	creating	something	out	of	 the	past.	The	future	 is
nothing	but	the	past	projected	again.	It	may	be	more	colorful,	more	beautiful,
more	pleasant,	but	it	is	the	past	refined.
You	cannot	think	anything	other	than	the	past:	the	future	is	nothing	but	the
past	projected	again.	Future	and	past	are	not;	the	present	is,	but	you	are	never
in	 the	present.	This	 is	what	dreaming	means.	Nietzsche	is	right	when	he	says
that	 man	 cannot	 live	 with	 the	 truth.	 He	 needs	 lies,	 he	 lives	 through	 lies.
Nietzsche	says	that	we	go	on	saying	that	we	want	the	truth,	but	no	one	wants	it.
Our	so-called	truths	are	nothing	but	lies,	beautiful	lies.	No	one	is	ready	to	see
the	naked	reality.
This	mind	cannot	enter	on	the	path	of	Yoga	because	Yoga	is	a	methodology
to	reveal	the	truth.	Yoga	is	a	method	to	come	to	a	non-dreaming	mind.	Yoga	is
the	science	to	be	in	the	here	and	now.	Yoga	means	that	now	you	are	ready	not
to	move	 into	 the	 future.	Yoga	means	 now	 you	 are	 ready	 not	 to	 hope,	 not	 to
jump	ahead	of	your	being.	Yoga	means	to	encounter	the	reality	as	it	is.
One	can	enter	Yoga,	or	the	path	of	Yoga,	only	when	he	is	totally	frustrated
with	his	own	mind	as	it	is.	If	you	are	still	hoping	that	you	can	gain	something
through	 your	 mind,	 Yoga	 is	 not	 for	 you.	 A	 total	 frustration	 is	 needed	 –	 the
revelation	 that	 the	 mind	 which	 projects	 is	 futile,	 the	 mind	 that	 hopes	 is
nonsense,	 it	 leads	 nowhere.	 It	 simply	 closes	 your	 eyes,	 it	 intoxicates	 you,	 it
never	allows	reality	to	be	revealed	to	you.	It	protects	you	against	reality.
Your	mind	is	a	drug.	It	is	against	that	which	is.	So	you	can	enter	on	the	path
only	if	you	are	totally	frustrated	with	your	mind,	with	your	way	of	being,	with
the	way	you	have	existed	up	to	now,	and	you	can	drop	it	unconditionally.
Many	 become	 interested	 but	 very	 few	 enter,	 because	 that	 interest	may	 be
just	because	of	the	mind.	You	may	be	hoping	that	now,	through	Yoga,	you	may
gain	 something.	 The	 achieving	 motive	 is	 there	 with	 the	 hope	 that	 you	 may
become	 perfect	 through	Yoga,	 you	may	 reach	 to	 the	 blissful	 state	 of	 perfect
being,	 that	you	may	become	one	with	 the	brahman	 that	you	may	achieve	 the
satchitananda.	This	may	be	why	you	are	interested	in	Yoga.	If	this	is	the	cause
then	 there	can	be	no	meeting	between	you	and	 the	path	which	 is	Yoga.	Then
you	are	totally	against	it,	moving	in	a	totally	opposite	dimension.
Yoga	means:	“Now	no	hope,	now	no	future,	now	no	desires.	But	I	am	ready
to	know	what	is.	I	am	not	interested	in	what	can	be,	what	should	be,	what	ought
to	be.	I	am	not	interested!	I	am	interested	only	in	that	which	is.”	Because	only
the	real	can	free	you,	only	the	reality	can	become	liberation.
Total	despair	is	needed.	That	despair	Buddha	called	dukkha.	If	you	are	really
in	misery	 don’t	 hope,	 because	 your	 hope	will	 only	 prolong	 the	misery.	Your
hope	is	a	drug.	It	can	help	you	to	continue,	but	where	are	you	moving?	It	will
help	you	 to	 reach	only	death	and	nowhere	else.	All	your	hopes	can	 lead	you
only	to	death;	they	are	leading.
Become	totally	hopeless	–	no	future,	no	hope.	It	is	difficult;	it	needs	courage
to	face	the	real.	But	such	a	moment	comes	to	everyone,	sometime	or	other.	A
moment	 comes	 to	 every	 human	 being	 when	 he	 feels	 total	 hopelessness.
Absolute	 meaninglessness	 happens	 to	 him.	 When	 he	 becomes	 aware	 that
whatsoever	he	is	doing	is	useless,	wheresoever	he	is	going	is	going	to	nowhere,
and	all	life	is	meaningless,	then	hopes	drop.	Future	drops,	and	for	the	first	time
he	is	in	tune	with	the	present,	for	the	first	time	he	is	face	to	face	with	reality.
Unless	 this	moment	 comes	 to	you,	you	can	go	on	doing	asanas,	 postures,
but	 that	 is	not	Yoga.	Yoga	is	an	inward	turning,	a	 total	about-turn.	When	you
are	 not	 moving	 into	 the	 future,	 not	 moving	 towards	 the	 past,	 then	 you	 start
moving	within	 yourself,	 because	 your	 being	 is	 here	 and	now,	 it	 is	 not	 in	 the
future.	You	are	present	here	and	now,	you	can	enter	this	reality.	But	then	mind
has	to	be	here.
This	moment	is	indicated	by	the	first	sutra	of	Patanjali.	Before	we	talk	about
the	first	sutra,	a	few	other	things	have	to	be	understood.
Yoga	 is	 not	 a	 religion,	 remember	 that.	 Yoga	 is	 not	 Hindu,	 it	 is	 not
Mohammedan.	 Yoga	 is	 a	 pure	 science	 just	 like	 mathematics,	 physics	 or
chemistry.	 Physics	 is	 not	 Christian,	 physics	 is	 not	 Buddhist.	 Christians	 may
have	 discovered	 the	 laws	 of	 physics,	 but	 physics	 is	 not	 Christian.	 It	 is	 just
accidental	 that	Christians	have	come	to	discover	 the	 laws	of	physics.	Physics
remains	 just	 a	 science.	 Yoga	 is	 a	 science;	 it	 is	 just	 accidental	 that	 Hindus
discovered	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 Hindu.	 It	 is	 pure	 mathematics	 of	 the	 inner	 being.	 A
Mohammedan	can	be	a	yogi,	a	Christian	can	be	a	yogi,	a	Jaina,	a	Buddhist	can
be	a	yogi.
Yoga	 is	 pure	 science.	 And	 Patanjali	 is	 the	 greatest	 name	 in	 the	 world	 of
Yoga.	This	man	is	rare;	there	is	no	other	name	comparable	to	Patanjali.	For	the
first	 time	 in	 the	history	of	humanity	 this	man	brought	 religion	 to	 the	 state	of
science.	 He	 made	 religion	 a	 science;	 a	 religion	 of	 pure	 laws,	 no	 belief	 is
needed.
So-called	 religions	 need	 beliefs.	There	 is	 no	 other	 difference	 between	 one
religion	 and	 another	 except	 the	 difference	 of	 beliefs.	 A	 Mohammedan	 has
certain	beliefs,	a	Hindu	certain	others,	a	Christian	certain	others.	The	difference
is	of	beliefs.	Yoga	has	nothing	as	far	as	belief	is	concerned;	Yoga	doesn’t	say	to
believe	 in	 anything.	 Yoga	 says	 to	 experience.	 Just	 as	 science	 says	 to
experiment,	Yoga	says	to	experience.	Experiment	and	experience	are	both	the
same;	their	directions	are	different.	Experiment	means	there	is	something	you
can	 do	 outside;	 experience	 means	 there	 is	 something	 you	 can	 do	 inside.
Experience	is	an	inner	experiment.
Science	says,	“Don’t	believe,	doubt	as	much	as	you	can,”	but	also,	“Don’t
disbelieve”	–	because	disbelief	is	again	a	sort	of	belief.	You	can	believe	in	God,
you	can	believe	in	the	concept	of	no-God.	You	can	say	that	God	exists	with	a
fanatic	attitude	and	you	can	say	quite	the	reverse,	that	God	exists	not,	with	the
same	fanaticism.	Atheists,	theists,	are	all	believers,	and	belief	is	not	the	realm
of	science.	Science	means	to	experience	something,	that	which	is;	no	belief	is
needed.
The	 second	 thing	 to	 remember	 is	 that	 Yoga	 is	 existential,	 experiential,
experimental;	 no	 belief	 is	 required,	 no	 faith	 is	 needed.	 Only	 the	 courage	 to
experience	 is	 needed,	 and	 that	 is	 what	 is	 lacking.	 You	 can	 believe	 easily
because	 in	 belief	 you	 are	 not	 going	 to	 be	 transformed.	 Belief	 is	 something
added	 to	 you,	 something	 superficial.	Your	 being	 is	 not	 changed,	 you	 are	 not
passing	 through	 some	mutation.	You	may	be	a	Hindu	one	day	and	become	a
Christian	 the	 next	 day,	 simply	 by	 changing	 the	 Gita	 for	 a	 Bible.	 You	 can
change	 it	 for	 a	 Koran,	 but	 the	 man	 who	 was	 holding	 the	 Gita	 and	 is	 now
holding	the	Bible	remains	the	same;	he	has	just	changed	his	beliefs.
Beliefs	are	like	clothes.	Nothing	substantial	is	transformed,	you	remain	the
same.	Dissect	a	Hindu,	dissect	a	Mohammedan	–	inside	they	are	the	same.	The
Hindu	goes	to	a	temple,	the	Mohammedan	hates	the	temple.	The	Mohammedan
goes	 to	 the	mosque	 and	 the	Hindu	 hates	 the	mosque	 but	 inside	 they	 are	 the
same	human	beings.
Belief	 is	 easy	 because	 you	 are	 not	 really	 required	 to	 do	 anything,	 just	 a
superficial	 dressing,	 a	 decoration,	 something	 which	 you	 can	 put	 aside	 any
moment	 you	 like.	 Yoga	 is	 not	 belief;	 that’s	 why	 it	 is	 difficult,	 arduous,
sometimes	it	seems	impossible.	It	is	an	existential	approach.	You	will	come	to
the	 truth	 not	 through	 belief	 but	 through	 your	 own	 experience,	 through	 your
own	 realization.	 That	 means	 you	 will	 have	 to	 be	 totally	 changed	 –	 your
viewpoints,	your	way	of	life,	your	mind;	your	psyche	as	it	is	has	to	be	shattered
completely.	 Something	 new	 has	 to	 be	 created.	 Only	 with	 that	 new	 will	 you
come	in	contact	with	the	reality.
Yoga	 is	both	a	death	and	a	new	life.	As	you	are	you	will	have	 to	die,	and
unless	you	die	the	new	cannot	be	born.	The	new	is	hidden	in	you.	You	are	just
a	seed	for	it	and	the	seed	must	fall	down,	be	absorbed	by	the	earth.	The	seed
must	die,	only	then	will	the	new	arise	out	of	you.	Your	death	will	become	your
new	life.	Yoga	is	both	a	death	and	a	new	birth.	Unless	you	are	ready	to	die	you
cannot	be	reborn.	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	changing	beliefs.
Yoga	 is	 not	 a	 philosophy.	 I	 say	 it	 is	 not	 a	 religion	 and	 I	 say	 it	 is	 not	 a
philosophy.	 It	 is	not	something	you	can	 think	about.	 It	 is	 something	you	will
have	to	be;	 thinking	won’t	do.	Thinking	goes	on	in	your	head.	It	is	not	really
deep	 into	 the	 roots	 of	 your	 being,	 it	 is	 not	 your	 totality,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 part,	 a
functional	 part.	 It	 can	 be	 trained	 and	 you	 can	 argue	 logically,	 you	 can	 think
rationally,	 but	 your	 heart	 will	 remain	 the	 same.	 Your	 heart	 is	 your	 deepest
center,	your	head	is	just	a	branch.	You	can	be	without	the	head	but	you	cannot
be	without	the	heart.	Your	head	is	not	basic.
Yoga	 is	 concerned	 with	 your	 total	 being,	 with	 your	 roots.	 It	 is	 not
philosophical.	 So	 with	 Patanjali	 we	 will	 not	 be	 thinking,	 speculating.	 With
Patanjali	we	will	be	trying	to	know	the	ultimate	laws	of	being,	the	laws	for	its
transformation,	the	laws	of	how	to	die	and	how	to	be	reborn	again,	the	laws	for
a	new	order	of	being.	That	is	why	I	call	it	a	science.
Patanjali	is	rare.	He	is	an	enlightened	person	like	Buddha,	like	Krishna,	like
Christ,	like	Mahavira,	Mohammed,	Zarathustra,	but	he	is	different	in	one	way.
Buddha,	 Krishna,	 Mahavira,	 Zarathustra,	 Mohammed	 –	 none	 of	 them	 has	 a
scientific	attitude.	They	are	great	founders	of	religions.	They	have	changed	the
whole	 pattern	 of	 the	 human	mind	 and	 its	 structure,	 but	 their	 approach	 is	 not
scientific.
Patanjali	 is	 like	an	Einstein	in	the	world	of	buddhas.	He	is	a	phenomenon.
He	 could	 easily	 have	 been	 a	Nobel	Prize	winner	 like	 an	Einstein	 or	Bohr	 or
Max	Planck	or	Heisenberg.	He	has	 the	same	attitude,	 the	same	approach	as	a
rigorous,	 scientific	 mind.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 poet;	 Krishna	 is	 a	 poet.	 He	 is	 not	 a
moralist;	 Mahavira	 is	 a	 moralist.	 Patanjali	 is	 basically	 a	 scientist	 who	 is
thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 laws.	And	 he	 has	 come	 to	 deduce	 absolute	 laws	 of	 the
human	being,	the	ultimate	working	structure	of	the	human	mind	and	of	reality.
If	 you	 follow	Patanjali	 you	will	 come	 to	 know	 that	 he	 is	 as	 exact	 as	 any
mathematical	formula.	Simply	do	what	he	says	and	the	result	will	happen.	The
result	 is	 bound	 to	 happen	 –	 it	 is	 just	 like	 two	 plus	 two	 equals	 four	 or	 like
heating	 water	 to	 one	 hundred	 degrees	 causes	 it	 to	 evaporate.	 No	 belief	 is
needed,	 you	 simply	 do	 it	 and	 know;	 it	 is	 something	 to	 be	 done	 and	 known.
That’s	why	I	say	there	is	no	comparison:	never	has	another	man	like	Patanjali
existed	on	this	earth.
You	can	 find	poetry	 in	Buddha’s	utterances;	 it	 is	bound	 to	be	 there.	Many
times	 while	 Buddha	 is	 expressing	 himself	 he	 becomes	 poetic.	 The	 realm	 of
ecstasy,	the	realm	of	ultimate	knowing	is	so	beautiful,	the	temptation	is	strong
to	become	poetic,	the	beauty	is	such,	the	benediction	is	such,	the	bliss	is	such
that	one	starts	talking	in	poetic	language.
But	Patanjali	 resists	 that.	 It	 is	very	difficult	 to	 resist,	no	one	else	has	been
able	 to.	 Jesus,	 Krishna,	 Buddha	 all	 became	 poetic.	 When	 the	 splendor,	 the
beauty,	 explode	within	 you,	 you	will	 start	 dancing,	 you	will	 start	 singing.	 In
that	 state	 you	 are	 just	 like	 a	 lover	 who	 has	 fallen	 in	 love	 with	 the	 whole
universe.
Patanjali	 resists	 that.	He	will	not	use	poetry;	he	will	not	even	use	a	 single
poetic	symbol.	He	will	not	do	anything	with	poetry.	He	will	not	talk	in	terms	of
beauty:	he	will	talk	in	terms	of	mathematics,	he	will	be	exact.	He	will	give	you
maxims,	but	 those	maxims	are	 just	 indications	of	what	 is	 to	be	done.	He	will
not	explode	into	ecstasy,	he	will	not	say	things	that	cannot	be	said,	he	will	not
try	the	impossible.	He	will	just	put	down	the	foundation	and	if	you	follow	the
foundation	 you	 will	 reach	 the	 peak	 which	 is	 beyond.	 He	 is	 a	 rigorous
mathematician,	remember	this.
The	first	sutra:
Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
Athayoganushasanam:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
Each	 single	 word	 has	 to	 be	 understood,	 because	 Patanjali	 will	 not	 use	 a
single	superfluous	word.
Now	 the	 discipline	 of	 Yoga.	 First	 try	 to	 understand	 the	 word	 now.	 This
“now”	is	an	indication	to	the	state	of	mind	I	was	just	talking	to	you	about.
If	you	are	disillusioned,	if	you	are	hopeless,	if	you	have	completely	become
aware	 of	 the	 futility	 of	 all	 desires;	 if	 you	 see	 your	 life	 as	 meaningless;
whatsoever	 you	 have	 been	 doing	 up	 to	 now	 has	 simply	 fallen	 dead,	 nothing
remains	 in	 the	 future,	 you	 are	 in	 absolute	 despair	 –	 what	 Kierkegaard	 calls
anguish	–	you	are	in	anguish,	suffering,	not	knowing	what	to	do,	not	knowing
where	 to	 go,	 not	 knowing	 to	whom	 to	 turn,	 just	 on	 the	 verge	 of	madness	 or
suicide	or	death,	your	whole	pattern	of	life	has	suddenly	become	futile;	if	this
moment	has	come,	Patanjali	says:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga	–	only	now	can
you	understand	the	science	of	Yoga,	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
If	 that	moment	 has	 not	 come	 you	 can	 go	 on	 studying	Yoga,	 and	 you	 can
become	a	great	scholar	but	you	will	not	be	a	yogi.	You	can	write	theses	on	it,
you	can	give	discourses	on	it,	but	you	will	not	be	a	yogi.	The	moment	has	not
come	for	you.	Intellectually	you	can	become	interested,	through	your	mind	you
can	be	related	to	Yoga,	but	Yoga	is	nothing	if	it	is	not	a	discipline.	Yoga	is	not	a
shastra;	it	is	not	a	scripture.	It	is	a	discipline;	it	is	something	you	have	to	do.	It
is	not	curiosity,	it	is	not	philosophical	speculation,	it	is	deeper	than	that.	It	is	a
question	of	life	and	death.
If	 the	 moment	 has	 come	 when	 you	 feel	 that	 all	 directions	 have	 become
confused,	 all	 roads	have	disappeared,	 the	 future	 is	 dark	 and	 every	desire	 has
become	bitter	and	through	every	desire	you	have	known	only	disappointment,
all	movement	into	hopes	and	dreams	has	ceased:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
This	“now”	may	not	have	come.	Then	I	may	go	on	talking	about	Yoga	but
you	will	not	listen.	You	can	listen	only	if	the	moment	is	present	in	you.	Are	you
really	dissatisfied?	Everybody	will	say	yes,	but	that	dissatisfaction	is	not	real.
You	are	dissatisfied	with	this,	you	may	be	dissatisfied	with	that,	but	you	are	not
totally	dissatisfied.	You	are	 still	 hoping.	You	are	dissatisfied	because	of	your
past	 hopes	 but	 you	 are	 still	 hoping	 for	 the	 future.	Your	 dissatisfaction	 is	 not
total:	 you	 are	 still	 hankering	 for	 some	 satisfaction	 somewhere,	 for	 some
gratification	somewhere.
Sometimes	 you	 feel	 hopeless	 but	 that	 hopelessness	 is	 not	 true.	 You	 feel
hopeless	 because	 certain	 hopes	 have	 not	 been	 achieved,	 certain	 hopes	 have
fallen	away,	but	hoping	is	still	there,	hoping	has	not	fallen	away.	You	will	still
hope.	You	are	dissatisfied	with	this	hope,	that	hope,	but	you	are	not	dissatisfied
with	hope	as	such.	If	you	are	disappointed	with	hope	as	such	the	moment	has
come,	and	then	you	can	enter	Yoga.	And	then	this	entry	will	not	be	an	entering
into	 a	 mental,	 speculative	 phenomenon.	 This	 entry	 will	 be	 an	 entry	 into	 a
discipline.
What	is	discipline?	Discipline	means	creating	an	order	within	you.	As	you
are,	you	are	a	chaos.	As	you	are,	you	are	 totally	disorderly.	Gurdjieff	used	to
say	–	and	Gurdjieff	is	in	many	ways	like	Patanjali,	he	was	again	trying	to	make
the	core	of	religion	a	science	–	Gurdjieff	said	that	you	are	not	one,	you	are	a
crowd;	not	even	when	you	say	“I”	 is	 there	any	 I.	There	are	many	 I’s	 in	you,
many	egos.	In	the	morning	one	I,	 in	 the	afternoon	another	I,	 in	 the	evening	a
third	I,	but	you	never	become	aware	of	this	mess	–	because	who	will	become
aware	of	it?	There	is	not	a	center	that	can	become	aware.
…the	discipline	of	Yoga	means	Yoga	wants	to	create	a	crystallized	center	in
you.	As	you	are,	you	are	a	crowd	and	a	crowd	has	many	phenomena.	One	 is
that	 you	 cannot	 believe	 a	 crowd.	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 that	 man	 cannot
promise:	who	will	promise?	You	are	not	there.	If	you	promise	who	will	fulfill
the	promise?	Next	morning	the	one	who	promised	is	not	there.
People	come	to	me	and	they	say,	“Now	I	will	take	the	vow.	I	promise	to	do
this,”	 and	 I	 tell	 them,	 “Think	 twice	 before	 you	 promise	 something.	Are	 you
confident	 that	 the	next	moment	 the	one	who	promised	 it	will	be	 there?”	You
decide	 that	 starting	 tomorrow	 you	 will	 get	 up	 early	 in	 the	 morning	 at	 four
o’clock,	and	at	four	o’clock	somebody	in	you	says,	“Don’t	bother.	It	is	so	cold
outside.	And	why	are	you	in	such	a	hurry?	We	can	do	it	tomorrow”	–	and	you
fall	asleep	again.	When	you	get	up	you	repent	and	you	think,	“This	is	not	good.
I	 should	 have	 done	 it.”	You	 decide	 again,	 “Tomorrow	 I	will	 do	 it”;	 and	 the
same	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow	because	at	four	in	the	morning	the	one	who
promised	 is	no	 longer	 there,	 somebody	else	 is	 in	 the	 chair.	You	are	 a	Rotary
Club:	 the	 chairman	 goes	 on	 changing	 and	 every	member	 becomes	 a	 Rotary
chairman.	There	is	rotation:	every	moment	someone	else	is	the	master.
Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say,	 “This	 is	 the	 chief	 characteristic	 of	 man	 –	 that	 he
cannot	promise.”	You	cannot	fulfill	a	promise.	You	go	on	giving	promises,	and
you	know	well	that	you	cannot	fulfill	them	because	you	are	not	one;	you	are	a
disorder,	a	chaos.	Hence	Patanjali	says:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.	If	your	life
has	 become	 an	 absolute	misery,	 if	 you	have	 realized	 that	whatsoever	 you	 do
creates	 hell,	 then	 the	 moment	 has	 come.	 This	 moment	 can	 change	 your
dimension,	your	direction	of	being.
Up	until	now	you	have	lived	as	a	chaos,	a	crowd.	Yoga	means	now	you	will
have	to	be	a	harmony,	you	will	have	to	become	one.	A	crystallization	is	needed,
a	centering	is	needed.	And	unless	you	attain	a	center	all	that	you	do	is	useless;
it	is	wasting	life	and	time.	A	center	is	the	first	necessity,	and	only	a	person	who
has	a	center	can	be	blissful.	Everybody	asks	 for	 it,	but	you	cannot	ask	 for	 it,
you	have	to	earn	it!	Everybody	hankers	for	a	blissful	state	of	being,	but	only	a
center	can	be	blissful,	a	crowd	cannot	be	blissful.	A	crowd	has	no	self,	there	is
no	atman.	Who	is	going	to	be	blissful?
Bliss	 means	 absolute	 silence,	 and	 silence	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 there	 is
harmony,	when	all	the	discordant	fragments	have	become	one,	when	there	is	no
crowd,	only	one.	When	you	are	 alone	 in	 the	house	and	nobody	else	 is	 there,
you	will	be	blissful.	Right	now	everybody	else	 is	 in	your	house,	you	are	not
there.	Only	the	guests	are	there,	the	host	is	always	absent,	and	only	the	host	can
be	blissful.
This	centering	Patanjali	calls	discipline,	anushasanam.	The	word	discipline
is	beautiful.	It	comes	from	the	same	root	as	the	word	disciple.	Discipline	means
the	capacity	to	learn,	 the	capacity	to	know.	But	you	cannot	know,	you	cannot
learn	unless	you	have	attained	the	capacity	to	be.
	
A	 man	 once	 went	 to	 Buddha	 and	 he	 said	 –	 he	 must	 have	 been	 a	 social
reformer,	a	revolutionary	–	he	said	to	Buddha,	“The	world	is	in	misery.	I	agree
with	you.”
Buddha	has	never	said	that	the	world	is	in	misery.	Buddha	says	you	are	the
misery,	 not	 the	 world;	 life	 is	 misery,	 not	 the	 world;	man	 is	 misery,	 not	 the
world;	mind	is	misery,	not	the	world.	But	that	revolutionary	said,	“The	world	is
in	 misery,	 I	 agree	 with	 you.	 Now	 tell	 me,	 what	 can	 I	 do?	 I	 have	 a	 deep
compassion	and	I	want	to	serve	humanity.”
Service	 must	 have	 been	 his	 motto!	 Buddha	 looked	 at	 him	 and	 remained
silent.	Buddha’s	disciple,	Ananda,	said,	“This	man	seems	to	be	sincere.	Guide
him.	Why	are	you	silent?”
Then	Buddha	said	 to	 that	 revolutionary,	“You	want	 to	serve	 the	world,	but
where	are	you?	I	don’t	see	anyone	 inside.	 I	 look	 in	you,	and	 there	 is	no	one.
You	don’t	have	any	center,	and	unless	you	are	centered	whatsoever	you	do	will
create	more	mischief.”
	
All	 your	 social	 reformers,	 your	 revolutionaries,	 your	 leaders,	 are	 the	great
mischief	creators,	mischief-mongers.	The	world	would	be	better	 if	 there	were
no	leaders.	But	they	cannot	help:	they	must	do	something	because	the	world	is
in	misery	 and	 they	 are	 not	 centered,	 so	whatsoever	 they	do	will	 create	more
misery.	 Compassion	 alone	 will	 not	 help,	 service	 alone	 will	 not	 help.
Compassion	 through	 a	 centered	 being	 is	 something	 totally	 different.
Compassion	through	a	crowd	is	mischief;	that	compassion	is	poison.
Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
Discipline	means	 the	 capacity	 to	 be,	 the	 capacity	 to	 know,	 the	 capacity	 to
learn.	We	must	understand	these	three	things.
The	capacity	to	be…	All	the	Yoga	postures	are	not	really	concerned	with	the
body,	they	are	concerned	with	the	capacity	to	be.	Patanjali	says	if	you	can	sit
silently	 without	moving	 your	 body	 for	 a	 few	 hours,	 you	 are	 growing	 in	 the
capacity	to	be.	Why	do	you	move?	You	cannot	sit	without	moving	even	for	a
few	seconds:	your	body	starts	moving,	somewhere	you	feel	itching,	the	legs	go
dead,	many	things	start	happening	–	these	are	just	excuses	for	you	to	move.
You	are	not	a	master.	You	cannot	say	to	the	body,	“Now	I	will	not	move	for
one	hour.”	The	body	will	revolt	immediately!	Immediately	it	will	force	you	to
move,	to	do	something.	And	it	will	give	reasons:	“You	have	to	move	because
an	insect	is	biting.”	You	may	not	find	the	insect	when	you	look.	You	are	not	a
being,	 you	 are	 a	 trembling,	 a	 continuous	 hectic	 activity.	 Patanjali’s	 asanas,
postures,	are	not	really	concerned	with	any	kind	of	physiological	 training	but
with	an	inner	training	of	being:	just	to	be,	without	doing	anything,	without	any
movement,	 without	 any	 activity.	 Just	 remain	 –	 that	 remaining	 will	 help
centering.
If	you	can	remain	in	one	posture	the	body	will	become	a	slave;	it	will	follow
you.	And	the	more	the	body	follows	you	the	more	you	will	have	a	greater	being
within	you,	a	stronger	being	within	you.	Remember,	if	the	body	is	not	moving
your	mind	cannot	move,	because	mind	and	body	are	not	 two	 things,	 they	are
two	poles	of	one	phenomenon.	You	are	not	body	and	mind,	you	are	bodymind.
Your	 personality	 is	 psychosomatic,	 bodymind,	 both.	Mind	 is	 the	most	 subtle
part	of	the	body,	or	you	can	say	the	reverse,	that	body	is	the	grossest	part	of	the
mind.	So	whatsoever	happens	in	the	body	happens	in	the	mind	and	vice	versa,
whatsoever	happens	in	the	mind	happens	in	the	body.	If	the	body	is	nonmoving
and	you	can	attain	a	posture,	if	you	can	say	to	the	body,	“Keep	quiet,”	the	mind
will	remain	silent.	Really,	the	mind	starts	moving	and	tries	to	move	the	body,
because	if	the	body	moves	then	the	mind	can	move.	In	a	nonmoving	body	the
mind	cannot	move;	it	needs	a	moving	body.
If	the	body	is	nonmoving,	the	mind	is	nonmoving	–	you	are	centered.	This
nonmoving	 posture	 is	 not	 only	 a	 physiological	 training,	 it	 is	 to	 create	 a
situation	in	which	centering	can	happen,	in	which	you	can	become	disciplined.
When	you	are,	when	you	have	become	centered,	when	you	know	what	it	means
to	 be,	 then	 you	 can	 learn	 because	 then	 you	 will	 be	 humble.	 Then	 you	 can
surrender.	Then	no	false	ego	will	cling	to	you	because	once	centered	you	know
all	egos	are	false.	Then	you	can	bow	down.	Then	a	disciple	is	born.
To	become	a	disciple	 is	 a	great	 achievement.	Only	 through	discipline	will
you	become	a	disciple.	Only	through	being	centered	will	you	become	humble,
will	you	become	receptive,	will	you	become	empty	and	 the	guru,	 the	master,
can	pour	himself	into	you.	In	your	emptiness,	in	your	silence,	he	can	come	and
reach	to	you.	Communication	becomes	possible.
Disciple	means	one	who	 is	centered,	humble,	 receptive,	open,	 ready,	alert,
waiting,	 prayerful.	 In	 Yoga	 the	 master	 is	 very,	 very	 important,	 absolutely
important,	because	only	when	you	are	in	the	close	proximity	of	a	being	who	is
centered	will	your	own	centering	happen.
That	is	the	meaning	of	satsang.	You	have	heard	the	word	satsang;	it	is	used
totally	wrongly.	Satsang	means,	in	close	proximity	to	the	truth;	it	means,	near
the	 truth,	 it	 means	 near	 a	master	 who	 has	 become	 one	with	 the	 truth	 –	 just
being	near	him,	open,	receptive	and	waiting.	If	your	waiting	has	become	deep,
intense,	a	deep	communion	will	happen.
The	master	is	not	going	to	do	anything.	He	is	simply	there,	available.	If	you
are	open	he	will	flow	within	you.	This	flowing	is	called	satsang.	With	a	master
you	need	not	learn	anything	else.	If	you	can	learn	satsang,	that’s	enough.	If	you
can	 just	 be	 near	 him	without	 asking,	 without	 thinking,	 without	 arguing;	 just
present	 there,	 available,	 so	 the	 being	 of	 the	 master	 can	 flow	 in	 you,	 it	 is
enough.	And	being	can	flow;	it	is	already	flowing.	Whenever	a	person	achieves
integrity	his	being	becomes	a	radiation.	He	is	flowing.	Whether	you	are	there	to
receive	or	not	is	not	the	point.	He	flows	like	a	river,	and	if	you	are	empty	like	a
vessel,	ready,	open,	he	will	flow	in	you.
A	 disciple	 is	 one	who	 is	 ready	 to	 receive,	 who	 has	 become	 a	womb;	 the
master	can	penetrate	into	him.	This	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	satsang.	It	is	not
basically	a	discourse;	satsang	is	not	a	discourse.	There	may	be	a	discourse	but
the	 discourse	 is	 just	 an	 excuse.	 You	 are	 here	 and	 I	 will	 talk	 on	 Patanjali’s
sutras,	but	that	is	just	an	excuse.	If	you	are	really	here	then	the	discourse,	the
talk,	becomes	just	an	excuse	for	your	being	here,	for	you	to	be	here.	And	if	you
are	really	here,	satsang	starts.	I	can	flow,	and	that	flow	is	deeper	than	any	talk,
any	communication	through	language,	than	any	intellectual	meeting	with	you.
If	you	are	a	disciple,	if	you	are	a	disciplined	being,	if	your	mind	is	engaged
in	 listening	 to	 me,	 then	 your	 being	 can	 be	 in	 satsang.	 Then	 your	 head	 is
occupied.	If	your	heart	is	open	then	on	a	deeper	level	a	meeting	happens.	That
meeting	 is	 satsang,	 and	 everything	 else	 is	 just	 an	 excuse	 to	 find	ways	 to	 be
close	to	the	master.
Closeness	 is	all,	but	only	a	disciple	can	be	close.	Anybody	and	everybody
cannot	 be	 close.	 Closeness	 means	 a	 loving	 trust.	 Why	 are	 we	 not	 close?	 –
because	there	is	fear.	Too	close	may	be	dangerous,	too	open	may	be	dangerous,
because	you	become	vulnerable	and	then	it	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	defend.
So	just	as	a	security	measure	we	keep	everybody	at	a	distance,	we	never	allow
anyone	to	enter	a	certain	space.
Everybody	 has	 a	 territory	 around	 him.	 Whenever	 somebody	 enters	 your
territory	you	become	afraid.	Everybody	has	a	space	to	protect.	You	are	sitting
alone	 in	your	room	and	a	stranger	enters	 into	 the	room:	 just	watch	when	you
become	 really	 scared.	 There	 is	 a	 point	 that	 if	 he	 enters	 that	 point	 you	 will
become	scared,	you	will	be	afraid.	A	sudden	trembling	will	be	felt.	He	cannot
move	beyond	a	certain	territory.
To	be	close	means	that	now	you	have	no	territory	of	your	own.	To	be	close
means	 to	 be	vulnerable;	 to	 be	 close	means	 that	whatsoever	 happens,	 you	 are
not	thinking	in	terms	of	security.
A	disciple	can	be	close	for	two	reasons.	One:	he	is	centered	or	he	is	trying	to
be	centered.	A	person	who	is	even	trying	to	be	centered	becomes	unafraid;	he
becomes	 fearless.	He	 has	 something	which	 cannot	 be	 killed.	You	 don’t	 have
anything,	 hence	 the	 fear.	 You	 are	 a	 crowd.	 The	 crowd	 can	 disperse	 at	 any
moment.	You	don’t	have	something	like	a	rock	which	will	be	there	whatsoever
happens.	 You	 are	 existing	 without	 a	 rock,	 without	 a	 foundation;	 a	 house	 of
cards,	bound	to	be	always	in	fear.	Any	wind,	even	any	breeze	can	destroy	you,
so	you	have	to	protect	yourself.
Because	of	 this	constant	protection	you	cannot	 love,	you	cannot	 trust,	you
cannot	 be	 friendly.	 You	 may	 have	 many	 friends	 but	 there	 is	 no	 friendship,
because	friendship	needs	closeness.	You	may	have	wives	and	husbands	and	so-
called	 lovers	 but	 there	 is	 no	 love	 because	 love	 needs	 closeness,	 love	 needs
trust.	You	may	have	gurus,	masters	but	 there	 is	no	disciplehood,	because	you
cannot	allow	yourself	to	be	totally	given	to	somebody’s	being;	nearness	to	his
being,	closeness	to	his	being,	so	he	can	overpower	you,	flood	over	you.
A	disciple	is	a	seeker	who	is	not	a	crowd,	who	is	trying	to	be	centered	and
crystallized,	who	 is	 at	 least	 trying,	making	 efforts,	 sincere	 efforts	 to	 become
individual,	to	feel	his	being,	to	become	his	own	master.	The	whole	discipline	of
Yoga	is	an	effort	to	make	you	a	master	of	yourself.	As	you	are,	you	are	just	a
slave	of	many,	many	desires.	Many,	many	masters	are	there	and	you	are	just	a
slave	pulled	in	many	directions.
Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
Yoga	is	discipline.	It	is	an	effort	on	your	part	to	change	yourself.	Many	other
things	 have	 to	 be	 understood.	 Yoga	 is	 not	 a	 therapy.	 In	 the	 West	 many
psychological	 therapies	 are	 now	 prevalent,	 and	 many	Western	 psychologists
think	 that	 Yoga	 is	 also	 a	 therapy.	 It	 is	 not;	 it	 is	 a	 discipline.	 What	 is	 the
difference?	This	is	the	difference:	a	therapy	is	needed	if	you	are	ill,	a	therapy	is
needed	 if	 you	 are	 diseased,	 a	 therapy	 is	 needed	 if	 you	 are	 pathological.	 A
discipline	 is	 needed	 even	 when	 you	 are	 healthy.	 Really,	 only	 when	 you	 are
healthy	can	a	discipline	help;	it	is	not	for	pathological	cases.
Yoga	 is	 for	 those	who	are	 completely	healthy	 as	 far	 as	medical	 science	 is
concerned,	normal.	They	are	not	schizophrenic,	they	are	not	mad,	they	are	not
neurotic.	They	are	normal	people,	healthy	people	with	no	particular	pathology.
Still	 they	 become	 aware	 that	 whatsoever	 is	 called	 normality	 is	 futile,
whatsoever	is	called	health	is	of	no	use.	Something	more	is	needed,	something
greater	is	needed;	something	holier	and	whole	is	needed.
Therapies	 are	 for	 ill	 people.	Therapies	 can	help	you	 to	 come	 to	Yoga,	but
Yoga	is	not	a	therapy.	Yoga	is	for	a	higher	order	of	health,	a	different	order	of
health,	a	different	type	of	being	and	wholeness.	Therapy	can,	at	the	most,	make
you	adjusted.	Freud	says	we	cannot	do	more.	We	can	make	you	an	adjusted,
normal	 member	 of	 the	 society,	 but	 if	 the	 society	 itself	 is	 pathological,	 then
what?	And	it	is!	The	society	itself	is	ill.	A	therapy	can	make	you	normal	in	the
sense	that	you	are	adjusted	to	the	society,	but	the	society	itself	is	ill.
So	sometimes	it	happens	that	in	an	ill	society	a	healthy	person	is	thought	to
be	ill.	A	Jesus	is	thought	to	be	ill	and	every	effort	is	done	to	make	him	adjusted.
And	when	it	is	found	that	he	is	a	hopeless	case	then	he	is	crucified.	When	it	is
found	that	nothing	can	be	done,	that	this	man	is	incurable,	then	he	is	crucified.
The	 society	 is	 itself	 ill	 because	 society	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 collective.	 If	 all	 the
members	are	ill	the	society	is	ill,	and	every	member	has	to	be	adjusted	to	it.
Yoga	is	not	therapy;	Yoga	is	not	trying	in	any	way	to	make	you	adjusted	to
the	 society.	 If	 you	want	 to	 define	Yoga	 in	 terms	 of	 adjustment	 then	 it	 is	 not
adjustment	 with	 the	 society,	 but	 it	 is	 adjustment	 with	 existence	 itself.	 It	 is
adjustment	with	the	divine.
So	it	may	happen	that	a	perfect	yogi	may	appear	mad	to	you.	He	may	look
out	of	his	senses,	out	of	his	mind,	because	now	he	is	in	touch	with	the	greater,
with	a	higher	mind,	a	higher	order	of	things.	He	is	in	touch	with	the	universal
mind.	 It	has	always	happened	so:	a	Buddha,	a	 Jesus,	 a	Krishna	always	 looks
somehow	eccentric.	They	don’t	belong	to	us,	they	seem	to	be	outsiders.
That’s	why	 they	call	 them	avataras,	outsiders.	They	have	come	as	 if	 from
some	other	planet,	 they	don’t	belong	to	us.	They	may	be	higher,	 they	may	be
good,	 they	 may	 be	 divine,	 but	 they	 don’t	 belong	 to	 us.	 They	 come	 from
somewhere	 else.	 They	 are	 not	 part	 and	 parcel	 of	 our	 being,	 mankind.	 The
feeling	 has	 persisted	 that	 they	 are	 outsiders.	 They	 are	 not;	 they	 are	 the	 real
insiders	because	they	have	touched	the	innermost	core	of	existence.	But	to	us
they	appear	outsiders.
Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
If	your	mind	has	come	to	realize	that	whatsoever	you	have	been	doing	up	to
now	was	just	senseless,	it	was	a	nightmare	at	the	worst	or	a	beautiful	dream	at
the	best,	 then	the	path	of	discipline	opens	before	you.	What	 is	 that	path?	The
basic	definition	is:
Yoga	is	the	cessation	of	mind	–	chittavrittinirodha.
I	 told	 you	 that	 Patanjali	 is	 mathematical.	 In	 a	 single	 sentence:	 Now	 the
discipline	of	Yoga,	he	 is	 finished	with	you.	This	 is	 the	only	 sentence	 that	has
been	used	for	you.	Now	he	takes	it	for	granted	that	you	are	interested	in	Yoga
not	as	a	hope	but	as	a	discipline,	as	a	 transformation	 right	here	and	now.	He
proceeds	to	define:
Yoga	is	the	cessation	of	mind.
This	is	the	definition	of	Yoga,	the	best	definition.	Yoga	has	been	defined	in
many	ways;	 there	are	many	definitions.	Some	say	Yoga	is	 the	meeting	of	 the
mind	with	 the	divine;	hence,	 it	 is	called	Yoga	–	Yoga	means	meeting,	joining
together.	Some	say	 that	Yoga	means	dropping	 the	ego,	ego	 is	 the	barrier:	 the
moment	 you	 drop	 the	 ego	 you	 are	 joined	 to	 the	 divine.	 You	 were	 already
joined;	it	only	appeared	that	you	were	not	joined	because	of	the	ego.	There	are
many	 definitions,	 but	 Patanjali’s	 is	 the	most	 scientific.	 He	 says:	Yoga	 is	 the
cessation	of	mind.
Yoga	is	the	state	of	no-mind.	The	word	mind	covers	everything	–	your	egos,
your	 desires,	 your	 hopes,	 your	 philosophies,	 your	 religions,	 your	 scriptures.
Mind	covers	all.	Whatsoever	you	can	think	is	mind.	All	that	is	known,	all	that
can	 be	 known,	 all	 that	 is	 knowable,	 is	 within	 mind.	 Cessation	 of	 the	 mind
means	cessation	of	the	known,	cessation	of	the	knowable.	It	is	a	jump	into	the
unknown.	When	there	is	no-mind	you	are	in	the	unknown.	Yoga	is	a	jump	into
the	unknown.	It	will	not	be	right	to	say	“unknown”;	rather,	“unknowable.”
What	is	the	mind?	What	is	the	mind	doing	there?	What	is	it?	Ordinarily	we
think	that	mind	is	something	substantial	there,	inside	the	head.	Patanjali	doesn’t
agree,	 and	 no	 one	 who	 has	 ever	 known	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 mind	 will	 agree.
Modern	 science	 also	 doesn’t	 agree.	Mind	 is	 not	 something	 substantial	 inside
the	head.	Mind	is	just	a	function,	just	an	activity.
You	walk,	and	I	say	you	are	walking.	What	is	walking?	If	you	stop,	where	is
walking?	 If	 you	 sit	 down,	 where	 has	 the	 walking	 gone?	Walking	 is	 nothing
substantial;	 it	 is	an	activity.	So	while	you	are	sitting	no	one	can	ask,	“Where
have	 you	 put	 your	 walking?	 Just	 now	 you	 were	 walking,	 so	 where	 has	 the
walking	 gone?”	 You	 will	 laugh.	 You	 will	 say,	 “Walking	 is	 not	 something
substantial,	it	is	just	an	activity.	I	can	walk.	I	can	again	walk	and	I	can	stop.	It
is	activity.”
Mind	 is	 also	 activity,	 but	 because	 of	 the	 word	 mind	 it	 appears	 as	 if
something	 substantial	 is	 there.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 call	 it	 “minding”	 –	 just	 like
walking.	Mind	means	“minding,”	mind	means	thinking.	It	is	an	activity.
Again	and	again	I	have	been	quoting	Bodhidharma…
	
Bodhidharma	went	to	China	and	the	emperor	of	China	came	to	see	him.	The
emperor	said,	“My	mind	 is	very	uneasy,	very	disturbed.	You	are	a	great	 sage
and	I	have	been	waiting	for	you.	Tell	me	what	I	should	do	to	put	my	mind	at
peace.”
Bodhidharma	said,	“Don’t	do	anything.	First,	bring	your	mind	to	me.”
The	emperor	could	not	follow.	He	said,	“What	do	you	mean?”
He	said,	“Come	in	the	morning	at	four	o’clock,	when	nobody	is	here.	Come
alone,	and	remember	to	bring	your	mind	with	you.”
The	 emperor	 couldn’t	 sleep	 the	whole	 night.	Many	 times	 he	 canceled	 the
whole	idea:	“This	man	seems	to	be	mad.	What	does	he	mean,	‘Come	with	your
mind,	don’t	 forget’?”	But	 the	man	was	so	enchanting,	so	charismatic	 that	 the
emperor	couldn’t	cancel	the	appointment.	As	if	a	magnet	were	pulling	him,	at
four	o’clock	he	jumped	out	of	the	bed	and	said,	“Whatsoever	happens,	I	must
go.	 This	 man	may	 have	 something;	 his	 eyes	 say	 that	 he	 has	 something.	 He
looks	a	little	crazy,	but	still	I	must	go	and	see	what	can	happen.”
So	he	arrived,	and	Bodhidharma	was	sitting	with	his	big	staff.	And	he	said,
“So	you	have	come?	Where	is	your	mind?	Have	you	brought	it	or	not?”
The	 emperor	 said,	 “You	 talk	nonsense.	When	 I	 am	here	my	mind	 is	 here,
and	it	is	not	something	which	I	can	forget	somewhere.	It	is	in	me.”
So	Bodhidharma	said,	“Okay.	So	the	first	thing	is	decided	–	that	the	mind	is
within	you.”
The	emperor	said,	“Okay,	the	mind	is	within	me.”
Bodhidharma	 said,	 “Now	close	your	 eyes	 and	 find	out	where	 it	 is.	And	 if
you	can	find	out	where	it	is,	immediately	indicate	to	me.	I	will	put	it	at	peace.”
So	the	emperor	closed	his	eyes,	tried	and	tried,	looked	and	looked.	The	more
he	 looked	 the	more	 he	 became	 aware	 that	 there	 is	 no	mind,	 that	mind	 is	 an
activity.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 there	 so	you	can	pinpoint	 it.	But	 the	moment	he
realized	 that	 it	 is	 not	 something,	 then	 the	 absurdity	 of	 his	 quest	 became
exposed	to	him:	“If	it	is	not	something,	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	If	it	is	an
activity,	then	don’t	do	the	activity;	that’s	all.	If	it	is	like	walking,	don’t	walk.”
He	opened	his	eyes.	He	bowed	down	to	Bodhidharma	and	said,	“There	is	no
mind	to	be	found.”
Bodhidharma	said,	“Then	I	have	put	it	at	peace.	And	whenever	you	feel	that
you	are	uneasy,	just	look	within	for	where	that	uneasiness	is.”
	
The	very	looking	is	anti-mind,	because	a	look	is	not	a	thinking.	And	if	you
look	 intensely	 your	 whole	 energy	 becomes	 a	 look,	 and	 the	 same	 energy
becomes	movement	and	thinking.
Yoga	is	the	cessation	of	mind.
This	is	Patanjali’s	definition:	when	there	is	no	mind	you	are	in	Yoga,	when
there	 is	mind	you	are	not	 in	Yoga.	So	you	may	do	all	 the	postures	but	 if	 the
mind	goes	on	functioning,	if	you	go	on	thinking,	you	are	not	in	Yoga.
Yoga	is	the	state	of	no-mind.	If	you	can	be	without	the	mind	without	doing
any	posture,	you	have	become	a	perfect	yogi.	It	has	happened	to	many	without
doing	 any	 postures,	 and	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 to	many	who	 have	 been	 doing
postures	for	many	lives.	Because	the	basic	thing	to	be	understood	is:	when	the
activity	of	thinking	is	not	there,	you	are	there.	When	the	activity	of	the	mind	is
not	there,	when	thoughts	have	disappeared	–	they	are	just	 like	clouds	–	when
they	have	disappeared	your	being,	just	like	the	sky,	is	uncovered.	It	is	always
there,	only	covered	with	the	clouds,	only	covered	with	thoughts.
Yoga	is	the	cessation	of	mind.
Now	in	the	West	there	is	much	appeal	for	Zen	which	is	a	Japanese	method
of	 Yoga.	 The	 word	 Zen	 comes	 from	 dhyana.	 Bodhidharma	 introduced	 this
word	dhyana	 into	China.	 The	word	dhyana	 became	 jhan,	 and	 then	 in	 China
ch’an,	and	then	the	word	traveled	to	Japan	and	became	Zen.
The	root	is	dhyana.	Dhyana	means	no-mind,	so	the	whole	training	of	Zen	in
Japan	is	nothing	but	how	to	stop	“minding,”	how	to	be	a	no-mind,	how	to	be
simply	without	thinking.	Try	it!	When	I	say	try	it,	it	will	look	contradictory,	but
there	is	no	other	way	to	say	it,	because	if	you	try,	the	very	trying,	the	effort,	is
coming	 from	 the	mind.	You	 can	 sit	 in	 a	 posture	 and	 you	 can	 try	 some	 japa,
chanting	a	mantra,	or	you	can	just	try	to	sit	silently,	not	to	think.	But	then	“not
to	 think”	 becomes	 the	 thinking.	 Then	 you	 go	 on	 saying,	 “I	 am	 not	 to	 think,
don’t	think,	stop	thinking,”	but	this	is	all	thinking.
Try	 to	 understand.	When	 Patanjali	 says	 no-mind	…cessation	 of	 mind,	 he
means	 complete	 cessation.	 He	will	 not	 allow	 you	 to	make	 a	mantra,	 “Ram-
Ram-Ram.”	He	will	say	that	this	is	not	cessation,	you	are	using	the	mind.	He
will	say,	“Simply	stop!”	But	you	will	ask,	“How?	How	can	you	simply	stop?”
The	mind	continues.	Even	if	you	sit	the	mind	continues.	Even	if	you	don’t	do,
it	goes	on	doing.
Patanjali	 says,	 “Then	 just	 look.	Let	mind	go,	 let	mind	do	whatsoever	 it	 is
doing.	You	just	look.	You	don’t	interfere.	You	just	be	a	witness.	You	just	be	an
onlooker,	 not	 concerned,	 as	 if	 the	mind	doesn’t	 belong	 to	 you,	 as	 if	 it	 is	 not
your	 business,	 not	 your	 concern.	 Don’t	 be	 concerned.	 Just	 look	 and	 let	 the
mind	flow.	It	is	flowing	because	of	past	momentum,	because	you	have	always
helped	 it	 to	flow.	The	activity	has	 taken	 its	own	momentum,	so	 it	 is	 flowing.
Just	don’t	cooperate.	Look,	and	let	the	mind	flow.”
For	many,	many	lives,	perhaps	a	million	lives,	you	have	cooperated	with	it,
you	have	helped	it,	you	have	given	your	energy	to	it.	The	river	will	flow	for	a
while.	If	you	don’t	cooperate,	if	you	just	look,	unconcerned	–	Buddha’s	word	is
indifference,	 upeksha:	 looking	 without	 any	 concern,	 just	 looking,	 not	 doing
anything	in	any	way	–	the	mind	will	flow	for	a	while	and	it	will	stop	by	itself.
When	the	momentum	is	lost,	when	the	energy	has	flowed,	the	mind	will	stop.
When	the	mind	stops	you	are	in	Yoga:	you	have	attained	the	discipline.	This	is
the	definition:
Yoga	is	the	cessation	of	mind.
Then	the	witness	is	established	in	itself.
When	the	mind	ceases	…the	witness	is	established	in	itself.
When	you	can	simply	look	without	being	identified	with	the	mind,	without
judging,	without	appreciating,	condemning,	without	choosing;	you	simply	look
and	the	mind	flows,	a	time	comes	when	by	itself,	of	itself,	the	mind	stops.
When	 there	 is	 no-mind	 you	 are	 established	 in	 your	witnessing.	 Then	 you
have	become	a	witness,	just	a	seer,	a	drashta,	a	sakshi.	Then	you	are	not	a	doer,
then	you	are	not	 a	 thinker.	Then	you	are	 simply	being,	 pure	being,	 purest	 of
being.	Then	the	witness	is	established	in	itself.
In	the	other	states	there	is	identification
with	the	modifications	of	the	mind.
Except	 witnessing,	 in	 all	 states	 you	 are	 identified	 with	 the	 mind.	 You
become	 one	 with	 the	 flow	 of	 thoughts,	 you	 become	 one	 with	 the	 clouds:
sometimes	with	 the	white	 cloud,	 sometimes	with	 the	black	 cloud,	 sometimes
with	a	rain-filled	cloud,	sometimes	with	a	vacant,	empty	cloud.	But	when	you
become	one	with	the	thought,	you	become	one	with	the	cloud,	and	you	miss	the
purity	 of	 the	 sky,	 the	 purity	 of	 the	 space.	 You	 become	 clouded	 and	 this
clouding	happens	because	you	get	identified,	you	become	one.
A	thought	comes.	You	are	hungry	and	the	thought	flashes	in	the	mind.	The
thought	 is	 simply	 that	 there	 is	 hunger,	 the	 stomach	 is	 feeling	 hunger.
Immediately	 you	 get	 identified;	 you	 say,	 “I	 am	 hungry.”	 The	mind	was	 just
filled	with	a	thought	that	hunger	is	there,	and	you	have	become	identified	and
you	say,	“I	am	hungry.”	This	is	identification.
Buddha	 also	 feels	 hunger,	 Patanjali	 also	 feels	 hunger,	 but	 Patanjali	 will
never	say,	“I	am	hungry”:	he	will	say,	“The	body	is	hungry”;	he	will	say,	“My
stomach	 is	 feeling	 hungry”;	 he	will	 say,	 “There	 is	 hunger.	 I	 am	 a	witness.	 I
have	come	to	witness	this	thought	which	has	been	flashed	by	the	belly	into	the
brain:	‘I	am	hungry.’”	The	belly	is	hungry,	Patanjali	will	remain	a	witness.	You
become	identified,	you	become	one	with	the	thought.
Then	the	witness	is	established	in	itself.
In	the	other	states	there	is	identification
with	the	modifications	of	the	mind.
This	is	the	definition:
Yoga	is	the	cessation	of	mind.
When	 mind	 ceases	 you	 are	 established	 in	 your	 witnessing	 self.	 In	 other
states	except	this	there	are	identifications.	And	all	identifications	constitute	the
sansar;	they	are	the	world.	If	you	are	in	the	identifications	you	are	in	the	world,
in	the	misery.	If	you	have	transcended	the	identifications	you	are	liberated.	You
have	become	a	siddha,	you	are	in	nirvana.	You	have	transcended	this	world	of
misery	and	entered	the	world	of	bliss.
And	 that	world	 is	here	and	now	–	 right	now,	 this	very	moment!	You	need
not	wait	for	even	a	single	moment.	Just	become	a	witness	of	the	mind	and	you
have	 entered.	Get	 identified	with	 the	mind	 and	 you	 have	missed.	This	 is	 the
basic	definition.
Remember	 everything,	 because	 later	 on,	 in	 other	 sutras,	 we	 will	 go	 into
details	about	what	is	to	be	done,	how	it	is	to	be	done.
But	 always	 keep	 in	mind	 that	 this	 is	 the	 foundation:	 one	 has	 to	 achieve	 a
state	of	no-mind.	That	is	the	goal.
Enough	for	today.
Chapter	2:	Desireless,	You	Are	Enlightened
	
The	first	question:
Osho,
You	said	last	night	that	total	despair,	frustration	and	hopelessness	is	the	beginning	ground
for	Yoga.	This	gives	Yoga	a	pessimistic	look.	Is	this	pessimistic	state	really	necessary	to
begin	the	path	of	Yoga?	Can	an	optimist	also	begin	with	the	path	of	Yoga?
It	is	neither	pessimistic	nor	optimistic,	because	pessimism	and	optimism	are
two	aspects	of	 the	 same	coin.	A	pessimist	 is	one	who	was	an	optimist	 in	 the
past;	 an	 optimist	 is	 one	who	will	 be	 a	 pessimist	 in	 the	 future.	All	 optimism
leads	to	pessimism	because	every	hope	leads	to	hopelessness.
If	you	are	still	hoping	then	Yoga	is	not	for	you.	The	desire	is	there,	hope	is
there;	 sansar,	 the	 world	 is	 there.	 Your	 desire	 is	 the	 world,	 your	 hope	 is	 the
bondage,	because	hope	will	 not	 allow	you	 to	be	 in	 the	present.	 It	will	 go	on
forcing	you	towards	the	future;	it	will	not	allow	you	to	be	centered.	It	will	pull
and	push	but	it	will	not	allow	you	to	remain	in	a	restful	moment,	in	a	state	of
stillness.	It	will	not	allow	you.
So	 when	 I	 say	 total	 hopelessness	 I	 mean	 that	 hope	 has	 failed	 and
hopelessness	 has	 also	 become	 futile.	 Then	 it	 is	 total	 hopelessness.	 Total
hopelessness	 means	 even	 hopelessness	 is	 not	 there,	 because	 when	 you	 feel
hopeless	a	subtle	hope	is	there.	Otherwise	why	should	you	feel	hopeless?	Hope
is	there,	you	are	still	clinging	to	it;	hence	the	hopelessness.
Total	hopelessness	means	now	there	is	no	hope.	And	when	there	is	no	hope
there	 cannot	 be	 hopelessness.	 You	 have	 simply	 dropped	 the	 whole
phenomenon.	 Both	 aspects	 have	 been	 thrown	 out,	 the	 whole	 coin	 has	 been
dropped.	 In	 this	 state	 of	mind	 you	 can	 enter	 the	 path	 of	Yoga,	 never	 before.
Before	there	is	no	possibility:	hope	is	against	Yoga.
Yoga	 is	 not	 pessimistic.	 You	 may	 be	 optimistic	 or	 pessimistic;	 Yoga	 is
neither.	If	you	are	pessimistic	you	cannot	enter	on	the	path	of	Yoga	because	a
pessimist	clings	to	his	miseries.	He	will	not	allow	his	miseries	to	disappear.	An
optimist	 clings	 to	 his	 hopes	 and	 a	 pessimist	 clings	 to	 his	 miseries,	 to	 his
hopelessness.	 That	 hopelessness	 has	 become	 the	 companion.	Yoga	 is	 for	 the
one	 who	 is	 neither,	 who	 has	 become	 so	 totally	 hopeless	 that	 even	 to	 feel
hopelessness	is	futile.
The	 opposite	 can	 be	 felt	 only	 if	 you	 go	 on	 clinging	 with	 the	 positive
somewhere	deep	down.	If	you	cling	to	hope	you	can	feel	hopelessness.	If	you
cling	to	expectation	you	can	feel	frustration.	If	you	simply	come	to	realize	that
there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 expecting	 anything,	 then	 where	 is	 the	 frustration?
Then	 this	 is	 the	 nature	 of	 existence,	 that	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 expecting
anything,	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	hope.	When	this	becomes	a	certainty,	how
can	you	feel	hopeless?	Then	both	have	disappeared.
Patanjali	says:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.	That	now	will	happen	only	when
you	are	neither	positive	nor	negative.	Both	pessimistic	attitudes	and	optimistic
attitudes	are	ill.	But	there	are	teachers	who	go	on	talking	in	terms	of	optimism,
particularly	American	Christian	missionaries.	They	go	on	 talking	 in	 terms	of
hope,	 optimism,	 future,	 heaven.	 In	 the	 eyes	 of	 Patanjali	 that	 is	 just	 juvenile,
childish,	because	you	are	simply	giving	a	new	disease.	You	are	substituting	a
new	 disease	 for	 the	 old.	 You	 are	 unhappy	 and	 somehow	 you	 are	 seeking
happiness.	So	whosoever	gives	you	an	assurance	that,	“This	is	the	path	that	will
lead	 you	 to	 happiness,”	 you	 will	 follow	 it.	 He	 is	 giving	 you	 hope,	 but	 the
misery	 you	 are	 feeling	 so	much	 is	 because	 of	 your	 past	 hopes;	 he	 is	 simply
creating	a	future	hell.
Yoga	 expects	 you	 to	 be	 more	 adult,	 more	 mature.	 Yoga	 says	 there	 is	 no
possibility	 to	expect	anything;	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	any	fulfillment	 in	 the
future.	There	is	no	heaven	in	the	future	waiting	for	you	and	no	God	waiting	for
you	with	Christmas	gifts.	There	is	nobody	waiting	for	you	so	don’t	hanker	after
the	future.
When	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 which	 is	 going	 to	 happen
somewhere	in	the	future,	you	will	become	alert	here	and	now	because	there	is
nowhere	to	move.	Then	there	is	no	way	to	tremble,	a	stillness	happens	to	you.
Suddenly	you	are	 in	 a	deep	 rest.	You	cannot	go	 anywhere;	 you	 are	 at	 home.
Movement	ceases,	restlessness	disappears.	Now	is	the	time	to	enter	Yoga.
Patanjali	will	not	give	you	any	hope.	He	respects	you	more	than	you	respect
yourself.	He	thinks	you	are	mature	and	toys	will	not	help.	It	is	better	to	be	alert
to	whatever	is	the	case.	But	immediately	when	I	say,	“Total	hopelessness”	your
mind	 will	 say,	 “This	 appears	 pessimistic,”	 because	 your	 mind	 lives	 through
hope,	your	mind	clings	to	desires,	expectations.
You	are	so	miserable	right	now	that	you	will	commit	suicide	 if	 there	 is	no
hope.	Really,	if	Patanjali	is	true,	what	will	happen	to	you?	If	there	is	no	hope,
no	 future	and	you	are	 thrown	back	 to	your	present,	you	will	commit	 suicide.
Then	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 live	 for.	You	 live	 for	 something	which	will	 happen
somewhere,	 sometime.	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to	 happen,	 but	 the	 feeling	 that	 it	may
happen	helps	you	to	stay	alive.
That’s	why	I	say	when	you	have	come	to	a	point	where	suicide	has	become
a	 meaningful	 thing,	 where	 life	 has	 lost	 all	 its	 meaning,	 where	 you	 can	 kill
yourself,	in	that	moment	Yoga	becomes	possible	because	you	will	not	be	ready
to	 transform	yourself	 unless	 this	 intense	 futility	 of	 life	 has	 happened	 to	 you.
You	will	 be	 ready	 to	 transform	yourself	 only	when	 you	 feel	 there	 is	 no	way
except	 suicide	 or	 sadhana,	 either	 commit	 suicide	 or	 transform	 your	 being.
When	only	 two	 alternatives	 are	 left,	 only	 then	 is	Yoga	 chosen,	 never	 before.
But	 Yoga	 is	 not	 pessimistic.	 You	 are	 optimistic	 so	 Yoga	 appears	 to	 you	 as
pessimistic.	It	is	because	of	you.
In	 the	 West	 Buddha	 has	 been	 taken	 as	 the	 peak	 of	 pessimism	 because
Buddha	 says	 life	 is	 dukkha,	 anguish.	 Therefore	 Western	 philosophers	 have
been	 commenting	 that	 Buddha	 is	 a	 pessimist.	 Even	 a	 person	 like	 Albert
Schweitzer,	 a	 person	 we	 can	 expect	 to	 know	 certain	 things,	 even	 he	 is	 in
confusion.	He	thinks	the	whole	East	is	pessimistic	and	this	is	a	great	criticism
for	 him.	 The	 whole	 East	 –	 Buddha,	 Patanjali,	 Mahavira,	 Lao	 Tzu,	 are	 all
pessimists	 for	him.	They	do	appear	so;	 they	appear	so	because	 they	say	your
life	is	meaningless.	Not	that	they	say	life	is	meaningless,	but	the	life	that	you
know.	 And	 unless	 this	 life	 becomes	 absolutely	 meaningless	 you	 cannot
transcend	it,	you	will	cling	to	it.
Unless	 you	 transcend	 this	 life,	 this	mode	 of	 existence,	 you	will	 not	 know
what	bliss	 is.	But	Buddha	or	Patanjali	will	not	 talk	much	about	bliss	because
they	have	a	deep	compassion	for	you.	If	they	start	talking	about	bliss	you	again
create	 a	 hope.	 You	 are	 incurable:	 you	 again	 create	 a	 hope.	 You	 say,	 “Okay!
Then	we	can	 leave	 this	 life.	 If	 a	more	abundant	 life,	 a	 richer	 life	 is	possible,
then	 we	 can	 leave	 desires.	 If	 through	 leaving	 desires	 the	 deepest	 desire	 of
reaching	 to	 the	 ultimate,	 the	 peak	 of	 bliss,	 is	 possible,	 then	 we	 can	 leave
desires.	But	we	can	leave	only	for	a	greater	desire.”
Then	 where	 are	 you	 leaving?	 You	 are	 not	 leaving	 at	 all.	 You	 are	 simply
substituting	a	different	desire	for	the	old	one.	And	the	new	desire	will	be	more
dangerous	than	the	old	because	you	are	already	frustrated	with	the	old.	To	get
frustrated	with	the	new	you	may	again	take	even	a	few	lives	to	come	to	a	point
where	you	can	say	God	is	useless,	where	you	can	say	heaven	is	foolish,	where
you	can	say	all	future	is	nonsense.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 worldly	 desires;	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 desire	 as	 such.
Desiring	 must	 cease.	 Only	 then	 you	 become	 ready,	 only	 then	 you	 gather
courage,	only	then	the	door	opens	and	you	can	enter	into	the	unknown.	Hence,
Patanjali’s	first	sutra:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
	
The	second	question:
Osho,
It	is	said	that	Yoga	is	an	atheistic	system.	Do	you	agree	with	this?
Again,	 Yoga	 is	 neither.	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 science.	 It	 is	 neither	 theistic	 nor
atheistic.	Patanjali	 really	 is	 superb,	 a	miracle	of	 a	man.	He	never	 talks	about
God.	And	even	if	he	mentions	God	once,	then	too	he	says	it	is	just	one	of	the
methods	of	reaching	the	ultimate.	The	belief	in	God	is	just	a	method	to	reach
the	ultimate	–	there	is	no	God.	To	believe	in	God	is	just	a	technique,	because
through	believing	in	God	prayerfulness	becomes	possible;	through	believing	in
God	 surrender	 becomes	 possible.	 The	 significance	 is	 of	 surrender	 and
prayerfulness,	not	of	God.
Patanjali	is	really	unbelievable!	He	said	God	–	the	belief	in	God,	the	concept
of	God	–	is	also	one	of	the	methods	among	many	methods	to	reach	the	truth.
Ishwara	pranidhan	–	to	believe	in	God	is	just	a	path.	But	it	is	not	a	necessity.
You	can	choose	something	else.	Buddha	reaches	to	that	ultimate	reality	without
believing	in	God.	He	chooses	a	different	path	where	God	is	not	needed.
You	have	come	to	my	house,	you	have	passed	through	a	certain	street,	but
that	street	was	not	the	goal,	it	was	just	instrumental.	You	could	have	reached	to
the	same	house	 through	some	other	 street;	others	have	 reached	 through	other
streets.	On	your	street	there	may	be	green	trees,	big	trees,	on	other	streets	there
may	not	be.	So	God	is	just	one	path.	Remember	the	distinction:	God	is	not	the
goal.	God	is	just	one	of	the	paths.
Patanjali	 never	 denies,	 he	 never	 assumes.	He	 is	 absolutely	 scientific.	 It	 is
difficult	 for	 Christians	 to	 understand	 how	 Buddha	 could	 attain	 the	 ultimate
truth,	because	he	never	believed	in	God.	It	is	difficult	for	Hindus	to	understand
how	Mahavira	could	attain	liberation,	because	he	never	believed	in	God.
Before	 the	 Western	 thinkers	 became	 alert	 about	 Eastern	 religions	 they
always	 defined	 religion	 as	 God-centered.	 When	 they	 came	 upon	 Eastern
thinking	and	they	became	aware	that	there	has	been	a	traditional	path,	a	godless
path	reaching	toward	truth,	they	were	shocked:	“It	is	impossible!”
H.	G.	Wells	has	written	about	Buddha	that	Buddha	is	the	most	godless	man
and	yet	 the	most	godly.	He	never	believed	and	he	will	 never	 tell	 anybody	 to
believe	 in	 any	 God,	 but	 he	 himself	 is	 the	 suprememost	 phenomenon	 of	 the
happening	 of	 divine	 being.	 Mahavira	 too	 travels	 a	 path	 where	 God	 is	 not
needed.
Patanjali	 is	 absolutely	 scientific:	 he	 says	 we	 are	 not	 related	 with	 means,
there	are	a	thousand	and	one	means	–	the	goal	is	the	truth.	Some	have	achieved
it	 through	God,	 so	 it	 is	okay	–	believe	 in	God	and	achieve	 the	goal,	because
when	 the	goal	 is	 achieved	you	will	 throw	away	your	 belief.	 So	belief	 is	 just
instrumental.	If	you	don’t	believe	it	is	okay,	don’t	believe,	and	travel	the	path
of	belieflessness	and	reach	the	goal.
He	 is	 neither	 theist	 nor	 atheist.	He	 is	 not	 creating	 a	 religion,	 he	 is	 simply
showing	you	all	the	paths	that	are	possible	and	all	the	laws	that	work	in	your
transformation.	God	is	one	of	 those	paths,	 it	 is	not	a	must.	If	you	are	godless
there	 is	no	need	 to	be	non-religious.	Patanjali	 says	you	can	also	 reach,	 so	be
godless,	 don’t	 bother	 about	 God.	 These	 are	 the	 laws	 and	 these	 are	 the
experiments;	this	is	the	meditation	–	pass	through	it.
He	does	not	insist	on	any	concept.	It	was	very	difficult.	That’s	why	the	Yoga
Sutras	 of	 Patanjali	 are	 rare,	 unique.	 Such	 a	 book	 has	 never	 happened	 before
and	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	 its	happening	again,	because	whatsoever	can	be
written	 about	 Yoga	 he	 has	written,	 he	 has	 left	 nothing	 out.	 No	 one	 can	 add
anything	to	it.	Never	in	the	future	is	there	any	possibility	to	create	another	work
like	Patanjali’s	Yoga	Sutras.	He	has	finished	the	job	completely,	and	he	could
do	this	so	totally	because	he	is	not	partial.	If	he	were	partial	then	he	could	not
do	it	so	totally.
Buddha	is	partial,	Mahavira	is	partial,	Jesus	is	partial,	Mohammed	is	partial
–	they	have	a	certain	path.	And	their	partiality	may	be	because	of	you,	because
of	 a	 deep	 compassion	 for	 you.	 They	 insist	 on	 a	 certain	 path,	 they	 go	 on
insisting	their	whole	 life.	And	they	say,	“Everything	else	 is	wrong,	 this	 is	 the
right	path,”	 just	 to	 create	 faith	 in	you.	You	are	 so	 faithless;	 you	are	 so	 filled
with	doubt	that	if	they	say,	“This	path	leads,	others’	paths	also	lead,”	you	will
not	follow	any.	They	insist	that	only	this	path	leads.
This	 is	 not	 true.	 This	 is	 just	 a	 device	 for	 you	 because	 if	 you	 feel	 any
uncertainty	 in	 them,	 if	 they	 say,	 “This	 also	 leads,	 that	 also	 leads;	 this	 is	 also
true,	 that	 is	also	 true,”	you	will	become	uncertain.	You	are	already	uncertain.
You	need	someone	who	is	absolutely	certain.	Just	 to	 look	certain	 to	you	 they
have	pretended	to	be	partial.
But	 if	 you	 are	partial	 you	 cannot	 cover	 the	whole	ground.	Patanjali	 is	 not
partial.	He	is	less	concerned	with	you,	more	concerned	with	the	past	designs	of
the	path.	He	will	not	use	a	lie;	he	will	not	use	a	device,	he	will	not	compromise
with	you.	No	scientist	can	compromise.
Buddha	 can	 compromise.	 He	 has	 compassion,	 he	 is	 not	 treating	 you
scientifically.	A	very	deep	human	feeling	is	there	for	you;	he	can	even	lie	just
to	help	you.	You	cannot	understand	the	truth	so	he	compromises	with	you.
Patanjali	will	not	compromise	with	you.	Whatsoever	is	the	fact,	he	will	talk
about	 the	 fact.	 And	 he	 will	 not	 descend	 a	 single	 step	 to	 meet	 you,	 he	 is
absolutely	 uncompromising.	 Science	 has	 to	 be.	 Science	 cannot	 compromise;
otherwise	it	will	itself	become	a	religion.	He	is	neither	atheist	nor	theist.	He	is
neither	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan	nor	Christian	nor	 Jaina	nor	Buddhist.	He	 is
absolutely	 a	 scientific	 seeker	 just	 revealing	whatsoever	 is	 the	 case,	 revealing
without	 any	myth.	He	will	 not	use	 a	 single	parable.	 Jesus	will	 talk	 in	 stories
because	you	are	children	and	you	can	only	understand	stories.	He	will	 talk	in
parables.	Buddha	uses	many	stories	just	to	help	you	to	attain	a	little	glimpse.
	
I	was	reading	about	a	Hassid,	a	Jewish	master,	Baal	Shem.	He	was	a	rabbi	in
a	 small	 village,	 and	 whenever	 there	 was	 some	 trouble,	 some	 disease,	 some
calamity	in	the	village,	he	would	move	into	the	forest.	He	would	go	to	a	certain
spot	under	a	certain	tree	and	there	he	would	do	some	ritual	and	then	he	would
pray	to	God.	And	it	always	happened	that	the	calamity	would	leave	the	village,
the	illness	would	disappear	from	the	village,	the	trouble	would	go.
Then	Baal	Shem	died.	His	successor	came.	Then	a	problem	arose	again,	the
village	was	 in	 trouble.	 There	was	 some	 calamity	 and	 the	 villagers	 asked	 the
successor,	 the	new	rabbi,	 to	go	 to	 the	 forest	and	pray	 to	God.	The	new	rabbi
was	very	much	disturbed	because	he	was	unacquainted	with	the	spot,	the	exact
tree.	But	still	he	went,	stopped	under	any	tree.	He	burned	the	fire,	did	the	ritual
and	 prayed	 and	 said	 to	God,	 “Look,	 I	 don’t	 know	 the	 exact	 spot	my	master
used	to	come	to,	but	you	know.	You	are	omnipotent,	you	are	omnipresent,	so
you	know,	so	there	is	no	need	to	seek	for	the	exact	spot.	My	village	is	in	some
trouble,	so	listen	and	do	something.”	The	calamity	was	gone.
Then	when	 this	 rabbi	died	and	his	 successor	was	 there,	 again	 the	problem
came.	The	village	was	in	a	certain	crisis	and	they	came	to	him.	The	rabbi	was
disturbed,	he	had	even	forgotten	 the	prayer.	So	he	went	 into	 the	forest,	chose
any	place.	He	didn’t	know	how	to	burn	the	ritual	fire	but	anyhow	he	burned	a
fire	and	said	to	God,	“Listen,	I	don’t	know	how	to	burn	the	ritual	fire,	I	don’t
know	the	exact	spot	and	I	have	forgotten	the	prayer.	But	you	are	all-knowing	so
you	 know	 already;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 me	 to	 know.	 So	 do	 whatsoever	 is
needed.”	And	he	came	back	and	the	village	passed	through	the	crisis.
Then	 he	 also	 died.	 Again	 the	 successor…	 And	 again	 the	 village	 was	 in
trouble,	so	they	came.	He	was	sitting	in	his	armchair.	He	said	to	God,	“I	don’t
want	 to	go	anywhere.	Listen,	you	are	everywhere.	 I	don’t	know	 the	prayer,	 I
don’t	know	any	 ritual.	But	 that	doesn’t	matter;	my	knowing	 is	not	 the	point.
You	know	everything.	What	is	the	use	of	praying	and	what	is	the	use	of	a	ritual
and	what	 is	 the	use	of	 a	particular	 sacred	 spot?	 I	know	only	 the	 story	of	my
successors.	I	will	tell	you	the	story	that	happened	in	Baal	Shem’s	time,	then	his
successor,	then	his	successor:	this	is	the	story.	Now	do	the	right	thing	and	this
is	enough.”	And	the	calamity	disappeared.	It	is	said	that	God	loved	the	story	so
much.
	
People	 love	 their	 stories,	 and	 the	 people’s	 God	 also	 loves	 stories,	 and
through	 stories	 you	 can	 have	 certain	 glimpses.	 But	 Patanjali	 will	 not	 use	 a
single	 parable.	 I	 told	 you	 he	 is	 just	 Einstein	 plus	 Buddha,	 a	 very	 rare
combination.	 He	 has	 the	 inner	 witnessing	 of	 Buddha	 and	 the	 mechanism	 of
mind	of	an	Einstein,	but	he	is	neither.
Theism	is	a	story,	atheism	is	the	anti-story.	They	are	just	myths,	man-created
parables.	To	some	the	one	appeals,	to	some	the	other.	Patanjali	is	not	interested
in	stories	or	myths,	he	is	interested	in	the	naked	truth.	He	will	not	even	clothe
it,	he	will	not	put	on	any	dressing,	he	will	not	decorate	it.	That	is	not	his	way,
remember	this.
We	will	move	on	a	very	dry	 land,	a	desert-like	 land.	But	 the	desert	has	 its
own	beauty.	It	has	no	trees,	it	has	no	rivers,	but	it	has	a	vastness	of	its	own.	No
forest	 can	 be	 compared	 to	 it.	 Forests	 have	 their	 own	 beauty,	 hills	 have	 their
own	beauty,	rivers	their	own	beauty.	The	desert	has	its	own	vast	infinity.
We	will	be	moving	through	desert-land.	Courage	is	needed.	He	will	not	give
you	 a	 single	 tree	 to	 rest	 under.	He	will	 not	 give	 you	 any	 story,	 just	 the	 bare
facts.	He	will	 not	use	 even	a	 single	 superfluous	word;	hence	 the	word	 sutra.
Sutra	means	the	basic	minimum.
A	sutra	is	not	even	a	complete	sentence.	It	is	just	the	essential,	just	as	when
you	write	a	 telegram	you	cut	out	superfluous	words.	Then	 it	becomes	a	sutra
because	only	 ten	words	or	nine	words	 can	be	put	 in	 it.	 If	 you	were	going	 to
write	 a	 letter	 you	 would	 fill	 ten	 pages,	 and	 even	 in	 ten	 pages	 the	 message
would	not	be	complete.	But	in	a	telegram	in	ten	words	it	is	not	only	complete,
it	is	more	than	complete.	It	hits	the	heart,	the	very	essence	is	there.
Patanjali’s	 sutras	 are	 telegrams.	 He	 is	 a	 miser,	 he	 will	 not	 use	 a	 single
superfluous	word.	So	how	can	he	tell	stories?	–	he	cannot.	And	don’t	expect	it.
So	don’t	ask	whether	he	is	a	theist	or	an	atheist;	those	are	stories.
Philosophers	 have	 created	many	 stories,	 and	 it	 is	 a	 game.	 If	 you	 like	 the
game	of	atheism,	be	an	atheist.	If	you	like	the	game	of	theism,	be	a	theist.	But
these	are	games,	not	the	reality.	Reality	is	something	else.	Reality	is	concerned
with	you,	not	what	you	believe.	The	reality	is	you,	not	what	you	believe.	The
reality	is	behind	the	mind,	not	in	the	contents	of	the	mind.	Because	theism	is	a
content	of	the	mind,	atheism	is	a	content	of	the	mind,	something	in	the	mind.
Hinduism	is	a	content	of	the	mind	or	Christianity	is	a	content	of	the	mind.
Patanjali	 is	 concerned	 with	 the	 beyond,	 not	 with	 the	 content.	 He	 says,
“Throw	out	this	whole	mind.	Whatsoever	it	contains,	it	is	useless.”	You	may	be
carrying	 beautiful	 philosophies;	 Patanjali	 will	 say,	 “Throw	 them	 out!	 All	 is
rubbish.”	 It	 is	difficult.	 If	someone	says,	“Your	Bible	 is	 rubbish,	your	Gita	 is
rubbish,	 your	 scriptures	 are	 rubbish,	 rot,	 throw	 them	 away,”	 you	 will	 be
shocked.	 But	 this	 is	 how	 it	 is	 going	 to	 happen.	 Patanjali	 cannot	 make	 any
compromise	with	you.	He	is	uncompromising	and	that’s	the	beauty.	And	that	is
his	uniqueness.
	
The	third	question:
Osho,
You	talked	about	the	significance	of	discipleship	on	the	path	of	Yoga,	but	how	can	an
atheist	be	a	disciple?
Neither	a	theist	nor	an	atheist	can	be	a	disciple.	They	have	already	taken	an
attitude,	they	have	already	decided,	so	what	is	the	point	of	being	a	disciple?	If
you	 already	 know	 how	 can	 you	 be	 a	 disciple?	 Discipleship	 means	 the
realization	that,	“I	don’t	know.”	Atheists,	theists	–	no,	they	cannot	be	disciples.
And	if	you	believe	in	something	you	will	miss	the	beauty	of	disciplehood.	If
you	know	something	already,	that	knowing	will	give	you	ego;	it	will	not	make
you	 humble.	 That’s	why	 pundits	 and	 scholars	miss.	 Sometimes	 sinners	 have
reached,	 but	 scholars	 never.	 They	 know	 too	much,	 they	 are	 so	 clever.	 Their
cleverness	is	the	disease	that	becomes	their	suicide.	They	won’t	listen	because
they	are	not	ready	to	learn.
Disciplehood	 simply	 means	 an	 attitude	 to	 learn,	 a	 moment-to-moment
remaining	aware	 that	“I	don’t	know.”	This	knowing	 that	“I	don’t	know,”	 this
awareness	 that	 “I	 am	 ignorant”	 gives	 you	opening.	Then	you	 are	 not	 closed.
The	moment	you	say	“I	know”	you	are	a	closed	circle;	 the	door	 is	no	 longer
open.	But	when	you	say	“I	don’t	know”	 it	means	you	are	 ready	 to	 learn,	 the
door	is	open.
If	you	have	already	reached,	concluded,	you	cannot	be	a	disciple.	One	has	to
be	 in	 a	 receptive	 mood.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 completely	 aware	 that	 the	 real	 is
unknown,	 “And	whatsoever	 I	 know	 is	 trivial,	 is	 just	 rubbish.”	What	 do	 you
know?	You	may	 have	 gathered	much	 information	 but	 that	 is	 not	 knowledge.
You	 may	 have	 accumulated	 much	 dust	 through	 universities;	 that	 is	 not
knowledge.	You	may	know	about	Buddha,	you	may	know	about	Jesus,	but	that
is	not	knowledge.	Unless	you	become	a	Buddha	there	is	no	knowledge.	Unless
you	are	a	Jesus	there	is	no	knowledge.
Knowledge	 comes	 through	 being,	 not	 through	 memory.	 You	 can	 have	 a
trained	memory;	memory	 is	 just	 a	mechanism.	 It	 will	 not	 give	 you	 a	 richer
being.	 It	may	 give	 you	 nightmarish	 dreams	 but	 it	will	 not	 give	 you	 a	 richer
being.	 You	will	 remain	 the	 same,	 covered	 with	much	 dust.	 Knowledge,	 and
particularly	the	ego	that	comes	through	knowledge	–	the	feeling	that	“I	know”
–	closes	you.	Now	you	cannot	be	a	disciple.	And	 if	you	cannot	be	a	disciple
you	cannot	enter	the	discipline	of	Yoga.	So	come	to	the	door	of	Yoga	ignorant,
aware	of	your	ignorance,	alert	that	you	don’t	know.	And	I	will	tell	you:	this	is
the	only	knowledge	which	will	help,	the	knowledge	that	“I	don’t	know.”
This	will	make	you	humble.	A	subtle	humility	will	come	to	you.	The	ego,	by
and	by,	will	subside.	Knowing	that	you	don’t	know,	how	can	you	be	egoistic?
Knowledge	 is	 the	most	 subtle	 food	 for	 the	 ego:	 you	 feel	 you	 are	 something.
You	know,	therefore	you	become	somebody.
Just	two	days	ago	I	initiated	a	girl	from	the	West	into	sannyas	and	I	gave	her
a	 name,	 Yoga	 Sambodhi,	 and	 I	 asked	 her,	 “Will	 it	 be	 easy	 for	 you	 to
pronounce?”	She	said,	“Yes.	It	looks	just	like	the	English	word	somebody.”	But
sambodhi	 is	 quite	 the	 opposite.	 When	 you	 become	 nobody,	 then	 sambodhi
happens.	Sambodhi	means	enlightenment.	If	you	are	somebody,	sambodhi	will
never	happen.	That	“somebodiness”	is	the	barrier.
When	 you	 feel	 you	 are	 nobody,	when	 you	 feel	 you	 are	 nothing,	 suddenly
you	are	available	 for	many	mysteries	 to	happen	 to	you.	Your	doors	are	open.
The	 sun	 can	 rise,	 the	 sunrays	 can	penetrate	you.	Your	gloom,	your	darkness,
will	disappear.	But	you	are	closed.	The	sun	may	be	knocking	on	the	door	but
there	is	no	opening,	not	even	a	window	is	open.
Atheists	 or	 theists,	 Hindus	 or	 Mohammedans,	 Christians	 or	 Buddhists,
cannot	 enter	 on	 the	 path.	 They	 believe	 they	 have	 already	 reached	 Buddha
without	 reaching	 anywhere.	 They	 have	 concluded	 without	 any	 realization.
They	have	words	in	the	mind,	concepts,	theories,	scriptures	–	and	the	more	the
burden,	the	more	dead	they	are.
	
The	fourth	question:
Osho,
You	said	that	Yoga	does	not	ask	for	any	faith.	But	if	a	disciple	needs	faith,	surrender	and
trust	in	the	master	as	a	basic	condition,	then	how	is	the	first	statement	valid?
I	did	not	say	that	Yoga	doesn’t	ask	for	faith.	I	said	Yoga	doesn’t	ask	for	any
belief.	Faith	is	totally	different,	trust	is	totally	different.	Belief	is	an	intellectual
thing,	but	faith	is	a	very	deep	intimacy,	it	is	not	intellectual.	You	love	a	master,
then	you	trust	and	there	is	faith.	But	this	faith	is	not	in	any	concept,	it	is	in	the
very	 person.	 And	 this	 is	 not	 a	 condition,	 it	 is	 not	 required.	 Remember	 this
distinction:	it	is	not	required	that	you	must	have	faith	in	the	master,	it	is	not	a
precondition.	 All	 that	 is	 said	 is	 this:	 if	 trust	 happens	 between	 you	 and	 the
master,	 then	 satsang	 will	 be	 possible.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 situation,	 not	 a	 condition.
Nothing	is	required.
Just	as	with	love:	if	love	happens	then	marriage	can	follow,	but	you	cannot
make	love	a	condition	that	first	you	must	 love	and	then	marriage	will	 follow.
But	then	you	will	ask,	“How	can	one	love?”	If	it	happens	it	happens,	if	it	is	not
happening	 it	 is	 not	 happening.	You	 cannot	 do	 anything.	So	you	 cannot	 force
trust.
In	 the	 old	 days	 seekers	would	 roam	all	 over	 the	world.	They	would	 roam
from	one	master	 to	another,	 just	waiting	 for	 the	phenomenon	 to	happen.	You
cannot	force	it.	You	may	pass	through	many	masters	just	in	a	search	to	see	if
somewhere	 something	 clicks.	 Then	 the	 thing	 has	 happened;	 it	 is	 not	 a
condition.	You	cannot	go	to	a	master	and	try	to	trust	him.	How	can	you	try	to
trust?	The	very	trying,	the	very	effort	shows	you	don’t	trust.	How	can	you	try
to	 love	 someone?	 If	 you	 try,	 the	 whole	 thing	 has	 become	 false.	 It	 is	 a
happening.
But	 unless	 this	 happens,	 satsang	 will	 not	 be	 possible.	 Then	 the	 master
cannot	give	his	grace	to	you.	Not	that	he	will	prevent	himself	from	giving;	you
are	not	available.	He	cannot	do	anything,	you	are	not	open.
The	sun	may	be	waiting	near	the	window	but	if	it	is	closed,	what	can	the	sun
do?	 The	 rays	 will	 reflect	 back.	 They	 will	 come,	 knock	 on	 the	 door,	 and	 go
back.	Remember,	it	is	not	a	condition	that	you	open	the	door	and	the	sun	will
rise,	 it	 is	not	a	condition!	The	sun	may	not	be	 there,	 it	may	be	night.	Just	by
opening	your	door	you	cannot	create	the	sun.	Your	opening	of	the	door	is	just
your	being	available:	if	the	sun	is	there	it	can	enter.
So	seekers	will	move,	will	have	 to	move	 from	one	master	 to	another.	The
only	 thing	 to	 remember	 is	 that	 they	 must	 remain	 open	 and	 they	 should	 not
judge.	 If	 you	 come	 near	 a	 master	 and	 you	 don’t	 feel	 any	 tuning	 with	 him,
move,	but	don’t	judge,	because	your	judgment	will	be	wrong.	You	have	never
been	in	contact.	Unless	you	love	you	don’t	know,	so	don’t	judge.	Simply	say,
“This	 master	 is	 not	 for	 me,	 I	 am	 not	 for	 this	 master.	 The	 thing	 has	 not
happened.”	You	simply	move.
If	you	start	judging	then	you	are	closing	yourself	for	other	masters	also.	You
may	 have	 to	 pass	 through	 many,	 many	 situations,	 but	 remember	 this:	 don’t
judge.	Whenever	you	feel	 that	something	is	wrong	with	the	master,	move	on.
That	means	you	cannot	trust.	Something	has	gone	wrong,	you	cannot	trust.	But
don’t	say	the	master	is	wrong,	because	you	don’t	know!	You	simply	move	on,
that’s	enough.	You	seek	somewhere	else.
If	you	start	judging,	condemning,	concluding,	then	you	will	be	closed.	And
the	 eyes	 which	 judge	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 trust.	 Once	 you	 have	 become	 a
victim	 of	 judgment	 you	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 trust	 because	 you	 will	 find
something	 or	 other	 which	 will	 help	 you	 not	 to	 trust,	 which	 will	 give	 you	 a
closing.
So	 don’t	 trust,	 don’t	 judge,	move	 on.	 Someday,	 if	 you	 go	 on	moving,	 the
thing	 is	 bound	 to	 happen.	 Someday,	 somewhere,	 in	 some	moment	 –	 because
there	 are	 moments;	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 them.	 When	 you	 are
vulnerable	and	when	the	master	is	flowing	you	meet.	In	a	certain	point	of	time
and	space,	the	meeting	happens.	Then	satsang	becomes	possible.
Satsang	means	to	be	in	close	proximity	with	a	master,	with	a	man	who	has
known,	because	 then	he	can	flow.	He	is	already	flowing.	Sufis	say	 that	 that’s
enough;	just	to	be	in	close	proximity	to	a	master	is	enough.	Just	to	sit	near	him,
just	to	walk	by	his	side,	just	to	sit	outside	his	room,	just	to	watch	in	the	night
sitting	outside	his	wall,	just	to	go	on	remembering,	that	is	enough.
But	 it	 takes	years,	many	years	of	waiting.	And	he	will	 not	 treat	you	well,
remember	 –	 he	will	 create	 every	 type	 of	 hindrance.	 He	will	 give	 you	many
chances	to	judge.	He	will	spread	rumors	about	himself	so	you	can	think	that	he
is	wrong	and	you	can	escape.	He	will	help	you	in	every	way	to	escape.	Unless
you	pass	all	 these	necessary	hurdles,	and	 they	are	necessary	because	a	cheap
trust	 is	 of	 no	 use	 –	 it	 needs	 a	 seasoned	 trust	which	 has	waited	 long	 and	 has
become	a	strong	rock	–	only	then	can	the	deepest	layers	be	penetrated.
Patanjali	doesn’t	say	that	you	will	have	to	believe.	Belief	is	intellectual.	You
believe	 in	Hinduism,	 it	 is	not	your	 trust.	 It	 is	 just	 that	 accidentally	you	were
born	in	a	Hindu	family.	And	so	you	have	heard;	from	the	very	childhood	you
have	 been	 impregnated.	 You	 have	 been	 impressed	 with	 theories,	 concepts,
philosophies,	 systems.	They	have	become	part	of	your	blood.	They	have	 just
fallen	into	your	unconscious,	you	believe	in	them.	But	that	belief	is	of	no	use
because	it	has	not	transformed	you,	it	is	a	dead	thing,	borrowed.
Trust	is	never	a	dead	thing.	You	cannot	borrow	trust	from	your	family;	it	is	a
personal	 phenomenon.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 come	 to	 it.	 Hinduism	 is	 traditional,
Mohammedanism	is	traditional.
That’s	why	the	sangham,	 the	first	group	around	Mohammed,	were	 the	real
Mohammedans	because	it	was	a	trust	for	them;	they	had	come	personally	to	the
master.	They	had	 lived	with	 the	master	 in	 close	proximity,	 they	had	 satsang.
They	believed	in	Mohammed,	and	Mohammed	is	not	a	man	to	be	easily	trusted
–	difficult.	If	you	had	been	to	Mohammed	you	would	have	had	to	resist	him,	it
was	impossible	to	believe	in	such	a	man.	He	had	nine	wives.	He	had	a	sword	in
his	hand	and	on	his	sword	was	written,	“Peace	 is	 the	motto”;	 the	word	 islam
means	peace.	How	can	you	believe	this	man?
You	 can	 believe	 in	 a	 Mahavira	 when	 he	 says,	 “Nonviolence”;	 he	 is
nonviolent.	Obviously,	you	can	believe	 in	Mahavira.	How	can	you	believe	 in
Mohammed	with	a	sword?	And	he	says,	“Love	is	the	message	and	peace	is	the
motto.”	You	cannot	believe.	This	man	is	creating	hurdles.
He	was	a	Sufi;	he	was	a	master.	He	would	create	every	difficulty.	So	if	your
mind	still	functioned,	you	doubted,	you	were	skeptical,	you	could	escape.	But
if	you	remained,	waited,	if	you	had	patience	–	and	infinite	patience	would	have
been	 needed	 –	 someday	 you	 would	 come	 to	 know	Mohammed,	 you	 would
become	 a	 Mohammedan.	 Just	 by	 knowing	 him	 you	 would	 become	 a
Mohammedan.
The	first	group	of	disciples	was	a	totally	different	thing.	The	first	group	of
disciples	 of	 Buddha	 was	 a	 totally	 different	 thing.	 Now	 Buddhists	 are	 dead,
Mohammedans	are	dead.	They	are	traditionally	Mohammedans.
Truth	 cannot	 be	 transferred	 like	 property.	 Your	 parents	 cannot	 give	 you
truth.	They	can	give	you	property	because	 the	property	belongs	 to	 the	world.
Truth	doesn’t	belong	to	the	world,	they	cannot	give	it	to	you;	they	cannot	have
it	as	a	treasure.	They	cannot	have	it	in	the	bank	so	that	it	can	be	transferred	to
you.	You	will	have	to	seek	on	your	own.	You	will	have	to	suffer	and	you	will
have	 to	 become	 a	 disciple	 and	 you	 will	 have	 to	 pass	 through	 rigorous
discipline.	It	will	be	a	personal	happening.	Truth	is	always	personal:	it	happens
to	a	person.	Trust	is	different,	belief	is	different.	Belief	is	given	by	others,	trust
is	earned	by	you.
Patanjali	doesn’t	require	any	belief.	But	without	trust	nothing	can	be	done,
without	 trust	 nothing	 is	 possible.	 But	 you	 cannot	 force	 it.	 Understand,	 you
cannot	force	your	trust;	it	is	not	in	your	hands	to	force	it.	If	you	force,	it	will	be
false,	and	no	trust	is	better	than	a	false	trust,	because	you	are	wasting	yourself.
It	is	better	to	move	somewhere	else	where	the	real	can	happen.
Don’t	 judge,	go	on	moving:	 someday,	 somewhere,	your	master	 is	waiting.
And	 the	 master	 cannot	 be	 shown	 to	 you	 –	 “Go	 here	 and	 this	 will	 be	 your
master.”	 You	 will	 have	 to	 seek,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 suffer,	 because	 through
suffering	and	seeking	you	will	be	able	to	see	him.	Your	eyes	will	become	clear.
The	tears	will	disappear,	your	eyes	will	be	unclouded	and	you	will	realize	that
this	is	the	master.
	
It	 is	reported	that	one	of	the	Sufis	named	Junnaid	went	to	an	old	fakir	and
said	to	him,	“I	have	heard	that	you	know.	Show	me	the	path.”
The	old	man	said,	“You	have	heard	that	I	know.	You	don’t	know.	Look	at	me
and	feel.”
The	man	said,	“I	cannot	feel	anything.	Just	do	one	thing,	just	show	me	the
path	where	I	can	find	my	master.”
So	the	old	man	said,	“Go	first	 to	Mecca.	Do	the	pilgrimage	and	search	for
such	and	such	a	man.	He	will	be	sitting	under	a	tree.	His	eyes	will	be	such,	they
will	be	 throwing	 light,	 and	you	will	 feel	 a	 certain	perfume	 like	musk	around
him.	Go	and	seek.”
And	 Junnaid	 traveled	 and	 traveled	 for	 twenty	 years.	 Wherever	 he	 heard
there	 was	 a	 master,	 he	 would	 go.	 But	 neither	 was	 the	 tree	 there,	 nor	 the
perfume,	the	musk,	nor	those	eyes	the	old	man	has	described.	The	personality
was	 not	 there.	 And	 he	 had	 a	 ready-made	 formula,	 so	 he	 would	 judge
immediately,	 “This	 is	 not	my	master,”	 and	 he	would	move	 on.	After	 twenty
years	he	reached	under	a	tree	–	the	master	was	there.	The	musk	was	floating	in
the	 air	 just	 like	 a	haze	 around	 the	man.	The	 eyes	were	 fiery,	 a	 red	 light	was
flowing.	This	was	 the	man!	He	fell	at	his	 feet	and	said,	“Master,	 I	have	been
searching	for	you	for	twenty	years.”
The	master	said,	“I	have	also	been	waiting	for	you	for	 twenty	years.	Look
again.”
He	looked,	and	saw	that	this	was	the	same	man	who	twenty	years	before	had
told	him	the	way	to	find	the	master.	Junnaid	started	weeping.	He	said,	“What?
You	played	a	joke	on	me?	Twenty	years	wasted!	Why	couldn’t	you	have	said
that	you	are	my	master?”
The	old	man	said,	“That	would	not	have	helped.	That	would	not	have	been
of	any	use	because	you	did	not	have	eyes	to	see.	These	twenty	years	helped	you
to	see	me.	I	am	the	same	man,	but	twenty	years	ago	you	told	me	‘I	don’t	feel
anything.’	I	am	the	same,	but	now	you	have	become	capable	to	feel.	You	have
changed.	These	 twenty	 years	 rubbed	 you	 hard	 –	 all	 the	 dust	 has	 fallen,	 your
mind	is	clear.	This	fragrance	of	musk	was	also	there	that	time	but	you	were	not
capable	of	smelling	it.	Your	nose	was	closed,	your	eyes	were	not	functioning,
and	your	heart	was	not	really	beating	so	contact	was	not	possible.”
	
You	don’t	know,	and	nobody	can	say	where	the	trust	will	happen.	I	don’t	say
trust	the	master.	I	simply	say	find	the	person	where	trust	happens	–	that	person
is	your	master.	And	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it.	You	will	have	to	wander.
The	 thing	 is	 certain	 to	 happen,	 but	 the	 seeking	 is	 necessary	 because	 seeking
prepares	 you.	Not	 that	 the	 seeking	 leads	 you	 to	 the	master:	 seeking	 prepares
you	so	that	you	can	see.	He	may	be	just	near	you…
	
The	fifth	question:
Osho,
Last	night	you	spoke	of	satsang	and	the	importance	of	the	disciple’s	proximity	to	the	guru.
Does	this	mean	physical	proximity?	Is	the	disciple	who	lives	at	a	great	physical	distance
from	the	guru	at	a	loss?
Yes	and	no.	Yes,	a	physical	closeness	is	necessary	in	the	beginning	because
as	you	are,	you	cannot	understand	anything	else	right	now.	You	can	understand
the	 body,	 you	 can	 understand	 the	 language	 of	 the	 physical.	 You	 exist	 at	 the
physical,	so	yes,	a	physical	closeness	is	necessary	in	the	beginning.
And	 I	 also	 say	 no,	 because	 as	 you	 grow,	 as	 you	 start	 learning	 a	 different
language	which	is	of	the	non-physical,	then	physical	closeness	is	not	necessary.
Then	 you	 can	 go	 anywhere.	 Then	 space	 doesn’t	 make	 any	 difference,	 you
remain	in	contact.	Not	only	space,	but	time	also	doesn’t	make	any	difference.	A
master	may	be	dead,	you	remain	in	contact.	He	may	have	dropped	his	physical
body,	you	remain	 in	contact.	 If	a	 trust	happens,	 then	both	 time	and	space	are
transcended.
Trust	 is	 the	miracle.	You	can	be	 in	closeness	with	Mohammed	or	 Jesus	or
Buddha	 right	now	 if	 trust	 is	 there.	But	 it	 is	difficult	because	you	don’t	know
how.	You	cannot	 trust	 a	 living	person,	how	can	you	 trust	 a	dead	one?	But	 if
trust	happens,	 then	you	are	close	 to	Buddha	 right	now.	And	 for	persons	who
have	 faith,	Buddha	 is	 alive.	No	master	 ever	dies	 for	 those	who	can	 trust.	He
goes	 on	 helping,	 he	 is	 always	 there.	 But	 for	 you,	 even	 if	 Buddha	 is	 there
physically	standing	behind	you	or	in	front	of	you,	just	sitting	by	your	side,	you
are	not	close	to	him.	There	may	be	vast	space	between	you.	Love,	trust,	faith
destroy	both	space	and	time.
In	 the	 beginning,	 because	 you	 cannot	 understand	 any	 other	 language,	 you
can	 understand	 only	 the	 language	 of	 the	 physical,	 physical	 closeness	 is
necessary	–	but	only	 in	 the	beginning.	A	moment	will	come	when	the	master
himself	will	 send	 you	 away.	He	will	 force	 you	 to	 go	 away	 because	 that	 too
becomes	necessary	or	you	may	start	clinging	to	the	physical	language.
All	 of	 his	 life,	Gurdjieff	 nearly	 always	 sent	 his	 disciples	 away.	He	would
create	 such	 a	miserable	 situation	 for	 them	 that	 they	would	 have	 to	 leave.	 It
would	be	impossible	to	live	with	him.	After	a	certain	point	he	would	help	them
to	go	 away.	He	would	 really	 force	 them	 to	go	 away,	because	one	 should	not
become	 too	much	dependent	on	 the	physical.	The	other,	 the	higher	 language,
must	develop.	You	must	start	 feeling	close	 to	him	wherever	you	are,	because
the	body	has	to	be	transcended.	Not	only	your	body,	but	the	master’s	body	also
has	to	be	transcended.
But	in	the	beginning	physical	closeness	is	a	great	help.	Once	the	seeds	are
sown,	once	they	have	taken	root,	then	you	are	strong	enough.	Then	you	can	go
away	and	still	you	can	feel.	If	just	by	going	away	the	contact	is	lost,	then	the
contact	is	not	of	much	importance.	Trust	will	grow	more	the	further	away	you
go.	Trust	will	grow	more,	because	wherever	you	are	on	the	earth	you	will	start
feeling	 the	 master’s	 presence	 continuously.	 The	 trust	 will	 grow.	 He	 will	 be
helping	you	now	through	hidden	hands,	invisible	hands.	He	will	be	working	on
you	through	your	dreams	and	you	will	feel	that	constantly,	like	a	shadow,	he	is
following	you.
But	that	is	a	very	developed	language.	Don’t	try	it	from	the	very	beginning
because	 then	 you	 can	 deceive	 yourself.	 So	 I	 will	 say,	 move	 step	 by	 step.
Wherever	 trust	 happens,	 then	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 follow	blindly.	Really,	 the
moment	 trust	 happens	 you	 have	 closed	 your	 eyes.	 Then	 what	 is	 the	 use	 of
thinking,	arguing?	Trust	has	happened	and	trust	will	not	listen	to	anything	now.
Then	follow,	and	remain	close	unless	the	master	himself	sends	you	away.	And
when	he	sends	you	away	then	don’t	cling.	Then	follow	his	instruction	and	go
away,	because	he	knows	better.	And	he	knows	what	is	helpful.
Sometimes	just	being	near	the	master	may	make	it	difficult	for	you	to	grow,
just	as	under	a	big	tree	a	new	seed	will	have	many	difficulties	to	grow.	Under	a
big	 tree	a	new	 tree	will	become	crippled.	Even	 trees	 take	care	 to	 throw	 their
seed	far	away	so	that	 the	seeds	can	sprout.	The	trees	use	many	tricks	 to	send
the	seed	away.	Otherwise	they	will	die	if	they	fall	down	just	under	the	big	tree;
there	is	so	much	shadow,	no	sun	reaches	there,	no	sunrays	reach.
So	a	master	 knows	better.	 If	 he	 feels	 that	 you	 should	go	 away,	 then	don’t
resist.	 Then	 simply	 follow	 and	 go	 away.	 This	 going	 away	will	 be	 a	 coming
nearer	 to	 him.	 If	 you	 can	 follow,	 if	 you	 can	 silently	 follow	 without	 any
resistance,	then	this	going	away	will	be	a	coming	nearer.	You	will	attain	a	new
closeness.
	
The	sixth	question:
Osho,
When	you	ask	us	to	understand	something	clearly,	whom	do	you	address	to	understand?
Mind	has	to	cease.	Therefore,	it	is	no	use	trying	to	make	the	mind	understand	anything.
Who	should	understand	then?
Yes,	mind	has	to	cease,	but	it	has	not	ceased	yet.	Mind	has	to	be	worked	on.
An	understanding	has	to	be	created	in	the	mind:	through	that	understanding	this
mind	will	die.	That	understanding	is	just	like	poison:	you	take	the	poison	–	you
are	 the	 taker	 and	 the	 poison	 kills	 you.	 The	 mind	 understands,	 but	 the
understanding	is	poison	for	the	mind.	That’s	why	the	mind	resists	so	much.	It
tries	 and	 tries	 not	 to	 understand,	 it	 creates	 doubt,	 it	 fights.	 In	 every	 way	 it
protects	itself	because	understanding	is	poison	for	the	mind.	It	is	elixir	for	you,
but	for	the	mind	it	is	poison.
So	when	I	say	understand	clearly,	I	mean	your	mind,	not	you,	because	you
need	not	have	any	understanding,	you	are	already	understanding.	You	are	 the
very	wisdom,	the	pragnya.	You	need	no	help	from	me	or	from	anybody	else.
Your	mind	has	 to	 be	 changed.	And	 if	 understanding	happens	 to	 the	mind,
mind	will	die,	and	with	 the	mind	 the	understanding	will	disappear.	Then	you
will	be	in	your	purity;	your	being	will	reveal	a	mirror-like	purity	–	no	content,
contentless.	But	that	inner	being	needs	no	understanding;	it	is	already	the	very
core	of	understanding.	 It	needs	no	understanding,	 just	 the	clouds	of	 the	mind
have	to	be	persuaded.
Really,	understanding	is	just	a	persuasion	for	the	mind	to	leave.	Remember,
I	 don’t	 say	 fight,	 I	 say	 persuasion.	 If	 you	 fight,	 the	 mind	 will	 never	 leave
because	through	fight	you	show	your	fear.	If	you	fight	you	show	that	the	mind
is	 something	 you	 are	 afraid	 of.	 Just	 persuade.	 All	 these	 teachings,	 all
meditations	are	a	deep	persuasion	for	the	mind	to	come	to	a	point	where	it	can
commit	 suicide,	 where	 it	 simply	 drops,	 where	 mind	 itself	 becomes	 such	 an
absurdity	that	you	cannot	carry	it	anymore	–	you	simply	drop	it.	It	is	better	to
say	mind	drops	itself.
So	when	I	say	clear	understanding,	I	am	addressing	your	mind.	And	there	is
no	other	way.	Only	your	mind	can	be	approached	because	you	are	unavailable.
You	are	so	hidden	deep	inside,	and	just	the	mind	is	at	the	door.	The	mind	has	to
be	persuaded	to	leave	the	door	and	to	leave	the	door	open	so	you	will	become
available.
I	am	addressing	mind	–	your	mind,	not	you.	If	mind	drops	there	is	no	need
to	 address.	 I	 can	 sit	 in	 silence	 and	 you	will	 understand;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
address.	 The	 mind	 needs	 words,	 the	 mind	 needs	 thoughts,	 the	 mind	 needs
something	mental	which	can	persuade	it.	When	Buddha	or	Patanjali	or	Krishna
talk	to	you,	they	are	addressing	your	mind.
A	moment	comes	when	mind	simply	becomes	aware	of	the	whole	absurdity.
It	is	just	like	this:	I	see	that	you	are	pulling	the	strings	of	your	shoelaces,	trying
to	pull	yourself	up	by	them,	and	I	tell	you,	“What	nonsense	you	are	doing!	This
is	 impossible.	You	 cannot	 pull	 yourself	 up	 just	 by	 your	 own	 shoelaces.	 It	 is
simply	 impossible,	 it	cannot	happen.”	So	I	persuade	you	 to	 think	more	about
the	 whole	 thing:	 “This	 is	 absurd.	What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 And	 then	 you	 feel
miserable	 because	 it	 is	 not	 happening.	 So	 I	 go	 on	 telling	 you,	 insisting,
hammering,	 and	one	day	you	may	become	aware,	 “Yes,	 this	 is	 absurd.	What
am	I	doing?”
The	whole	 effort	of	 the	mind	 is	 just	 like	pulling	yourself	up	by	your	own
shoelaces.	Whatsoever	you	are	doing	is	absurd.	It	can	never	lead	you	anywhere
other	than	to	hell,	than	to	misery.	It	has	always	led	you	to	misery,	but	you	are
still	not	aware.	All	this	communication	from	me	is	just	to	make	your	mind	alert
that	the	whole	effort	is	absurd.	Once	you	come	to	feel	that	the	whole	effort	is
absurd,	the	effort	disappears.	It	is	not	that	you	will	have	to	leave	your	shoelaces
and	you	will	have	to	make	some	effort	and	it	is	going	to	be	arduous:	you	will
simply	 see	 the	 fact	 and	 you	 will	 stop	 and	 you	 will	 laugh.	 If	 you	 drop	 your
shoelaces	and	 simply	 stand	and	 laugh,	you	have	become	enlightened.	This	 is
going	to	be	the	case.
Through	understanding	the	mind	drops.	Suddenly	you	become	aware	that	no
one	else	was	 responsible	 for	your	misery,	you	were	creating	 it;	 continuously,
moment	 to	moment,	you	were	 the	creator.	And	you	were	creating	 the	misery
and	then	you	were	asking	how	to	go	beyond	it,	how	to	not	be	miserable,	how	to
achieve	bliss,	 how	 to	 achieve	 samadhi.	And	even	as	you	are	 asking,	you	are
creating.	 Even	 this	 asking,	 “How	 to	 achieve	 samadhi?”	 is	 creating	 misery
because	then	you	say,	“I	have	been	making	so	much	effort	and	samadhi	has	not
been	attained	yet.	I	am	doing	everything	that	can	be	done	and	the	samadhi	has
not	been	attained	yet.	When	will	I	become	enlightened?”
Now	you	create	a	new	misery	when	you	make	enlightenment	also	an	object
of	 desire,	 which	 is	 absurd.	 No	 desire	 will	 come	 to	 a	 fulfillment.	When	 you
realize	this,	desires	drop	–	you	are	enlightened.	Desireless,	you	are	enlightened.
With	desires	you	go	moving	in	a	circle	of	misery.
	
The	last	question:
Osho,
You	said	that	Yoga	is	a	science,	a	methodology	for	inner	awakening.	But	effort	to	be,	to	go
nearer	to	no-mind,	implies	motivation	and	hope.	Even	to	undergo	the	process	of	inner
transformation	implies	motivation.	Then	how	can	one	move	on	the	path	of	Yoga	without
hope	and	motivation?	Does	not	waiting	even	imply	motivation?
Yes,	you	cannot	move	on	the	path	of	Yoga	with	motivation,	with	desire,	with
hope.	Really,	 there	 is	no	movement	on	 the	path	of	Yoga.	When	you	come	 to
understand	that	all	desire	is	absurd,	all	desire	is	misery,	then	there	is	nothing	to
do,	 because	 every	 doing	 will	 be	 a	 new	 desire.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 do!	 You
simply	cannot	do	anything	because	whatsoever	you	do	will	lead	you	into	a	new
misery.	Then	you	don’t	do.	Desires	have	dropped,	mind	has	ceased,	and	this	is
Yoga.	You	have	entered.	This	 is	not	a	movement,	 this	 is	a	stillness.	Problems
arise	 because	 of	 language.	When	 I	 say	 that	 you	have	 entered,	 it	 appears	 that
you	have	moved.	All	movement	ceases	when	desire	ceases.	You	are	 in	Yoga:
Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.
With	motivation,	in	the	name	of	Yoga	you	will	again	create	other	miseries.
Every	day	people	come	to	me	and	they	say:	“I	have	been	practicing	Yoga	for
thirty	years,	nothing	has	happened.”	But	who	told	you	that	something	is	going
to	happen?	You	must	be	waiting	for	something	to	happen,	that’s	why	nothing
has	happened.	Yoga	says,	don’t	wait	for	the	future.
You	meditate,	but	you	meditate	with	the	motive	that	through	meditation	you
will	 reach	 somewhere,	 some	 goal.	 You	 are	 missing	 the	 point.	 Meditate	 and
enjoy	it!	There	is	no	goal,	there	is	no	future,	no	further;	there	is	nothing	ahead.
Meditate,	 enjoy	 it	 without	 any	 motivation,	 and	 suddenly	 the	 goal	 is	 there.
Suddenly	the	clouds	disappear	because	they	were	created	by	your	desire.	Your
motivation	is	the	smoke	which	creates	the	clouds,	and	they	have	disappeared.
So	play	with	the	meditation;	enjoy	it.	Don’t	make	it	a	means.	It	is	the	end.	This
is	the	whole	point	to	be	understood.
Don’t	 create	new	desires.	Understand	 the	very	nature	of	desire	–	 that	 it	 is
misery.	Just	try	to	understand	the	nature	of	desire	and	you	will	come	to	know
that	 it	 is	misery.	Then	what	 is	 to	be	done?	Nothing	 is	 to	be	done!	Becoming
alert	that	desire	is	misery,	desire	drops:	Now	the	discipline	of	Yoga.	You	have
entered	the	path.
And	it	depends	on	your	intensity.	If	your	realization	that	desire	is	misery	is
so	deep,	so	total,	you	have	not	only	entered	Yoga,	you	have	become	a	siddha.
You	have	reached	the	goal.	It	will	depend	on	your	intensity.	If	the	intensity	is
total	then	you	have	reached	the	goal.	If	your	intensity	is	not	so	total	you	have
entered	the	path.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	3:	Five	Modifications	of	Mind
	
The	modifications	of	the	mind	are	five.
They	can	be	either	a	source	of	misery	or	of	non-misery.
They	are	right	knowledge,	wrong	knowledge,
imagination,	sleep	and	memory.
Mind	can	be	either	 the	source	of	bondage	or	 the	source	of	 freedom.	Mind
becomes	 the	gate	 for	 this	world,	 the	entry;	 it	can	also	become	 the	exit.	Mind
leads	you	to	hell,	mind	can	also	lead	you	to	heaven.	So	it	all	depends	on	how
the	mind	 is	 used.	 Right	 use	 of	 mind	 becomes	meditation;	 wrong	 use	 of	 the
mind	becomes	madness.
Mind	is	there,	with	everyone.	The	possibility	of	darkness	and	light	are	both
implied	in	it.	Mind	itself	is	neither	the	enemy	nor	the	friend.	You	can	make	it	a
friend,	you	can	make	it	an	enemy;	it	depends	on	you,	on	the	you	who	is	hidden
behind	 the	mind.	 If	 you	 can	make	 the	mind	your	 instrument,	 your	 slave,	 the
mind	becomes	 the	passage	 through	which	you	 can	 reach	 the	ultimate.	 If	 you
become	 the	 slave	 and	 the	 mind	 is	 allowed	 to	 be	 the	 master,	 then	 this	 mind
which	has	become	the	master	will	lead	you	to	ultimate	anguish	and	darkness.
All	the	techniques,	all	the	methods,	all	the	paths	of	Yoga,	are	really	deeply
concerned	 only	with	 one	 problem:	 how	 to	 use	 the	mind.	Rightly	 used,	mind
comes	 to	a	point	where	 it	becomes	no-mind.	Wrongly	used,	mind	comes	 to	a
point	 where	 it	 is	 just	 a	 chaos,	 many	 voices	 antagonistic	 to	 each	 other,
contradictory,	confusing,	insane.
The	madman	 in	 the	madhouse	and	Buddha	under	his	bodhi	 tree	have	both
used	the	mind,	both	have	passed	through	the	mind.	Buddha	has	come	to	a	point
where	mind	disappears.	Rightly	used,	it	goes	on	disappearing;	a	moment	comes
when	 it	 is	 not.	 The	 madman	 has	 also	 used	 the	 mind.	 Wrongly	 used,	 mind
becomes	 divided;	 wrongly	 used,	 mind	 becomes	 many;	 wrongly	 used,	 it
becomes	 a	multitude.	And	 finally	 the	mad	mind	 is	 there,	 you	 are	 absolutely
absent.
Buddha’s	 mind	 has	 disappeared	 and	 Buddha	 is	 present	 in	 his	 totality.	 A
madman’s	mind	has	become	total	and	he	himself	has	disappeared	completely.
These	 are	 the	 two	 different	 poles.	You	 and	 your	mind:	 if	 they	 exist	 together
then	you	will	be	in	misery.	Either	you	will	have	to	disappear	or	the	mind	will
have	 to	 disappear.	 If	 the	 mind	 disappears	 then	 you	 achieve	 truth;	 if	 you
disappear	 you	 achieve	 insanity.	 And	 this	 is	 the	 struggle:	 who	 is	 going	 to
disappear?	Are	you	going	 to	disappear,	or	 the	mind?	This	 is	 the	conflict,	 the
root	of	all	struggle.
These	 sutras	 of	 Patanjali	 will	 lead	 you	 step	 by	 step	 towards	 this
understanding	of	the	mind:	what	it	is,	what	types	of	modes	it	takes,	what	types
of	 modifications	 come	 into	 it,	 how	 you	 can	 use	 it	 and	 go	 beyond	 it.	 And
remember,	you	have	nothing	else	right	now	except	the	mind,	you	have	to	use	it.
Wrongly	used	you	will	go	on	falling	into	more	and	more	misery.
You	are	in	misery.	That	is	because	for	many	lives	you	have	used	your	mind
wrongly	and	the	mind	has	become	the	master;	you	are	 just	a	slave,	a	shadow
following	the	mind.	You	cannot	say	to	the	mind,	“Stop!”	You	cannot	order	your
own	mind;	 your	mind	goes	on	ordering	you	 and	you	have	 to	 follow	 it.	Your
being	has	become	the	shadow	and	the	slave,	an	instrument.
Mind	 is	 nothing	 but	 an	 instrument,	 just	 like	 your	 hands	 or	 your	 feet.	You
order	your	feet	and	your	legs	to	move	and	they	move.	When	you	say	stop,	they
stop.	You	are	the	master.	If	I	want	to	move	my	hand,	I	move	it.	If	I	don’t	want
it	 to	move,	 I	 don’t	move	 it.	 The	 hand	 cannot	 say	 to	me,	 “Now	 I	want	 to	 be
moved.”	The	hand	cannot	say	to	me,	“Now	I	will	move.	Whatsoever	you	do,	I
am	not	going	to	 listen	 to	you.”	And	if	my	hand	starts	moving	in	spite	of	me,
then	it	will	be	a	chaos	in	the	body.	The	same	has	happened	in	the	mind.
You	don’t	want	to	think	and	the	mind	goes	on	thinking.	You	want	to	sleep	–
you	are	lying	down	on	your	bed,	changing	sides;	you	want	to	go	to	sleep	and
the	mind	continues.	The	mind	says,	“No,	I	am	going	to	think	about	something”;
you	 go	 on	 saying,	 “Stop!”	 and	 it	 never	 listens	 to	 you.	 And	 you	 cannot	 do
anything.	Mind	is	also	an	instrument	but	you	have	given	it	too	much	power.	It
has	become	dictatorial,	and	it	will	struggle	hard	if	you	try	to	put	it	in	its	right
place.
Buddha	also	uses	the	mind,	but	his	mind	is	just	like	your	legs.	People	come
to	me	and	they	ask,	“What	happens	to	the	mind	of	an	enlightened	one?	Does	it
simply	disappear?	He	cannot	use	it?”
It	 disappears	 as	 a	 master,	 it	 remains	 as	 a	 slave.	 It	 remains	 as	 a	 passive
instrument.	If	a	Buddha	wants	to	use	it,	he	can	use	it.	When	Buddha	speaks	to
you	he	will	have	to	use	it,	because	there	is	no	possibility	of	speech	without	the
mind.	The	mind	has	to	be	used.	If	you	go	to	Buddha	and	he	recognizes	you	–
that	you	have	also	been	before	–	he	has	to	use	the	mind:	without	mind	there	can
be	 no	 recognition,	without	mind	 there	 is	 no	memory.	 But	he	 uses	 the	mind,
remember	 –	 this	 is	 the	 distinction	 –	 and	 you	 are	 being	 used	 by	 the	 mind.
Whenever	he	wants	to	use	it,	he	uses	it.	Whenever	he	doesn’t	want	to	use	it,	he
doesn’t	use	it.	It	is	a	passive	instrument	that	has	no	hold	upon	him.
So	Buddha	remains	like	a	mirror.	If	you	come	before	the	mirror,	the	mirror
reflects	you.	When	you	move	the	reflection	is	gone,	the	mirror	is	vacant.	You
are	 not	 like	 a	mirror.	You	 see	 somebody:	 the	man	 has	 gone	 but	 the	 thinking
continues,	the	reflection	continues.	You	go	on	thinking	about	him,	and	even	if
you	want	to	stop,	the	mind	won’t	listen.
Mastery	 of	 the	mind	 is	Yoga.	And	when	Patanjali	 says,	 “Cessation	 of	 the
mind,”	he	means	cessation	as	a	master.	Mind	ceases	as	a	master.	Then	it	is	not
active,	then	it	 is	a	passive	instrument.	You	order,	 it	works;	you	don’t	order,	 it
remains	still.	 It	 is	 just	waiting,	 it	cannot	assert	by	itself.	The	assertion	is	 lost,
the	violence	 is	 lost.	 It	will	not	 try	 to	control	you:	now	 just	 the	 reverse	 is	 the
case.
How	to	become	masters?	And	how	to	put	mind	in	its	right	place	where	you
can	use	it,	where	if	you	don’t	want	to	use	it	you	can	put	it	aside	and	it	remains
silent?	So	the	whole	mechanism	of	the	mind	will	have	to	be	understood.	Now
we	should	enter	the	sutra.
The	first	sutra:
The	modifications	of	the	mind	are	five.
They	can	be	either	a	source	of	misery	or	of	non-misery.
The	 first	 thing	 to	be	understood:	mind	 is	not	 something	different	 from	 the
body,	remember.	Mind	is	part	of	the	body.	It	is	body,	but	deeply	subtle;	a	state
of	body,	but	very	delicate,	 very	 refined.	You	cannot	 catch	 it,	 but	 through	 the
body	you	can	influence	it.	If	you	take	a	drug,	if	you	take	LSD	or	marijuana	or
alcohol	or	something	else,	the	mind	is	suddenly	affected.	The	alcohol	goes	into
the	body,	not	into	the	mind,	but	the	mind	is	affected.	Mind	is	the	subtlest	part
of	the	body.
The	reverse	 is	also	 true:	 influence	 the	mind	and	 the	body	 is	affected.	That
happens	 in	 hypnosis.	 A	 person	 who	 cannot	 walk,	 who	 says	 that	 he	 has	 a
paralysis,	 can	 walk	 under	 hypnosis.	 You	 don’t	 have	 paralysis,	 but	 if	 under
hypnosis	it	is	said,	“Now	your	body	is	paralyzed,	you	cannot	walk,”	you	cannot
walk.	A	paralyzed	man	can	walk	under	hypnosis.	What	is	happening?	Hypnosis
goes	into	the	mind,	the	suggestion	goes	into	the	mind	then	the	body	follows.
So	the	first	thing	to	be	understood:	mind	and	body	are	not	two.	This	is	one
of	the	deepest	discoveries	of	Patanjali.	Now	modern	science	recognizes	it,	it	is
very	 recent	 in	 the	 West.	 Now	 they	 say	 body-and-mind,	 but	 to	 talk	 in	 this
dichotomy	 is	 not	 right.	 Now	 they	 say	 it	 is	 “psychosoma,”	 it	 is	 mind-body.
These	two	terms	are	just	two	functions	of	one	phenomenon.	One	pole	is	mind,
the	other	pole	is	body,	so	you	can	work	from	either	and	change	the	other.
The	 body	 has	 five	 organs	 of	 activity,	 five	 indriyas,	 five	 instruments	 of
activity.	 The	mind	 has	 five	modifications,	 five	modes	 of	 function.	Mind	 and
body	are	one.	Body	is	divided	into	five	functions,	mind	is	also	divided	into	five
functions.	We	will	go	into	each	function	in	detail.
The	second	thing	about	this	sutra	is:
They	can	be	either	a	source	of	misery	or	of	non-misery.
These	five	modifications	of	the	mind,	this	totality	of	the	mind,	can	lead	you
into	 deep	 anguish,	 in	 dukkha,	 in	misery.	Or	 if	 you	 rightly	 use	 this	mind,	 its
functioning,	it	can	lead	you	into	non-misery.
That	word	non-misery	 is	 very	 significant.	Patanjali	 doesn’t	 say	 that	 it	will
lead	 you	 into	 ananda,	 into	 bliss,	 no;	 at	 the	 most	 it	 can	 lead	 you	 into	 non-
misery.	The	mind	can	lead	you	into	misery	if	you	wrongly	use	it,	if	you	become
a	slave	to	it.	If	you	become	the	master	the	mind	can	lead	you	into	non-misery	–
not	into	bliss,	because	bliss	is	your	nature;	the	mind	cannot	lead	you	to	it.	But
if	you	are	in	non-misery	then	the	inner	bliss	starts	flowing.
The	bliss	is	always	there	inside,	it	is	your	intrinsic	nature.	It	is	nothing	to	be
achieved	and	earned,	it	is	nothing	to	be	reached	somewhere.	You	are	born	with
it,	you	have	it	already,	it	 is	already	the	case.	That’s	why	Patanjali	doesn’t	say
that	 the	mind	can	 lead	you	 into	misery	and	can	 lead	you	 into	bliss,	no.	He	 is
very	 scientific,	 very	 accurate.	He	will	 not	 use	 even	 a	 single	word	which	 can
give	you	any	untrue	information.	He	simply	says	either	misery	or	non-misery.
Buddha	 also	 says	many	 times,	whenever	 seekers	will	 come	 to	 him	 –	 and
seekers	 are	 after	 bliss,	 so	 they	 will	 ask	 Buddha,	 “How	 can	 we	 attain	 to	 the
bliss,	the	ultimate	bliss?”	He	will	say,	“I	don’t	know.	I	can	show	you	the	path
which	 leads	 to	 non-misery,	 just	 the	 absence	 of	 misery.	 I	 don’t	 say	 anything
about	the	positive,	bliss,	just	the	negative.	I	can	show	you	how	to	move	into	the
world	of	non-misery.”
That’s	all	that	methods	can	do.	Once	you	are	in	the	state	of	non-misery	the
inner	 bliss	 starts	 flowing.	 But	 that	 doesn’t	 come	 from	 the	mind,	 that	 comes
from	your	inner	being.	So	mind	has	nothing	to	do	with	it,	mind	cannot	create	it.
If	mind	is	in	misery	then	mind	becomes	a	hindrance;	if	mind	is	in	non-misery
then	mind	becomes	an	opening,	but	it	is	not	creative,	it	is	not	doing	anything.
You	 open	 the	 windows	 and	 the	 rays	 of	 the	 sun	 enter:	 by	 opening	 the
windows	you	are	not	creating	the	sun,	the	sun	was	already	there.	If	it	were	not
there	then	just	by	opening	the	windows,	rays	wouldn’t	enter.	Your	window	can
become	a	hindrance:	the	sunrays	may	be	outside	and	the	window	is	closed.	The
window	can	hinder	or	it	can	give	way.	It	can	become	a	passage	but	it	cannot	be
creative.	It	cannot	create	the	rays,	the	rays	are	there.
Your	 mind,	 if	 it	 is	 in	 misery,	 becomes	 closed.	 Remember,	 one	 of	 the
characteristics	 of	 misery	 is	 closedness.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 in	 misery	 you
become	closed.	Observe	–	whenever	you	feel	some	anguish	you	are	closed	to
the	world.	Even	to	your	dearest	friend	you	are	closed.	Even	to	your	wife,	your
children,	your	beloved,	you	are	closed	when	you	are	in	misery,	because	misery
gives	 you	 a	 shrinking	 inside.	You	 shrink.	 From	 everywhere	 you	 have	 closed
your	doors.
That’s	why	 in	misery	people	 start	 thinking	of	 suicide.	Suicide	means	 total
closure,	no	possibility	of	any	communication,	no	possibility	of	any	door.	Even
a	closed	door	is	dangerous,	someone	can	open	it.	So	destroy	the	door,	destroy
all	possibilities.	Suicide	means,	“Now	I	am	going	to	destroy	all	possibility	of
any	opening.	Now	I	am	closing	myself	totally.”
Whenever	you	are	in	misery	you	start	thinking	of	suicide.	Whenever	you	are
happy	you	cannot	think	of	suicide,	you	cannot	imagine,	you	cannot	even	think
that	people	would	commit	suicide.	“Why?	Life	is	such	joy,	life	is	such	a	deep
music,	why	do	people	destroy	life?”	It	appears	impossible.
Why,	when	you	are	happy,	does	it	look	impossible?	Because	you	are	open,
life	is	flowing	in	you.	When	you	are	happy	you	have	a	bigger	soul,	it	expands;
when	you	are	unhappy	you	have	a	smaller	soul,	it	shrinks.
When	someone	is	unhappy	touch	him,	take	his	hand	into	your	hand,	and	you
will	feel	the	hand	is	dead;	nothing	is	flowing	through	it,	no	love,	no	warmth.	It
is	 just	 cold,	 as	 if	 it	 belonged	 to	 a	 corpse.	When	 someone	 is	 happy	 touch	his
hand:	 there	 is	 communication,	 energy	 is	 flowing.	His	hand	 is	not	 just	 a	dead
end;	his	hand	has	become	a	bridge.	Through	his	hand	something	comes	to	you,
communicates,	 relates,	 a	 warmth	 flows.	 He	 reaches	 to	 you;	 he	 makes	 every
effort	to	flow	into	you	and	he	allows	you	also	to	flow	within	him.
When	two	persons	are	happy	they	become	one.	That’s	why	oneness	happens
in	 love	and	 lovers	 start	 feeling	 that	 they	are	not	 two.	They	are	 two,	but	 they
start	feeling	they	are	not	two	because	in	love	they	are	so	happy	that	a	melting
happens.	 They	 melt	 into	 each	 other,	 they	 flow	 into	 each	 other.	 Boundaries
dissolve,	 definitions	 are	 blurred	 and	 they	 don’t	 know	 who	 is	 who.	 In	 that
moment	they	become	one.
When	you	are	happy	you	can	flow	into	others	and	you	can	allow	others	to
flow	 into	you:	 this	 is	what	celebration	means.	When	you	allow	everybody	 to
flow	in	and	you	flow	into	everybody,	you	are	celebrating	life.	And	celebration
is	the	greatest	prayerfulness,	the	highest	peak	of	meditation.
In	 misery	 you	 start	 thinking	 of	 committing	 suicide;	 in	 misery	 you	 start
thinking	 of	 destruction.	 In	 misery	 you	 are	 at	 just	 the	 opposite	 pole	 of
celebration.	 You	 blame,	 you	 cannot	 celebrate,	 you	 have	 a	 grudge	 against
everything.	 Everything	 is	 wrong	 and	 you	 are	 negative	 and	 you	 cannot	 flow.
You	cannot	 relate	and	you	cannot	allow	anybody	 to	 flow	 into	you.	You	have
become	an	island,	closed	completely.	This	is	a	living	death.	Life	is	only	when
you	are	open	and	 flowing,	when	you	are	unafraid,	 fearless,	open,	vulnerable,
celebrating.
Patanjali	says	mind	can	do	two	things.	It	can	create	misery.	You	can	use	it	in
such	a	way	that	you	can	become	miserable,	and	you	have	used	it	this	way,	you
are	past	masters	of	 it.	There	 is	no	need	 to	 talk	about	 it,	you	know	 it	 already.
You	know	the	art	of	creating	misery.	You	may	not	be	aware,	but	 that	 is	what
you	 are	 doing	 continuously.	 Whatsoever	 you	 touch	 becomes	 a	 source	 of
misery;	I	say,	whatsoever!
I	see	poor	men,	they	are	miserable,	obviously,	they	are	poor,	the	basic	needs
of	 life	 are	not	 fulfilled.	But	 then	 I	 see	 rich	men	who	are	 also	miserable,	 and
these	rich	men	think	 that	wealth	 leads	nowhere.	That	 is	not	 right.	Wealth	can
lead	 to	celebration,	but	you	don’t	have	 the	mind	to	celebrate.	 If	you	are	poor
you	 are	miserable,	 if	 you	become	 rich	you	 are	more	miserable.	The	moment
you	touch	the	riches	you	have	destroyed	them.
You	have	heard	 the	Greek	 story	of	 the	king	Midas?	Whatsoever	he	would
touch	would	turn	into	gold.	You	touch	gold,	immediately	it	becomes	mud.	It	is
turned	 into	 dust	 and	 then	 you	 think	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 in	 this	world,	 even
riches	are	useless.	They	are	not	useless,	but	your	mind	cannot	celebrate,	your
mind	cannot	participate	in	any	non-misery.	If	you	are	invited	into	heaven	you
will	not	find	a	heaven	there,	you	will	create	a	hell.	As	you	are,	wherever	you	go
you	will	take	your	hell	with	you.
There	 is	 one	 Arabic	 proverb:	 that	 hell	 and	 heaven	 are	 not	 geographical
places,	they	are	attitudes.	And	no	one	enters	heaven	or	hell	–	everybody	enters
with	 heaven	 or	 hell.	Wherever	 you	 go	 you	 have	 your	 hell	 projection	 or	 the
heaven	 projection	 with	 you.	 You	 have	 a	 projector	 inside:	 immediately	 you
project.
But	Patanjali	 is	careful:	he	says	misery	or	non-misery	–	positive	misery	or
negative	misery	–	but	not	bliss.	Mind	cannot	give	you	bliss;	no	one	can	give	it.
It	 is	 hidden	 in	 you.	When	mind	 is	 in	 a	 non-miserable	 state,	 that	 bliss	 starts
flowing.	It	is	not	coming	from	the	mind,	it	is	coming	from	beyond.	That’s	why
he	says	they	can	be	either	a	source	of	anguish	or	of	non-anguish.
The	second	sutra:
The	modifications	of	the	mind	are	five….
They	are	right-knowledge,	wrong-knowledge,
imagination,	sleep	and	memory.
The	 first	 is	 praman,	 right-knowledge.	 The	 Sanskrit	 word	 praman	 is	 very
deep	and	really	cannot	be	translated.	Right-knowledge	is	just	a	shadow,	not	the
exact	meaning,	because	there	is	no	word	which	can	translate	praman.	Praman
comes	from	the	root	prama.	Many	things	have	to	be	understood	about	it.
Patanjali	says	that	the	mind	has	a	capacity:	if	that	capacity	is	directed	rightly
then	whatsoever	 is	 known	 is	 true,	 it	 is	 self-evidently	 true.	We	 are	 not	 aware
about	it	because	we	have	never	used	it.	That	faculty	has	remained	unused.	It	is
just	as	if	you	come	into	a	dark	room,	you	have	a	torch,	but	you	are	not	using	it
so	the	room	remains	dark.	You	go	on	stumbling	onto	this	table,	onto	that	chair,
and	you	have	 a	 torch	 but	 the	 torch	 has	 to	 be	 switched	on.	Once	you	put	 the
torch	on,	 immediately	darkness	disappears,	and	wherever	the	torch	is	focused
at	least	you	know	that	spot	becomes	evident,	self-evidently	clear.
Mind	has	a	capacity	of	praman,	of	right-knowledge,	of	wisdom.	Once	you
know	 it,	 how	 to	 put	 it	 on,	 then	 wherever	 you	 move	 that	 light,	 only	 right-
knowledge	 is	 revealed.	 Without	 knowing	 it,	 whatsoever	 you	 know	 will	 be
wrong.
Mind	 has	 the	 capacity	 of	 wrong-knowledge	 also.	 In	 Sanskrit	 that	 wrong-
knowledge	is	called	viparyaya,	false,	mithya.	And	you	have	that	capacity	also.
You	take	alcohol,	what	happens?	–	the	whole	world	becomes	a	viparyaya,	 the
whole	world	becomes	false.	You	start	seeing	things	which	are	not	there.	What
has	 happened?	 Alcohol	 cannot	 create	 things.	 Alcohol	 is	 doing	 something
within	 your	 body	 and	 brain.	 The	 alcohol	 starts	 working	 the	 center	 Patanjali
calls	viparyaya.	The	mind	has	a	center	which	can	pervert	anything.	Once	that
center	starts	functioning	everything	is	perverted.
I	am	reminded…
	
Once	 it	 happened	 that	Mulla	Nasruddin	 and	 his	 friend	were	 drinking	 in	 a
pub.	 They	 came	 out,	 completely	 drunk.	 Nasruddin	 was	 an	 old,	 experienced
drinker;	 the	other	was	new,	so	 the	other	was	affected	more.	The	other	asked,
“Now	I	cannot	see,	I	cannot	hear,	I	cannot	even	walk	rightly.	How	will	I	reach
my	 home?	 Tell	 me,	 Nasruddin.	 Please	 direct	 me.	 How	 should	 I	 reach	 my
home?”
Nasruddin	said,	“First	you	go.	After	so	many	steps	you	will	come	to	a	point
where	there	are	two	ways:	one	goes	to	the	right,	the	other	goes	to	the	left.	You
go	 to	 the	 left,	because	 that	which	goes	 to	 the	 right	doesn’t	exist.	 I	have	been
many	times	on	that	right	path	also,	but	now	I	am	an	experienced	man.	You	will
see	 two	 paths	 –	 choose	 the	 left	 one,	 don’t	 choose	 the	 right.	 That	 right	 one
doesn’t	 exist.	Many	 times	 I	 have	 gone	 on	 it	 and	 then	 you	 never	 reach,	 you
never	reach	your	home.”
	
Nasruddin	was	 teaching	 his	 son	 the	 first	 lesson	 of	 drinking.	 The	 son	was
asking,	he	was	curious;	he	asked,	“When	is	one	to	stop?”
Nasruddin	 said,	 “Look	 at	 that	 table.	 Four	 persons	 are	 sitting	 there.	When
you	start	seeing	eight,	stop!”
The	boy	said,	“But	father,	there	are	only	two	persons	sitting	there!”
	
Mind	has	a	faculty.	That	faculty	functions	when	you	are	under	the	influence
of	 any	 drug,	 any	 intoxicant.	 Patanjali	 calls	 that	 faculty	 viparyaya,	 wrong-
knowledge,	the	center	of	perversion.
Exactly	 opposite	 to	 it	 there	 is	 a	 center	 which	 you	 don’t	 know.	 Exactly
opposite	to	it	there	is	another	center:	if	you	meditate	deeply,	silently,	that	other
center	 will	 start	 functioning.	 That	 center	 is	 called	 praman,	 right-knowledge.
Through	 the	 functioning	of	 that	center,	whatsoever	 is	known	 is	 right.	So	 it	 is
not	a	question	of	what	you	know;	from	where	you	know	is	the	question.
That’s	 why	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 against	 alcohol.	 It	 is	 not	 on	 any
moralistic	 grounds,	 no.	 It	 is	 because	 alcohol	 influences	 the	 center	 of
perversion.	 And	 every	 religion	 is	 for	 meditation	 because	 meditation	 means
creating	more	and	more	stillness,	becoming	more	and	more	silent.
Alcohol	 does	 quite	 the	 opposite.	 It	 makes	 you	 more	 and	 more	 agitated,
excited,	 disturbed;	 a	 trembling	 enters	within	 you.	 The	 drunkard	 cannot	 even
walk	rightly;	his	balance	is	lost.	Balance	is	lost	not	only	in	the	body,	but	in	the
mind	also.
Meditation	 means	 gaining	 the	 inner	 balance.	 When	 you	 gain	 the	 inner
balance	and	there	is	no	trembling,	the	whole	body-mind	has	become	still	–	then
the	 center	 of	 right-knowledge	 starts	 functioning.	 Through	 that	 center,
whatsoever	is	known	is	true.
Where	are	you?	You	are	not	alcoholics,	you	are	not	meditators;	you	must	be
somewhere	between	the	two.	You	are	not	in	any	center.	You	are	between	these
two	 centers	 of	 wrong-knowledge	 and	 right-knowledge.	 That’s	 why	 you	 are
confused.
Sometimes	you	have	glimpses.	You	lean	a	little	towards	the	right-knowledge
center,	then	certain	glimpses	come	to	you.	You	lean	toward	the	center	which	is
of	perversion,	then	perversion	enters	in	you.	And	everything	is	mixed,	you	are
in	 chaos.	 That’s	why	 either	 you	will	 have	 to	 become	meditators	 or	 you	will
have	 to	 become	 alcoholics,	 because	 confusion	 is	 too	much	 and	 these	 are	 the
two	ways.
Either	 you	 lose	yourself	 into	 intoxication:	 then	you	 are	 at	 ease	because	 at
least	 you	 have	 gained	 a	 center,	 maybe	 of	 wrong-knowledge,	 but	 you	 are
centered.	The	whole	world	may	 say	 you	 are	wrong,	 you	 don’t	 think	 so;	 you
think	the	whole	world	is	wrong.	At	least	in	those	moments	of	unconsciousness
you	are	centered,	centered	in	the	wrong	center,	but	you	are	happy	because	even
centering	in	the	wrong	center	gives	a	certain	happiness.	You	enjoy	it,	hence,	the
great	appeal	of	alcohol.
Governments	 have	 been	 fighting	 alcohol	 for	 centuries.	 Laws	 have	 been
made,	prohibition	and	everything,	but	nothing	helps.	Unless	humanity	becomes
meditative,	 nothing	 can	 help.	 People	 will	 go	 on	 finding	 new	ways	 and	 new
means	 to	get	 intoxicated.	They	cannot	be	prevented,	and	 the	more	you	 try	 to
prevent	them,	the	more	prohibition	laws,	the	more	appeal.
America	did	it	and	had	to	fall	back.	They	tried	their	best,	but	when	alcohol
was	prohibited	more	alcohol	was	used.	They	tried,	they	failed.	India	has	been
trying	since	Independence.	It	has	failed,	and	many	states	have	started	again.	It
seems	useless.
Unless	man	changes	inwardly,	you	cannot	force	man	by	any	prohibition;	it	is
impossible,	because	then	man	will	go	mad.	This	is	his	way	of	remaining	sane.
For	a	few	hours	he	becomes	drugged,	“stoned,”	then	he	is	okay.	Then	there	is
no	misery,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 anguish.	 The	misery	will	 come,	 the	 anguish	will
come,	but	at	least	it	is	postponed.	Tomorrow	morning	the	misery	will	be	there,
the	anguish	will	be	there,	and	he	will	have	to	face	it.	But	by	the	evening	he	can
hope	again;	he	will	drink	and	be	at	ease.
These	are	the	two	alternatives.	If	you	are	not	meditative	then	sooner	or	later
you	will	 have	 to	 find	 some	 drug.	And	 there	 are	 subtle	 drugs.	Alcohol	 is	 not
very	subtle,	it	is	very	gross.	There	are	subtle	drugs.	Sex	may	become	a	drug	for
you,	and	through	sex	you	may	be	just	losing	your	consciousness.	You	can	use
anything	 as	 a	 drug.	 Only	 meditation	 can	 help.	 Why?	 –	 because	 meditation
gives	you	centering	on	the	center	which	Patanjali	calls	praman.
Why	does	every	religion	put	so	much	emphasis	on	meditation?	Meditation
must	 be	doing	 some	 inner	miracle.	This	 is	 the	miracle:	 that	meditation	helps
you	 to	 put	 on	 the	 light	 of	 right-knowledge.	 Then	 wherever	 you	 move,	 then
wherever	your	focus	moves,	whatsoever	is	known	is	true.
Buddha	 has	 been	 asked	 thousands	 and	 thousands	 of	 questions.	 One	 day
somebody	asked	him,	“We	come	with	new	questions.	We	have	not	even	put	the
question	 before	 you	 and	you	 start	 answering.	You	never	 think	 about	 it.	How
does	it	happen?”
So	Buddha	said,	“It	is	not	a	question	of	thinking.	You	put	the	question	and	I
simply	 look	 at	 it,	 and	whatsoever	 is	 true	 is	 revealed.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
thinking	 and	 brooding	 about	 it.	 The	 answer	 is	 not	 coming	 as	 a	 logical
syllogism.	It	is	just	a	focusing	of	the	right	center.”
Buddha	is	like	a	torch.	Wherever	the	torch	moves,	it	reveals.	Whatsoever	the
question,	 that	 is	 not	 the	point.	Buddha	has	 the	 light,	 and	whenever	 that	 light
will	come	on	any	question	the	answer	will	be	revealed.	The	answer	will	come
out	of	that	light.	It	is	a	simple	phenomenon,	a	revelation.
When	 somebody	 asks	 you,	 you	 have	 to	 think	 about	 it.	 But	 how	 can	 you
think	 if	you	don’t	know?	If	you	know	there	 is	no	need	 to	 think.	 If	you	don’t
know	what	will	you	do?	You	will	 search	 in	 the	memory,	you	will	 find	many
clues.	 You	 will	 just	 do	 a	 patchwork.	 You	 don’t	 really	 know,	 otherwise	 the
response	would	have	been	immediate.
I	have	heard…
	
A	woman	 teacher	 in	 a	 primary	 school	 asked	 the	 children,	 “Have	 you	 any
questions?”
One	 small	 boy	 stood	 and	 said,	 “I	 have	 one	 question	 and	 I	 have	 been
waiting…whenever	 you	 ask	 I	 will	 ask	 it:	 what	 is	 the	 weight	 of	 the	 whole
earth?”
She	 became	 disturbed	 because	 she	 had	 never	 thought	 about	 it,	 never	 read
about	it.	What	is	the	weight	of	the	whole	earth?	So	she	played	a	trick	teachers
know.	They	have	to	play	tricks.	She	said,	“Yes,	the	question	is	significant.	Now
tomorrow,	everybody	has	 to	find	 the	answer.”	She	needed	time.	“Tomorrow	I
will	ask	the	question,	and	for	whoever	brings	the	right	answer	there	will	be	a
present	for	him.”
All	 the	 children	 searched	 and	 searched,	 but	 they	 couldn’t	 find	 the	 answer.
And	the	teacher	ran	to	the	library.	The	whole	night	she	searched,	and	only	just
by	the	morning	could	she	find	out	the	weight	of	the	earth.	She	was	very	happy.
She	 came	 back	 to	 school	 and	 the	 children	were	 there.	They	were	 exhausted.
They	said	 they	couldn’t	 find	 the	answer.	“We	asked	Mom	and	we	asked	Dad
and	 we	 asked	 everybody.	 Nobody	 knows.	 This	 question	 seems	 to	 be	 so
difficult.”
The	teacher	laughed	and	she	said,	“This	is	not	difficult.	I	know	the	answer,
but	 I	was	 just	 trying	 to	 see	whether	 you	 could	 find	 it	 out	 or	 not.	This	 is	 the
weight	of	the	earth…”
That	small	child	who	had	raised	the	question,	he	stood	again	and	he	asked,
“With	people	or	without?”	Now	the	same	situation…
	
You	cannot	put	Buddha	 in	 such	 a	 situation.	 It	 is	 not	 a	question	of	 finding
somewhere;	it	is	not	really	a	question	of	answering	you.	Your	question	is	just
an	 excuse.	When	 you	 put	 a	 question	 to	 Buddha,	 he	 simply	 moves	 his	 light
towards	that	question	and	whatsoever	is	revealed	is	revealed.	He	answers	you,
that	is	a	deep	response	of	his	right-center,	praman.
Patanjali	says	there	are	five	modifications	of	the	mind.	Right-knowledge:	if
this	 center	 of	 right-knowledge	 starts	 functioning	 in	 you,	 you	 will	 become	 a
sage,	 a	 saint.	 You	 will	 become	 religious.	 Before	 that	 you	 cannot	 become
religious.
That’s	 why	 Jesus	 and	Mohammed	 look	 mad	 –	 because	 they	 don’t	 argue;
they	don’t	put	their	case	logically,	they	simply	assert.	You	ask	Jesus,	“Are	you
really	the	only	son	of	God?”	He	says,	“Yes.”	And	if	you	ask	him,	“Prove	it,”	he
will	laugh.	He	will	say,	“There	is	no	need	to	prove	it.	I	know.	This	is	the	case,
this	 is	 self-evident.”	To	 us	 it	 looks	 illogical.	 This	man	 seems	 to	 be	 neurotic,
claiming	something	without	any	proof.
If	 this	praman,	 this	 center	 of	prama,	 this	 center	 of	 right-knowledge	 starts
functioning,	you	will	be	the	same:	you	can	assert	but	you	cannot	prove.	How
can	you	prove?	If	you	are	in	love	how	can	you	prove	that	you	are	in	love?	You
can	 simply	 assert.	You	have	a	pain	 in	your	 leg:	how	can	you	prove	 that	 you
have	pain?	You	simply	assert,	“I	have	pain.”	You	know	somewhere	inside;	that
knowing	is	enough.
	
Ramakrishna	was	asked,	“Is	there	a	God?”
He	said	“Yes.”
He	was	asked,	“Then	prove	it.”
He	said,	“There	is	no	need	–	I	know.	For	me	there	is	no	need.	For	you	there
is	a	need,	so	you	search.	Nobody	could	prove	 it	 for	me,	 I	cannot	prove	 it	 for
you.	I	had	to	seek,	I	had	to	find.	And	I	have	found	God	is!”
	
This	 is	 the	 functioning	 of	 the	 right	 center.	 So	Ramakrishna	 or	 Jesus	 look
absurd:	they	are	claiming	certain	things	without	giving	any	proof.	They	are	not
claiming,	 they	are	not	claiming	anything.	Certain	 things	are	 revealed	 to	 them
because	 they	 have	 a	 new	 center	 functioning	 which	 you	 don’t	 have	 –	 and
because	you	don’t	have	it	you	need	proof.
Remember,	proving	proves	that	you	don’t	have	an	inner	feeling	of	anything,
everything	has	to	be	proved;	even	love	has	to	be	proved.	And	people	go	on…
I	know	many	couples:	the	husband	goes	on	proving	that	he	loves	and	he	has
not	convinced	the	wife,	and	the	wife	goes	on	proving	that	she	loves	and	she	has
not	 convinced	 the	 husband.	 They	 remain	 unconvinced	 and	 that	 remains	 the
conflict.	They	keep	feeling	 that	 the	other	has	not	yet	proved	 it.	Lovers	go	on
searching.	 They	 create	 situations	 in	 which	 you	 have	 to	 prove	 that	 you	 love.
And	by	and	by	both	get	bored	–	this	futile	effort	to	prove	and	nothing	can	be
proved.
How	can	you	prove	love?	You	can	give	presents,	but	nothing	is	proved.	You
can	kiss	and	hug	and	you	can	sing,	you	can	dance,	but	nothing	is	proved.	You
may	be	just	pretending.
This	first	modification	of	 the	mind	is	right-knowledge.	Meditation	leads	to
this	 modification.	 And	 when	 you	 can	 know	 rightly	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
prove,	only	then	can	mind	be	dropped,	not	before	it.	When	there	is	no	need	to
prove,	mind	 is	 not	 needed	because	mind	 is	 a	 logical	 instrument.	You	need	 it
every	moment.	You	have	to	think,	find	what	is	wrong	and	what	is	right.	Every
moment	there	are	choices	and	alternatives;	you	have	to	choose.
Only	 when	 praman	 functions,	 when	 right-knowledge	 functions,	 can	 you
drop	the	mind,	because	now	choosing	has	no	meaning.	You	move	choicelessly;
whatsoever	is	right	is	revealed	to	you.
The	definition	of	a	sage	is	one	who	never	chooses.	He	never	chooses	good
against	bad.	He	simply	moves	towards	the	direction	which	is	that	of	good.	It	is
just	like	sunflowers:	when	the	sun	is	in	the	east	the	flower	turns	to	the	east,	it
never	chooses;	when	the	sun	moves	to	the	west	the	flower	turns	to	the	west.	It
simply	moves	with	the	sun.	It	has	not	chosen	to	move,	it	has	not	decided;	it	has
not	 taken	a	decision,	“Now	I	should	move	because	 the	sun	has	moved	 to	 the
west.”
A	 sage	 is	 just	 like	 a	 sunflower	 –	 he	 simply	moves	 wherever	 good	 is.	 So
whatsoever	 he	 does	 is	 good.	 The	 Upanishads	 say,	 “Don’t	 judge	 sages.	 Your
ordinary	measurements	won’t	do.”	You	have	 to	choose	good	against	bad.	He
has	nothing	to	choose,	he	simply	moves;	whatsoever	he	does	is	good.	And	you
cannot	change	him	because	it	is	not	a	question	of	alternatives.	If	you	say,	“This
is	bad,”	he	will	say,	“Okay,	it	may	be	bad,	but	this	is	how	I	move,	this	is	how
my	being	flows.”
Those	who	knew	–	and	people	 in	 the	days	of	 the	Upanishads	knew	–	had
decided	 that,	 “We	 will	 not	 judge	 a	 sage.”	 Once	 a	 person	 has	 come	 to	 be
centered	in	himself,	when	a	person	has	achieved	meditation,	has	become	silent
and	 the	mind	has	been	dropped,	he	 is	beyond	our	morality,	beyond	 tradition.
He	is	beyond	our	limitations.	If	we	can	follow	we	can	follow	him,	if	we	cannot
follow	we	are	helpless.	But	nothing	can	be	done	and	we	should	not	judge.
If	 right-knowledge	 functions,	 if	 your	 mind	 has	 taken	 the	 modification	 of
right-knowledge,	 you	 will	 become	 religious.	 Look,	 it	 is	 totally	 different.
Patanjali	doesn’t	say	if	you	go	to	the	mosque,	to	the	gurudwara,	to	the	temple,
if	 you	do	 some	 ritual,	 you	pray…	No,	 that’s	 not	 religion.	You	have	 to	make
your	right-knowledge	center	function,	so	whether	you	go	to	the	temple	or	not	is
immaterial;	 it	 doesn’t	 matter.	 If	 your	 right-knowledge	 center	 functions,
whatsoever	you	do	is	prayerfulness	and	wherever	you	go	is	a	temple.
Kabir	 has	 said,	 “Wherever	 I	 go	 I	 find	 you,	my	God.	Wherever	 I	move,	 I
move	 into	 you,	 I	 stumble	 upon	 you.	 And	 whatsoever	 I	 do,	 even	 walking,
eating,	 it	 is	 prayer.”	Kabir	 says,	 “This	 spontaneity	 is	my	 samadhi.	 Just	 to	 be
spontaneous	is	my	meditation.”
Second	 is	 wrong-knowledge:	 if	 your	 center	 of	 wrong-knowledge	 is
functioning,	then	whatsoever	you	do	you	will	do	wrongly,	and	whatsoever	you
choose	 you	 will	 choose	 wrongly.	 Whatsoever	 you	 decide	 will	 be	 wrong
because	you	are	not	deciding,	the	wrong	center	is	functioning.
There	 are	 people	 who	 feel	 very	 unfortunate	 because	 whatsoever	 they	 do
goes	wrong.	And	they	try	not	 to	do	wrong	again,	but	 that’s	not	going	to	help
because	their	center	has	to	be	changed.	Their	mind	functions	in	a	wrong	way.
They	may	 think	 that	 they	are	doing	good	but	 they	will	do	bad.	With	all	 their
good	wishes	they	cannot	help	it;	they	are	helpless.
	
Mulla	Nasruddin	used	to	visit	a	saint.	He	visited	for	many,	many	days.	And
the	saint	was	a	silent	one,	he	would	not	say	anything.	Then	Mulla	Nasruddin
had	to	ask;	he	said,	“I	have	been	coming	again	and	again,	waiting	that	you	will
say	something.	And	you	have	not	said	anything.	And	unless	you	speak	I	cannot
understand.	So	just	give	me	a	message	for	my	life,	a	direction	so	I	can	move	in
that	direction.”
So	that	Sufi	sage	said,	“Neki	kar	kuyen	may	dal”:	Do	good,	and	throw	it	in
the	well.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	 Sufi	 sayings:	 “Do	 good,	 and	 throw	 it	 in	 the
well.”	It	means	do	good	and	forget	it	immediately;	don’t	carry	the	thought,	“I
have	done	good.”
So	next	day	Mulla	Nasruddin	helped	one	old	woman	to	cross	the	road,	and
then	he	pushed	her	into	the	well.
	
Neki	kar	kuyen	may	dal:	Do	good,	and	throw	it	in	the	well.
If	your	wrong	center	is	functioning,	whatsoever	you	do	–	you	can	read	the
Koran,	 you	 can	 read	 the	Gita,	 and	you	will	 find	 such	meanings	 that	Krishna
would	be	 shocked,	Mohammed	would	be	 shocked	 to	 see	 that	 you	 could	 find
such	meanings.
Mahatma	 Gandhi	 wrote	 his	 autobiography	 with	 the	 intention	 of	 helping
people.	Then	many	 letters	 came	 to	him	because	he	describes	his	 sex	 life.	He
was	honest,	one	of	 the	most	honest	men,	so	he	wrote	everything,	whatsoever
had	 happened	 in	 his	 past:	 how	 he	 was	 too	 indulgent	 the	 day	 his	 father	 was
dying;	he	couldn’t	sit	by	his	father’s	side	even	that	day,	he	had	to	go	with	his
wife	to	bed.
The	doctors	had	told	him,	“This	is	the	last	night.	Your	father	cannot	survive
till	the	morning.	He	will	be	dead	by	the	morning.”	But	just	about	twelve	or	one
in	the	night	Gandhi	started	feeling	desire,	sexual	desire.	The	father	was	feeling
sleepy	so	Gandhi	slipped	away,	went	to	his	wife	and	indulged	in	sex.	And	the
wife	was	pregnant,	it	was	the	ninth	month.	The	father	was	dying,	he	died	in	the
night,	and	the	child	also	died	at	the	moment	of	birth.	So	his	whole	life	Gandhi
had	 a	 deep	 repentance	 that	 he	 couldn’t	 be	with	 his	 dying	 father	 because	 sex
was	so	obsessive.
So	he	wrote	everything,	he	was	honest	–	and	just	to	help	others.	But	many
letters	started	coming	to	him,	and	those	letters	were	such	that	he	was	shocked.
Many	people	wrote	to	him,	“Your	autobiography	is	such	that	we	have	become
more	sexual	than	before	reading	it.	Just	reading	through	your	autobiography	we
have	become	more	sexual	and	indulgent.	It	is	erotic.”
If	the	wrong	center	is	functioning	then	nothing	can	be	done.	Whatsoever	you
do,	 read,	 behave,	 it	will	 be	wrong.	You	will	move	 to	 the	wrong.	You	have	 a
center	which	is	forcing	you	to	move	towards	the	wrong.	You	can	go	to	Buddha,
but	 you	 will	 see	 something	 wrong	 in	 him	 immediately.	 You	 cannot	 meet
Buddha	–	immediately	you	will	see	something	wrong.	You	have	a	focusing	for
the	wrong,	a	deep	urge	to	find	wrong	anywhere,	everywhere.
Patanjali	 calls	 this	 modification	 of	 the	 mind	 viparyaya.	Viparyaya	 means
perversion.	You	pervert	everything;	you	interpret	everything	in	such	a	way	that
it	becomes	a	perversion.
Omar	Khayyam	writes,	 “I	 have	heard	 that	God	 is	 compassionate.”	This	 is
beautiful.	 Mohammedans	 go	 on	 repeating,	 “God	 is	 rahman,	 compassion;
rahim,	 compassion.”	They	go	on	 repeating,	continuously.	So	Omar	Khayyam
says,	“If	he	is	really	compassionate,	if	he	is	compassion,	then	there	is	no	need
to	be	afraid.	I	can	go	on	committing	sin.	If	he	is	compassion	then	what	is	the
fear?	I	can	commit	whatsoever	sin	I	want	and	he	is	compassion	–	so	whenever	I
stand	before	him	I	will	 say,	 ‘Rahim,	rahman:	Oh	God	of	 compassion,	 I	have
sinned…	 But	 you	 are	 compassion;	 if	 you	 are	 really	 compassion	 then	 have
compassion	 on	 me.’”	 So	 he	 goes	 on	 drinking,	 he	 goes	 on	 committing
whatsoever	he	thinks	is	sin.	He	has	interpreted	in	a	very	perverted	way.
All	over	the	world	people	have	done	that.	In	India	we	say,	“If	you	go	to	the
Ganges,	if	you	bathe	in	the	Ganges,	your	sins	will	dissolve.”	It	was	a	beautiful
concept	in	itself.	It	shows	many	things.	It	shows	that	sin	is	not	something	very
deep,	 it	 is	 just	 like	 dust	 on	 you.	 So	 don’t	 get	 too	 obsessed	 by	 it,	 don’t	 feel
guilty;	 it	 is	 just	dust	and	inside	you	remain	pure.	Even	bathing	in	the	Ganges
can	help.	This	is	just	to	show	you	not	to	become	so	obsessed	with	sin	the	way
Christianity	has	become.	Guilt	has	become	so	burdensome,	so	even	just	taking
a	bath	in	the	Ganges	will	help.	Don’t	be	so	afraid.	But	how	have	we	interpreted
it?	We	say,	“Then	it	is	okay	–	go	on	committing	sin.”	And	after	a	while,	when
you	 feel	 that	 now	 you	 have	 committed	 many	 sins,	 so	 give	 a	 chance	 to	 the
Ganges	 to	 purify	 them	 and	 then	 come	 back	 and	 commit	 again.	 This	 is	 the
center	of	perversion.
Third	 is	 imagination:	 mind	 has	 the	 faculty	 to	 imagine.	 It	 is	 good,	 it	 is
beautiful.	 All	 that	 is	 beautiful	 has	 come	 through	 imagination.	 Paintings,	 art,
dance,	music,	 everything	 that	 is	 beautiful	 has	 come	 through	 the	 imagination.
But	everything	that	is	ugly	has	also	come	through	the	imagination.	Hitler,	Mao,
Mussolini,	have	all	come	through	imagination.
Hitler	 imagined	 a	 world	 of	 supermen.	 And	 he	 believed	 in	 Friedrich
Nietzsche	who	 had	 said,	 “Destroy	 all	 those	who	 are	weak.	Destroy	 all	 those
who	are	not	 super;	 leave	only	 supermen	on	 the	 earth.”	So	he	destroyed.	 Just
imagination,	 just	utopian	 imagination	–	 that	 just	by	destroying	 the	weak,	 just
by	destroying	the	ugly,	just	by	destroying	the	physically	crippled	you	will	have
a	beautiful	world.	But	 the	very	destruction	 is	 the	ugliest	 thing	possible	 in	 the
world	–	the	verydestruction.
But	he	was	working	through	imagination.	He	had	an	imagination,	a	utopian
imagination;	 he	 was	 the	 most	 imaginative	 man!	 Hitler	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
imaginative	men	ever,	and	his	imagination	became	so	fantastic	and	so	mad	that
for	 his	 imagined	 world	 he	 tried	 to	 destroy	 this	 world	 completely.	 His
imagination	had	gone	mad.
Imagination	can	give	you	poetry	and	painting	and	art,	and	imagination	can
also	give	you	madness.	 It	depends	on	how	you	use	 it.	All	 the	great	 scientific
discoveries	have	been	through	imagination	–	people	who	could	imagine,	who
could	imagine	the	impossible.	Now	we	can	fly	into	the	air,	now	we	can	go	to
the	moon.	These	are	deep	imaginings.
Man	has	been	 imagining	for	centuries,	millennia,	how	to	fly,	how	to	go	 to
the	moon.	Every	child	is	born	with	the	desire	 to	go	to	the	moon,	 to	catch	the
moon.	But	we	 reached	 it!	Through	 imagination	creativity	comes,	but	 through
imagination	destruction	also	comes.
Patanjali	 says	 imagination	 is	 the	 third	mode	 of	mind.	You	 can	 use	 it	 in	 a
wrong	way	and	then	it	will	destroy	you.	You	can	also	use	it	in	a	right	way.	And
then	there	are	imaginative	meditations:	they	start	with	imagination,	but	by	and
by	imagination	becomes	subtler	and	subtler	and	subtler.	And	then	imagination
is	ultimately	dropped	and	you	are	face	to	face	with	the	truth.
All	 Christian	 and	 Mohammedan	 meditations	 are	 basically	 through
imagination.	First	you	have	to	imagine	something,	then	you	go	on	imagining	it
and	then	through	imagination	you	create	an	atmosphere	around	you.	Try	it;	try
what	is	possible	through	imagination.	Even	the	impossible	is	possible.
If	 you	 think	 you	 are	 beautiful,	 if	 you	 imagine	 you	 are	 beautiful,	 a	 certain
beauty	will	start	happening	to	your	body.	So	whenever	a	man	says	to	a	woman,
“You	are	beautiful,”	the	woman	changes	immediately.	She	may	not	have	been
beautiful	 before	 this	moment.	She	may	not	 have	been	beautiful,	 just	 homely,
ordinary,	but	this	man	has	given	imagination	to	her.
So	every	woman	who	 is	 loved	becomes	more	beautiful,	every	man	who	 is
loved	becomes	more	beautiful.	A	person	who	is	not	loved	may	be	beautiful,	but
becomes	 ugly	 because	 he	 cannot	 imagine,	 she	 cannot	 imagine.	 And	 if
imagination	is	not	there,	you	shrink.
Coué,	one	of	the	great	psychologists	of	the	West,	helped	millions	of	people
to	be	cured	of	many,	many	diseases	just	through	imagination.	His	formula	was
very	 simple.	He	would	 say,	 “Just	 start	 feeling	 that	 you	 are	 okay.	 Just	 go	 on
repeating	 inside	 the	 mind,	 ‘I	 am	 getting	 better	 and	 better.	 Every	 day	 I	 am
getting	 better.’	 In	 the	 night,	 while	 you	 fall	 asleep,	 go	 on	 thinking	 you	 are
healthy,	and	you	are	getting	healthier	every	moment,	and	by	the	morning	you
will	be	the	healthiest	person	in	the	world.	Go	on	imagining.”
And	 he	 helped	millions	 of	 people.	 Even	 incurable	 diseases	were	 cured.	 It
looked	 like	 a	 miracle.	 It	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 basic	 law:	 your	 mind	 follows
imagination.
Now	psychologists	say	 that	 if	you	say	 to	children,	“You	are	duffers,	dull,”
they	become	dull.	You	 force	 them	 to	be	dull.	You	give	 their	 imagination	 the
suggestion	that	they	are	dull.
Many	 experiments	 have	 been	 done.	 Say	 to	 a	 child,	 “You	 are	 dull.	 You
cannot	 do	 anything;	 you	 cannot	 solve	 this	 mathematical	 problem,”	 and	 give
him	the	problem	and	tell	him,	“Now	try”	–	he	will	not	be	able	to	solve	it.	You
have	closed	the	door.	Say	to	the	child,	“You	are	intelligent	and	I	have	not	seen
any	 boy	 as	 intelligent	 as	 you;	 for	 your	 stage,	 for	 your	 age	 you	 are	 over-
intelligent.	You	show	many	potentialities,	you	can	solve	any	problem.	Now	try
this”	–	and	he	will	be	able	to	solve	it.	You	have	given	imagination	to	him.
Now	 these	 things	 are	 scientifically	 proven,	 scientifically	 discovered,	 that
whatsoever	imagination	catches	becomes	a	seed.	Whole	generations	have	been
changed,	 whole	 ages;	 whole	 countries	 have	 been	 changed	 just	 through
imagination.
Go	to	the	Punjab…
	
I	was	traveling	once	from	Delhi	to	Manali.	My	driver	was	a	Sikh,	a	sardar.
The	way,	the	road,	was	dangerous,	and	the	car	was	very	big.	And	many	times
the	driver	became	afraid.	Many	times	he	would	say,	“Now	I	cannot	go	ahead.
We	will	have	to	go	back.”
We	tried	in	every	way	to	persuade	him.	At	one	point	he	became	so	afraid	he
stopped	 the	 car,	 got	 out	 of	 the	 car	 and	 said,	 “No!	Now	 I	 cannot	move	 from
here.	It	is	dangerous.”	He	said.	“It	may	not	be	dangerous	for	you,	you	may	be
ready	to	die.	But	I	am	not,	I	want	to	go	back.”
By	chance	one	of	my	friends	who	is	also	a	sardar	and	a	big	police	official
was	also	coming.	He	was	following	me	to	attend	the	camp	in	Manali.	His	car
arrived	and	I	told	him,	“Do	something!	The	man	has	got	out	of	the	car.”
That	 police	 official	 came	 and	 he	 said,	 “You	 are	 a	 sardar,	 a	 Sikh,	 and	 a
coward?	Get	into	the	car!”
The	man	immediately	got	into	the	car	and	started	it.	So	I	asked	him,	“What
is	the	matter?”
He	 said,	 “Now	 he	 has	 touched	 my	 ego.	 He	 says,	 ‘You	 are	 a	 sardar?’	 –
Sardar	means	 leader	 of	men	 –	 ‘a	 Sikh	 and	 a	 coward?!’	He	 has	 touched	my
imagination.	He	has	touched	my	pride.	Now	we	can	go.	Dead	or	alive,	we	will
reach	Manali!”
	
And	this	has	not	only	happened	with	one	man.	In	the	Punjab	it	has	happened
with	millions.	Look	at	the	Hindus	of	the	Punjab	and	at	the	Sikhs	of	the	Punjab.
Their	blood	is	the	same,	they	belong	to	the	same	race,	just	five	hundred	years
ago	 all	were	Hindus.	And	 then	 a	 different	 type	 of	 race,	 a	military	 race,	was
born.	Just	by	growing	a	beard,	just	by	changing	your	face,	you	cannot	become
brave.	But	you	can	with	 imagination.	Nanak	gave	 them	 the	 imagination	 that,
“You	 are	 a	 different	 type	 of	 race.	 You	 are	 unconquerable.”	 And	 once	 they
believed,	 once	 that	 imagination	 started	 to	work,	within	 five	 hundred	 years	 a
new	race,	totally	different	from	Punjabi	Hindus,	came	into	being	in	the	Punjab.
Nothing	is	different,	but	in	India	no	one	is	braver	than	they.	These	two	world
wars	have	proved	 that	 on	 the	whole	of	 the	 earth,	Sikhs	have	no	 comparison.
They	can	fight	fearlessly.
What	 has	 happened?	 Just	 their	 imagination	 has	 created	 a	 milieu	 around
them.	They	feel	that	just	by	being	Sikhs	they	are	different.	Imagination	works!
It	can	make	a	brave	man	out	of	you,	it	can	make	you	a	coward.
I	have	heard…
	
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	 sitting	 in	 a	 pub,	 drinking.	He	was	not	 a	 brave	man,
one	of	 the	most	 cowardly,	but	 alcohol	gave	him	courage.	And	 then	a	man,	 a
giant	of	a	man,	entered	the	pub.	He	was	ferocious	looking,	dangerous,	looked
like	a	murderer.	At	any	other	time,	in	his	senses,	Mulla	Nasruddin	would	have
been	afraid,	but	now	he	was	drunk	so	he	was	not	afraid	at	all.
That	ferocious	looking	man	went	near	to	Mulla,	and	seeing	that	he	was	not
afraid	 at	 all	 he	 stomped	 on	 his	 feet.	 Mulla	 got	 angry,	 furious,	 and	 he	 said,
“What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	doing	it	on	purpose	or	is	it	just	a	sort	of	joke?”
But	 by	 this	 time,	 by	 stomping	on	 his	 feet,	Mulla	was	 brought	 back	 from	his
alcohol.	He	was	brought	back,	he	came	to	his	senses.	But	he	had	said,	“What
are	you	doing?	Is	it	on	purpose	or	is	it	just	a	sort	of	joke?”
The	man	said,	“On	purpose.”
Mulla	Nasruddin	 said,	 “Then	 thank	 you.	On	 purpose	 it	 is	 okay,	 because	 I
don’t	like	those	types	of	jokes”
	
Patanjali	says	imagination	is	the	third	faculty.	You	go	on	imagining…	If	you
wrongly	 imagine	you	can	create	delusions	around	you,	 illusions,	dreams,	and
you	can	be	lost	in	them.	LSD	and	other	drugs	help	and	work	on	this	center.	So
whatsoever	potentiality	you	have	inside,	your	LSD	trip	will	help	you	develop
it.	So	nothing	is	certain.	If	you	have	happy	imaginations,	the	drug	trip	will	be	a
happy	 trip,	 a	 high.	 If	 you	 have	 miserable	 imaginations,	 nightmarish
imaginations,	the	trip	is	going	to	be	bad.
That’s	 why	 many	 people	 make	 contradictory	 reports.	 Huxley	 says	 it	 can
become	 a	 key	 to	 the	 door	 of	 heaven,	 and	Rheiner	 says	 it	 is	 ultimate	 hell.	 It
depends	on	you;	LSD	cannot	do	anything.	 It	 simply	 jumps	on	your	center	of
imagination	and	starts	functioning	there	chemically.	If	you	have	an	imagination
of	the	nightmarish	type	then	you	will	develop	that,	and	you	will	pass	through
hell.	And	if	you	are	addicted	to	beautiful	dreams	you	may	reach	heaven.
This	imagination	can	function	either	as	a	hell	or	as	heaven.	You	can	use	it	to
go	completely	insane.	What	has	happened	to	madmen	in	the	madhouses?	They
have	used	their	imagination,	and	they	have	used	it	in	such	a	way	that	they	are
engulfed	 by	 it.	 A	 madman	 may	 be	 sitting	 alone	 and	 he	 is	 talking	 loudly	 to
someone.	 He	 not	 only	 talks,	 he	 answers	 also.	 He	 questions,	 he	 answers,	 he
speaks	for	the	other	who	is	absent	also.	You	may	think	that	he	is	mad,	but	he	is
talking	 to	 a	 real	 person.	 In	 his	 imagination	 the	 person	 is	 real,	 and	 he	 cannot
judge	what	is	imaginary	and	what	is	real.
Children	 cannot	 judge.	 So	 many	 times	 children	 may	 lose	 their	 toy	 in	 a
dream,	 and	 then	 they	 will	 weep	 in	 the	 morning,	 “Where	 is	 my	 toy?”	 They
cannot	judge	that	a	dream	is	a	dream	and	reality	is	reality.	And	they	have	not
lost	anything,	they	were	just	dreaming.	The	boundaries	are	blurred;	they	don’t
know	where	the	dream	ends	and	where	reality	starts.
A	madman	is	also	blurred.	He	doesn’t	know	what	is	real,	what	is	unreal.	If
imagination	is	used	rightly	then	you	will	know	that	this	is	imagination,	and	you
will	remain	alert	that	this	is	imagination.	You	can	enjoy	it,	but	this	is	not	real.
So	when	 people	meditate,	many	 things	 happen	 through	 their	 imagination.
They	start	seeing	lights,	colors,	visions,	talking	to	God	himself,	or	moving	with
Jesus	or	dancing	with	Krishna.	These	are	 imaginative	 things,	and	a	meditator
has	to	remember	that	these	are	functions	of	the	imagination.	You	can	enjoy	it,
nothing	is	wrong	in	them,	they	are	fun,	but	don’t	think	that	they	are	real.
Remember	 that	 only	 the	 witnessing	 consciousness	 is	 real,	 nothing	 else	 is
real.	Whatsoever	happens	may	be	beautiful	–	enjoy,	enjoy	it.	It	is	beautiful	to
dance	 with	 Krishna,	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it.	 Dance,	 enjoy,	 but	 remember
continuously	that	this	is	imagination,	a	beautiful	dream.	Don’t	get	lost	in	it.	If
you	 are	 lost	 in	 it	 then	 imagination	 has	 become	 dangerous.	 Many	 religious
people	are	just	in	imagination	and	they	move	into	imagination	and	waste	their
life.
The	 fourth	 faculty	 is	 sleep.	 Sleep	 means	 unconsciousness	 as	 far	 as	 your
outward-moving	 consciousness	 is	 concerned.	 It	 has	 gone	 deep	 into	 itself.
Activity	has	stopped,	conscious	activity	has	stopped.	Mind	is	not	functioning.
Sleep	is	a	non-functioning	of	the	mind.	If	you	are	dreaming	then	it	is	not	sleep.
You	are	just	in	the	middle	between	waking	and	sleep.	You	have	left	waking	and
you	have	not	entered	sleep;	you	are	just	in	the	middle.
Sleep	means	 a	 totally	 contentless	 state	 –	 no	 activity,	 no	movement	 in	 the
mind.	Mind	has	been	completely	absorbed,	relaxed.	This	sleep	is	beautiful,	it	is
life-giving.	 You	 can	 use	 it.	 And	 this	 sleep,	 if	 you	 know	 how	 to	 use	 it,	 can
become	samadhi.	Samadhi	and	sleep	are	not	very	different.	There	is	only	one
difference:	in	samadhi	you	will	be	aware;	everything	else	will	be	the	same.
In	sleep	everything	is	the	same,	only	you	are	not	aware.	You	are	in	the	same
bliss	 into	which	Buddha	entered,	 in	which	Ramakrishna	 lives,	 in	which	Jesus
has	made	his	home.	In	deep	sleep	you	are	in	the	same	blissful	state,	but	you	are
not	aware.	So	in	the	morning	you	feel	the	night	has	been	good,	in	the	morning
you	 feel	 refreshed,	 vital,	 rejuvenated.	 In	 the	morning	 you	 feel	 that	 the	 night
was	 just	 beautiful,	 but	 this	 is	 just	 an	 afterglow.	 You	 don’t	 know	 what	 has
happened,	what	really	happened.	You	were	not	aware.
Sleep	can	be	used	in	two	ways.	Just	as	a	natural	rest…	You	have	even	lost
that.	People	are	not	really	going	into	sleep	–	they	go	on	dreaming	continuously.
Sometimes,	for	a	very	few	seconds,	they	touch	deep	sleep,	and	they	again	start
dreaming.	 The	 silence	 of	 sleep,	 the	 blissful	 music	 of	 sleep,	 has	 become
unknown,	you	have	destroyed	 it.	Even	natural	 sleep	 is	destroyed.	You	are	 so
agitated	and	excited	that	the	mind	cannot	fall	completely	into	oblivion.
But	Patanjali	says	natural	sleep	is	good	for	the	body’s	health,	and	if	you	can
become	 alert	 in	 sleep	 it	 can	 become	 samadhi,	 it	 can	 become	 a	 spiritual
phenomenon.	So	there	are	techniques	–	we	will	discuss	them	later	on	–	of	how
sleep	can	become	an	awakening.	The	Gita	says	that	the	yogi	doesn’t	sleep	even
while	 he	 is	 asleep.	He	 remains	 alert,	 something	 inside	 goes	 on	 being	 aware.
The	whole	body	 falls	 into	sleep,	 the	mind	 falls	 into	sleep,	but	 the	witnessing
remains.	Someone	 is	watching	–	a	watcher	on	 the	 tower	goes	on.	Then	sleep
becomes	samadhi;	it	becomes	the	ultimate	ecstasy.
And	the	fifth	modification	of	the	mind	is	memory.	That	too	can	be	used	or
misused.	If	memory	is	misused	it	creates	confusion.	Really,	you	may	remember
something,	but	you	cannot	be	certain	whether	it	happened	that	way	or	not.	Your
memory	is	not	reliable.	You	may	add	many	things	to	it;	imagination	may	enter
into	it.	You	may	delete	many	things	from	it,	you	may	do	many	things	to	it.	And
when	you	say,	“This	is	my	memory,”	it	is	a	very	refined	and	changed	thing.	It
is	not	real.
Everybody	says,	“My	childhood	was	 just	paradise”	–	and	look	at	children.
These	children	will	also	say	later	on	that	their	childhood	was	paradise,	and	they
are	 suffering.	And	every	child	hankers	 to	grow	up	soon,	 to	become	an	adult.
Every	child	thinks	that	adults	are	enjoying,	they	are	enjoying	all	that	is	worth
enjoying.	They	are	powerful,	 they	can	do	everything;	he	is	helpless.	Children
think	they	are	suffering.	But	these	children	will	grow	as	you	have	grown,	and
then	later	on	they	will	say	that	childhood	was	beautiful,	just	a	paradise.
Your	memory	is	not	reliable.	You	are	imagining.	You	are	just	creating	your
past.	You	are	not	true	to	it.	And	you	drop	many	things	from	it	–	you	drop	all
that	was	ugly,	all	that	was	sad,	all	that	was	painful;	all	that	was	beautiful	you
continue.	You	remember	all	that	was	a	support	to	your	ego,	and	all	that	was	not
a	support	you	drop,	you	forget.
So	everybody	has	a	great	storehouse	of	dropped	memories.	And	whatsoever
you	 say	 is	 not	 true	 because	 you	 cannot	 remember	 truly.	All	 your	 centers	 are
confused	and	they	enter	into	each	other	and	disturb.
Right-memory…	Buddha	has	used	the	words	right-memory	for	meditation.
Patanjali	says,	if	memory	is	right,	that	means	one	has	to	be	totally	honest	with
oneself.	Then,	only	then,	can	memory	be	right.	Whatsoever	has	happened,	bad
or	 good,	 don’t	 change	 it.	Know	 it	 as	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 very	 hard,	 it	 is	 arduous.	You
choose	and	change.	Knowing	one’s	past	as	it	is	will	change	your	whole	life.	If
you	rightly	know	your	past	as	it	is,	you	will	not	like	to	repeat	it	in	the	future.
Right	now	everybody	is	thinking	of	how	to	repeat	it	in	a	modified	form,	but	if
you	know	your	past	exactly	as	it	was,	you	will	not	like	to	repeat	it.
Right-memory	will	give	you	 the	 impetus	of	how	 to	be	 free	 from	all	 lives.
And	if	memory	is	right	then	you	can	even	go	into	past	lives.	If	you	are	honest
then	 you	 can	 go	 into	 past	 lives.	 And	 then	 you	 have	 only	 one	 desire:	 to
transcend	all	this	nonsense.	But	you	think	the	past	was	beautiful,	and	you	think
the	future	is	going	to	be	beautiful,	only	this	present	is	wrong.	But	the	past	was
present	a	few	days	before,	and	the	future	will	become	present	a	few	days	after.
And	each	time	each	present	is	wrong	and	all	past	is	beautiful	and	all	future	is
beautiful.	 This	 is	 wrong	memory.	 Look	 directly	 at	 the	 past,	 don’t	 change	 it;
look	at	the	past	as	it	was.	But	we	are	very	dishonest.
Every	man	hates	his	father,	but	if	you	ask	anybody	he	will	say,	“I	love	my
father.	I	honor	my	father	as	no	one	else.”	Every	woman	hates	her	mother,	but
ask	 and	 every	 woman	 will	 say,	 “My	mother	 is	 just	 divine.”	 This	 is	 wrong-
memory.
	
Gibran	has	a	story.	He	says	one	night	a	mother	and	daughter	were	awakened
suddenly	by	a	noise.	They	both	were	sleepwalkers,	and	at	the	time	the	sudden
noise	 happened	 in	 the	 neighborhood,	 they	were	 both	walking	 in	 the	 garden,
asleep.	They	were	sleepwalkers.
It	must	have	been	a	shock,	because	in	sleep	the	old	woman,	the	mother,	was
saying	to	the	daughter,	“Because	of	you,	you	bitch	–	because	of	you	my	youth
is	lost.	You	destroyed	me.	And	now	anybody	who	comes	to	the	house	looks	at
you.	Nobody	looks	at	me.”	A	deep	jealousy	that	comes	to	every	mother	when
the	daughter	becomes	young	and	beautiful:	it	happens	to	every	mother,	but	it	is
inside.
And	 the	 daughter	was	 saying,	 “You	old	 rotten…	Because	 of	 you	 I	 cannot
enjoy	 life.	 You	 are	 the	 hindrance.	 Everywhere	 you	 are	 the	 hindrance,	 the
obstacle.	I	cannot	love,	I	cannot	enjoy.”
And	suddenly,	because	of	the	noise,	they	were	both	awakened.	And	the	old
woman	said,	“My	child,	what	are	you	doing	here?	You	may	catch	cold.	Come
inside.”
And	the	daughter	said,	“But	what	are	you	doing	here?	You	were	not	feeling
well	and	this	is	a	cold	night.	Come,	mother.	Come	to	bed.”
	
The	first	thing	that	was	happening	was	coming	from	the	unconscious.	Now
they	are	again	pretending.	They	have	become	awake.	Now	the	unconscious	has
gone	back	and	the	conscious	mind	has	come	in.	Now	they	are	hypocrites.	Your
conscious	mind	is	hypocrisy.
To	 be	 truly	 honest	with	 one’s	 own	memories	 one	will	 have	 to	 really	 pass
through	arduous	effort.	And	you	have	to	be	true,	whatsoever	it	is.	You	have	to
be	 nakedly	 true.	You	 have	 to	 know	what	 you	 really	 think	 about	 your	 father,
about	 your	mother,	 about	 your	 brother,	 about	 your	 sister	 –	 really.	And	 don’t
mix,	don’t	change,	don’t	polish	what	you	have	in	the	past;	 let	 it	be	as	it	 is.	If
this	happens,	then,	Patanjali	says,	this	will	be	a	freedom.	You	will	drop	it.	The
whole	 thing	 is	 nonsense	 and	 you	 will	 not	 want	 to	 project	 it	 again	 into	 the
future.
Then	you	will	not	be	a	hypocrite.	You	will	be	 real,	 true,	 sincere.	You	will
become	authentic.	And	when	you	become	authentic	 you	become	 like	 a	 rock:
nothing	can	change	you,	nothing	can	create	confusion.
You	become	like	a	sword:	you	can	always	cut	whatsoever	is	wrong,	you	can
divide	 whatsoever	 is	 right	 from	 the	 wrong.	 And	 then	 a	 clarity	 of	 mind	 is
achieved.	 That	 clarity	 can	 lead	 you	 towards	 meditation.	 That	 clarity	 can
become	the	basic	ground	to	grow	–	to	grow	beyond.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	4:	Madness	or	Meditation
	
The	first	question:
Osho,
You	said	that	there	are	only	two	alternatives	for	man,	either	madness	or	meditation.	But
millions	of	people	on	the	earth	have	not	reached	to	either	of	the	two.	Do	you	think	they
will?
They	have	 reached.	 They	 have	 not	 reached	 to	 meditation,	 but	 they	 have
reached	 to	madness.	And	 the	difference	between	 the	mad	who	 are	 inside	 the
madhouses	 and	 the	mad	who	 are	 outside	 the	madhouses	 is	 only	 of	 degrees.
There	is	no	qualitative	difference;	the	difference	is	only	of	quantity.	You	may
be	less	mad,	they	may	be	more	mad,	but	man	as	he	is,	is	mad.
Why	do	I	say	man	as	he	is,	is	mad?	Madness	means	many	things.	One:	you
are	not	centered.	If	you	are	not	centered	you	will	be	insane,	with	many	voices
in	 you.	 Not	 centered,	 you	 are	 many,	 you	 are	 a	 multitude.	 And	 no	 one	 is	 a
master	 in	 the	 house,	 and	 every	 servant	 of	 the	 house	 claims	 to	 be	 the	master.
There	is	confusion,	conflict	and	a	continuous	struggle.	You	are	in	a	continuous
civil	war.	If	this	civil	war	were	not	going	on	then	you	would	be	in	meditation.
But	it	continues	day	and	night,	for	twenty-four	hours.	Write	down	whatsoever
goes	on	 in	 your	mind	 for	 a	 few	minutes,	 and	be	honest.	Write	 down	exactly
whatsoever	goes	on	and	you	yourself	will	feel	that	this	is	mad.
I	have	a	particular	technique	I	use	with	many	people.	I	say	to	them,	sit	in	a
closed	room	and	then	start	saying	loudly	whatsoever	comes	into	the	mind.	Talk
aloud	so	that	you	can	listen.	After	fifteen	minutes	of	this	talking,	you	will	feel
that	you	are	listening	to	a	madman.	Absurd,	inconsistent,	unrelated	fragments
float	 in	 the	 mind,	 your	 mind!	 So	 you	 may	 be	 ninety-nine	 percent	 mad	 and
someone	 else	 has	 crossed	 the	 boundary,	 he	 has	 gone	 beyond	 one	 hundred
percent.	 Those	 who	 have	 gone	 beyond	 one	 hundred	 percent	 are	 put	 in	 the
madhouses.	We	cannot	put	you	in	the	madhouse	because	there	are	not	enough
madhouses.	 And	 there	 cannot	 be,	 or	 the	 whole	 earth	 would	 have	 to	 be	 a
madhouse.
Khalil	Gibran	writes	a	small	anecdote:
	
He	says,	one	of	his	friends	became	mad	so	he	was	put	in	a	madhouse.	Then
just	 out	 of	 love,	 compassion,	 Gibran	 went	 to	 see	 him,	 to	 visit	 him.	 He	 was
sitting	under	a	 tree	 in	 the	garden	of	 the	madhouse,	 surrounded	by	a	very	big
wall.	Khalil	Gibran	went	there,	sat	by	the	side	with	his	friend	on	the	bench	and
asked	him,	“Do	you	ever	think	about	why	you	are	here?”
The	madman	laughed	and	he	said,	“I	am	here	because	I	wanted	to	leave	that
big	madhouse	outside.	And	I	am	at	peace	here.	In	this	madhouse	–	you	call	it	a
madhouse	–	no	one	is	mad.”
	
Mad	 people	 cannot	 think	 that	 they	 are	 mad;	 that	 is	 one	 of	 the	 basic
characteristics	of	madness.	If	you	are	mad	you	cannot	think	that	you	are	mad.
If	you	can	think	you	are	mad	there	is	a	possibility	that	you	may	not	be.	If	you
can	think	and	conceive	that	you	are	mad	you	are	still	a	little	sane.	The	madness
has	not	occurred	in	its	totality.	So	this	is	the	paradox:	those	who	are	really	sane
know	that	they	are	mad,	and	those	who	are	completely	mad	cannot	think	that
they	are	mad.
You	 never	 think	 that	 you	 are	 mad:	 that	 is	 part	 of	 madness.	 You	 are	 not
centered;	you	cannot	be	sane.	Your	sanity	is	just	superficial,	arranged.	Just	on
the	surface	you	appear	to	be	sane.	That’s	why	you	have	to	continuously	deceive
the	world	around	you.	You	have	to	hide	much,	you	have	to	prevent	much.	You
don’t	allow	everything	to	come	out.	You	are	suppressive:	you	may	be	thinking
something	but	you	will	say	something	else.	You	are	pretending,	and	because	of
this	pretension	you	can	have	the	minimum	superficial	sanity	around	you;	inside
you	are	boiling.
Sometimes	there	are	eruptions.	In	anger	you	erupt	and	the	madness	that	you
have	been	hiding	comes	out.	 It	breaks	all	your	adjustments.	So	psychologists
say	 anger	 is	 a	 temporary	 madness.	 You	 will	 again	 regain	 balance,	 you	 will
again	 hide	 your	 reality,	 you	will	 again	 polish	 your	 surface	 –	 you	will	 again
become	sane.	And	you	will	say	that,	“It	was	wrong.	I	did	it	in	spite	of	myself.	I
never	meant	 it,	 so	 forgive	me.”	But	 you	meant	 it!	 That	was	more	 real!	 This
asking	 for	 forgiveness	 is	 just	 a	 pretension.	 Again	 you	 are	 maintaining	 your
surface,	your	mask.
A	 sane	man	 has	 no	mask.	His	 face	 is	 original:	whatsoever	 he	 is,	 he	 is.	A
madman	has	to	continuously	change	his	faces.	Every	moment	he	has	to	use	a
different	mask	 for	 a	 different	 situation,	 for	 different	 relationships.	 Just	watch
yourself	changing	your	faces:	when	you	come	to	your	wife	you	have	one	face,
when	you	go	to	your	beloved,	your	mistress,	you	have	a	totally	different	face.
When	you	talk	to	your	servant	you	have	a	different	mask	and	when	you	talk	to
your	master,	a	totally	different	face.	It	may	be	that	your	servant	is	standing	on
your	 right	 and	 your	 boss	 is	 standing	 on	 your	 left	 –	 then	 you	 have	 two	 faces
simultaneously.	On	the	left	you	have	one	face,	on	the	right	you	have	a	different
face.	Because	 to	 the	 servant	you	cannot	 show	 the	 same	 face;	you	need	not	–
you	are	the	boss	there,	so	one	side	of	the	face	will	be	“the	boss.”	You	cannot
show	that	“boss	face”	to	your	boss,	you	are	a	servant	there;	your	other	side	will
show	a	servile	attitude.
This	 is	 constantly	going	on.	You	are	not	watching,	 that’s	why	you	are	not
aware.	If	you	watch	you	will	become	aware	that	you	are	mad.	You	don’t	have
any	 face;	 the	 original	 face	 has	 been	 lost.	 To	 regain	 the	 original	 face	 is	what
meditation	means.
So	Zen	masters	say,	“Go	and	find	your	original	face,	the	face	you	had	before
you	were	born,	the	face	you	will	have	when	you	have	died.”	Between	birth	and
death	you	have	false	faces,	you	continuously	go	on	deceiving.	Not	only	others:
you	 also	 deceive	 yourself;	 when	 you	 stand	 before	 a	 mirror	 you	 deceive
yourself,	 you	 never	 see	 your	 real	 face	 in	 the	mirror.	You	 don’t	 have	 enough
courage	to	face	yourself.	That	face	in	the	mirror	is	also	false.	You	create	it,	you
enjoy	it;	it	is	a	painted	mask.
We	are	not	only	deceiving	others,	we	are	also	deceiving	ourselves.	Really,
we	 cannot	 deceive	 others	 if	 we	 have	 not	 already	 deceived	 ourselves.	 So	we
have	to	believe	in	our	own	lies,	only	then	can	we	make	others	believe.	If	you
don’t	believe	in	your	lies	nobody	else	is	going	to	be	deceived.
This	whole	nuisance	that	you	call	your	life	leads	nowhere.	It	is	a	mad	affair.
You	work	too	much,	you	overwork;	you	walk	and	run.	You	struggle	your	whole
life	and	you	reach	nowhere.	You	don’t	know	from	where	you	are	coming,	you
don’t	know	where	you	are	moving	to,	where	you	are	going.	If	you	meet	a	man
on	the	road	and	you	ask	him,	“Where	are	you	coming	from,	sir?”	and	he	says,
“I	don’t	know,”	and	you	ask	him,	“Where	are	you	going,”	and	he	says,	“I	don’t
know,”	and	still	he	says,	“Don’t	prevent	me,	 I	am	 in	a	hurry,”	what	will	you
think	about	him?	You	will	think	he	is	mad.
If	 you	 don’t	 know	where	 you	 are	 coming	 from	 and	where	 you	 are	 going,
then	what	is	the	hurry?	But	this	is	the	situation	of	everybody,	and	everybody	is
on	the	road.	Life	is	a	road	–	you	are	always	in	the	middle	–	and	you	don’t	know
where	you	have	come	from,	you	don’t	know	where	you	are	going.	You	have	no
knowledge	 of	 the	 source,	 no	 knowledge	 of	 the	 goal,	 but	 you	 are	 in	 a	 great
hurry,	making	every	effort	to	reach	nowhere.
What	 type	 of	 sanity	 is	 this?	 And	 out	 of	 this	 whole	 struggle	 not	 even
glimpses	 of	 happiness	 come	 to	 you,	 not	 even	 glimpses.	 You	 simply	 hope
someday,	 somewhere,	 tomorrow,	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow	 –	 or	 after	 death,	 in
some	 afterlife	 –	 that	 happiness	 is	 waiting	 for	 you.	 This	 is	 just	 a	 trick	 to
postpone,	so	that	you	don’t	feel	too	miserable	right	now.
You	don’t	even	have	glimpses	of	bliss.	What	type	of	sanity	is	this?	You	are
in	continuous	misery,	and	moreover,	misery	that	is	not	created	by	anybody	else.
You	 create	 your	 suffering.	 What	 type	 of	 sanity	 is	 this?	 You	 create	 your
suffering	continuously.	I	call	it	madness.
Sanity	will	be	this:	you	will	become	aware	that	you	are	not	centered.	So	the
first	thing	to	be	done	is	to	get	centered	–	to	have	a	center	within	yourself	from
where	you	can	lead	your	life,	from	where	you	can	discipline	your	life;	to	have	a
master	within	you	from	where	you	can	direct,	you	can	move.	The	first	thing	is
to	be	crystallized,	and	then	the	second	thing	will	be	not	to	create	suffering	for
yourself.	Drop	all	that	creates	suffering,	all	those	motives,	desires,	hopes	which
create	suffering.
But	you	are	not	aware.	You	simply	go	on	doing	 it,	you	don’t	 see	 that	you
create	 it.	 Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 you	 are	 sowing	 some	 seeds.	 Then	 trees	 will
follow,	and	whatsoever	you	have	sown	you	will	reap.	And	whenever	you	reap
anything	 there	 is	 suffering,	 but	 you	never	 see	 that	 these	 seeds	were	 sown	by
you.	 Whenever	 suffering	 happens	 to	 you,	 you	 think	 it	 is	 coming	 from
somewhere	 else.	 You	 think	 it	 is	 some	 accident	 or	 that	 some	 evil	 forces	 are
working	against	you.	So	you	have	invented	the	Devil.
The	Devil	is	just	a	scapegoat.	You	are	the	Devil;	you	create	your	suffering.
But	whenever	you	suffer	you	simply	throw	it	on	the	Devil:	“The	Devil	is	doing
something.”	Then	you	are	at	ease.	Then	you	never	become	aware	of	your	own
foolish	pattern	of	life,	stupid	pattern	of	life.
Or	you	call	it	fate,	or	you	say,	“God	is	testing	me.”	But	you	go	on	avoiding
the	basic	 fact	 that	you	are	 the	sole	cause	of	whatsoever	happens	 to	you.	And
nothing	is	accidental.	Everything	has	a	causal	link	–	and	you	are	the	cause.
For	 example,	 you	 fall	 in	 love.	 Love	 gives	 you	 a	 feeling	 that	 bliss	 is
somewhere	 nearby.	 You	 feel	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that	 you	 are	 welcomed	 by
someone,	 at	 least	 one	 person	 welcomes	 you.	 You	 start	 flowering.	 Even	 one
person	welcoming	you,	waiting	for	you,	 loving	you,	caring	for	you,	you	start
flowering.	 But	 only	 in	 the	 beginning,	 immediately	 your	wrong	 patterns	 start
working,	and	you	immediately	want	to	possess	the	beloved,	the	loved	one.
And	 possession	 is	 killing.	 The	 moment	 you	 possess	 the	 lover	 you	 have
killed.	Then	you	suffer.	Then	you	weep	and	cry	and	you	think	that	the	lover	is
wrong,	 fate	 is	wrong,	“Destiny	 is	not	 in	my	 favor.”	But	you	don’t	know	 that
you	have	poisoned	love	through	possession,	through	possessiveness.
But	every	lover	is	doing	that,	and	every	lover	suffers.	Love,	which	can	give
you	the	deepest	blessings,	becomes	the	deepest	misery;	therefore	old	cultures,
particularly	in	India	in	the	old	days,	completely	destroyed	the	phenomenon	of
love.	 They	 had	 arranged	marriages	 for	 children	 –	 no	 possibility	 of	 falling	 in
love,	because	love	leads	to	misery.	This	was	such	a	known	phenomenon	that	if
you	 allow	 love,	 then	 love	 leads	 to	 misery,	 so	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	 have	 the
possibility.	Let	the	children,	small	children,	be	married.	Before	they	can	fall	in
love	let	them	be	married.	Then	they	will	never	know	what	love	is	and	they	will
not	be	in	misery.
But	love	never	creates	misery	–	it	is	you	who	poisons	it.	Love	is	always	joy,
love	is	always	celebration.	Love	is	the	deepest	ecstasy	that	nature	allows	you,
but	 you	 destroy	 it.	 So	 just	 not	 to	 fall	 into	misery,	 in	 India	 and	 in	 other	 old,
ancient	 countries,	 the	possibility	of	 love	was	completely	 closed.	So	 then	you
will	 not	 fall	 in	 misery,	 but	 then	 you	 have	 also	 missed	 the	 only	 ecstasy	 that
nature	allows.	So	a	mediocre	 life	will	be	 there	with	no	misery,	no	happiness,
just	dragging	on	somehow.	This	is	what	marriage	has	been	in	the	past.
Now	America	is	trying,	the	West	is	trying	to	revive	love.	But	much	misery	is
coming	through	that,	and	sooner	or	later	Western	countries	will	have	to	decide
for	child	marriage	again.	A	few	psychologists	have	already	proposed	that	child
marriage	has	to	be	brought	back	because	love	is	creating	so	much	misery.	But	I
say	again	that	it	is	not	love.	Love	cannot	create	misery.	It	is	you,	your	pattern
of	 madness	 which	 creates	 misery	 –	 and	 not	 only	 in	 love,	 everywhere.
Everywhere	you	are	bound	to	bring	your	mind.
For	 example,	 many	 people	 come	 to	me,	 and	 they	 start	 meditating.	 In	 the
beginning	there	are	sudden	flashes,	but	only	in	the	beginning.	Once	they	have
known	certain	experiences,	once	they	have	known	certain	glimpses,	everything
stops.	 And	 they	 come	 to	 me	 weeping	 and	 crying	 and	 saying,	 “What	 is
happening?	Something	was	going	 to	happen,	 something	was	happening,	 now
everything	has	stopped.	And	we	are	trying	our	best,	but	nothing,	nothing	comes
out	of	it.”
I	tell	them,	“It	happened	for	the	first	time	because	you	were	not	expecting.
Now	you	are	expecting	so	the	whole	situation	has	changed.	When	you	had	that
feeling	 of	 weightlessness	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 a	 feeling	 of	 being	 filled	 by
something	unknown,	a	feeling	of	being	carried	from	your	dead	life,	a	feeling	of
ecstatic	 moments,	 you	 were	 not	 expecting	 it.	 You	 had	 never	 known	 such
moments.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 they	 were	 falling	 on	 you.	 You	 were	 unaware,
unexpecting.	That	was	the	situation.
“Now	 you	 are	 remembering	 that	 situation,	 and	 every	 day	 you	 sit	 for
meditation	with	expectation.	Now	you	are	cunning,	clever,	calculating.	When
for	the	first	time	you	had	the	glimpse	you	were	innocent,	like	a	child.	You	were
playing	with	meditation	and	there	was	no	expectation.	Then	it	happened.	It	will
happen	again	but	only	when	you	have	again	become	innocent.	Now	your	mind
is	 bringing	 misery.	 And	 if	 you	 go	 on	 insisting	 that	 you	 must	 have	 the
experience	 again	 and	 again,	 you	 will	 lose	 it	 forever.	 You	 must	 forget	 it
completely.	It	may	take	years,	unless	you	become	again	completely	inattentive
that	 somewhere	 in	 the	 past	 such	 a	 happening	was	 there.	Then	 the	 possibility
will	again	be	open	to	you.”
This	 I	 call	 madness.	 You	 destroy	 everything,	 whatsoever	 comes	 in	 your
hands,	 you	 immediately	destroy	 it.	And	 remember	 life	 gives	you	many	gifts,
unasked.	You	have	never	asked	life.	Life	gives	you	many	gifts,	but	you	destroy
every	gift.	And	every	gift	can	become	greater	and	greater;	it	can	grow	because
life	never	gives	you	anything	dead.	If	love	has	been	given	to	you	it	can	grow.	It
can	grow	 to	unknown	dimensions.	But	 the	very	 first	moment	 you	destroy.	 If
meditation	has	happened	 to	you	 just	 feel	 thankful	 to	 the	divine	and	 forget	 it.
Just	feel	grateful	and	remember	well	that	you	don’t	have	any	capacity	to	have
it;	you	are	not	in	any	way	authorized	to	have	it.
It	has	been	a	gift.	It	has	been	an	overflowing	of	the	divine.	Forget	it.	Don’t
expect	 it,	 don’t	 demand	 it.	 It	 will	 come	 some	 day	 again	 –	 deeper,	 higher,
greater.	It	will	go	on	expanding,	but	every	day	drop	it	from	the	mind.
There	is	no	end	to	its	possibilities.	It	will	become	infinite;	the	whole	cosmos
will	become	ecstatic	for	you.	But	your	mind	has	to	be	dropped.	Your	mind	is
the	 madness.	 So	 when	 I	 say	 there	 are	 only	 two	 alternatives,	 madness	 and
meditation,	 I	mean	mind	and	meditation.	 If	you	 remain	confined	 in	 the	mind
you	 will	 remain	 mad.	 Unless	 you	 transcend	 the	 mind	 you	 cannot	 transcend
madness.	At	 the	most	you	can	be	a	 functioning	member	of	 the	society,	 that’s
all.	And	 you	 can	 be	 a	 functioning	member	 of	 the	 society	 because	 the	whole
society	is	just	like	you.	Everybody	is	mad,	so	madness	is	the	rule.
Become	aware	–	and	don’t	think	that	others	are	mad;	feel	it	deeply	that	you
are	mad	and	something	has	to	be	done.	Immediately!	It	is	an	emergency!	Don’t
postpone	it	because	there	may	come	a	moment	when	you	cannot	do	anything.
You	may	go	so	mad	that	you	cannot	do	anything.
Right	now	you	can	do	something.	You	are	still	within	limits.	Something	can
be	done,	some	efforts	can	be	made;	the	pattern	can	be	changed.	But	a	moment
can	 come	when	you	 cannot	 do	 anything,	when	you	have	become	 completely
shattered	and	you	have	lost	even	the	consciousness.
If	you	can	feel	that	you	are	mad	this	is	a	very	hopeful	sign.	It	shows	you	can
become	 alert	 towards	 your	 own	 reality.	 The	 door	 is	 there,	 you	 can	 become
really	sane.	At	least	this	much	sanity	is	there	–	that	you	can	understand.
	
The	second	question:
Osho,
Capacity	of	right-knowledge	is	one	of	the	five	faculties	of	the	mind,	but	it	is	not	a	state	of
no-mind.	Then	how	is	it	possible	that	whatsoever	one	sees	through	this	center	is	true?
Does	this	center	of	right-knowledge	function	after	enlightenment,	or	can	even	a	meditator,
a	sadhak,	be	with	this	center?
Yes,	 the	 center	 of	 right-knowledge,	 praman,	 is	 still	 within	 the	 mind.
Ignorance	is	of	the	mind,	knowledge	is	also	of	the	mind.	When	you	go	beyond
mind	there	is	neither;	there	is	neither	ignorance	nor	knowledge.	Knowledge	is
also	a	disease.	It	is	a	good	disease,	a	golden	one,	but	it	is	a	disease.	So	really,	it
cannot	be	said	that	Buddha	knows,	it	cannot	be	said	that	he	doesn’t	know.	He
has	 gone	 beyond.	Whether	 he	 knows	 or	 is	 ignorant,	 nothing	 can	 be	 asserted
about	it.
When	 there	 is	 no	 mind,	 how	 can	 you	 know	 or	 not	 know?	 Knowing	 is
through	mind,	not	knowing	is	also	through	mind.	Through	mind	you	can	know
wrongly,	 through	 mind	 you	 can	 know	 rightly.	 When	 there	 is	 no	 mind,
knowledge	and	ignorance	both	cease.	This	will	be	difficult	to	understand,	but	it
is	easy	if	you	follow:	mind	knows,	so	mind	can	be	ignorant;	when	there	is	no
mind	 how	 can	 you	 be	 ignorant	 and	 how	 can	 you	 be	 knowing?	You	 are,	 but
knowing	and	not	knowing	have	both	ceased.
Mind	 has	 two	 centers:	 one,	 of	 right-knowledge.	 If	 that	 center	 functions	 it
starts	 functioning	 through	 concentration,	 meditation,	 contemplation,
prayerfulness	–	then	whatsoever	you	know	is	true.	There	is	a	wrong	center:	it
functions	 if	 you	 are	 sleepy,	 live	 in	 a	 hypnotic-like	 state,	 intoxicated	 with
something	or	other	–	sex,	music,	drugs	or	anything.
You	 can	 be	 addicted	 to	 food,	 then	 it	 becomes	 an	 intoxicant.	 You	may	 be
eating	 too	much.	You	are	mad,	obsessed,	with	 food.	Then	 food	becomes	 like
alcohol.	Anything	that	takes	possession	of	your	mind,	anything	without	which
you	cannot	 live	becomes	 intoxicating.	So	 if	you	live	 through	intoxicants	 then
your	center	of	wrong-knowledge	functions	and	whatsoever	you	know	is	false,
untrue.	You	live	in	a	world	of	lies.
But	both	these	centers	belong	to	the	mind.	When	mind	drops	and	meditation
has	come	to	its	totality…	In	Sanskrit	we	have	two	terms:	one	term	is	dhyana	–
dhyana	 means	 meditation;	 and	 the	 other	 term	 is	 samadhi.	 Samadhi	 means
perfect	 meditation,	 where	 even	 meditation	 has	 become	 unnecessary,	 where
even	to	do	meditation	is	meaningless.	You	cannot	do	it,	you	have	become	it	–
then	it	is	samadhi.
In	 this	 state	 of	 samadhi	 there	 is	 no	mind;	 there	 is	 neither	 knowledge	 nor
ignorance,	 there	 is	 only	 pure	 being.	 This	 pure	 being	 is	 a	 totally	 different
dimension.	It	is	not	a	dimension	of	knowing,	it	is	a	dimension	of	being.
Even	if	such	a	man	as	a	Buddha	or	a	Jesus	wants	to	communicate	to	you,	he
will	have	to	use	mind.	For	communication	he	will	have	to	use	mind.	And	if	you
ask	 a	 certain	 question	 he	 will	 have	 to	 use	 his	 center	 of	 mind	 for	 right-
knowledge.	Mind	is	the	instrument	of	communication,	of	thinking,	of	knowing.
But	when	you	 are	not	 asking	 anything	 and	Buddha	 is	 sitting	under	his	bo
tree,	 he	 is	 neither	 ignorant	 nor	 a	 knower.	 He	 is	 there.	 Really,	 there	 is	 no
difference	between	the	tree	and	the	Buddha.	There	is	a	difference,	but	in	a	way
there	is	no	difference.	He	has	become	just	as	if	a	tree;	he	just	exists.	There	is	no
movement,	even	of	knowledge.	The	sun	will	rise	but	he	will	not	know	that	the
sun	has	risen.	Not	that	he	will	remain	ignorant	–	no,	simply	that	is	now	not	his
movement.	He	has	become	so	silent,	so	still,	that	nothing	moves.	He	is	just	like
the	tree.	The	tree	is	totally	ignorant.	Or,	you	can	say	the	tree	is	just	below	the
mind;	the	mind	has	not	started	functioning.	The	tree	will	become	man	in	some
life,	 the	 tree	will	become	mad	 like	you	 in	 some	 life,	 and	 the	 tree	will	 try	 for
meditation	in	some	life,	and	the	tree	will	also	one	day	become	a	buddha.	The
tree	is	below	mind,	and	Buddha	sitting	under	the	tree	is	beyond	mind.	They	are
both	mindless.	One	is	still	to	attain	the	mind	and	one	has	attained	and	crossed
over	it.
So	when	mind	 is	 transcended,	when	 no-mind	 is	 achieved,	 you	 are	 a	 pure
being,	satchitananda.	There	is	no	happening	in	you.	Neither	is	there	action	nor
is	there	knowing	–	but	it	is	difficult	for	us…
Scriptures	 say	 that	 all	 duality	 is	 transcended.	 Knowledge	 is	 also	 part	 of
duality	–	ignorance,	knowledge.	But	so-called	saints	go	on	saying	that	Buddha
had	 become	 “a	 knower.”	 Then	 we	 are	 clinging	 to	 the	 duality.	 That’s	 why
Buddha	never	answered	when	many	times,	millions	of	times	it	had	been	asked
of	him,	“What	happens	when	a	person	becomes	a	buddha?”	He	remained	silent.
He	said,	“Become	and	know.”	Nothing	can	be	said	about	what	happens	because
whatsoever	 can	 be	 said	will	 be	 said	 in	 your	 language.	And	 your	 language	 is
basically	dualistic	so	whatsoever	can	be	said	will	be	untrue.
If	it	 is	said	that	he	knows	it	will	be	untrue,	if	it	 is	said	that	he	has	become
immortal	it	will	be	untrue,	if	it	is	said	that	now	he	has	achieved	bliss	it	will	be
untrue	 –	 because	 all	 duality	 disappears.	 Misery	 disappears,	 happiness
disappears.	Ignorance	disappears,	knowledge	disappears.	Darkness	disappears,
light	 disappears.	 Death	 disappears,	 life	 disappears.	 Nothing	 can	 be	 said.	 Or,
only	this	much	can	be	said	–	that	whatsoever	you	can	think	will	not	be	there,
whatsoever	 you	 can	 conceive	 of	 will	 not	 be	 there.	 And	 the	 only	 way	 is,	 to
become	that.	Only	then	do	you	know.
	
The	third	question:
Osho,
You	said	that	if	we	see	visions	of	Rama	or	that	we	are	dancing	with	Krishna,	to	remember
it	is	only	imagination.	But	the	other	night	you	said	that	if	we	were	receptive	we	could
communicate	with	Christ,	Buddha	or	Krishna	right	now.	Is	that	communication	also
imagination	when	it	happens,	or	are	there	meditative	states	in	which	Christ	or	Buddha	are
really	there?
This	 is	 a	 little	 difficult	 to	 understand.	 The	 first	 thing:	 out	 of	 one	 hundred
cases,	ninety-nine	cases	will	be	of	imagination.	You	imagine,	which	is	why	to	a
Christian	 Krishna	 never	 appears	 in	 visions;	 to	 a	 Hindu	 Mohammed	 never
appears	 in	visions.	Leave	Mohammed	and	 Jesus;	 they	 are	 far	 away.	But	 to	 a
Jaina	Rama	never	appears	in	his	visions	–	cannot	appear.	To	a	Hindu	Mahavira
never	appears.	Why?	–	you	don’t	have	any	imagination	for	Mahavira.
If	you	are	born	a	Hindu	you	have	been	fed	with	 the	concept	of	Rama	and
Krishna.	If	you	are	born	a	Christian	you	have	been	fed	–	your	computer,	your
mind,	has	been	fed	–	with	the	image	of	Jesus.	Whenever	you	start	meditating
that	fed-in	image	comes	up	in	the	mind;	it	flashes	in	the	mind.
Jesus	appears	 to	you,	 Jesus	never	appears	 to	 Jews.	And	he	was	a	 Jew.	He
was	born	a	Jew,	he	died	a	Jew,	but	he	never	appears	to	Jews	because	they	never
believed	in	him.	They	thought	he	was	just	a	vagabond,	they	crucified	him	as	a
criminal.	 Jesus	 never	 appears	 to	 Jews;	 he	 belonged	 to	 Jews,	 he	 had	 Jewish
blood	and	bones.
I	have	heard…
	
In	Nazi	Germany	soldiers	of	Hitler	were	killing	Jews	 in	a	 town.	They	had
killed	many.	 A	 few	 Jews	 escaped.	 It	 was	 a	 Sunday	morning.	 They	 escaped;
they	went	 into	 a	 church	 because	 they	 thought	 that	 would	 be	 the	 best	 hiding
place,	 the	 Christian	 church.	 The	 church	 was	 filled	 with	 Christians,	 it	 was	 a
Sunday	morning.	So	a	few,	a	dozen	Jews	were	hiding	there.
But	the	soldiers	got	the	news	that	some	Jews	had	gone	into	the	church	and
they	were	hiding	there.	So	they	went	into	the	church;	they	told	the	priest,	“Stop
your	 service!”	The	 leader	 of	 the	 soldiers	went	 to	 the	 rostrum	and	 said,	 “You
cannot	deceive	us.	There	are	a	few	Jews	hiding	here.	So	anyone	who	is	a	Jew
should	 go	 out	 and	 stand	 in	 a	 line.	 If	 you	 follow	 our	 orders	 you	 can	 save
yourself.	If	someone	tries	to	deceive,	he	will	be	killed	immediately.”
So	by	and	by,	the	Jews	came	out	of	the	church	and	they	stood	in	a	line.	Then
suddenly	 the	 whole	 crowd	 in	 the	 church	 became	 aware	 that	 Jesus	 had
disappeared,	the	statue	of	Jesus.	He	was	also	a	Jew	so	he	was	standing	outside
in	the	line!
	
But	Jesus	never	appears	to	Jews.	He	was	not	a	Christian,	he	never	belonged
to	 any	Christian	 church.	 If	 he	 comes	 back	 he	will	 not	 recognize	 a	 Christian
church,	he	will	go	to	the	synagogue;	he	will	go	to	the	Jewish	community.	He
will	go	to	see	the	rabbi;	he	cannot	go	to	see	a	Catholic	or	Protestant	priest.	He
doesn’t	know.	But	he	never	appears	to	Jews	because	he	has	never	been	a	seed
in	their	imagination.	They	refused	him,	so	the	seed	is	not	there.
So	whatsoever	happens,	ninety-nine	possibilities	are	that	it	may	be	just	fed-
in	knowledge,	concepts,	 images:	 they	flash	before	your	mind.	And	when	you
start	meditating	you	become	sensitive.	You	become	so	 sensitive	 that	you	can
become	a	victim	of	your	own	 imagination.	And	 the	 imagination	will	 look	 so
real,	and	there	is	no	way	to	judge	whether	it	is	real	or	unreal.
In	one	percent	of	cases	it	will	not	be	imaginary,	but	how	can	you	know?	In
that	one	percent	of	cases	there	will	be	no	image,	really.	You	will	not	feel	Jesus
standing	 before	 you	 crucified,	 you	will	 not	 feel	Krishna	 standing	 before	 you
and	dancing	with	you.	You	will	 feel	 the	presence	but	 there	will	be	no	 image,
remember	 this.	You	will	 feel	 a	 descendance	 of	 divine	 presence.	You	will	 be
filled	 with	 something	 unknown,	 but	 without	 any	 form.	 There	 will	 be	 no
dancing	 Krishna	 and	 there	 will	 be	 no	 crucified	 Jesus	 and	 there	 will	 be	 no
Buddha	 sitting	 in	 siddhasan,	 no!	 There	 will	 simply	 be	 a	 presence,	 a	 vital
presence	that	is	flowing	within	you,	in	and	out.	You	are	overwhelmed,	you	are
in	the	ocean	of	it.
Jesus	will	not	be	within	you,	you	will	be	in	Jesus;	that	will	be	the	difference.
Krishna	will	not	be	in	your	mind,	an	image;	you	will	be	in	Krishna.	But	then
Krishna	will	be	formless.	It	will	be	an	experience	but	not	an	image.
Then	why	call	it	Krishna?	There	will	be	no	form.	Why	call	it	Jesus?	These
are	 simply	 symbols,	 linguistic	 symbols.	 You	 are	 acquainted	 with	 the	 word
Jesus	so	when	that	presence	fills	you	and	you	become	part	of	it,	a	vibrating	part
of	 it,	 when	 you	 become	 a	 drop	 in	 that	 ocean,	 how	 can	 you	 express	 it?	 You
know	the	most	beautiful	word	for	you	may	be	Jesus	or	the	most	beautiful	word
may	be	Buddha	or	Krishna	–	these	words	are	fed	into	the	mind	so	you	have	to
choose	these	certain	words	to	indicate	toward	that	presence.
But	that	presence	is	not	an	image,	it	is	not	a	dream.	It	is	not	a	vision	at	all.
You	 can	 use	 Jesus,	 you	 can	 use	Krishna,	 you	 can	 use	 Christ,	 or	whatsoever
name	has	appeal	for	you,	whatsoever	name	has	a	love-appeal	for	you,	that’s	up
to	you.	That	word	and	that	name	and	that	image	will	come	from	your	mind,	but
the	experience	itself	is	imageless.	It	is	not	an	imagination.
	
A	Catholic	priest	was	visiting	a	Zen	master,	Nan-in.	Nan-in	had	never	heard
about	Jesus,	so	 this	Catholic	priest	 thought,	“It	will	be	good.	I	should	go	and
read	 some	 parts	 from	The	 Sermon	 on	 the	Mount,	 and	 I	will	 see	 how	Nan-in
reacts.	And	people	say	that	he	is	enlightened.”
So	that	Catholic	priest	went	to	Nan-in	and	he	said,	“Master,	I	am	a	Christian,
and	I	have	got	a	book	and	I	love	it.	I	would	like	to	read	something	from	it	just
to	know	how	you	 respond,	how	you	 react.”	So	he	 read	a	 few	 lines	 from	The
Sermon	 on	 the	 Mount,	 The	 New	 Testament.	 He	 translated	 it	 into	 Japanese
because	Nan-in	could	understand	only	Japanese.
When	he	started	translating,	the	whole	face	of	Nan-in	changed	completely.
Tears	 started	 flowing	 from	 his	 eyes	 and	 he	 said,	 “These	 are	 the	 words	 of
Buddha.”
The	Christian	priest	said,	“No,	no,	these	are	the	words	of	Jesus.”
But	Nan-in	said,	“Whatsoever	name	you	give,	I	feel	these	are	the	words	of
the	 Buddha,	 because	 I	 know	 only	 Buddha	 and	 these	 words	 can	 come	 only
through	Buddha.	And	if	you	say	they	have	come	through	Jesus,	then	Jesus	was
a	buddha;	that	doesn’t	make	any	difference.	Then	I	will	 tell	my	disciples	that
Jesus	was	a	buddha.”
	
This	will	be	the	feeling.	If	you	feel	 the	presence	of	 the	divine,	 then	names
are	 just	 immaterial.	 Names	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 different	 for	 everyone	 because
names	come	from	education,	names	come	from	culture,	names	come	from	the
race	 you	 belong	 to.	 But	 that	 experience	 doesn’t	 belong	 to	 any	 society,	 that
experience	 doesn’t	 belong	 to	 any	 culture,	 that	 experience	 doesn’t	 belong	 to
your	mind,	the	computer	–	it	belongs	to	you.
So	 remember,	 if	you	see	visions,	 they	are	 imagination.	 If	you	start	 feeling
presences,	 formless,	 existential	 experiences	 –	 enveloped	 in	 them,	 merged	 in
them,	melting	in	them	–	then	you	are	really	in	contact.
You	 can	 call	 that	 presence	 Jesus,	 you	 can	 call	 that	 presence	 Buddha,	 it
depends	 on	 you;	 it	makes	 no	 difference.	 Jesus	 is	 a	 buddha	 and	Buddha	 is	 a
christ.	 Those	 who	 have	 gone	 beyond	 the	 mind	 have	 also	 gone	 beyond
personalities.	 They	 have	 also	 gone	 beyond	 forms.	 If	 Jesus	 and	 Buddha	 are
standing	 together,	 there	 will	 be	 two	 bodies	 but	 one	 soul.	 There	 will	 be	 two
bodies	but	not	two	presences,	only	one	presence.
It	is	just	as	if	you	put	two	lamps	in	a	room.	There	are	two	lamps,	just	their
bodies,	 but	 the	 light	 has	 become	 one.	 You	 cannot	 demarcate	 that	 this	 light
belongs	 to	 this	 lamp	 and	 that	 light	 belongs	 to	 that	 lamp.	 The	 lights	 have
merged.	Only	the	material	part	of	the	lamp	has	remained	separate,	but	the	non-
material	part	has	become	one.
If	 Buddha	 and	 Jesus	 come	 close,	 if	 they	 stand	 together,	 you	will	 see	 two
lamps,	separate,	but	their	lights	have	already	merged.	They	have	become	one.
All	 those	who	have	known	truth	have	become	one.	Their	names	are	different
for	their	followers;	for	them,	now	there	are	no	names.
	
The	fourth	question:
Osho,
Please	explain	whether	awareness	is	also	one	of	the	modifications	of	the	mind.
No,	awareness	is	not	part	of	the	mind.	It	flows	through	the	mind,	but	it	is	not
part	of	the	mind.	It	is	just	like	this	bulb:	the	electricity	flows	through	it,	but	the
electricity	is	not	part	of	the	bulb.	If	you	break	the	bulb	you	have	not	broken	the
electricity.	 The	 expression	 will	 be	 hindered,	 but	 the	 potentiality	 remains
hidden.	You	put	in	another	bulb	and	the	electricity	starts	flowing.
Mind	is	just	an	instrument.	Awareness	is	not	part	of	it,	but	awareness	flows
through	it.	When	mind	is	transcended,	awareness	remains	in	itself.	That’s	why	I
say	even	Buddha	will	have	to	use	the	mind	if	he	talks	 to	you,	 if	he	relates	 to
you,	because	then	he	will	need	flow,	flow	of	his	inner	pool.	He	will	have	to	use
instruments,	mediums,	and	then	mind	will	function.	But	mind	is	just	a	vehicle.
You	move	in	a	vehicle,	but	you	are	not	the	vehicle.	You	go	in	a	car	or	you
fly	in	an	aircraft,	but	you	are	not	the	vehicle.	Mind	is	just	the	vehicle.	And	you
are	not	using	the	mind	to	its	total	capacity.	If	you	use	it	to	its	total	capacity,	it
will	become	right-knowledge.
We	are	using	our	mind	like	someone	using	an	airplane	as	a	bus.	You	can	cut
the	wings	off	the	airplane	and	use	it	like	a	bus	on	the	road.	That	will	do,	it	will
work	like	a	bus	–	but	you	are	foolish.	That	bus	can	fly!	You	are	not	using	it	to
its	right	capacity.
You	are	using	your	mind	for	dreams,	imaginations,	madness.	You	have	not
used	it	rightly,	you	have	cut	the	wings	off.	If	you	use	it	with	the	wings	it	can
become	 right-knowledge,	 it	 can	 become	wisdom.	 But	 that	 too	 is	 part	 of	 the
mind,	that	too	is	the	vehicle.	The	user	remains	behind;	the	user	cannot	be	the
used.	You	are	using	 it,	you	are	awareness.	And	all	 the	effort	 for	meditation	 is
meant	to	know	this	awareness	in	its	purity,	without	any	medium,	without	any
instrument.	You	can	know	it	only	when	mind	has	stopped	functioning.	When
mind	has	stopped	functioning	you	will	become	aware	that	awareness	is	 there,
you	are	filled	with	it.	Mind	was	just	a	vehicle,	a	passage.	Now	if	you	want	you
can	use	the	mind,	if	you	don’t	want	you	need	not	use	it.
Body	 and	 mind	 are	 both	 vehicles.	 You	 are	 not	 the	 vehicle,	 you	 are	 the
master	hidden	behind	these	vehicles.	But	you	have	forgotten	completely.	And
you	have	become	the	cart,	you	have	become	the	vehicle.	This	is	what	Gurdjieff
calls	identification.	This	is	what	in	India	yogis	have	called	tadatmya,	becoming
one	with	something	which	you	are	not.
	
The	fifth	question:
Osho,
Please	explain	how	it	is	possible	that	just	by	looking,	by	witnessing	the	recordings	in	the
brain	cells,	the	sources	of	thought-process	can	cease	to	be.
They	never	cease	to	be,	but	by	witnessing	identification	is	broken.	Buddha
lived	in	his	body	for	forty	years	after	his	enlightenment,	the	body	did	not	cease.
Continuously,	 for	 forty	 years	 he	 was	 talking,	 explaining,	 making	 people
understand	what	had	happened	to	him	and	how	the	same	can	happen	to	them.
He	was	using	the	mind,	the	mind	had	not	ceased.	And	when	he	came	back	to
his	home	 town	after	 twelve	years	he	 recognized	his	 father,	he	 recognized	his
wife,	 he	 recognized	 his	 son.	 The	 mind	 was	 there,	 the	 memory	 was	 there;
otherwise	 recognition	would	 have	 been	 impossible.	 The	mind	 had	 not	 really
ceased.
When	we	say	the	mind	ceases,	we	mean	your	identification	is	broken.	Now
you	know	this	 is	 the	mind	and	 this	 is	“I	am.”	The	bridge	 is	broken.	Now	the
mind	is	not	the	master.	It	has	become	just	an	instrument,	it	has	fallen	to	its	right
place.	So	whenever	you	need	it	you	can	use	it.	It	is	just	like	this	fan:	if	we	want
to	 use	 it	we	 put	 it	 on,	 then	 the	 fan	 starts	 functioning.	Right	 now	we	 are	 not
using	the	fan	so	it	is	non-functioning.	But	it	is	there,	it	has	not	ceased	to	be,	any
moment	we	can	use	it.	It	has	not	disappeared.
By	witnessing	identification	disappears,	not	the	mind.	But	by	identification
disappearing,	you	are	a	totally	new	being.	For	the	first	time	you	have	come	to
know	your	real	phenomenon,	your	real	reality.	For	the	first	time	you	have	come
to	know	who	you	are.	Now	mind	is	just	part	of	the	mechanism	around	you.
It	 is	 just	 as	 if	 you	 are	 a	 pilot	 and	 flying	 an	 airplane:	 you	 use	 many
instruments,	your	eyes	are	working	on	many	instruments	continuously	aware	of
this	and	that,	but	you	are	not	the	instruments.
This	mind,	this	body	and	many	functions	of	the	body-mind,	are	just	around
you	–	the	mechanism.	In	this	mechanism	you	can	exist	in	two	ways.	One	way
of	existence	is	forgetting	yourself	and	feeling	as	if	you	are	the	mechanism.	This
is	bondage,	this	is	misery;	this	is	the	world,	the	sansar.
Another	way	of	functioning	is	to	become	alert	that	you	are	separate,	you	are
different.	Then	you	go	on	using,	but	now	it	makes	a	lot	of	difference	–	now	the
mechanism	is	not	you.	And	if	something	goes	wrong	in	the	mechanism	you	can
try	to	put	it	right,	but	you	will	not	be	disturbed.	Even	if	the	whole	mechanism
disappears	you	will	not	be	disturbed.
Buddha	dying	and	you	dying	are	two	different	phenomena.	Buddha	knows
only	the	mechanism	is	dying.	It	has	been	used	and	now	there	is	no	need	of	it.	A
burden	 has	 been	 removed,	 he	 is	 becoming	 free.	 Now	 he	 will	 move	 without
form.	 But	 you	 dying	 is	 totally	 different:	 you	 are	 suffering,	 you	 are	 crying
because	 you	 feel	 you	 are	 dying,	 not	 the	mechanism.	 It	 is	 your	 death;	 then	 it
becomes	an	intense	suffering.
Just	 by	witnessing,	mind	 doesn’t	 cease	 and	 the	 brain	 cells	will	 not	 cease.
Rather,	 they	will	become	more	alive	because	there	will	be	less	conflict,	more
energy.	They	will	 become	 fresher,	 and	 you	 can	 use	 them	more	 rightly,	more
accurately,	but	you	will	not	be	burdened	by	them	and	they	will	not	force	you	to
do	something.	They	will	not	push	and	pull	you	here	and	there.	You	will	be	the
master.
But	 how	 does	 it	 happen	 just	 by	 witnessing?	 –	 because	 the	 bondage	 has
happened	by	not	witnessing.	The	bondage	has	happened	because	you	are	not
alert,	so	the	bondage	will	disappear	if	you	become	alert.	The	bondage	is	only
unawareness.	Nothing	else	is	needed	but	becoming	more	alert,	whatsoever	you
do.
You	are	sitting	here	listening	to	me.	You	can	listen	with	awareness,	you	can
listen	without	awareness.	Without	awareness	listening	will	also	be	there,	but	it
will	be	a	different	thing,	the	quality	will	differ.	Then	your	ears	are	listening	and
your	mind	is	functioning	somewhere	else.
Then,	somehow,	a	few	words	will	penetrate	you	and	they	will	be	mixed,	and
your	mind	will	 interpret	 them	 in	 its	 own	way.	 It	 will	 put	 its	 own	 ideas	 into
them.	Everything	will	 be	 a	muddle	 and	 a	mess.	You	 have	 listened	 but	many
things	will	be	bypassed,	you	will	not	 listen	 to	many	 things,	you	will	 choose.
Then	the	whole	thing	will	be	distorted.
If	 you	 are	 alert,	 the	 moment	 you	 become	 alert	 thinking	 ceases.	 With
alertness	you	cannot	think.	The	whole	energy	becomes	alert,	there	is	no	energy
left	to	move	into	thinking.	When	you	are	alert	even	for	a	single	moment,	you
simply	listen.	There	is	no	barrier.	Your	own	words	are	not	there	to	get	mixed	in.
You	need	not	interpret.	The	impact	is	direct.
If	you	can	listen	with	alertness,	then	what	I	am	saying	may	be	meaningful	or
may	 not	 be	 meaningful,	 but	 your	 listening	 with	 alertness	 will	 always	 be
significant	 in	 meaning.	 That	 very	 alertness	 will	 make	 a	 peak	 of	 your
consciousness.	 The	 past	will	 dissolve,	 the	 future	will	 disappear.	You	will	 be
nowhere	else,	you	will	be	just	here	and	now.
In	that	moment	of	silence	when	thinking	is	not,	you	will	be	deep	in	contact
with	your	own	source.	And	that	source	is	bliss,	and	that	source	is	divine.	So	the
only	thing	to	be	done	is	to	do	everything	with	alertness.
	
The	last	question:
Osho,
While	talking	on	Lao	Tzu	you	become	a	Taoist	sage,	while	talking	on	Tantra	you	become	a
tantrika,	while	talking	on	bhakti	you	become	an	enlightened	bhakta,	and	while	talking	on
Yoga	you	have	become	a	perfect	yogi.	Will	you	please	explain	how	this	phenomenon	has
become	possible?
If	you	are	not,	only	 then	can	it	become	possible.	 If	you	are,	 then	it	cannot
become	possible.	 If	you	are	not,	 if	 the	host	has	completely	disappeared,	 then
the	guest	becomes	 the	host.	So	 the	guest	may	be	Lao	Tzu,	 the	guest	may	be
Patanjali.	 The	 host	 is	 not	 there,	 so	 the	 guest	 takes	 the	 place	 completely,	 he
becomes	 the	host.	 If	 you	are	not,	 then	you	can	become	Patanjali;	 there	 is	no
difficulty.	You	can	become	Krishna,	you	can	become	Christ.	 If	you	are	 there,
then	it	is	very	difficult.	And	if	you	are	there,	whatsoever	you	say	will	be	wrong.
That’s	 why	 I	 say	 these	 are	 not	 commentaries.	 I	 am	 not	 commenting	 on
Patanjali.	I	am	simply	absent,	allowing	Patanjali.	So	it	is	not	a	commentary.
“Commentary”	means,	“Patanjali	is	something	separate,	and	I	am	something
separate,	 and	 I	 am	 commenting	 on	 Patanjali”	 –	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 distorted
because	how	can	you	comment	on	Patanjali?	Whatsoever	 I	 say	would	be	my
saying,	 and	 whatsoever	 I	 say	 would	 be	 my	 interpretation.	 It	 cannot	 be	 of
Patanjali	 himself.	 And	 that’s	 not	 good.	 That	 is	 destructive.	 So	 I	 am	 not
commenting	at	all.	 I	am	simply	allowing,	and	this	allowing	is	possible	 if	you
are	not.
If	you	become	a	witness,	the	ego	disappears.	And	when	the	ego	disappears
you	 become	 a	 vehicle,	 you	 become	 a	 passage,	 you	 become	 a	 flute.	And	 the
flute	can	be	put	on	Patanjali’s	lips,	and	the	flute	can	be	put	on	Krishna’s	lips,
and	 the	 flute	 can	 be	 put	 on	Buddha’s	 lips	 –	 the	 flute	 remains	 the	 same.	But
when	it	is	on	Buddha’s	lips,	Buddha	is	flowing.
So	 this	 is	 not	 a	 commentary.	 This	 is	 difficult	 to	 understand	 because	 you
cannot	allow.	You	are	so	much	inside	you	cannot	allow	anyone.	And	these	are
not	persons.	Patanjali	is	not	a	person:	Patanjali	is	a	presence.	If	you	are	absent,
his	presence	can	function.
If	you	ask	Patanjali,	he	will	say	the	same.	If	you	ask	Patanjali,	he	will	not
say	 that	 these	 sutras	have	been	created	by	him.	He	will	 say,	 “These	are	very
ancient	 –	 sanatan.”	 He	 will	 say,	 “Millions	 and	 millions	 of	 seers	 have	 seen
them.	 I	 am	 just	 a	 vehicle.	 I	 am	 absent	 and	 they	 are	 speaking.”	 If	 you	 ask
Krishna,	he	will	 say,	“I	am	not	 speaking.	This	 is	 the	ancientmost	message.	 It
has	been	always	so.”	And	if	you	ask	Jesus,	he	will	say,	“I	am	no	more,	I	am	not
there.”
Why	 this	 insistence?	Anybody	who	becomes	absent,	who	becomes	 a	non-
ego,	starts	functioning	as	a	vehicle,	as	a	passage	for	all	 that	is	true,	a	passage
for	 all	 that	 is	 hidden	 in	 existence,	 that	 can	 flow.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to
understand	whatsoever	 I	 am	 saying	 only	when	 even	 for	 a	 few	moments	 you
will	be	absent.
If	you	are	too	much	there,	your	ego	is	there	and	then	whatsoever	I	am	saying
cannot	flow	in	you.	It	is	not	only	an	intellectual	communication.	It	is	something
deeper.
If	you	are	a	non-ego	even	for	a	single	moment,	then	the	impact	will	be	felt.
Then	something	unknown	has	entered	 into	you,	and	 in	 that	moment	you	will
understand.	And	there	is	no	other	way	to	understand.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	5:	Why	Can’t	you	Dance?
	
Right-knowledge	has	three	sources:	direct-cognition,
inference	and	the	words	of	the	awakened	ones,
Wrong-knowledge	is	a	false	conception	not
corresponding	to	the	thing	as	it	is.
An	image	conjured	up	by	words	without	any
substance	behind	it	is	vikalpa,	imagination.
The	modification	of	the	mind	which	is	based	on
the	absence	of	any	content	in	it,	is	sleep.
Memory	is	the	calling	up	of	past	experiences.
The	first	sutra:
Right-knowledge	has	three	sources:	direct	cognition,
inference	and	the	words	of	the	awakened	ones.
Pratyaksha,	 direct	 cognition,	 is	 the	 first	 source	of	 right-knowledge.	Direct
cognition	means	 a	 face-to-face	 encounter	 without	 any	mediator,	 without	 any
medium,	without	 any	agent.	When	you	know	something	directly,	 the	knower
faces	 the	known	 immediately.	There	 is	no	one	 to	 relate,	no	bridge.	Then	 it	 is
right-knowledge.	But	then	many	problems	arise.
Ordinarily,	 pratyaksha,	 direct	 cognition,	 has	 been	 translated,	 interpreted,
commented	on,	in	a	very	wrong	way.	The	very	word	pratyaksha	means	before
the	eyes,	in	front	of	the	eyes.	But	eyes	themselves	are	a	mediation,	the	knower
is	 hidden	 behind.	 Eyes	 are	 the	 medium.	 You	 are	 hearing	 me	 but	 this	 is	 not
direct,	 this	 is	not	 immediate.	You	are	hearing	me	 through	 the	senses,	 through
the	ears.	You	are	seeing	me	through	the	eyes.	Your	eyes	can	wrongly	report	to
you,	 your	 ears	 can	wrongly	 report.	 No	 one	 should	 be	 believed;	 no	mediator
should	be	believed	because	you	cannot	rely	on	the	mediator.
If	your	eyes	are	ill	they	will	report	differently,	if	your	eyes	are	drugged	they
will	 report	 differently,	 if	 your	 eyes	 are	 filled	 with	 memory	 they	 will	 report
differently.	If	you	are	in	love	then	you	see	something	that	you	can	never	see	if
you	are	not	in	love.	An	ordinary	woman	can	become	the	most	beautiful	person
in	the	world	if	you	see	through	love.	When	your	eyes	are	filled	with	love	then
they	report	something	else.	And	the	same	person	can	appear	ugly	if	your	eyes
are	filled	with	hate.	Eyes	are	not	reliable.
You	 hear	 through	 the	 ears.	 Ears	 are	 just	 instruments,	 they	 can	 function
wrongly;	 they	 can	 hear	 something	 which	 has	 not	 been	 said,	 they	 can	 miss
something	 which	 was	 being	 said.	 Senses	 cannot	 be	 reliable,	 senses	 are	 just
mechanical	devices.
Then	what	is	pratyaksha,	what	is	direct	cognition?	Direct	cognition	can	only
be	when	there	is	no	mediator,	not	even	the	senses.	Patanjali	says	then	it	is	right-
knowledge.	This	is	the	first	basic	source	of	right-knowledge:	when	you	know
something	and	you	need	not	depend	on	anybody	else.
You	 transcend	 the	 senses	 only	 in	 deep	 meditation.	 Then	 direct	 cognition
becomes	 possible.	 When	 Buddha	 comes	 to	 know	 his	 innermost	 being,	 that
innermost	being	is	pratyaksha,	that	is	direct	cognition.	No	senses	are	involved,
nobody	has	reported	it,	 there	is	no	one	like	an	agent.	The	knower	and	known
are	 face	 to	 face,	 there	 is	 nothing	 in	 between.	 This	 is	 immediacy,	 and	 only
immediacy	can	be	true.
So	 the	 first	 right-knowledge	 can	 only	 be	 that	 of	 the	 inner	 self.	 You	 may
know	the	whole	world,	but	if	you	have	not	known	the	innermost	core	of	your
being	all	your	knowledge	is	absurd,	it	is	not	really	knowledge;	it	cannot	be	true
because	the	first,	basic,	right-knowledge	has	not	happened	to	you.	Your	whole
edifice	 is	 false.	 You	 may	 know	 many	 things,	 but	 if	 you	 have	 not	 known
yourself,	all	your	knowledge	is	based	on	reports	given	by	the	senses.	And	how
can	you	be	certain	that	the	senses	are	reporting	rightly?
In	 the	night	you	dream.	While	dreaming	you	 start	 believing	 in	 the	dream,
that	it	is	true.	Your	senses	are	reporting	the	dream:	your	eyes	are	seeing	it,	your
ears	are	hearing	 it,	you	may	be	 touching	 it.	Your	senses	are	reporting	 to	you,
that’s	why	you	fall	under	the	illusion	that	it	 is	real.	You	are	here…	It	may	be
just	a	dream.	How	can	you	be	certain	that	I	am	speaking	to	you,	in	reality?	It	is
possible	it	may	be	just	a	dream,	and	you	are	dreaming	me.	Every	dream	is	true
while	you	dream.
	
Chuang	Tzu	once	saw	in	a	dream	that	he	had	become	a	butterfly.	And	in	the
morning	he	was	sad.	His	disciples	asked,	“Why	are	you	so	sad?”
Chuang	Tzu	said,	“I	am	in	trouble.	I	have	never	been	in	such	trouble	before.
This	puzzle	seems	to	be	impossible,	it	cannot	be	solved.	Last	night	I	saw	in	a
dream	that	I	have	become	a	butterfly.”
The	 disciples	 laughed.	 They	 said,	 “What	 is	 there?	 This	 is	 not	 a	 riddle.	A
dream	is	just	a	dream.”
Chuang	Tzu	said,	“But	listen,	I	am	troubled.	If	Chuang	Tzu	can	dream	that
he	 has	 become	 a	 butterfly,	 a	 butterfly	 may	 be	 dreaming	 now	 that	 she	 has
become	Chuang	 Tzu.	 So	 how	 to	 decide	whether	 I	 am	 now	 facing	 reality	 or
again	 a	 dream?	 And	 if	 Chuang	 Tzu	 can	 become	 a	 butterfly	 why	 can’t	 a
butterfly	dream	that	she	has	become	a	Chuang	Tzu?”
	
There	 is	 no	 impossibility,	 the	 reverse	 can	 occur.	 You	 cannot	 rely	 on	 the
senses.	 In	 dreams	 the	 senses	 deceive	 you.	 If	 you	 take	 a	 drug,	 LSD	 or
something,	 your	 senses	will	 start	 deceiving	 you;	 you	will	 start	 seeing	 things
which	are	not	there.	They	can	deceive	you	to	such	an	extent	that	you	can	start
believing	things	so	absolutely	that	you	will	be	in	danger.
One	girl	in	New	York	jumped	from	the	sixtieth	floor	because	under	LSD	she
thought	she	could	fly.	Chuang	Tzu	was	not	wrong:	 the	girl	 really	flew	out	of
the	window.	Of	course,	she	died.	But	she	will	never	be	able	to	know	that	she
had	been	deceived	by	her	senses	under	the	influence	of	the	drug.
Even	without	drugs	we	have	illusions.	You	are	passing	through	a	dark	street
and	suddenly	you	get	scared,	you	see	a	snake.	You	start	running,	and	later	on
you	 come	 to	 know	 that	 there	was	 no	 snake,	 just	 a	 rope	was	 lying	 there.	But
when	 you	 felt	 that	 there	 was	 a	 snake,	 there	 was	 a	 snake.	 Your	 eyes	 were
reporting	that	the	snake	was	there	and	you	behaved	accordingly	–	you	escaped
from	the	place.
Senses	cannot	be	believed.	Then	what	is	direct	cognition?	Direct	cognition
is	something	which	is	known	without	the	senses.	So	the	first	right-knowledge
can	only	be	of	the	inner	self,	because	only	there	will	the	senses	not	be	needed.
Everywhere	else	the	senses	will	be	needed.	If	you	want	to	see	me	you	will	have
to	 see	 through	 the	eyes,	but	 if	you	want	 to	 see	yourself	 eyes	are	not	needed.
Even	a	blind	man	can	see	himself.	If	you	want	to	see	me	light	will	be	needed,
but	if	you	want	to	see	yourself	darkness	is	okay,	light	is	not	needed.
Even	 in	 the	 darkest	 cave	 you	 can	 know	 yourself.	 No	 medium,	 not	 light,
eyes,	nothing	is	needed.	The	inner	experience	is	immediate,	and	that	immediate
experience	is	the	basis	of	all	right-knowledge.
Once	 you	 are	 rooted	 in	 that	 inner	 experience	 then	many	 things	 will	 start
happening	 to	 you.	 It	will	 not	 be	 possible	 to	 understand	 them	 right	 now.	One
who	 is	 rooted	 in	his	center,	 in	his	 inner	being,	one	who	has	come	upon	 it,	 to
feel	 it	 as	 a	 direct	 experience,	 cannot	 be	 deceived	 by	 the	 senses.	 He	 is
awakened,	his	eyes	cannot	deceive	him,	his	ears	cannot	deceive	him,	nothing
can	deceive	him.	Deception	has	dropped.
You	 can	 be	 deceived	 because	 you	 are	 living	 in	 delusion.	 You	 cannot	 be
deceived	once	you	have	come	to	be	a	right	knower.	You	cannot	be	deceived!
Then	 everything,	 by	 and	 by,	 takes	 the	 shape	 of	 right-knowledge.	 Once	 you
know	 yourself,	 then	whatsoever	 you	 know	will	 automatically	 fall	 into	 being
right	because	now	you	 are	 right.	This	 is	 the	distinction	 to	be	 remembered:	 if
you	are	right	then	everything	becomes	right,	if	you	are	wrong	then	everything
goes	wrong.	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	doing	something	outside,	it	is	a	question
of	doing	something	inside.
You	 cannot	 deceive	 a	 buddha,	 it	 is	 impossible.	 How	 can	 you	 deceive	 a
buddha?	 He	 is	 rooted	 in	 himself.	 You	 are	 transparent	 to	 him,	 you	 cannot
deceive	him.	Before	you	know,	he	knows	you.	Even	a	glimmer	of	 thought	 in
you	is	clearly	seen	by	him.	He	penetrates	you	to	your	very	being.
Your	penetration	goes	to	the	same	extent	in	others	as	it	goes	into	yourself.	If
you	can	penetrate	into	yourself,	you	can	penetrate	into	everything	to	the	same
extent.	The	deeper	you	move	within,	 the	deeper	you	can	move	without.	And
you	have	not	moved	within	even	a	single	inch,	so	whatsoever	you	do	outside	is
just	like	a	dream.
Patanjali	 says	 the	 first	 source	 of	 right-knowledge	 is	 immediate,	 direct
cognition,	 pratyaksha.	 He	 is	 not	 concerned	 with	 the	 charvakas,	 the	 old
materialists,	who	said	that	only	that	which	is	before	the	eyes	is	true.
Because	of	this	word	pratyaksha,	direct	cognition,	much	misunderstanding
has	 happened.	 The	 Indian	 school	 of	materialists	 is	 Charvaka.	 The	 source	 of
Indian	materialism	was	Brihaspati,	a	very	penetrating	thinker,	but	a	thinker;	a
very	profound	philosopher	but	a	philosopher,	not	a	realized	soul.	He	says	only
pratyaksha	 is	 true,	 and	 by	 that	 he	means	whatsoever	 you	 know	 through	 the
senses	 is	 true.	And	he	 says	 there	 is	no	way	of	knowing	anything	without	 the
senses,	so	only	sense-knowledge	is	real	for	charvakas.
Hence	he	denies	 there	can	be	any	God	because	no	one	has	ever	seen	him.
And	only	that	which	can	be	seen	can	be	real,	that	which	cannot	be	seen	cannot
be	real.	God	exists	not	because	you	cannot	see;	the	soul	exists	not	because	you
cannot	see	it.	And	he	says,	“If	there	is	a	God,	bring	him	before	me	so	I	can	see
him.	If	I	see,	 then	he	is,	because	only	seeing	is	 truth.”	He	also	uses	the	word
pratyaksha,	direct	cognition,	but	his	meaning	is	totally	different.
When	Patanjali	 uses	 the	word	pratyaksha	 his	meaning	 is	 on	 an	 altogether
different	level.	He	says	immediate	knowledge	not	derived	from	any	instrument,
not	derived	 from	any	medium	is	 true.	And	once	 this	knowledge	happens	you
have	become	true.	Now	nothing	false	can	happen	to	you.	When	you	are	 true,
authentically	rooted	in	truth,	then	illusions	become	impossible.
That’s	why	it	is	said	that	buddhas	never	dream;	one	who	is	awakened	never
dreams	–	because	even	dreams	cannot	happen	to	him,	he	cannot	be	deceived.
He	sleeps,	but	not	like	you.	He	sleeps	in	a	totally	different	way,	the	quality	is
different.	 Only	 his	 body	 sleeps,	 relaxes.	 His	 being	 remains	 alert,	 and	 that
alertness	won’t	allow	any	dreaming	to	happen.
You	can	dream	only	when	alertness	is	lost.	When	you	are	not	aware,	when
you	are	deeply	hypnotized,	then	you	start	dreaming.	Dreaming	can	happen	only
when	you	 are	 completely	 unaware.	The	more	 unawareness,	 the	more	 dreams
there	will	be;	 the	more	awareness,	 the	fewer	dreams;	fully	aware,	no	dreams.
Even	dreaming	becomes	impossible	for	one	who	is	rooted	in	himself,	who	has
come	to	know	the	inner	being	immediately.
This	is	the	first	source	of	right-knowledge.	The	second	source	is	inference.
That	is	secondary,	but	that	too	is	worth	consideration	because,	as	you	are	right
now,	you	don’t	know	whether	there	is	a	self	within	or	not.	You	have	no	direct
knowledge	of	your	 inner	being.	What	 to	do?	There	are	 two	possibilities.	You
can	simply	deny	that	 there	is	an	inner	core	of	your	being,	 there	is	no	soul,	as
charvakas	do,	or	in	the	West	as	Epicurus,	Marx,	Engels	and	others	have	done.
But	Patanjali	says	that	if	you	know,	there	is	no	need	for	inference,	but	if	you
don’t	know	then	too	it	will	be	helpful	to	infer.	For	example,	Descartes,	one	of
the	greatest	thinkers	of	the	West,	started	his	philosophical	quest	through	doubt.
He	 took	 the	 standpoint	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 that	 he	 will	 not	 believe	 in
anything	 which	 is	 not	 indubitable.	 That	 which	 could	 be	 doubted,	 he	 would
doubt.	And	he	would	try	to	find	a	point	which	could	not	be	doubted,	and	only
on	 that	 point	 would	 he	 create	 the	 whole	 edifice	 of	 his	 thinking.	 It	 was	 a
beautiful	quest	–	honest,	arduous,	dangerous.
So	he	denied	God,	because	you	can	doubt	it.	Many	have	doubted	and	no	one
has	been	able	to	answer	their	doubts.	He	went	on	denying.	Whatsoever	could
be	 doubted,	 conceived	 to	 be	 dubitable,	 he	 denied.	 For	 years	 he	 was
continuously	 in	 an	 inner	 turmoil.	 Then	 he	 fell	 upon	 the	 point	 which	 was
indubitable:	he	couldn’t	deny	himself,	that	was	impossible.	You	cannot	say,	“I
am	not.”	 If	you	say	 it,	your	very	saying	proves	 that	you	are.	So	 this	was	 the
basic	rock,	“I	cannot	deny	myself,	I	cannot	say	I	am	not.	Who	will	say	it?	Even
to	doubt,	I	am	needed.”
This	 is	 inference.	 This	 is	 not	 direct	 cognition.	 This	 is	 through	 logic	 and
argument,	but	it	gives	a	shadow,	it	gives	a	glimpse,	it	gives	you	a	possibility,	an
opening.	And	then	Descartes	had	the	rock,	and	on	this	rock	a	great	temple	can
be	built.	One	 indubitable	 fact	and	you	can	 reach	 to	 the	absolute	 truth.	 If	you
start	with	 a	 doubtful	 thing	 you	will	 never	 reach	 anywhere.	 In	 the	 very	 base,
doubt	remains.
Patanjali	 says	 inference	 is	 the	 second	 source	 of	 right-knowledge.	 Right-
logic,	 right-doubting,	 right-argument	 can	give	you	 something	which	can	help
towards	 real	knowledge.	That	he	calls	 inference,	anuman.	You	have	not	 seen
directly,	but	everything	proves	it;	it	must	be	so.	There	are	situational	proofs	that
it	must	be	so.
For	 example,	 you	 look	 around	 the	 vast	 universe.	You	may	 not	 be	 able	 to
conceive	 that	 there	 is	 a	 God,	 but	 you	 cannot	 deny;	 even	 through	 simple
inference	you	cannot	deny	that	the	whole	world	is	a	system,	a	coherent	whole,
a	design.	That	cannot	be	denied.	The	design	is	so	apparent,	even	science	cannot
deny	 it.	 Rather,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 science	 goes	 on	 finding	 more	 and	 more
designs,	more	and	more	laws.
If	 the	world	 is	 just	 an	 accident	 then	 science	 is	 impossible.	 But	 the	world
doesn’t	 seem	 to	 be	 an	 accident,	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 planned.	 And	 it	 is	 running
according	to	certain	laws	and	those	laws	are	never	broken.
Patanjali	will	say	that	design	in	the	universe	cannot	be	denied,	and	if	once
you	feel	there	is	design,	the	designer	has	entered.	But	that	is	an	inference,	you
have	not	known	him	directly	–	but	the	design	of	the	universe,	the	planning,	the
law,	 the	 order;	 and	 the	 order	 is	 so	 superb,	 it	 is	 so	minute,	 so	 superb	 and	 so
infinite,	 the	 order	 is	 there.	 Everything	 is	 humming	with	 an	 order,	 a	musical
harmony	of	the	whole	universe.	Someone	seems	to	be	hidden	behind,	but	that’s
an	 inference.	 Patanjali	 says	 inference	 can	 also	 be	 a	 help	 towards	 right-
knowledge,	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be	 right-inference.	Logic	 is	 dangerous,	 it	 is	 double-
edged.	You	can	use	logic	wrongly,	then	too	you	will	reach	conclusions.
For	example,	I	told	you	that	the	plan	is	there,	the	design	is	there;	the	world
has	an	order,	a	beautiful	order,	perfect.	Right-inference	will	be	that	there	seems
to	be	somebody’s	hand	behind	it.	We	may	not	be	directly	aware,	we	may	not	be
in	direct	touch	with	that	hand	but	a	hand	seems	to	be	there,	hidden.	This	is	the
right-inference.
But	 from	 the	 same	premises	 you	 can	 also	 infer	wrongly.	There	have	been
thinkers	who	have	said	as	Diderot	has	said,	“Because	of	order	I	cannot	believe
there	 is	 a	God.	 In	 the	world	 there	 seems	 to	be	perfect	 order.	Because	of	 this
order,	I	cannot	believe	in	God.”	What	is	his	logic?	He	says	if	there	is	a	person
behind	it,	then	there	cannot	be	so	much	order.	If	a	person	is	behind	it	then	he
must	 commit	 mistakes	 sometimes.	 Sometimes	 he	 must	 go	 whimsical,	 crazy,
sometimes	 he	 will	 change.	 Laws	 cannot	 be	 so	 perfect	 if	 someone	 is	 behind
them.	Laws	can	be	perfect	if	there	is	no	one	behind	them	and	they	are	simply
mechanical.
That	 too	 has	 an	 appeal.	 If	 everything	 goes	 perfectly,	 it	 looks	 mechanical
because	man	 is	 imperfect.	 It	 is	 said,	 to	 err	 is	human.	 If	 some	person	 is	 there
then	he	must	err	 sometimes;	he	will	get	bored	with	 so	much	perfection.	And
sometimes	he	must	like	to	change.
Water	 boils	 at	 one	 hundred	 degrees.	 It	 has	 been	 boiling	 at	 one	 hundred
degrees	for	millennia,	always	and	always.	God	must	get	bored.	“So,	if	someone
is	behind,”	Diderot	 says,	“just	 for	a	change,	one	day	he	will	 say,	 ‘From	now
onwards	the	water	will	boil	at	ninety	degrees.’”	But	it	has	never	happened,	so
there	seems	to	be	no	person.
Both	arguments	 look	perfect.	But	Patanjali	 says	 that	 right-inference	 is	 that
which	gives	you	possibilities	of	growth.	It	is	not	a	question	whether	the	logic	is
perfect	or	not.	The	question	is	your	conclusion	should	become	an	opening.	If
there	is	no	God	it	becomes	a	closing.	Then	you	cannot	grow.	If	you	conclude
there	is	some	hidden	hand,	the	world	becomes	a	mystery.	And	then	you	are	not
here	 just	 by	 accident,	 your	 life	 becomes	meaningful,	 you	 are	 part	 of	 a	 great
scheme.	 Then	 something	 is	 possible,	 you	 can	 do	 something,	 you	 can	 rise	 in
awareness.
A	 right-inference	 means	 one	 which	 can	 give	 you	 growth,	 that	 which	 can
give	you	growth;	a	wrong-inference,	howsoever	perfect	looking,	is	that	which
closes	your	growth.	 Inference	can	also	be	a	 source	of	 right-knowledge.	Even
logic	can	be	used	to	be	a	source	of	right-knowledge,	but	you	have	to	be	very
aware	of	what	you	are	doing.	If	you	are	 just	 logical	you	may	commit	suicide
through	it.	Logic	can	become	a	suicide,	and	for	many	it	does	become.
Just	 a	 few	days	 ago	a	 seeker	 from	California	was	here.	He	had	 traveled	a
long	way	to	come	to	meet	me.	He	said,	“Before	I	can	meditate,	or	before	you
tell	me	to	meditate	–	because	I	have	heard	that	whosoever	comes	to	you,	you
push	them	into	meditation	–	so	before	you	push	me	in,	I	have	many	questions.”
He	had	 a	 list	 of	 at	 least	 a	 hundred	questions.	 I	 think	he	had	not	 left	 out	 any
possible	ones.	He	had	questions	about	God,	about	the	soul,	about	truth,	about
heaven	 and	 hell	 and	 everything	 –	 a	 sheet	 full	 of	 questions.	He	 said,	 “Unless
you	solve	these	questions	first,	I	am	not	going	to	meditate.”
He	is	logical	in	a	way	because	he	says,	“Unless	my	questions	are	answered
how	 can	 I	 meditate?	 Unless	 I	 feel	 confident	 that	 you	 are	 right,	 you	 have
answered	my	doubts,	how	can	I	go	in	a	direction	which	you	show	and	indicate?
You	 may	 be	 wrong.	 So	 you	 can	 prove	 your	 rightness	 only	 if	 my	 doubts
disappear.”
Now	his	doubts	are	such	that	they	cannot	disappear.	This	is	the	dilemma:	if
he	meditates	they	can	disappear,	but	he	says	he	will	meditate	only	when	these
doubts	are	not	there.	What	to	do?	He	says,	“First	prove	there	is	a	God.”	No	one
has	ever	proved	it,	no	one	ever	can.	That	doesn’t	mean	that	God	is	not	 there,
but	 he	 cannot	 be	 proved.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 small	 thing	 which	 can	 be	 proved	 or
disproved.	It	is	such	a	vital	thing	that	you	have	to	live	it	to	know	it.	No	proof
can	help.
But	 logically	 he	 is	 right.	He	 says,	 “Unless	 you	 prove,	 how	 can	 I	 start?	 If
there	 is	no	soul,	who	 is	going	 to	meditate?	So	 first	prove	 that	 there	 is	a	 self,
then	I	can	meditate.”
This	man	is	committing	suicide.	No	one	will	ever	be	able	to	answer	him.	He
has	 created	 all	 the	 barriers,	 and	 through	 these	 barriers	 he	will	 not	 be	 able	 to
grow.	 But	 he	 is	 logical.	 What	 should	 I	 do	 with	 such	 a	 person?	 If	 I	 start
answering	his	questions,	a	person	who	can	create	a	hundred	doubts	can	create
millions,	 because	 doubting	 is	 a	 way,	 a	 style	 of	 mind.	 You	 can	 answer	 one
question	 and	 through	your	 answer	 he	will	 create	 ten	more	 questions	 because
the	mind	remains	the	same.
He	looks	for	doubts,	and	if	I	answer	logically	I	am	helping	his	logical	mind
to	be	fed,	to	be	more	strengthened.	I	am	feeding	it;	that	will	not	help.	He	has	to
be	brought	out	of	his	logicalness.
So	I	asked	him,	“Have	you	ever	been	in	love?”
He	said,	“But	why?	You	are	changing	the	subject.”
I	 said,	 “I	 will	 come	 to	 your	 points,	 but	 suddenly	 it	 has	 become	 very
meaningful	to	me	to	ask	if	you	have	ever	loved.”
He	said,	“Yes!”	His	face	changed.
I	 asked,	 “But	you	 loved	before,	or	before	 falling	 in	 love,	you	doubted	 the
whole	phenomenon?”
Then	 he	 was	 disturbed.	 He	 was	 uncomfortable.	 He	 said,	 “No,	 I	 never
thought	about	it.	I	had	simply	fallen	in	love,	and	only	then	I	became	aware.”
So	I	said,	“Do	the	opposite:	first	think	about	love,	whether	love	is	possible,
whether	 love	 exists,	 whether	 love	 can	 exist.	 And	 first	 let	 it	 be	 proved.	 And
make	it	a	condition	that	unless	it	is	proved	you	will	not	love	anybody.”
He	said,	“What	are	you	saying?	You	will	destroy	my	 life.	 If	 I	make	 this	a
condition,	then	I	cannot	love.”
“But,”	I	told	him,	“this	is	the	same	as	you	are	doing.	Meditation	is	just	like
love,	you	have	to	know	it	first.	God	is	just	like	love.	That’s	why	Jesus	says	that
God	is	love.	It	is	just	like	love.	First	one	has	to	experience.”
A	logical	mind	can	be	closed,	and	so	logically	that	he	will	never	feel	that	he
has	 closed	his	 own	doors	 to	 all	 the	possibilities	 for	 all	 growth.	So	 inference,
anuman,	 means	 thinking	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 growth	 is	 helped.	 Then	 it	 can
become	a	source	of	right-knowledge.
And	 the	 third	 is	 the	most	 beautiful,	 and	 nowhere	 else	 has	 it	 been	made	 a
source	of	right-knowledge:	the	words	of	the	awakened	ones,	agama.	There	has
been	a	 long	controversy	about	 this	 third	source.	Patanjali	 says	you	can	know
directly,	then	it	is	okay.	You	can	infer	rightly,	then	too	you	are	on	the	right	path
and	you	will	reach	the	source.
But	there	are	a	few	things	you	cannot	even	infer,	and	you	have	not	known.
But	you	are	not	the	first	on	this	earth,	you	are	not	the	first	seeker.	Millions	have
been	 seeking	 for	 millions	 of	 ages,	 and	 not	 only	 on	 this	 planet	 but	 on	 other
planets	also.	The	search	is	eternal,	and	many	have	arrived.	They	have	reached
the	goal,	they	have	entered	the	temple.	Their	words	are	also	a	source	of	right-
knowledge.
Agama	means	the	words	of	those	who	have	known.	Buddha	says	something
or	 Jesus	 says	 something:	 we	 don’t	 know	 what	 he	 is	 saying,	 we	 have	 not
experienced	 that,	 so	we	have	no	way	of	 judging	 it.	We	don’t	know	what	and
how	to	infer	rightly	through	his	words.	And	the	words	are	contradictory	so	you
can	infer	anything	you	like.
There	 are	 a	 few	who	 think	 Jesus	was	 neurotic.	Western	 psychiatrists	 have
been	trying	to	prove	that	he	was	neurotic,	he	was	a	maniac.	These	people	claim
that	 in	 saying,	 “I	 am	 the	 son	 of	 God,	 and	 the	 only	 son”	 he	 was	 mad,	 an
egomaniac,	neurotic.	 It	 can	be	proved	 that	he	was	neurotic	because	 there	 are
many	neurotic	people	who	claim	such	things.	You	can	find	them;	in	madhouses
there	are	many	such	people.
	
It	 happened	 once	 in	 Baghdad.	 Caliph	 Omar	 was	 the	 king,	 and	 one	 man
declared	on	the	streets	of	Baghdad,	“I	am	the	paigambara,	I	am	the	messenger,
I	am	the	prophet.	And	now	Mohammed	is	canceled	because	I	am	here.	I	am	the
last	 word,	 the	 last	 message	 from	 the	 divine.	 And	 now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for
Mohammed,	he	is	just	out	of	date.	He	was	the	messenger	up	to	now	but	now	I
have	come.	Now	you	can	forget	Mohammed.”
It	 was	 not	 a	 Hindu	 country.	 Hindus	 can	 tolerate	 everything;	 no	 one	 has
tolerated	 like	 the	 Hindus.	 They	 can	 tolerate	 everything	 because	 they	 say,
“Unless	we	know	exactly	we	cannot	say	yes,	we	cannot	say	no.	He	may	be	the
messenger,	who	knows?”
But	 Mohammedans	 are	 different;	 they	 are	 very	 dogmatic.	 They	 cannot
tolerate.	So	Caliph	Omar,	having	caught	the	new	prophet,	threw	him	in	jail	and
told	him,	“Twenty-four	hours	are	being	given	to	you.	Reconsider.	And	if	you
say	you	are	not	 the	prophet,	 that	Mohammed	is	 the	prophet,	 then	you	will	be
released.	If	you	insist	in	your	madness,	then	after	twenty-four	hours	I	will	come
to	the	jail	and	you	will	be	killed.”
The	man	 laughed.	 He	 said,	 “Look!	 This	 is	 written	 in	 the	 scripture	 –	 that
prophets	 will	 always	 be	 treated	 like	 this,	 as	 you	 are	 treating	 me.”	 He	 was
logical.	Mohammed	himself	was	treated	like	that,	so	this	was	nothing	new.	The
man	said	to	Omar,	“This	is	nothing	new.	This	is	how	things	are	naturally	going
to	be.	And	I	am	not	in	any	position	to	reconsider.	I	am	not	the	authority,	I	am
just	the	messenger.	Only	God	can	change.	In	twenty-four	hours	you	can	come,
you	will	find	me	the	same.	Only	he	can	change	who	has	appointed	me.”
While	this	talk	was	going	on	another	madman,	who	was	chained	to	a	pillar,
started	laughing.	So	Omar	asked,	“Why	are	you	laughing?”
He	 said,	 “This	man	 is	 absolutely	wrong.	 I	 never	 appointed	 him!	 I	 cannot
allow	this.	After	Mohammed	I	have	not	sent	any	messenger.”
	
In	every	madhouse	these	people	are	there,	and	it	can	be	proved	that	Jesus	is
a	similar	case.
Words	are	so	contradictory	and	illogical,	and	every	person	who	has	known
is	compelled	 to	speak	contradictorily,	paradoxically,	because	 the	 truth	 is	 such
that	it	can	be	expressed	only	through	paradoxes.	Their	statements	are	not	clear,
they	are	mysterious.	And	you	can	conclude	anything	out	of	them	if	you	infer.
You	infer,	your	mind	is	there.	The	inference	is	going	to	be	your	inference.	So
Patanjali	says	there	is	a	third	source.
You	don’t	know.	If	you	know	directly,	then	there	is	no	question,	then	there	is
no	need	for	any	other	source.	If	you	have	direct	cognition,	then	there	is	no	need
for	 inference	 or	 for	 the	 words	 of	 the	 enlightened	 ones;	 you	 yourself	 have
become	enlightened.	Then	you	can	drop	the	other	two	sources.	Then	inference,
but	the	inference	will	be	yours.	If	you	are	mad	then	your	inference	will	be	mad.
But	if	this	has	not	happened,	then	the	third	source	is	worth	trying	–	the	words
of	the	enlightened	ones.
You	cannot	prove	them,	you	cannot	disprove	them.	You	can	only	have	trust,
and	 that	 trust	 is	 hypothetical;	 it	 is	 very	 scientific.	 In	 science	 also	you	cannot
proceed	without	a	hypothesis.	But	a	hypothesis	is	not	belief;	it	is	just	a	working
arrangement.	A	hypothesis	is	just	a	direction,	you	will	have	to	experiment.	And
if	 the	 experiment	 proves	 right	 then	 the	 hypothesis	 becomes	 a	 theory.	 If	 the
experiment	 goes	 wrong	 then	 the	 hypothesis	 is	 discarded.	 The	 words	 of	 the
enlightened	ones	are	to	be	taken	on	trust,	as	a	hypothesis.	Then	work	them	out
in	your	life.	If	they	prove	true,	then	the	hypothesis	has	become	a	faith,	if	they
prove	false	then	the	hypothesis	has	to	be	discarded.
You	 go	 to	 Buddha.	He	will	 say,	 “Wait!	 Be	 patient,	meditate,	 and	 for	 two
years	don’t	ask	any	question.”	This	you	have	to	take	on	trust,	there	is	no	other
way.
You	can	think,	“This	man	may	be	just	deceiving	me.	Then	two	years	of	my
life	 are	wasted.	 If	 after	 two	 years	 it	 is	 proved	 that	 this	man	was	 just	 hocus-
pocus,	 just	 a	 deceiver	 or	 self-deceived,	 in	 an	 illusion	 that	 he	 has	 become
enlightened,	 then	my	 two	 years	 are	wasted.”	But	 there	 is	 no	 other	way.	You
have	to	 take	the	risk.	And	if	you	remain	there	without	 trusting	Buddha,	 these
two	years	will	be	useless	because	unless	you	trust	you	cannot	work.	The	work
is	so	intense	that	only	if	you	have	trust	can	you	move	wholly	into	it,	totally	into
it.	 If	 you	 don’t	 have	 trust	 then	 you	 go	 on	 withholding	 something,	 and	 that
withholding	will	not	allow	you	to	experience	what	Buddha	is	indicating.
There	is	risk,	but	life	itself	is	risk.	For	a	higher	life	there	will	be	higher	risks.
You	move	on	a	dangerous	path.	But	remember,	there	is	only	one	error	in	life,
and	 that	 is	 not	 moving	 at	 all;	 that	 is,	 just	 sitting	 afraid	 that	 if	 you	 move
something	may	go	wrong,	so	it	is	better	to	wait	and	sit.	This	is	the	only	error.
You	will	not	be	in	danger	but	no	growth	will	be	possible.
Patanjali	 says	 there	 are	 things	 which	 you	 do	 not	 know,	 there	 are	 things
which	your	logic	cannot	infer;	you	have	to	take	on	trust.	Because	of	this	third
source,	the	guru,	the	master,	becomes	a	necessity	–	someone	who	knows.	And
you	have	to	 take	 the	risk,	and	I	say	 it	 is	a	risk	because	 there	 is	no	guarantee.
The	whole	thing	may	prove	just	a	waste,	but	it	is	better	to	take	the	risk	because
even	if	it	is	proved	to	be	a	waste,	you	have	learned	much.	Now	no	other	person
will	be	able	to	deceive	you	so	easily.	At	least	you	have	learned	this	much.
If	you	move	with	trust,	if	you	move	totally,	follow	a	buddha	like	a	shadow,
things	may	 start	 happening	 because	 they	 have	 happened	 to	 the	 person.	They
have	happened	to	this	Gautam	Buddha,	to	Jesus,	 to	Mahavira,	and	they	know
the	path	they	have	traveled.	If	you	argue	with	them	you	will	be	the	loser.	They
cannot	be	the	losers,	they	will	simply	leave	you	aside.
In	 this	 century	 this	 has	 happened	 with	 Gurdjieff.	 So	 many	 people	 were
attracted	to	him,	but	he	would	create	such	a	situation	for	the	new	disciples	that
unless	they	could	trust	totally,	unless	they	could	trust	even	in	absurdities,	they
would	 have	 to	 leave	 immediately.	 And	 those	 absurdities	 were	 planned.
Gurdjieff	would	go	on	 lying.	 In	 the	morning	he	would	 say	 something,	 in	 the
afternoon	 something	 else.	 And	 you	 were	 not	 to	 ask!	 He	 would	 shatter	 your
logical	mind	completely.
In	 the	morning	 he	would	 say,	 “Dig	 this	 ditch.	And	 this	 is	 a	must!	By	 the
evening	 this	must	be	complete.”	The	whole	day	you	would	 spend	digging	 it.
You	exerted,	you	were	 tired,	you	were	perspiring,	you	had	not	 eaten,	 and	by
evening	he	would	come	and	say,	“Throw	the	mud	back	in	the	ditch.	And	before
you	go	to	bed	it	has	to	be	completed.”
Now	even	an	ordinary	mind	will	say,	“What	do	you	mean?	I	have	wasted	the
whole	day.	And	I	was	thinking	it	was	something	very	necessary,	by	the	evening
it	has	to	be	completed	and	now	you	say,	‘Throw	the	mud	back!’”
If	you	asked	such	a	thing	Gurdjieff	would	say,	“Simply	leave!	Go!	I	am	not
for	you,	you	are	not	for	me.”
The	ditch	or	the	digging	was	not	the	thing.	What	he	was	testing	was	whether
you	 could	 trust	 him	 even	when	 he	was	 absurd.	 And	 once	 he	 knew	 that	 you
could	trust	him	and	you	could	move	with	him	wherever	he	led,	only	then	real
things	would	follow.	Then	the	test	was	over,	you	had	been	examined	and	found
to	be	authentic,	a	 real	seeker	who	could	work	and	who	could	 trust.	And	 then
real	things	could	happen	to	you,	never	before.
Patanjali	 is	a	master,	and	he	knows	 this	 third	source	very	well	 through	his
own	 experience	 with	 thousands	 and	 thousands	 of	 disciples.	 He	 must	 have
worked	with	many,	many	disciples	and	seekers;	only	then	is	it	possible	to	write
such	a	treatise	as	 the	Yoga	Sutras.	They	are	not	by	a	 thinker,	 they	are	by	one
who	has	experimented	with	many	types	of	minds	and	who	has	penetrated	with
many,	many	layers	of	minds,	every	type	of	person	who	has	worked.	He	makes
this	the	third	source:	the	words	of	the	awakened	ones.
The	second	sutra:
Wrong-knowledge	is	a	false	conception	not
corresponding	to	the	thing	as	it	is.
Now	 some	 definitions	 which	 will	 be	 helpful	 later	 on:	 The	 definition	 of
viparyaya,	 wrong-knowledge.	 Wrong-knowledge	 is	 a	 false	 conception	 of
something	not	corresponding	to	the	thing	as	it	is.	We	all	have	a	big	burden	of
wrong-knowledge	 because	 before	 we	 encounter	 a	 fact	 we	 are	 already
prejudiced.
If	you	are	a	Hindu	and	someone	is	introduced	to	you	and	it	is	said	that	he	is
a	Mohammedan,	 immediately	 you	 have	 taken	 a	wrong	 attitude	 that	 this	man
must	be	wrong.	If	you	are	a	Christian	and	someone	is	introduced	as	a	Jew	you
are	not	going	to	“dig”	this	man,	you	are	not	going	to	be	open	to	this	particular
man.	 Just	 by	 saying	 “a	 Jew”	 your	 prejudice	 has	 come	 in;	 you	 have	 already
known	this	man.	Now	there	is	no	need,	you	know	what	type	of	man	this	is,	he
is	a	Jew.
You	 have	 a	 preconception,	 a	 prejudiced	 mind,	 and	 this	 prejudiced	 mind
gives	 you	wrong-knowledge.	All	 Jews	 are	 not	 bad;	 neither	 are	 all	Christians
good	 nor	 are	 all	 Mohammedans	 bad;	 neither	 are	 all	 Hindus	 good.	 Really,
goodness	 and	 badness	 don’t	 belong	 to	 any	 race,	 they	 belong	 to	 persons,
individuals.	 There	 may	 be	 bad	 Mohammedans,	 bad	 Hindus,	 good
Mohammedans,	 good	 Hindus.	 Goodness	 and	 badness	 do	 not	 belong	 to	 any
nation,	to	any	race,	to	any	culture,	they	belong	to	individuals,	personalities.	But
it’s	 difficult	 to	 face	 a	 person	 without	 any	 prejudice;	 and	 you	 will	 have	 a
revelation.
Once	it	happened	to	me	while	I	was	traveling…
	
I	entered	my	compartment	on	a	train.	Many	people	had	come	to	see	me	off,
so	 the	 person	 who	was	 in	 the	 compartment,	 another	 passenger,	 immediately
touched	my	feet	and	said,	“You	must	be	a	great	saint.	So	many	persons	have
come	to	see	you	off.”
So	I	told	this	man,	“I	am	a	Mohammedan.	I	may	be	a	great	saint	but	I	am	a
Mohammedan.”
He	 felt	 shocked!	 He	 had	 touched	 a	 Mohammedan’s	 feet	 and	 he	 was	 a
brahmin!	He	started	perspiring,	he	was	nervous.	He	looked	again	and	he	said,
“No,	you	are	joking.”	Just	to	console	himself	he	said,	“You	are	joking.”
“I	am	not	joking.	Why	should	I	joke?	You	should	have	inquired	before	you
touched	my	feet!”
Then	we	were	both	together	in	the	compartment.	Again	and	again	he	would
look	at	me	and	would	take	a	long,	deep	breath.	He	must	have	been	thinking	to
go	and	take	a	bath!	But	he	was	not	encountering	me.	I	was	there,	and	he	was
concerned	with	a	concept	of	“Mohammedan.”	And	he	was	a	brahmin;	he	had
become	impure	by	touching	me.
	
Nobody	 encounters	 things,	 persons,	 as	 they	 are	 –	 you	 have	 a	 prejudice.
These	 prejudices	 create	 viparyaya,	 these	 prejudices	 create	wrong-knowledge.
Whatsoever	you	think,	if	you	have	not	come	freshly	upon	the	fact,	it	is	going	to
be	wrong.	Don’t	bring	your	past,	 don’t	bring	your	prejudices.	Put	 aside	your
mind	 and	 encounter	 the	 fact.	 Just	 see	 whatsoever	 there	 is	 to	 be	 seen.	 Don’t
project.
We	go	on	projecting.	Our	mind	is	just	completely	filled	and	fixed	from	the
very	childhood.	Everything	has	been	given	to	us	ready	made,	and	through	that
ready-made	knowledge	our	whole	life	becomes	an	illusion.	You	never	meet	a
real	person,	you	never	see	a	 real	 flower.	Just	by	hearing	“This	 is	a	 rose”	you
say	 “Beautiful!”	 mechanically.	 You	 have	 not	 felt	 the	 beauty,	 you	 have	 not
sensed	the	beauty,	you	have	not	touched	this	flower.	Just	“rose	is	beautiful”	is
in	 your	mind;	 the	moment	 you	 hear	 “rose”	 the	mind	 projects	 and	 says	 “It	 is
beautiful.”
You	may	believe	that	you	have	come	to	feel	that	the	rose	is	beautiful;	this	is
not	so.	This	is	false.	Just	look.	That’s	why	children	come	to	things	more	deeply
than	 grown-up	 people,	 because	 they	 don’t	 know	 names.	 They	 are	 not	 yet
prejudiced.	If	a	rose	is	beautiful	only	then	will	it	be	beautiful;	not	all	roses	are
beautiful.	Children	come	near	to	things,	their	eyes	are	fresh.	They	see	things	as
they	are	because	they	don’t	know	how	to	project	anything.
But	we	are	always	in	a	hurry	to	make	them	grown-ups,	to	make	them	adults.
We	are	filling	their	minds	with	knowledge,	information.	This	is	one	of	the	most
recent	discoveries	of	psychologists:	that	when	children	enter	school	they	have
more	intelligence	than	when	they	leave	the	university.	The	latest	findings	prove
that	when	children	enter	the	first	grade,	they	have	more	intelligence,	and	they
will	have	less	and	less	intelligence	as	they	grow	in	knowledge.	And	by	the	time
they	become	bachelors	and	masters	and	doctors,	they	are	finished.	When	they
come	 back	 with	 a	 doctor’s	 degree,	 a	 Ph.D.,	 they	 have	 left	 their	 intelligence
somewhere	 in	 the	university.	They	are	dead,	 filled	with	knowledge,	crammed
with	knowledge,	but	this	knowledge	is	just	false,	a	prejudice	about	everything.
Now	 they	 cannot	 feel	 things	 directly,	 they	 cannot	 feel	 live	 persons	 directly,
they	cannot	 live	directly.	Everything	has	become	verbal,	wordy.	 It	 is	not	 real
now,	it	has	become	mental.
Wrong-knowledge	is	a	false	conception	not
corresponding	to	the	thing	as	it	is.
Put	 aside	 your	 prejudices,	 knowledge,	 conceptions,	 pre-formulated
information	 and	 look	 fresh,	 become	 a	 child	 again.	 And	 this	 has	 to	 be	 done
moment	to	moment	because	every	moment	you	are	gathering.
One	 of	 the	 oldest	 Yoga	 aphorisms	 is:	 Die	 every	 moment	 so	 you	 can	 be
reborn	every	moment.	Die	every	moment	to	the	past,	throw	off	all	the	dust	that
you	 have	 collected	 and	 look	 afresh.	 But	 this	 has	 to	 be	 done	 continuously
because	next	moment	the	dust	has	gathered	again.
	
Nan-in	was	in	search	of	a	Zen	master	when	he	was	a	seeker.	He	lived	with
his	master	for	many	years,	and	then	the	master	said,	“Everything	is	okay.	You
have	almost	achieved.”
But	he	said	“almost,”	so	Nan-in	said,	“What	do	you	mean?”
The	master	said,	“I	will	have	to	send	you	to	another	master	for	a	few	days.
That	will	do	the	last	finishing	touch.”	Nan-in	was	very	excited.	He	said,	“Send
me	immediately!”	A	letter	was	given	to	him.	And	he	was	excited;	he	thought	he
was	being	sent	to	someone	who	was	a	greater	master	than	his	own.	But	when
he	reached	to	the	man	he	was	a	nobody,	just	a	keeper	of	an	inn,	a	doorkeeper	of
an	inn.
He	felt	very	disappointed	and	he	thought,	“This	must	be	some	sort	of	joke.
This	man	is	going	to	be	my	last	master?	He	is	going	to	give	me	the	finishing
touch?”	But	he	had	come,	so	he	thought,	“It	is	better	to	be	here	for	a	few	days
at	 least	 to	 rest,	 then	 I	will	go	back.	 It	was	a	 long	 journey.”	So	he	said	 to	 the
innkeeper,	“My	master	has	given	this	letter.”
The	innkeeper	said,	“But	I	cannot	read,	so	you	can	keep	your	letter;	it	is	not
needed.	And	you	can	be	here.”
Nan-in	said,	“But	I	have	been	sent	to	learn	something	from	you.”
The	innkeeper	said,	“I	am	just	an	innkeeper.	I	am	not	a	master,	I	am	not	a
teacher.	There	must	have	been	some	misunderstanding.	You	may	have	come	to
a	wrong	person.	I	am	just	an	innkeeper.	I	cannot	teach;	I	don’t	know	anything.
But	since	you	have	come	you	can	just	watch	me.	That	may	be	helpful.	You	rest
and	watch.”
But	there	was	nothing	to	watch.	In	the	morning	he	would	open	the	door	of
the	inn.	Then	guests	would	come	and	he	would	clean	their	things	–	the	pots,	the
utensils	 and	 everything	 –	 and	 he	would	 serve.	And	 in	 the	 night	 again,	when
everybody	had	gone	and	the	guests	had	gone	to	sleep	to	their	beds,	he	would
clean	 things	 again,	 pots,	 utensils,	 everything.	And	 in	 the	morning,	 again	 the
same.
By	the	third	day	Nan-in	was	bored.	And	he	said,	“There	is	nothing	to	watch.
You	go	on	cleaning	utensils,	you	go	on	doing	ordinary	work,	so	I	must	leave.”
The	innkeeper	laughed,	but	said	nothing.
Nan-in	went	back.	He	was	very	angry	with	his	master	and	said,	“Why?	Why
was	 I	 sent	 for	 such	 a	 long	 journey?	 It	was	 tedious,	 and	 the	man	was	 just	 an
innkeeper.	And	he	didn’t	teach	me	anything,	and	he	simply	said,	‘Watch’	–	and
there	was	nothing	to	watch.”
But	the	master	said,	“Still,	you	were	there	for	three,	four	days.	Even	if	there
was	nothing	to	watch,	you	must	have	watched.	What	were	you	doing?”
So	he	said,	“I	was	watching!	In	the	night	he	would	clean	the	utensils,	pots,
put	everything	there,	and	in	the	morning	he	was	again	cleaning.”
The	master	said,	“This!	This	is	the	teaching!	This	is	what	you	were	sent	for!
He	 had	 cleaned	 those	 pots	 in	 the	 night,	 but	 in	 the	 morning	 he	 was	 again
cleaning	those	clean	pots.	What	does	it	mean?	Because	even	in	the	night,	when
nothing	had	happened,	they	had	become	unclean	again,	some	dust	had	settled
again.	So	you	may	be	pure	–	now	you	are	–	you	may	be	 innocent,	but	every
moment	 you	 have	 to	 continue	 cleaning.	 You	may	 not	 do	 anything,	 still	 you
become	impure	just	by	the	passage	of	time.	Moment	by	moment,	just	with	the
passage	 of	 time,	 not	 doing	 anything,	 just	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree,	 you	 become
unclean.	And	that	uncleanliness	is	not	because	you	were	doing	something	bad
or	something	wrong,	it	happens	just	through	the	passage	of	time.	Dust	collects,
so	 you	 go	 on	 cleaning.	And	 this	 is	 the	 last	 touch	 –	 because	 I	 feel	 you	 have
become	proud	that	you	are	pure	and	now	you	are	not	aware	of	a	constant	effort
to	clean.”
	
Moment	to	moment	one	has	to	die	and	be	reborn	again.	Only	then	are	you
freed	from	wrong-knowledge.
The	third	sutra:
An	image	conjured	up	by	words	without	any
substance	behind	it	is	vikalpa,	imagination.
Imagination	is	just	through	words,	verbal	structures.	You	create	a	thing	–	it
is	 not	 there,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 reality,	 but	you	create	 it	 through	your	mental	 images.
And	you	can	create	it	to	such	an	extent	that	you	yourself	become	deceived	by	it
and	you	think	it	is	real.	This	happens	in	hypnosis.	Hypnotize	a	person	and	say
anything;	he	conjures	up	the	image	and	that	image	becomes	real.	You	can	do	it,
you	are	doing	it	in	many	ways.
One	 of	 the	 most	 famous	 Swedish	 actresses,	 Greta	 Garbo,	 has	 written	 a
memoir.	She	was	an	ordinary	girl,	just	a	homely,	ordinary	girl,	very	poor,	and
working	 in	a	barber	shop.	Just	 for	a	 few	pennies	she	would	put	 lather	on	 the
customers’	faces.	She	did	this	for	three	years.
One	 day,	 an	American	 film	 director	was	 in	 that	 barber	 shop	 and	 she	was
putting	 soap	on	his	 face,	 and	 just	 the	way	Americans	are	–	he	may	not	have
even	meant	it	–	he	simply	looked	in	the	mirror	at	the	reflection	of	the	girl,	and
said,	“How	beautiful!”	And	Greta	Garbo	was	born	that	very	moment.
She	 writes	 that	 suddenly	 she	 became	 different.	 She	 had	 never	 thought
herself	beautiful,	she	couldn’t	conceive	of	it.	And	she	had	never	heard	anybody
saying	 that	she	was	beautiful.	For	 the	first	 time	she	also	 looked	 in	 the	mirror
and	the	face	was	different,	this	man	had	made	her	beautiful.	And	her	whole	life
changed.	 She	 followed	 the	 man	 and	 became	 one	 of	 the	 most	 famous	 film
actresses.
What	happened?	Just	hypnosis,	hypnosis	through	a	word	beautiful,	worked.
It	works,	 it	 becomes	 chemical.	Everybody	believes	 something	 about	 himself:
that	belief	becomes	reality	because	that	belief	starts	working	on	you.
Imagination	is	a	force,	but	it	is	a	conjured-up	force,	an	imagined	force.	You
can	use	it	and	you	can	be	used	by	it.	If	you	can	use	it,	it	will	be	helpful,	but	if
you	are	used	by	it,	it	is	fatal,	it	is	dangerous.	Imagination	can	become	madness
any	moment.	Imagination	can	be	helpful	if	through	it	you	create	a	situation	for
your	 inner	growth	and	crystallization.	But	 it	 is	 through	words,	 a	 conjured-up
thing.
For	 human	 beings	 words,	 language,	 verbal	 constructions	 have	 become	 so
significant	 that	 now	 nothing	 is	 more	 significant.	 If	 someone	 suddenly	 says,
“Fire!”	the	word	fire	will	change	you	immediately.	There	may	be	no	fire…	You
will	stop	listening	to	me.	There	will	be	no	effort	to	stop;	suddenly	you	will	stop
listening	to	me,	you	will	start	running	here	and	there.	The	word	fire	has	taken
your	imagination.
In	 that	way	you	are	 influenced	by	words.	The	people	 in	 the	advertisement
business	know	what	words	to	use	to	conjure	up	images.	Through	those	words
they	catch	you,	they	catch	the	whole	market.	There	are	many	such	words.	They
go	on	changing	with	the	fashions.
In	 the	 past	 few	 years	 new	 is	 the	 word.	 So	 everything	 you	 see	 in	 the
advertisements	 is	 new	 –	 a	 “new”	 Lux	 soap.	 Lux	 soap	 won’t	 do;	 the	 new
appeals	immediately.	Everybody	is	for	the	new.	Everybody	is	searching	for	the
new,	 something	 new,	 because	 everybody	 is	 bored	 with	 the	 old.	 So	 anything
new	has	appeal.	That	may	not	be	better	 than	the	old	–	 it	may	be	worse	–	but
just	the	word	new	opens	vistas	in	the	mind.
These	 words	 and	 their	 influence	 have	 to	 be	 understood	 deeply.	 A	 person
who	 is	 in	 search	 of	 the	 truth	 must	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 influence	 of	 words.
Politicians	and	advertising	people	are	using	words,	and	they	can	create	through
words,	they	can	capture	your	imagination	so	much	that	you	can	even	stake	your
life;	you	can	throw	your	life	away	just	for	words.
What	are	these?	–	“Nation,”	“the	national	flag”	–	just	words.	“Hinduism”…
You	can	say	“Hinduism	is	 in	danger”	and	suddenly	many	people	are	ready	to
do	something	or	even	to	die	–	just	a	few	words!	“Our	nation	is	insulted”:	what
is	“our	nation”?	–	just	words.	A	flag	is	nothing	but	a	piece	of	cloth,	but	a	whole
nation	can	die	 for	 the	flag	because	someone	has	 insulted	 the	flag,	 lowered	 it.
What	nonsense	goes	on	in	this	world	because	of	words!	Words	are	dangerous,
they	have	deep	sources	of	influence	within	you.	They	trigger	something	in	you
and	you	can	be	captured.
Patanjali	 says	 imagination	 has	 to	 be	 understood,	 because	 on	 the	 path	 of
meditation	 words	 have	 to	 be	 dropped	 so	 that	 influence	 by	 others	 can	 be
dropped.	Remember,	words	are	taught	by	others,	you	are	not	born	with	words.
They	 are	 taught	 to	 you	 and	 through	 words,	 many	 prejudices	 are	 taught.
Through	words	religion,	through	words	myths,	everything	is	fed	to	you	through
words.	The	word	is	the	medium,	the	vehicle	of	culture,	society,	information.
You	 cannot	 excite	 animals	 to	 fight	 for	 a	 nation.	 You	 cannot	 excite	 them
because	they	don’t	know	what	a	“nation”	is.	That’s	why	there	are	no	wars.	In
the	animal	kingdom	there	are	no	wars,	no	flags,	no	temples,	no	mosques.	And
if	animals	can	look	at	us,	they	are	bound	to	think	that	man	has	some	obsession
with	words,	because	wars	go	on	around	them,	millions	are	killed	just	because
of	words.
Someone	 is	 a	 Jew,	 kill	 him	 –	 just	 the	 word	 Jew.	 Change	 the	 label,	 he
becomes	a	Christian,	and	 then	 there	 is	no	need	 to	kill.	But	he	 is	not	 ready	 to
change	the	label.	He	will	say,	“I	would	rather	be	killed	but	I	cannot	change	my
label.	I	am	a	Jew.”	He	is	also	adamant,	others	are	also	adamant.	But	just	words!
Jean-Paul	Sartre	has	written	his	autobiography	and	he	has	given	it	 the	title
Words.	 It	 is	 beautiful,	 because	 as	 far	 as	 mind	 is	 concerned	 the	 whole
autobiography	of	any	mind	consists	of	words	and	nothing	else.	And	Patanjali
says	one	has	to	be	aware	of	this,	because	on	the	path	of	meditation	words	have
to	 be	 left	 behind.	 Nations,	 religions,	 scriptures,	 languages	 have	 to	 be	 left
behind	and	man	has	to	become	innocent,	freed	of	words.	When	you	are	free	of
words	there	will	be	no	imagination,	and	when	there	is	no	imagination	you	can
face	truth.	Otherwise	you	will	go	on	creating.
If	you	go	to	meet	God,	you	must	meet	him	without	any	words.	If	you	have
some	words,	he	may	not	fit	and	suit	your	idea.	Because	if	a	Hindu	thinks	God
has	one	thousand	hands	and	if	God	comes	with	only	two	hands,	he	will	reject:
“You	are	not	 a	God	at	 all.	With	only	 two	hands?	God	has	a	 thousand	hands.
Show	me	your	other	hands,	only	then	can	I	believe.”
I	have	heard…
	
One	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 persons	 of	 this	 past	 century	 was	 Sai	 Baba	 of
Shirdi.	Sai	Baba	was	a	Mohammedan.	Really,	no	one	knows	whether	he	was	a
Mohammedan	or	a	Hindu,	but	he	lived	in	a	mosque	so	it	was	believed	that	he
was	 a	Mohammedan.	He	had	 a	 friend	 and	 a	 follower	who	was	 a	Hindu	who
loved,	respected,	had	much	faith	in	Sai	Baba.	Every	day	he	would	come	for	his
darshan,	 and	 unless	 he	 saw	 him	 he	 would	 not	 leave.	 Sometimes	 it	 would
happen	 that	 for	 the	 whole	 day	 he	 would	 have	 to	 wait,	 but	 he	 would	 not	 go
without	seeing	him,	and	he	would	not	take	food	unless	he	had	seen	Sai	Baba.
Once	it	happened	that	the	whole	day	passed,	there	was	a	big	gathering	and
much	crowding;	he	couldn’t	enter.	When	everybody	had	gone,	just	in	the	night
he	reached	Sai	Baba	and	touched	his	feet.
Sai	Baba	said	to	him,	“Why	do	you	wait	unnecessarily?	There	is	no	need	to
see	me	here,	I	can	come	there.	And	drop	this;	from	tomorrow,	now	I	will	come.
You	will	see	me	every	day	before	you	take	your	food.”
The	disciple	was	very	happy.	So	the	next	day	he	waited	and	waited:	nothing
happened.	Really,	many	 things	happened,	 but	 nothing	happened	 according	 to
his	conception.	By	 the	evening	he	was	very	angry.	He	had	not	eaten	and	Sai
Baba	had	not	appeared,	so	he	went	again.	He	said,	“You	promise	and	you	don’t
fulfill?”
Sai	Baba	said,	“But	I	appeared	thrice,	not	even	once.	First	time	I	came	I	was
a	beggar,	and	you	said	to	me,	‘Move	away.	Don’t	come	here.’	The	second	time
I	came	as	an	old	woman,	and	you	 just	wouldn’t	 look	at	me;	you	closed	your
eyes”	 –	 because	 the	 disciple	 had	 the	 habit	 of	 not	 seeing	 women;	 he	 was
practicing	 not	 seeing	 women,	 so	 he	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 Sai	 Baba	 said,	 “I	 had
come,	but	what	do	you	expect?	Should	I	enter	your	closed	eyes?	I	was	standing
there	but	you	closed	your	eyes.	The	moment	you	saw	me	you	closed	the	eyes.
Then	the	third	time	I	came	as	a	dog,	and	you	wouldn’t	allow	me	in.	You	were
standing	at	the	door	with	a	stick.”
	
And	these	three	things	had	happened.	And	these	things	have	been	happening
to	 the	 whole	 humanity.	 The	 divine	 comes	 in	 many	 forms	 but	 you	 have	 a
prejudice;	 you	 have	 a	 pre-formulated	 conception,	 you	 cannot	 see.	 He	 must
appear	according	 to	you,	and	he	never	appears	according	 to	you,	and	he	will
never	appear	according	to	you.	You	cannot	be	the	rule	for	him	and	you	cannot
put	any	conditions.
When	 all	 imagination	 falls	 away,	 only	 then	 truth	 appears.	 Otherwise
imagination	 goes	 on	 making	 conditions	 and	 truth	 cannot	 appear.	 Only	 in	 a
naked	mind,	in	a	nude,	empty	mind,	truth	appears,	because	you	cannot	distort
it.
The	fourth	sutra:
The	modification	of	the	mind	which	is	based
on	the	absence	of	any	content	in	it	is	sleep.
This	 is	 the	 definition	 of	 sleep,	 the	 fourth	modification	 of	 the	mind:	when
there	is	no	content.	Mind	is	always	with	content,	except	in	sleep.	Something	or
other	is	there.	Some	thought	is	moving,	some	passion	is	moving,	some	desire	is
moving,	 some	 memory,	 some	 future	 imagination,	 some	 word,	 something	 is
moving.	 Something	 is	 continuously	 there.	 Only	 when	 you	 are	 fast	 asleep,
deeply	asleep,	content	stops,	mind	disappears	and	you	are	in	yourself	without
any	content.
This	has	to	be	remembered	because	this	is	going	to	be	the	state	of	samadhi
also,	with	only	one	difference:	 you	will	 be	 aware.	 In	 sleep	you	 are	unaware,
mind	 goes	 completely	 to	 non-existence.	 You	 are	 alone,	 left	 alone	 with	 no
thought,	 just	your	being.	But	you	are	not	 aware.	Mind	 is	not	 there	 to	disturb
you,	but	you	are	not	aware;	otherwise	sleep	can	become	enlightenment.
Contentless	 consciousness	 is	 there,	 but	 the	 consciousness	 is	not	 alert.	 It	 is
hidden,	 just	 in	 a	 seed.	 In	 samadhi	 the	 seed	 is	 broken,	 the	 consciousness
becomes	alert.	And	when	consciousness	is	alert	and	there	is	no	content,	this	is
the	goal.	Sleep	with	awareness	is	the	goal.
This	is	the	fourth	modification	of	the	mind	–	sleep.	But	that	goal,	sleep	with
awareness,	is	not	a	modification	of	the	mind,	it	is	beyond	mind.	Awareness	is
beyond	mind.	If	you	can	join	sleep	and	awareness	together,	you	have	become
enlightened.	But	it	is	difficult	because	even	when	we	are	awake	in	the	day,	we
are	not	alert.	Even	when	we	are	awake,	we	are	not	awake;	 the	word	 is	 false.
When	we	sleep,	how	can	we	be	awake,	when	even	when	we	are	awake,	we	are
not	awake.
So	one	has	 to	 start	 in	 the	day,	when	you	are	awake.	You	have	 to	be	more
awake,	more	and	more	intensely	awake.	And	then	you	have	to	try	with	dreams:
in	dreams	you	have	to	be	alert.	Only	if	you	succeed	with	the	waking	state,	then
with	 the	 dreaming	 state,	will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 succeed	with	 the	 third	 state,	 of
sleep.
Try	 first	walking	 on	 the	 street:	 try	 to	 be	 aware.	Don’t	 just	 go	 on	walking
automatically,	mechanically.	Be	alert	of	every	movement,	of	every	breath	that
you	take	–	exhale,	inhale	–	be	alert.	Of	every	eye	movement	you	are	doing,	of
every	person	you	look	at,	be	alert.	Whatever	you	are	doing,	be	alert	and	do	it
with	alertness.
Then	 at	 night,	 while	 you	 are	 falling	 asleep,	 try	 to	 remain	 alert.	 The	 last
phase	of	the	day	will	be	passing,	memories	will	be	floating	–	remain	alert	and
try	to	fall	asleep	with	alertness.	It	will	be	difficult,	but	if	you	try,	within	a	few
weeks	you	will	 have	 a	glimpse:	 you	 are	 asleep	 and	 alert.	 If	 you	 can	manage
even	 for	 a	 single	moment,	 it	 is	 so	beautiful,	 it	 is	 so	bliss-filled	 that	 you	will
never	be	the	same	again.
Then	you	will	not	say	that	sleep	is	just	wasting	time.	It	can	become	the	most
precious	sadhana,	because	when	the	waking	state	goes	and	the	sleeping	starts
there	is	a	change,	a	change	of	gears	inside.	It	is	just	like	a	change	of	gears	in	a
car.	When	 you	 change	 gears	 from	 one	 gear	 to	 another,	 for	 a	 single	moment
between	 these	 two	 there	 is	 a	 neutral	 gear,	 there	 is	 no	 gear.	 That	moment	 of
neutrality	is	very	significant.
The	 same	 happens	 in	 the	mind.	When	 from	waking	 you	move	 into	 sleep,
there	is	a	moment	when	you	are	neither	awake	nor	asleep.	In	that	moment	there
is	 no	 gear,	 the	 mechanism	 is	 not	 functioning.	 Your	 automatic	 personality	 is
nullified	in	that	moment.	In	that	moment	your	old	habits	will	not	force	you	in	a
certain	pattern.	In	that	moment	you	can	escape	and	become	alert.
In	 India	 this	 moment	 has	 been	 called	 sandhya,	 the	 moment	 in	 between.
There	are	two	sandhyas,	two	in-between	moments:	one	in	the	night	when	you
go	from	waking	to	sleep,	and	the	other	in	the	morning	when	you	again	move
from	 sleep	 to	 waking.	 Hindus	 have	 called	 these	 two	 the	 moments	 of
prayerfulness,	 sandhyakal,	 the	 period	 in	 between,	 because	 then	 for	 a	 single
moment	 your	 personality	 is	 not	 there.	 In	 that	 single	 moment	 you	 are	 pure,
innocent.	If	in	that	moment	you	can	become	alert,	your	whole	life	will	change.
You	will	have	a	base	for	transformation.
Then	try	to	be	alert	in	the	dream	state.	There	are	methods	for	how	to	be	alert
in	 a	 dream	 state.	 If	 you	want	 to	 try,	 first	 try	 in	 the	waking	 state.	When	 you
succeed	 in	 the	 waking,	 then	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 succeed	 in	 the	 dreaming
because	dreaming	is	deeper,	more	effort	will	be	needed.	And	it	is	also	difficult
because	what	to	do	in	a	dream	and	how	to	do	it?
For	the	dreaming	state,	Gurdjieff	developed	a	beautiful	method.	It	is	one	of
the	old	Tibetan	methods,	and	Tibetan	seekers	have	worked	very	deeply	into	the
dreamworld.
The	method	is:	just	when	falling	into	sleep	try	to	remember	one	thing,	any
one	 thing,	 perhaps	 just	 a	 roseflower.	 Just	 visualize	 a	 roseflower	 and	 go	 on
thinking	that	you	will	see	it	in	the	dream.	Visualize	it	and	go	on	thinking	that	in
the	dream,	whatsoever	 the	dream,	 this	 roseflower	must	be	 there.	Visualize	 its
color,	its	scent,	everything.	Feel	it	so	it	will	become	alive	inside	you,	and	with
that	roseflower	fall	into	sleep.
Within	 a	 few	 days	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 bring	 that	 flower	 into	 your	 dream.
This	 is	 a	 great	 success,	 because	 now	 you	 have	 created	 at	 least	 a	 part	 of	 the
dream.	Now	you	are	the	master.	At	least	one	part	of	the	dream,	the	flower,	has
come.	And	 the	moment	 you	 see	 the	 flower	 you	will	 immediately	 remember,
“This	is	a	dream.”	Nothing	else	is	needed.	The	flower	and,	“This	is	a	dream”
have	become	associated	because	you	have	created	the	flower	in	the	dream.	And
you	were	continuously	thinking	for	this	flower	to	appear	in	the	dream	and	the
flower	has	appeared.	 Immediately	you	will	 recognize,	“This	 is	a	dream,”	and
the	whole	quality	of	 the	dream	will	change,	 the	 flower-dream	and	everything
around	the	dream.	You	have	become	alert.
Then	you	can	enjoy	the	dream	in	a	new	way,	just	like	a	film.	And	then	if	you
want	to	stop	the	dream	you	can	simply	stop,	put	it	off.	But	that	will	take	a	little
more	time	and	more	practice.	Then	you	can	create	your	own	dreams.	There	is
no	need	 to	be	a	victim	of	dreams:	you	can	create	your	own	dreams,	you	can
live	your	own	dreams.	You	can	have	 a	 theme	 just	 before	you	 fall	 into	 sleep,
you	can	direct	your	dreams	just	like	a	film	director	and	you	can	create	a	theme
out	of	it.
Tibetans	have	used	dream	creations	because	through	dream	creation	you	can
change	your	 total	mind,	 the	structure.	And	when	you	succeed	 in	dreams	 then
you	can	succeed	in	sleep.	But	there	is	no	technique	for	sleep	because	there	is
no	 content.	 A	 technique	 can	 work	 only	 with	 content.	 Because	 there	 is	 no
content,	no	technique	can	help.	But	through	dream	you	will	learn	to	be	aware
and	that	awareness	can	be	carried	on	into	sleep.
The	last	sutra:
Memory	is	the	calling	up	of	past	experiences.
These	 are	 definitions.	He	 is	 clarifying	 things	 so	 later	 on	you	need	not	 get
mixed	up.
What	is	memory?	–	calling	up	of	past	experiences.	Memory	is	continuously
happening.	Whenever	you	see	something,	 immediately	memory	comes	in	and
distorts	 it.	 You	 have	 seen	 me	 before.	 You	 see	 me	 again	 and	 immediately
memory	comes	in.	If	you	had	seen	me	five	years	before,	then	the	picture	of	five
years	ago,	the	past	picture,	will	come	into	your	eyes	and	fill	your	eyes,	and	you
will	see	me	through	that	picture.
That’s	why	if	you	have	not	seen	your	friend	for	many	days,	the	moment	you
see	him	you	immediately	say,	“You	are	looking	very	thin,”	or	“You	are	looking
very	unhealthy,”	or	“You	have	gained	weight.”	Immediately!	Why?	–	because
you	 are	 comparing;	 the	memory	has	 come	 in.	The	man	himself	 is	 not	 aware
that	he	has	gotten	 fat	or	he	has	become	 thin,	but	you	become	aware	because
immediately	 you	 can	 compare.	 The	 past,	 the	 last	 picture	 comes	 in,	 and
immediately	you	can	compare.
This	memory	is	continuously	there,	being	projected	on	everything	you	see.
This	past	memory	has	to	be	dropped.	It	should	not	be	a	constant	interference	in
your	knowing	because	it	doesn’t	allow	you	to	know	the	new.	You	always	know
in	 the	 pattern	 of	 the	 old.	 It	 doesn’t	 allow	 you	 to	 feel	 the	 new,	 it	 makes
everything	 old	 and	 rotten.	 Because	 of	 this	memory,	 everybody	 is	 bored;	 the
whole	humanity	is	bored.	Look	at	anybody’s	face	–	he	is	bored,	bored	to	death.
There	is	nothing	new,	no	ecstasy.
Why	 are	 children	 so	 ecstatic?	 You	 cannot	 imagine	 how	 this	 ecstasy	 is
happening	for	such	simple	things.	Just	a	few	colored	stones	on	the	beach	and
they	 start	 dancing.	 What	 is	 happening	 to	 them?	 Why	 can’t	 you	 dance?	 –
because	 you	 know	 those	 are	 just	 stones,	 your	 memory	 is	 there.	 For	 those
children	 there	 is	 no	memory,	 those	 stones	 are	 a	 new	phenomenon,	 as	 if	 they
have	reached	to	the	moon.
I	 was	 reading	 that	 when	 the	 first	 man	 reached	 the	 moon	 there	 was
excitement	all	over	the	world.	And	everybody	was	looking	at	their	TV’s	–	but
within	fifteen	minutes	everybody	was	bored,	finished:	“What	to	do	now?	The
man	is	walking	on	the	moon.”	After	just	fifteen	minutes	–	and	this	dream	had
taken	millions	of	years	to	reach	there	–	and	now	nobody	was	interested	in	what
was	happening.
Everything	becomes	old.	Immediately	it	becomes	memory,	 it	becomes	old.
If	you	can,	drop	your	memories,	and	dropping	doesn’t	mean	that	you	cease	to
remember,	dropping	only	means	dropping	this	constant	interference.	When	you
need	 it	you	can	pull	 it	back	 into	 focus.	When	you	don’t	need	 it	 just	 let	 it	 be
there,	silent,	not	continuously	coming.
The	 past,	 if	 continuously	 present,	will	 not	 allow	 the	 present	 to	 be.	And	 if
you	miss	the	present	you	miss	all.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	6:	The	Purity	of	Yoga
	
The	first	question:
Osho,
You	said	that	Patanjali’s	Yoga	is	an	exact	science,	absolutely	logical,	in	which	the	result	is
as	certain	as	two	plus	two	make	four.	If	the	attainment	of	the	unknown	and	infinite	can	be
reduced	to	mere	logic,	is	it	not	true	and	at	the	same	time	absurd	that	the	infinite
phenomenon	is	within	the	orbit	of	the	finite	mind?
It	 looks	 absurd,	 it	 looks	 illogical,	 but	 existence	 is	 absurd	 and	 existence	 is
illogical.	 The	 sky	 is	 infinite,	 but	 it	 can	 be	 reflected	 in	 a	 very	 tiny	 pool;	 the
infinite	sky	can	be	reflected	in	a	small	mirror.	Of	course	the	whole	of	it	will	not
be	reflected,	it	cannot	be	reflected.	But	the	part	is	also	the	whole	and	the	part
also	belongs	to	the	sky.
The	human	mind	is	just	a	mirror.	If	it	is	pure	then	the	infinite	can	have	the
reflection	 in	 it.	The	 reflection	will	not	be	 the	 infinite.	 It	will	be	 just	a	part,	a
glimpse,	but	that	glimpse	becomes	the	door.	Then,	by	and	by,	you	can	leave	the
mirror	behind	and	enter	into	the	infinite,	leave	the	reflection	behind	and	enter
into	the	real.
Out	of	your	window,	the	small	frame	of	the	window	is	the	infinite	sky.	You
can	 look	 through	 the	window.	You	will	not	 see	 the	whole	 sky,	of	course,	but
whatsoever	you	see	is	the	sky.	The	only	thing	to	remember	is,	don’t	think	that
whatsoever	you	have	seen	is	the	infinite.	It	may	be	of	the	infinite,	it	is	not	the
infinite.	So	whatsoever	the	human	mind	can	conceive	may	be	divine,	but	it	is
just	a	part	of	it,	a	glimpse.	If	you	continuously	remember	that,	then	there	is	no
fallacy.	 Then,	 by	 and	 by,	 destroy	 the	 frame.	 By	 and	 by,	 destroy	 the	 mind
completely	 so	 the	 mirror	 is	 no	 longer	 there	 and	 you	 are	 freed	 from	 the
reflection	and	you	enter	the	reality.
On	the	surface	it	looks	absurd.	How,	in	such	a	tiny	mind,	can	there	be	any
contact	with	the	eternal,	with	the	infinite,	with	the	endless?	A	second	thing	has
also	to	be	understood.	This	tiny	mind	is	also	not	really	tiny,	because	it	is	also
part	of	the	infinite.	It	looks	tiny	because	of	you,	it	looks	finite	because	of	you.
You	 have	 created	 the	 boundaries.	 The	 boundaries	 are	 false.	 Even	 your	 tiny
mind	belongs	to	the	infinite,	it	is	part	of	it.
There	are	many	things	to	be	understood.	One	of	the	most	paradoxical	things
about	 the	 infinite	 is	 that	 the	 part	 is	 always	 equal	 to	 the	 whole.	 You	 cannot
divide	the	infinite.	All	divisions	are	false.	It	may	be	utilitarian	to	divide	it:	I	can
say	that	the	sky	on	my	house,	on	my	terrace,	is	my	sky,	just	as	India	says	that
the	sky	on	the	Indian	continent	is	Indian	sky.	What	do	you	mean?	You	cannot
divide	 the	 sky.	 It	 cannot	 be	 Indian	or	Chinese,	 it	 is	 an	undivided	 expanse.	 It
begins	nowhere,	it	ends	nowhere.
This	has	also	happened	with	the	mind.	You	call	it	your	mind;	that	“your”	is
false.	The	mind	is	part	of	the	infinite.	Just	as	matter	is	part	of	the	infinite,	mind
is	part	of	the	infinite.	Your	soul	is	also	part	of	the	infinite.	When	the	“my”	is
lost	you	are	the	infinite.	So	if	you	appear	finite,	it	is	an	illusion.
Finiteness	 is	 not	 a	 reality;	 finiteness	 is	 just	 a	 conception,	 an	 illusion.
Because	of	your	conception	you	are	confined	in	it.	And	whatsoever	you	think,
you	become.	Buddha	has	said	–	and	he	was	repeating	it	continuously	for	forty
years	 –	 that	 whatsoever	 you	 think	 you	 become.	 Thinking	 makes	 you
whatsoever	 you	 are.	 If	 you	 are	 finite,	 it	 is	 a	 standpoint	 that	 you	 have	 taken.
Drop	the	standpoint	and	you	become	infinite.
The	whole	 process	 of	Yoga	 is	 how	 to	 drop	 the	 frame,	 how	 to	 destroy	 the
mirror,	how	 to	move	 from	 the	 reflection	 to	 the	 reality,	how	 to	go	beyond	 the
boundaries.	Boundaries	are	self-created,	they	are	not	really	there.	They	are	just
thoughts.	That’s	why,	whenever	there	is	no	thought	in	the	mind,	you	are	not.	A
thoughtless	 mind	 is	 egoless,	 a	 thoughtless	 mind	 is	 boundless,	 a	 thoughtless
mind	 is	already	 the	 infinite.	 If	 even	 for	a	 single	moment	 there	 is	no	 thought,
you	are	the	infinite,	because	without	thought	there	can	be	no	boundary.	Without
thought	you	disappear	and	the	divine	descends.
To	be	in	thought	is	to	be	human,	to	be	below	thought	is	to	be	animal,	to	be
beyond	 thought	 is	 to	be	divine.	But	 the	 logical	mind	will	 raise	questions,	 the
logical	mind	will	say,	“How	can	the	part	be	equal	to	the	whole?	The	part	must
be	less	than	the	whole.	It	cannot	be	the	equal.”
Ouspensky	writes	in	Tertium	Organum,	one	of	the	best,	one	of	the	few	great
books	in	the	world,	that	not	only	can	the	part	be	the	equal	to	the	whole,	it	can
be	 even	 greater	 than	 the	 whole.	 But	 he	 calls	 it	 a	 higher	 mathematics.	 That
mathematics	belongs	to	the	Upanishads.	In	the	Ishavasya	Upanishad	it	is	said,
“You	 can	 take	 out	 the	 whole	 from	 the	 whole,	 and	 still	 the	 whole	 remains
behind.	You	can	put	the	whole	into	the	whole,	and	still	the	whole	remains	the
whole.”	 It	 is	 absurd.	 If	 you	 like	 to	 call	 it	 absurd	 you	 can	 call	 it	 absurd.	But
really,	 it	 is	 a	 higher	 mathematics	 where	 boundaries	 are	 lost	 and	 the	 drop
becomes	the	ocean	and	the	ocean	is	nothing	but	a	drop.
Logic	 raises	 questions,	 it	 goes	 on	 raising	 them.	 That	 is	 the	 nature	 of	 the
logical	mind,	 to	 raise	 questions.	And	 if	 you	go	 on	 following	 those	 questions
you	can	go	on	ad	infinitum.	Put	aside	the	mind,	its	logic,	its	reasoning,	and	for
a	few	moments	try	to	be	without	thought.	If	you	can	achieve	that	state	of	non-
thought	even	for	a	single	moment	you	will	come	to	realize	that	the	part	is	equal
to	 the	 whole,	 because	 suddenly	 you	 will	 see	 all	 the	 boundaries	 have
disappeared.	They	were	dream	boundaries.	All	the	divisions	have	disappeared,
and	you	and	the	whole	have	become	one.
This	can	be	an	experience.	This	cannot	be	a	logical	inference.	Then	when	I
say	that	Patanjali	is	logical,	what	do	I	mean?	In	the	conclusions,	nobody	can	be
logical	as	 far	as	 the	 inner,	 the	spiritual,	 the	ultimate	experience	 is	concerned.
But	 on	 the	 path,	 you	 can	 be	 logical.	As	 far	 as	 the	 ultimate	 result	 of	Yoga	 is
concerned,	Patanjali	 also	cannot	be	 logical;	nobody	can	be.	But	 to	 reach	 that
goal	you	can	follow	a	logical	path.
In	 that	 sense	 Patanjali	 is	 logical	 and	 rational,	mathematical,	 scientific.	He
does	not	ask	any	faith.	He	asks	only	for	the	courage	to	experiment,	courage	to
move,	courage	to	take	a	jump	into	the	unknown.	He	does	not	say,	“Believe	and
then	 you	will	 experience.”	He	 says,	 “Experience	 and	 then	 you	will	 believe.”
And	he	has	made	a	 structure	of	how	 to	proceed	step	by	step.	His	path	 is	not
haphazard;	 it	 is	 not	 like	 a	 labyrinth,	 it	 is	 like	 a	 superhighway.	 Everything	 is
clear	and	the	shortest	possible	route.	But	you	have	to	follow	it	in	every	detail,
otherwise	you	will	move	off	the	path	and	into	the	wilderness.
That’s	why	I	say	he	is	logical,	and	you	will	see	how	he	is	logical.	He	starts
from	 the	body	because	you	are	 rooted	 in	 the	body.	He	 starts	 and	works	with
your	breathing	because	your	breathing	is	your	life.	First	he	works	on	the	body,
then	he	works	on	the	prana	–	 the	second	layer	of	existence	–	your	breathing;
then	he	starts	working	on	thoughts.
There	are	many	methods	which	start	directly	with	the	thoughts.	They	are	not
so	logical	and	scientific	because	the	man	you	are	working	with	is	rooted	in	the
body.	He	 is	 a	 soma,	 a	 body.	A	 scientific	 approach	must	 start	with	 the	 body.
Your	 body	 must	 be	 changed	 first.	 When	 your	 body	 changes,	 then	 your
breathing	can	be	 changed.	When	your	breathing	 changes,	 then	your	 thoughts
can	be	changed.	And	when	your	thoughts	change	then	you	can	be	changed.
You	may	not	have	observed	that	you	are	a	close-knit	system	of	many	layers.
When	you	are	running	your	breathing	changes	because	more	oxygen	is	needed,
and	when	your	breathing	changes	your	thoughts	immediately	change.
In	Tibet	they	say	if	you	are	angry,	then	just	run.	Do	two	or	three	rounds	of
your	house,	and	then	come	back	and	see	where	your	anger	has	gone	because	if
you	 run	 fast	 your	 breathing	 changes;	 if	 your	 breathing	 changes	 your	 thought
pattern	cannot	remain	the	same,	it	has	to	change.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 run:	 you	 can	 simply	 take	 five	 deep	 breaths	 –	 exhale,
inhale	 –	 and	 see	 where	 your	 anger	 has	 gone.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 change	 anger
directly.	It	is	easier	to	change	the	body,	then	the	breathing,	then	the	anger.	This
is	a	scientific	process.	That	is	why	I	say	that	Patanjali	is	scientific.	Nobody	else
has	been	so	scientific.
If	you	go	to	Buddha	he	will	say,	“Drop	anger.”	Patanjali	will	never	say	that.
He	will	say	if	you	have	anger,	that	means	you	have	a	breathing	pattern	which
helps	 anger,	 and	 unless	 that	 breathing	 pattern	 is	 changed	 you	 cannot	 drop
anger.	You	may	do,	with	struggle,	but	that	is	not	going	to	help,	or	it	may	take	a
very	long	time,	unnecessary	time.	So	he	will	watch	your	breathing	pattern,	the
breathing	rhythm,	and	 if	you	have	a	certain	breathing	rhythm	that	means	you
have	a	certain	body	posture	for	it.
The	grossest	 is	 the	body	and	 the	subtlest	 is	 the	mind.	Don’t	start	 from	the
subtle	because	 it	will	be	more	difficult.	 It	 is	vague,	you	cannot	grasp	 it.	Start
with	the	body.	That’s	why	Patanjali	starts	with	body	postures.
You	 may	 not	 have	 observed,	 because	 you	 are	 so	 unalert	 in	 life,	 that
whenever	you	have	a	certain	mood	in	the	mind	you	have	a	certain	body	posture
associated	with	 it.	 If	you	are	angry,	can	you	sit	 relaxed?	–	 impossible.	 If	you
are	angry	your	body	posture	will	change,	 if	you	are	attentive	 then	your	body
posture	will	change,	if	you	are	sleepy	your	body	posture	will	change.
If	you	are	completely	silent	you	will	sit	buddha-like,	you	will	walk	buddha-
like.	 If	 you	walk	 buddha-like,	 you	will	 feel	 a	 certain	 silence	merging	within
your	heart.	A	certain	silent	bridge	is	being	created	by	your	buddha-like	walk.
Just	sit	under	a	tree	like	a	buddha.	Just	sit,	just	the	body:	suddenly	you	will	see
that	 your	 breathing	 is	 changing	 –	 it	 is	more	 relaxed,	 it	 is	more	 harmonious.
When	the	breathing	 is	harmonious	and	relaxed,	you	will	 feel	 the	mind	is	 less
tense.	There	are	fewer	thoughts,	fewer	clouds,	more	space,	more	sky.	You	will
feel	a	silence	in	and	out,	flowing.
Hence	I	say	Patanjali	is	scientific.	If	you	want	to	change	the	body	posture,
Patanjali	will	 say	 change	 your	 food	 habits,	 because	 every	 food	 habit	 creates
subtle	body	postures.	If	you	are	an	eater	of	meat	you	cannot	sit	buddha-like.	If
you	 are	 non-vegetarian	 your	 posture	 will	 be	 different	 than	 if	 you	 are	 a
vegetarian;	 your	 postures	will	 be	 different	 because	 the	 body	 is	 built	 by	 your
food.	 It	 is	not	an	accident.	Whatsoever	you	are	putting	 in	 the	body,	 the	body
will	reflect	it.
So	for	Patanjali	vegetarianism	is	not	a	moralist	cult,	it	is	a	scientific	method.
When	you	eat	meat	you	are	not	only	 taking	 food,	you	are	 allowing	a	 certain
animal	from	which	the	meat	has	come	to	enter	in	you.	The	meat	was	part	of	a
particular	body;	the	meat	was	part	of	a	particular	instinct	pattern.	The	meat	was
the	animal	just	a	few	hours	before,	and	that	meat	carries	all	the	impressions	of
the	animal,	all	the	habits	of	the	animal.	When	you	are	eating	meat	your	many
attitudes	will	be	affected	by	it.
If	 you	 are	 sensitive	 you	 can	 become	 aware	 that	whenever	 you	 eat	 certain
things,	certain	changes	immediately	take	place.	You	can	drink	alcohol	and	then
you	do	not	remain	the	same,	immediately	a	new	personality	comes	in.	Alcohol
cannot	 create	 a	 personality	 but	 it	 changes	 your	 body	 pattern,	 the	 body
chemistry	is	changed.	With	the	change	of	the	body	chemistry	the	mind	has	to
change	 its	 pattern,	 and	when	 the	mind	 changes	 its	 pattern	 a	 new	 personality
comes	in.
I	have	heard…
	
One	of	the	oldest	Chinese	parables	is	that	once	a	bottle	of	whisky	fell	down
from	a	table,	just	by	accident	–	a	cat	might	have	jumped.	The	bottle	was	broken
and	the	whisky	was	spilled	all	over	the	floor.	In	the	night	three	mice	lapped	at
the	whisky.	One	mouse	immediately	said,	“Now	I	am	going	to	the	king,	to	the
palace,	to	put	him	right	in	his	place.”
The	other	said,	“I	am	not	worried	about	kings.	I	myself	am	going	to	be	the
emperor	of	the	whole	earth.”
And	 the	 third	 said,	 “Do	 whatsoever	 you	 like,	 you	 fellows.	 I	 am	 going
upstairs	to	make	love	to	the	cat.”
	
The	whole	personality	has	changed	–	a	mouse	thinking	of	making	love	to	a
cat?	 It	 can	 happen,	 it	 happens	 every	 day.	Whatsoever	 you	 eat	 changes	 you,
whatsoever	you	drink	changes	you	because	body	is	a	great	part;	you	are	ninety
percent	your	bodies.
Patanjali	 is	 scientific	 because	 he	 takes	 note	 of	 everything	 –	 the	 food,	 the
posture,	the	way	you	sleep,	the	way	you	get	up	in	the	morning,	when	you	get
up	in	the	morning,	when	you	go	to	sleep.	He	takes	note	of	everything	so	that
your	body	becomes	a	situation	for	something	higher.
Then	he	 takes	 note	 of	 your	 breathing.	 If	 you	 are	 sad	 you	have	 a	 different
rhythm	 of	 breathing.	 Just	 note	 it	 down.	 Try;	 you	 can	 have	 a	 very	 beautiful
experiment.	Whenever	 you	 are	 sad	 just	watch	 your	 breath;	watch	 how	much
time	you	 take	 in	 inhalation	 and	 then	how	much	 time	you	 take	 in	 exhalation.
Just	note	it	down.	Just	count	numbers	inside:	one,	two,	three,	four,	five…	You
count	to	five	and	the	inhalation	is	over.	Then	you	count	–	it	comes	to	ten	and
the	 exhalation	 is	 over.	 Just	 watch	 it	minutely	 so	 you	 can	 come	 to	 know	 the
ratio.	Then	whenever	you	 feel	happy	 immediately	 try	 that	 sad	pattern	–	 five,
ten	–	and	the	happiness	will	disappear.
The	reverse	is	also	true.	Whenever	you	feel	happy	note	down	how	you	are
breathing,	 and	 whenever	 you	 feel	 sad	 try	 that	 pattern.	 Immediately,	 sadness
will	disappear,	because	mind	cannot	 exist	 in	 a	vacuum.	 It	 exists	 in	 a	 system,
and	breathing	is	the	deepest	system	for	the	mind.
Breath	 is	 thought.	 If	you	stop	breathing,	 immediately	 thoughts	stop.	Try	 it
for	a	second.	Stop	the	breathing.	Immediately	 there	 is	a	break	in	 the	 thinking
process;	 the	 process	 is	 broken.	 Thinking	 is	 the	 invisible	 part	 of	 the	 visible
breathing.
That’s	what	I	mean	when	I	say	Patanjali	is	scientific.	He	is	not	a	poet.	If	he
says,	“Don’t	eat	meat,”	he	is	not	saying	it	because	eating	meat	is	violence,	no.
He	is	saying	it	because	eating	meat	is	self-destructive.	There	are	poets	who	say
to	be	nonviolent	is	beautiful;	Patanjali	says	to	be	nonviolent	is	to	be	healthy,	to
be	 nonviolent	 is	 to	 be	 selfish.	You	 are	 not	 having	 compassion	 on	 somebody
else,	you	are	having	compassion	on	yourself.
He	is	concerned	with	you	–	and	the	transformation.	And	you	cannot	change
things	 just	 by	 thinking	 about	 change,	 you	 have	 to	 create	 the	 situation.
Otherwise,	 all	 over	 the	world	 love	 has	 been	 taught,	 but	 love	 exists	 nowhere
because	the	situation	doesn’t	exist.	How	can	you	be	loving	if	you	are	a	meat-
eater?	 If	 you	 are	 eating	 meat,	 the	 violence	 is	 there.	 And	 with	 such	 a	 deep
violence	how	can	you	be	loving?	Your	love	will	be	just	false.	Or,	it	may	be	just
a	form	of	hate.
There	is	an	old	Indian	tale:
	
A	Christian	missionary	was	passing	through	a	forest.	Of	course	he	believed
in	love,	so	he	was	not	carrying	a	gun.	Suddenly	he	saw	a	lion	approaching.	He
became	afraid.	He	started	to	think,	“Now	the	gospel	of	love	won’t	do.	It	would
have	been	wise	if	I	had	a	gun.”
But	 something	 had	 to	 be	 done,	 and	 he	 was	 in	 an	 emergency.	 Then	 he
remembered	somebody	has	 said	somewhere	 that	 if	you	 run	 then	 the	 lion	will
follow	you,	and	within	minutes	you	will	be	caught	and	dead.	But	if	you	stare
into	 the	eyes	of	 the	 lion	 then	 there	 is	some	possibility	he	may	get	 impressed,
hypnotized.	He	may	 change	 his	mind.	And	 there	 are	 stories	 that	many	 times
lions	have	changed	their	minds,	they	have	slunk	away.
So	 it	was	worth	 trying,	 and	 there	was	no	use	 in	 escaping.	The	missionary
stared.	 The	 lion	 also	 came	 near.	 He	 also	 started	 staring	 into	 the	 eyes	 of	 the
missionary.	For	five	minutes	they	were	standing	face	to	face,	staring	into	each
other’s	eyes.	Then	suddenly	the	missionary	saw	the	miracle.	Suddenly	the	lion
put	his	paws	close	together	and	then	bent	over	them	in	a	very	prayerful	mood,
as	if	he	was	praying.
This	was	too	much!	Even	the	missionary	was	not	expecting	so	much	–	that	a
lion	should	start	praying.	He	was	happy.	But	 then	he	 thought,	“What	 is	 to	be
done	now?	What	should	I	do?”	But	by	that	time	he	was	also	hypnotized	–	not
only	the	lion	–	so	he	thought,	“It	is	better	to	follow	the	lion.”
He	also	bent	over,	started	praying.	Five	minutes	again	passed.	Then	the	lion
opened	his	eyes	and	said,	“Man,	what	are	you	doing?	 I	am	saying	grace,	but
what	are	you	doing?”
	
The	 lion	was	a	 religious	 lion,	pious,	but	 just	 in	 thought.	 In	deed	he	was	a
lion,	 and	 he	 was	 going	 to	 be	 a	 lion.	 He	 was	 going	 to	 kill	 the	man;	 he	 was
saying	grace.
This	 is	 the	 situation	 of	 the	 whole	 human	 phenomenon,	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	is	just	pious	in	thoughts;	in	deeds,	man	remains	an	animal.	And	this
will	 always	 be	 so	 unless	 we	 don’t	 cling	 to	 thoughts	 but	 create	 situations	 in
which	thoughts	change.
Patanjali	won’t	say	that	it	is	good	to	be	loving,	he	will	help	you	to	create	the
situation	 in	which	 love	 can	 flower.	 This	 is	why	 I	 say	 he	 is	 scientific.	 If	 you
follow	 him,	 step	 by	 step,	 you	 will	 see	 many	 flowerings	 in	 you	 which	 were
inconceivable	before,	unimaginable.	You	could	not	have	even	dreamed	about
them.	If	you	change	your	food,	if	you	change	your	body	posture,	if	you	change
your	sleeping	patterns,	if	you	change	ordinary	habits,	you	will	see	a	new	person
is	 arising	 in	 you.	 And	 then	 there	 are	 different	 changes	 possible.	 After	 one
change	other	 changes	become	possible.	Step	by	 step	more	possibilities	 open.
That’s	why	I	say	he	is	logical.	He	is	not	a	logical	philosopher;	he	is	a	logical,
practical	man.
	
The	second	question:
Osho,
Yesterday	you	referred	to	a	Western	thinker	who	started	doubting	everything	that	can	be
doubted,	but	could	not	doubt	himself.	You	said	that	this	is	a	great	achievement	in	opening
towards	the	divine.	How?
The	opening	toward	higher	consciousness	means	you	must	have	something
indubitable	 with	 you	 –	 that’s	 what	 trust	 means.	 You	 have	 at	 least	 one	 point
which	you	trust,	which	you	cannot	doubt	even	if	you	want	to.	That’s	why	I	said
Descartes	came	to	a	point	through	his	logical	investigation:	“We	cannot	doubt
ourselves.	I	cannot	doubt	that	I	am,	because	even	to	say	that	I	doubt	I	have	to
be	there.	The	very	assertion	that	‘I	doubt’	proves	that	I	am.”
You	must	have	heard	the	famous	dictum	of	Descartes,	“Cogito,	ergo	sum	–	I
think,	therefore	I	am.”	Doubting	is	thinking:	I	doubt,	therefore	I	am.	But	this	is
just	 an	 opening,	 and	 Descartes	 never	 went	 beyond	 this	 opening.	 He	 again
turned	back.	You	can	come	back	from	the	very	door.	He	was	happy	that	he	had
found	 a	 center,	 an	 indubitable	 center,	 and	 then	 he	 started	 to	 work	 out	 his
philosophy.	So	all	that	he	had	denied	before,	he	pulled	in	from	the	back	door:
“Because	I	am,	then	there	must	be	a	creator	who	has	created	me.”	And	then	he
went	on	to	heaven	and	hell,	then	God	and	sin	and	the	whole	Christian	theology
came	in	from	the	back	door.
He	used	this	as	a	philosophical	inquiry.	He	was	not	a	yogi;	he	was	not	really
in	search	of	his	being,	he	was	in	search	of	a	theory.	But	you	can	use	that	as	an
opening.	An	opening	means	you	have	to	transcend	it,	you	have	to	go	beyond,
you	have	to	pass	over	it,	you	have	to	go	through	it.	You	are	not	to	cling	to	it.	If
you	cling	then	any	opening	will	become	closed.
It	 is	good	 to	 realize:	“At	 least	 I	cannot	doubt	myself.”	Then	 the	 right	 step
will	be	this:	“If	I	cannot	doubt	myself,	if	I	feel	I	am,	then	I	must	know	who	I
am.”	Then	 it	 becomes	 a	 right	 inquiry.	Then	 you	move	 into	 religion,	 because
when	 you	 ask,	 “Who	 am	 I?”	 you	 have	 asked	 a	 fundamental	 question.	 Not
philosophical	–	existential.	Nobody	else	can	tell	you	who	you	are.	Nobody	else
can	give	you	a	ready-made	answer.	You	will	have	to	search	yourself,	you	will
have	to	dig	it	out	within	yourself.
Just	 this	 logical	 certainty	 that	 “I	 am”	 is	 not	 of	much	 use	 if	 you	 don’t	 go
ahead	and	ask,	“Who	am	I?”	And	this	 is	not	a	question;	 this	 is	going	 to	be	a
quest.	A	question	may	lead	you	into	philosophy,	a	quest	leads	you	into	religion.
So	if	you	feel	that	you	don’t	know	yourself,	 then	don’t	go	to	anybody	to	ask,
“Who	am	I?”	Nobody	can	answer	you.	You	are	there	inside,	hidden.	You	have
to	penetrate	to	that	dimension	where	you	are,	encounter	yourself.
This	 is	 a	 different	 type	of	 journey,	 the	 inner	 journey.	All	 our	 journeys	 are
outer:	 we	 are	 making	 bridges	 to	 reach	 someone	 else.	 This	 quest	 means	 you
have	to	break	all	the	bridges	to	others.	All	that	you	have	done	without	has	to	be
dropped	and	 something	new	has	 to	be	 started	within.	 It	will	 be	difficult,	 just
because	 you	 have	 become	 so	 fixed	 with	 the	 without.	 You	 always	 think	 of
others,	you	never	think	of	yourself.
This	 is	strange,	but	no	one	 thinks	about	himself,	he	 thinks	about	others.	 If
sometimes	you	 think	about	yourself	 it	 is	also	 in	 relation	 to	others.	 It	 is	never
pure.	 It	 is	 not	 simply	 just	 about	 you.	 Then	 when	 you	 think	 just	 about	 you,
thinking	will	have	 to	be	dropped	because	what	can	you	 think?	You	can	 think
about	others;	thinking	means	“about.”	What	can	you	think	about	yourself?	You
will	have	to	drop	thinking	and	you	will	have	to	look	inside	–	not	thinking	but
looking,	 seeing,	 observing,	 witnessing.	 The	 whole	 process	 will	 change.	 One
has	to	look	for	oneself.
Doubt	is	good.	If	you	doubt,	and	if	you	continuously	doubt,	there	is	only	one
rock-like	 phenomenon	which	 cannot	 be	 doubted,	 and	 that	 is	 your	 existence.
Then	a	new	quest	will	arise,	and	that	 is	not	a	question.	You	will	have	to	ask,
“Who	am	I?”
His	whole	 life	Ramana	Maharshi	gave	only	one	 technique	 to	his	disciples.
He	would	say,	“Just	sit	down,	close	your	eyes,	and	go	on	asking,	‘Who	am	I?
Who	am	I?’	Use	it	as	a	mantra.”	But	it	is	not	a	mantra.	You	have	not	to	use	it	as
dead	words;	it	must	become	an	inner	penetration:	Who	am	I?	Go	on	asking	it.
Your	mind	will	answer	many	times	that	you	are	a	soul,	you	are	a	self,	you	are
divine,	but	don’t	listen	to	these	things,	these	are	all	borrowed;	you	have	heard
these	things.	Put	 them	aside.	And	if	you	go	on	continuously	putting	the	mind
aside,	one	day	there	is	an	explosion.	The	mind	explodes	and	all	the	borrowed
knowledge	disappears	from	you,	and	for	the	first	time	you	are	face	to	face	with
yourself,	looking	within	yourself.	This	is	the	opening,	and	this	is	the	way,	and
this	is	the	quest.
Ask	who	 you	 are	 and	 don’t	 cling	 to	 cheap	 answers.	 All	 answers	 that	 are
given	by	others	are	cheap.	The	real	answer	can	only	come	out	of	you.	It	is	just
like	a	real	flower	can	only	come	out	of	the	tree	itself;	you	cannot	put	it	onto	the
tree	from	the	outside.	You	can,	but	that	will	be	a	dead	flower.	It	may	deceive
others	but	it	cannot	deceive	the	tree	itself.	The	tree	knows,	“This	is	just	a	dead
flower	hanging	on	my	branch.	And	this	is	just	a	weight.	This	is	not	a	happiness,
this	is	just	a	burden.”	The	tree	cannot	celebrate	it,	the	tree	cannot	welcome	it.
The	 tree	 can	 welcome	 only	 something	 which	 comes	 from	 the	 very	 roots,
from	its	inner	being,	the	innermost	core.	And	when	it	comes	from	its	innermost
core,	the	flower	becomes	its	soul.	And	through	the	flower	the	tree	expresses	its
dance,	 its	 song.	 Its	whole	 life	becomes	meaningful.	 Just	 like	 that,	 the	answer
will	 come	 out	 of	 you,	 out	 of	 your	 roots.	 Then	 you	will	 dance	 it.	 Then	 your
whole	life	will	become	meaningful.
If	 the	answer	is	given	from	without	 it	will	be	just	a	sign,	a	dead	sign.	If	 it
comes	 from	within	 it	will	 not	be	 a	 sign,	 it	will	 be	 a	 significance.	Remember
these	 two	 words,	 sign	 and	 significance.	 Sign	 can	 be	 given	 from	 without,
significance	 can	 only	 flower	 from	 within.	 Philosophy	 works	 with	 signs,
concepts,	 words.	 Religion	 works	 with	 significance;	 it	 is	 not	 concerned	 with
words,	signs	or	symbols.
But	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 an	 arduous	 journey	 for	 you	 because	 nobody	 can
really	 help,	 and	 all	 the	 helpers	 are,	 in	 a	way,	 hindrances.	 If	 somebody	 is	 too
patronizing	and	gives	you	the	answer,	he	is	your	enemy.	Patanjali	is	not	going
to	give	you	 the	answer,	he	 is	only	going	 to	 indicate	 to	you	 the	path,	 the	way
from	where	 your	 own	 answer	will	 arise,	 from	where	 you	will	 encounter	 the
answer.
The	great	masters	have	only	given	methods,	they	have	not	given	the	answer.
Philosophers	 have	 given	 answers,	 but	 Patanjali,	 Jesus	 or	 Buddha,	 have	 not
given	answers.	You	ask	for	answers	and	they	give	you	methods,	they	give	you
techniques.	You	 have	 to	work	 your	 answer	 out	 yourself	 through	 your	 effort,
through	 your	 suffering,	 through	 your	 penetration.	 Only	 through	 your
tapascharya	 can	 the	 answer	 come,	 and	 it	 can	 become	 a	 significance.	 Your
fulfillment	is	through	it.
	
The	third	question:
Osho,
Buddha	finally	conveyed	to	Mahakashyapa	what	he	could	not	convey	to	anybody	else
through	words.	In	what	category	of	knowledge	–	direct,	inferential	and	words	of	the
awakened	ones	–	does	it	come?	What	was	the	message?
First,	 you	 ask,	 “What	 was	 the	 message?”	 If	 Buddha	 could	 not	 convey	 it
through	words,	I	also	cannot	convey	it	through	words.	It	is	not	possible.
I	will	tell	you	one	anecdote…
	
A	disciple	came	to	Mulla	Nasruddin	and	he	asked	the	Mulla,	“I	have	heard
that	 you	 have	 the	 secret,	 the	 ultimate	 secret,	 the	 key	which	 can	 open	 all	 the
doors	of	mystery.”
Nasruddin	said,	“Yes,	I	have	got	it.	But	what	about	it?	Why	are	you	asking
about	it?”
The	man	fell	down	at	his	feet	and	he	said,	“I	was	in	search	of	you,	master.	If
you	have	the	key	and	the	secret,	tell	it	to	me.”
Nasruddin	said,	“If	it	is	such	a	secret,	you	must	understand	it	cannot	be	told
so	easily.	You	will	have	to	wait.”
The	disciple	asked,	“How	long?”
Nasruddin	said,	“That	too	is	not	certain.	It	depends	on	your	patience	–	three
years	or	thirty	years.”
The	disciple	waited.	After	 three	 years	 he	 asked	 again.	Nasruddin	 said,	 “If
you	 ask	 again,	 then	 it	 will	 take	 thirty	 years.	 Just	 wait.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary
thing,	it	is	the	ultimate	secret.”
Thirty	 years	 passed	 and	 the	 disciple	 said,	 “Master,	 now	my	whole	 life	 is
wasted.	I	have	not	got	anything.	Now,	give	me	the	secret.”
Nasruddin	said,	“There	is	a	condition:	you	will	have	to	promise	me	that	you
will	keep	it	a	secret,	you	will	not	say	it	to	anybody.”
The	man	said,	“I	promise	you	that	 it	will	remain	a	secret	until	I	die.	I	will
not	mention	it	to	anyone.”
Nasruddin	 said,	 “Thank	you.	This	 is	what	my	master	 said	 to	me,	 and	 this
was	my	promise	to	my	master.	And	if	you	can	keep	it	a	secret	until	death,	what
do	you	think?	Cannot	I	keep	it	a	secret?”
	
If	Buddha	was	silent,	I	can	also	be	silent	about	it.	There	is	something	which
cannot	be	said.	It	is	not	a	message,	because	messages	can	always	be	said.	And
if	they	cannot	be	said	they	cannot	be	messages.	A	message	is	something	said,
something	to	be	said	that	can	be	said.	A	message	is	always	verbal.
Buddha	 has	 not	 a	message,	 that’s	why	 he	 couldn’t	 say	 it.	 There	were	 ten
thousand	disciples,	but	only	Mahakashyapa	got	it	because	he	could	understand
Buddha’s	 silence.	 That	 is	 the	 secret	 of	 the	 secret:	 he	 could	 understand	 the
silence.
	
Buddha	 remained	 silent	 under	 his	 tree	 one	 morning.	 And	 he	 was	 really
going	 to	give	a	 sermon	and	everybody	was	waiting.	He	 remained	 silent.	The
disciples	became	uneasy.	It	had	never	happened	before:	he	would	come	and	he
would	speak,	and	he	would	go.	But	half	an	hour	had	passed.	The	sun	had	risen,
everybody	was	feeling	hot.	There	was	silence	superficially,	but	everybody	was
uncomfortable	inside,	chattering	inside,	asking,	“Why	is	Buddha	silent	today?”
And	 he	 sat	 there	 under	 his	 tree	 with	 a	 flower	 in	 his	 hand	 and	 went	 on
looking	 at	 the	 flower	 as	 if	 he	 was	 not	 even	 aware	 of	 those	 ten	 thousand
disciples	who	had	gathered	to	listen.	They	had	come	from	very,	very	faraway
villages.	From	all	over	the	country,	they	had	gathered.
Then	somebody	said,	 somebody	gathered	courage	and	said,	“Why	are	you
not	 speaking?	 We	 are	 waiting.”	 Buddha	 is	 reported	 to	 have	 said,	 “I	 am
speaking.	This	half	hour,	I	have	been	speaking.”
It	was	too	paradoxical.	It	was	patently	absurd	–	he	had	remained	silent,	he
had	not	said	anything.	But	to	say	to	Buddha,	“You	are	talking	absurdities,”	was
not	possible.	The	disciples	again	remained	silent,	more	troubled	now.
And	suddenly	one	disciple,	Mahakashyapa,	started	laughing.	Buddha	called
him	near,	gave	him	the	flower	and	said,	“Whatsoever	can	be	said,	I	have	said	to
others,	and	that	which	cannot	be	said	I	have	given	to	you.”	He	only	gave	the
flower,	 but	 this	 flower	 is	 just	 a	 symbol.	With	 the	 flower	 he	 had	 given	 some
significance	also.	This	flower	was	just	a	sign,	but	he	had	conveyed	something
else	which	cannot	be	conveyed	by	words.
	
You	 also	 know	certain	 feelings	which	 cannot	 be	 conveyed.	When	you	 are
deep	 in	 love,	what	 do	 you	do?	You	will	 feel	 it	meaningless	 to	 simply	 go	 on
saying,	“I	love	you,	I	love	you.”	And	if	you	say	it	too	much	the	other	will	get
bored.	And	 if	 you	go	on	 repeating	 the	 other	will	 think	you	 are	 just	 a	 parrot.
And	if	you	continue	the	other	will	think	that	you	don’t	know	what	love	is.
When	you	feel	 love	it	 is	meaningless	to	say	that	you	love.	You	have	to	do
something	–	something	significant.	It	may	be	a	kiss,	it	may	be	a	hug,	it	may	be
just	 taking	 the	 other’s	 hand	 into	 your	 hands,	 not	 doing	 anything,	 but	 it	 is	 a
significance.	 You	 are	 conveying	 something	 which	 cannot	 be	 conveyed	 by
words.
Buddha	conveyed	something	which	cannot	be	conveyed	by	words.	He	gave
the	flower.	It	was	a	gift.	That	gift	is	visible;	something	invisible	is	passing	with
that	gift.
When	you	take	the	hand	of	your	friend	in	your	hand,	it	is	visible.	Just	taking
the	hand	of	your	friend	in	your	hand	doesn’t	make	much	sense,	but	something
else	 is	 passing.	 It	 is	 an	 exchange.	 Some	 energy,	 some	 feeling,	 something	 so
deep	that	words	cannot	express	it	 is	passing.	This	is	a	sign,	 the	hand	is	 just	a
sign.	Significance	is	invisible,	it	is	passing.	It	is	not	a	message,	it	is	a	gift,	it	is
grace.
Buddha	 has	 given	 himself,	 he	 has	 not	 given	 any	message.	He	 has	 poured
himself	 into	Mahakashyapa.	And	Mahakashyapa	became	capable	of	receiving
this	for	two	reasons.	One	was	that	he	remained	totally	silent	while	Buddha	was
silent.	 Others	 were	 also	 apparently	 silent,	 but	 they	 were	 not;	 they	 were
continuously	 thinking,	 “Why	 is	 Buddha	 silent?”	 They	 were	 looking	 at	 each
other,	making	gestures	–	“What	has	happened	to	Buddha?	Has	he	gone	mad?
He	has	never	been	so	silent.”
Nobody	 was	 silent.	 Only	 Mahakashyapa,	 in	 that	 great	 assembly	 of	 ten
thousand	monks,	was	silent.	He	was	not	troubled,	he	was	not	thinking.	Buddha
was	looking	at	the	flower	and	Mahakashyapa	was	looking	at	Buddha.	And	you
cannot	 find	 a	 greater	 flower	 than	Buddha.	That	was	 the	highest	 flowering	of
human	 consciousness.	 So	 Buddha	 went	 on	 looking	 at	 the	 flower	 and
Mahakashyapa	 went	 on	 looking	 at	 Buddha.	 Only	 two	 persons	 were	 not
thinking.	Buddha	was	not	 thinking;	he	was	 looking.	And	Mahakashyapa	was
not	 thinking;	 he	 was	 also	 looking.	 This	 was	 the	 one	 thing	 that	 made	 him
capable	of	receiving.
And	 the	 second	 thing	 was	 that	 he	 laughed.	 If	 silence	 cannot	 become
celebration,	 if	 silence	 cannot	 become	 a	 laughter,	 if	 silence	 cannot	 become	 a
dance,	if	silence	cannot	become	an	ecstasy,	then	it	is	pathological.	Then	it	will
become	sadness.	Then	it	will	turn	into	a	disease.	Then	silence	will	not	be	alive,
it	will	be	dead.
You	can	become	silent	just	by	becoming	dead,	but	then	you	will	not	receive
Buddha’s	grace.	Then	the	divine	cannot	descend	in	you.	The	divine	needs	two
things:	silence	and	a	dancing	silence	–	a	silence,	alive.	And	he	was	both	in	that
moment.	He	was	silent,	and	when	everybody	was	serious	he	laughed.	Buddha
poured	himself:	that	is	not	a	message.
Attain	these	two	things	then	I	can	pour	myself	into	you.	Be	silent,	and	don’t
make	that	silence	a	sad	thing.	Allow	it	to	be	laughing	and	dancing.	The	silence
must	be	childlike,	full	of	energy,	vibrant,	ecstatic.	It	should	not	be	dead.	Then,
only	then,	can	what	Buddha	did	to	Mahakashyapa	be	done	to	you.
My	whole	 effort	 is	 that	 somebody,	 someday	 will	 become	Mahakashyapa.
But	it	is	not	a	message.
	
The	fourth	question:
Osho,
You	have	often	said	that	most	scriptures	have	a	lot	of	what	are	called	“interpolations.”	Do
the	Yoga	Sutras	of	Patanjali	also	suffer	from	this	defect,	and	how	will	you	deal	with	it?
No,	 Patanjali’s	 Yoga	 Sutras	 are	 absolutely	 pure.	 No	 one	 has	 ever
interpolated	 anything	 into	 them.	 There	 are	 reasons	 it	 cannot	 be	 done.	 First,
Patanjali’s	Yoga	Sutras	 is	 not	 a	 popular	 scripture.	 It	 is	 not	 a	Gita,	 it	 is	 not	 a
Ramayana,	it	is	not	a	Bible.	The	common	masses	have	never	been	interested	in
it.	When	the	common	masses	are	interested	in	something,	they	make	it	impure.
It	is	bound	to	be	so	because	then	the	scripture	has	to	be	dragged	down	to	their
level.
Patanjali’s	Yoga	 Sutras	 has	 remained	 only	 for	 experts;	 only	 a	 few	 chosen
ones	will	get	interested	in	it.	Not	everybody	is	going	to	be	interested.	And	if	by
chance	you	happen	to	accidentally	have	Patanjali’s	Yoga	Sutras,	you	can	read
only	a	few	pages	and	then	you	will	throw	it	away.	It	is	not	for	you.	It	is	not	a
story,	 it	 is	not	a	drama,	 it	 is	not	an	allegory.	 It	 is	a	simple,	 scientific	 treatise,
only	for	the	few.	And	the	way	it	has	been	written	is	such	that	those	who	are	not
ready	for	it	will	turn	their	back	automatically.
A	similar	case	has	happened	in	this	century	with	Gurdjieff.	For	thirty	years
continuously	he	was	preparing	one	book.	A	man	of	the	caliber	of	Gurdjieff	can
do	that	work	in	three	days.	Even	three	days	may	be	more	than	enough.	Lao	Tzu
had	done	it:	in	three	days	the	whole	Tao	Te	Ching	was	written.	Gurdjieff	could
have	done	it	in	three	days;	there	was	no	difficulty	–	but	for	thirty	years	he	was
writing	his	 first	book.	And	what	was	he	doing?	He	would	write	one	chapter,
and	then	he	would	allow	it	to	be	read	before	his	disciples.	The	disciples	would
be	 listening	 to	 the	 chapter	 and	 he	would	 be	 looking	 at	 the	 disciples.	 If	 they
could	 understand,	 he	would	 change	 it.	 That	was	 the	 condition:	 if	 they	 could
understand	he	would	change	 it.	 If	he	 saw	 that	 they	were	 following	 it,	 then	 it
was	wrong.	Continuously,	for	 thirty	years,	every	chapter	was	read	a	 thousand
and	 one	 times,	 and	 every	 time	 he	 was	 watching.	 When	 the	 book	 became
completely	 impossible,	 that	 no	one	 could	 read	 and	understand	 it,	 then	 it	was
ready.
Even	a	very	intelligent	person	will	have	to	read	it	at	least	seven	times;	then
glimpses	of	meaning	will	start	coming.	And	that	too	will	be	just	glimpses.	If	he
wants	to	penetrate	more,	then	he	will	have	to	practice	whatsoever	Gurdjieff	has
said,	and	through	practice	meanings	will	become	clear.	And	it	will	take	at	least
one’s	whole	life	to	come	to	the	total	understanding	of	what	he	has	written.
This	 type	 of	 book	 cannot	 be	 interpolated.	 Really,	 it	 is	 said	 that	 very	 few
people	 have	 read	 his	 first	 book	 completely.	 lt	 is	 difficult;	 it	 is	 one	 thousand
pages.	 So	 when	 the	 first	 edition	 was	 published,	 he	 published	 it	 with	 a
condition:	 only	 one	 hundred	 pages,	 the	 introductory	 part,	 was	 cut	 open.	 All
other	pages	were	not	cut	open,	 they	were	left	uncut.	Only	one	hundred	pages
were	cut,	and	a	note	was	given	on	the	book,	“If	you	can	read	the	one	hundred
pages	and	still	 think	 to	read	ahead,	 then	cut	open	 the	other	pages.	Otherwise,
return	the	book	to	the	publisher	and	take	your	money	back.”
It	is	said	that	there	are	very	few	people	alive	who	have	read	the	whole	book
completely.	It	is	written	in	such	a	way	that	you	will	get	fed	up.	Reading	twenty,
twenty-five	pages,	it	is	enough;	and	this	man	seems	to	be	mad.
These	are	sutras,	Patanjali’s	sutras;	everything	has	been	condensed	in	a	seed.
Somebody	was	 asking	me,	 “Patanjali	 has	 condensed	 sutras…”	 Just	 the	 other
day	 somebody	 came	 and	 asked	 me,	 “…and	 you	 speak	 so	 much	 on	 those
sutras.”	I	have	to,	because	he	has	made	a	tree	a	seed,	and	I	have	to	make	the
seed	again	a	tree.
Each	 sutra	 is	 condensed,	 totally	 condensed.	You	 cannot	 do	 anything	 in	 it,
and	no	one	is	interested	to.	Just	to	keep	the	book	always	pure,	this	was	one	of
the	methods.	And	for	many	thousands	of	years	the	book	was	not	written,	it	was
just	 memorized	 by	 disciples;	 it	 was	 given	 from	 one	 to	 the	 other	 just	 as	 a
memory.	It	was	not	written,	so	nobody	could	do	anything	to	it.	It	was	a	sacred
memory,	preserved.	And	even	when	the	book	was	written	it	was	written	in	such
a	way	that	if	you	put	something	in	it,	it	will	be	found	immediately.
Unless	a	person	of	the	caliber	of	Patanjali	tries	that,	it	cannot	be	done.	You
cannot	do	it.	Just	think,	if	you	have	one	Einstein	formula,	what	can	you	do	to
it?	 If	 you	 do	 anything,	 it	 will	 be	 immediately	 caught.	 Unless	 a	 mind	 like
Einstein	 tries	 to	 play	with	 it	 nothing	 can	 be	 done.	 The	 formula	 is	 complete,
nothing	can	be	added,	nothing	can	be	deleted.	In	itself,	it	is	a	unit.	Whatsoever
you	do,	you	will	be	caught.
These	are	seed	formulas.	If	you	add	a	single	word,	anyone	who	is	working
on	the	path	of	Yoga	will	immediately	come	to	know	that	this	is	wrong.
I	will	tell	you	one	anecdote…
	
It	 happened	 just	 in	 this	 century.	 One	 of	 the	 greatest	 poets	 of	 India,
Rabindranath	 Tagore,	 translated	 his	 own	 book,	 Gitanjali,	 from	 Bengali	 to
English.	He	translated	it	himself,	and	then	he	was	a	little	hesitant	whether	the
translation	was	okay	or	not.	So	he	asked	C.	F.	Andrews,	one	of	the	friends	and
disciples	 of	 Mahatma	 Gandhi,	 “Just	 go	 through	 it.	 How	 has	 the	 translation
come	 out?”	 C.	 F.	 Andrews	 was	 not	 a	 poet,	 he	 was	 an	 Englishman,	 well
educated,	knowing	the	language,	the	grammar	and	everything,	but	he	was	not	a
poet.
So	 at	 four	 spots,	 on	 four	 points,	 he	 told	 Rabindranath	 to	 change	 certain
words:	“They	are	ungrammatical,	and	English	people	will	not	follow	them.”	So
Rabindranath	 simply	 changed	 whatsoever	 Andrews	 suggested.	 He	 changed
four	words	 in	all	 in	his	 translation.	Then	he	went	 to	London,	and	 in	a	poets’
gathering	which	 had	 been	 arranged	 by	 one	 of	 the	 English	 poets	 of	 his	 time,
Yeats,	the	translation	was	read	for	the	first	time.
When	the	whole	translation	was	read,	everybody	listened	and	Rabindranath
asked,	 “Have	 you	 any	 suggestions?	 Because	 this	 is	 just	 a	 translation	 and
English	is	not	my	mother	tongue.”
And	it	is	very	difficult	to	translate	poetry.	Yeats,	who	was	a	poet	of	the	same
caliber	as	Rabindranath,	said,	“Only	at	four	points	is	something	wrong”	–	and
those	were	exactly	the	four	words	that	Andrews	had	suggested!
Rabindranath	couldn’t	believe	 it.	He	said,	“How,	how	could	you	 find	out?
Because	these	are	the	four	words	I	have	not	translated:	Andrews	suggested	and
I	have	put	them	in.”
Yeats	said,	“The	whole	poetry	is	a	flow,	only	these	four	are	like	stones;	the
flow	is	broken.	It	seems	somebody	else	has	done	the	work.	Your	language	may
not	be	grammatical,	your	language	is	not	one	hundred	percent	right	–	it	cannot
be,	 that	we	can	understand	–	but	 it	 is	one	hundred	percent	poetry.	These	four
words	have	come	from	a	schoolmaster.	The	grammar	has	become	right	but	the
poetry	has	gone	wrong.”
	
With	Patanjali,	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything.	Anyone	who	 is	working	on	Yoga
will	 find	 immediately	 that	 someone	 else	 who	 doesn’t	 know	 anything	 has
interpolated	something.	There	are	very	few	books	which	are	still	pure,	and	the
purity	has	been	retained.	This	is	one	of	them.	Nothing	has	been	changed,	not	a
single	word,	nothing	has	been	added.	It	is	as	Patanjali	meant	it	to	be.
This	is	a	work	of	objective	art.	When	I	say	a	work	of	objective	art,	I	mean	a
certain	 thing.	 Every	 precaution	 has	 been	 taken.	 While	 these	 sutras	 were
condensed,	 every	 precaution	 has	 been	 taken	 so	 that	 they	 could	 not	 be
destroyed.	They	have	been	constructed	in	such	a	way	that	anything	foreign,	any
foreign	 element	will	 become	a	 jarring	note.	But	 I	 say	 if	 a	man	 like	Patanjali
tries,	he	can	do	that.
But	 a	 man	 like	 Patanjali	 will	 never	 try	 such	 a	 thing.	 Only	 lesser	 minds
always	 try	 to	 interpolate.	 And	 lesser	 minds	 can	 try	 that,	 and	 the	 thing	 can
continue,	interpolated,	only	when	it	becomes	a	mass	thing.	The	masses	are	not
aware,	cannot	be	aware.	Only	Yeats	became	aware	that	something	was	wrong
in	the	poetry	of	Rabindranath.	There	were	many	others	present	in	the	gathering;
no	one	else	was	aware.
This	is	a	secret	cult,	a	secret	heritage.	And	the	book	is	written,	but	the	book
form	has	not	been	thought	to	be	reliable.	There	are	still	persons	alive	who	have
got	 Patanjali’s	 sutras	 directly	 from	 their	master,	 not	 from	 the	 book.	And	 the
tradition	 has	 yet	 remained	 alive,	 and	 it	 will	 continue	 because	 books	 are	 not
reliable.	Sometimes	books	can	be	lost.	Many	things	can	go	wrong	with	books.
So	 there	 is	 a	 secret	 tradition,	 and	 that	 tradition	 has	 been	maintained.	And
those	who	 know	 through	 the	words	 of	 their	master,	 they	 go	 on	 continuously
checking	whether	there	is	something	wrong	or	something	has	been	changed	in
the	book	form.
This	 has	 not	 been	maintained	 for	 other	 scriptures.	The	Bible	 has	 so	many
interpolations	that	if	Jesus	comes	back	he	will	not	be	able	to	understand	what
has	happened,	how	these	things	have	come	in,	because	not	until	three	hundred
years	after	Jesus	died	was	the	Bible	recorded	for	 the	first	 time.	In	these	three
hundred	 years	 many	 things	 disappeared.	 Even	 his	 disciples	 have	 different
stories	to	tell.
Buddha	died.	Two	hundred	years	 after	his	death	his	words	were	 recorded.
There	are	many	schools,	many	scriptures,	and	no	one	can	say	which	is	true	and
which	is	false.	But	Buddha	was	talking	to	the	masses,	so	he	is	not	condensed
like	Patanjali.	He	was	talking	to	the	masses,	 to	the	ordinary,	common	people.
He	was	elaborating	things,	in	detail.	In	those	details	many	things	can	be	added,
many	things	can	be	deleted,	and	no	one	will	become	aware	that	something	has
been	done.
But	Patanjali	was	not	talking	to	the	masses.	He	was	talking	to	a	very	select
few,	a	group,	a	group	of	very	few	persons,	just	like	Gurdjieff.	Gurdjieff	never
talked	 before	 the	masses.	A	 very	 selected	 group	 of	 his	 disciples	was	 able	 to
listen	to	him,	and	that	too	with	many	conditions.	No	meeting	was	ever	declared
beforehand.	 If	 he	was	 going	 to	 talk	 this	 night,	 at	 eight-thirty,	 then	 nearabout
eight	 o’clock	 you	 would	 get	 the	 indication	 that	 Gurdjieff	 was	 going	 to	 talk
somewhere.	And	you	have	 to	 reach	 there	 immediately	because	at	 eight-thirty
the	doors	would	be	closed.	And	these	thirty	minutes	were	never	enough.	And
when	you	reached	you	might	find	that	he	had	canceled.	Next	day,	again…
Once	 he	 continually	 cancelled	 for	 seven	 days.	 The	 first	 day	 four	 hundred
people	came,	the	last	day	only	fourteen.	By	and	by	they	got	discouraged.	And
then	it	seemed	impossible	that	he	was	going	to	talk.	The	last	day,	only	fourteen
people	were	there.	When	he	looked,	he	said,	“Now	the	right	amount	of	people
are	left.	You	could	wait	for	seven	days	and	you	were	not	discouraged,	so	now
you	have	earned	it.	Now	I	will	speak,	and	only	these	fourteen	will	be	able	to
listen	to	this	series.	Now	no	one	is	to	be	informed	that	I	have	started	speaking.”
This	 type	of	work	 is	 different.	Patanjali	worked	with	 a	 very	 closed	 circle.
That’s	why	 no	 religion	 has	 come	 out	 of	 it,	 no	 organization.	 Patanjali	 has	 no
sect.	Such	a	 tremendous	 force,	but	he	 remained	closed	within	a	 small	group.
And	he	worked	it	out	in	such	a	way	that	the	purity	should	be	maintained.	It	has
been	maintained	up	to	now.
	
The	last	question:
Osho,
Would	you	please	explain	the	working	of	that	unknown	force	which	keeps	the	human	mind
attracted,	attached	to	worldly	things	and	habits,	in	spite	of	being	fully	aware	that	the
ultimate	result	is	nothing	but	misery?
The	awareness	is	not	total,	the	awareness	is	just	intellectual.	Logically	you
follow,	“Whatsoever	I	am	doing	is	leading	me	to	misery,”	but	this	is	not	your
existential	experience.	Just	rationally	you	understand.	If	you	were	reason	alone
then	there	would	be	no	problem,	but	you	are	“unreason”	also.	If	you	had	only	a
conscious	mind	 then	 it	would	 be	 okay;	 you	 have	 an	 unconscious	mind	 also.
The	conscious	mind	knows	that	you	are	going	into	misery	every	day	by	your
own	efforts;	you	are	creating	your	own	hell.	But	the	unconscious	is	not	aware,
and	 the	 unconscious	 is	 nine	 times	more	 than	 your	 conscious	mind.	And	 that
unconscious	goes	on	persisting	in	its	own	habits.
You	 decide	 not	 to	 be	 angry	 again	 because	 anger	 is	 doing	 nothing	 but
poisoning	your	 own	 system.	 It	 gives	 you	misery.	But	 the	next	 time	 someone
insults	 you	 the	 unconscious	 will	 put	 aside	 your	 conscious	 reasoning,	 it	 will
erupt,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 angry.	 That	 unconscious	 has	 not	 known	 about	 your
decision	at	all,	and	that	unconscious	remains	the	active	force.
The	conscious	mind	 is	not	active.	 It	only	 thinks,	 it	 is	 a	 thinker;	 it	 is	not	a
doer.	So	what	has	 to	be	done?	Just	by	 thinking	consciously	 that	something	 is
wrong	you	are	not	going	to	stop	it.	You	will	have	to	work	at	a	discipline,	and
through	discipline	 this	conscious	knowledge	will	penetrate	 like	an	arrow	 into
the	unconscious.
Through	discipline,	 through	Yoga,	through	practice,	 the	conscious	decision
will	reach	into	the	unconscious,	and	when	it	reaches	into	the	unconscious	only
then	will	it	be	of	any	use.	Otherwise	you	will	go	on	thinking	one	thing	and	you
will	go	on	doing	something	quite	the	contrary.
St.	Augustine	says,	“Whatsoever	good	I	know,	I	always	think	to	do	it	–	but
whenever	 the	 opportunity	 to	 do	 it	 comes	 I	 always	 do	whatsoever	 is	wrong.”
This	is	the	human	dilemma.
And	Yoga	 is	 the	path	 to	bridge	 the	conscious	with	 the	unconscious.	When
we	go	deeper	into	the	discipline	you	will	become	aware	how	this	can	be	done.
And	 this	 can	 be	 done.	 So	 don’t	 rely	 on	 the	 conscious,	 it	 is	 inactive;	 the
unconscious	 is	 the	 active.	 Change	 the	 unconscious,	 only	 then	 will	 your	 life
have	 a	 different	 meaning.	 Otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 in	 more	 misery.	 Thinking
something	and	doing	something	else	will	constantly	create	chaos,	and	by	and
by	 you	 will	 lose	 self-confidence.	 By	 and	 by	 you	 will	 feel	 that	 you	 are
absolutely	 incapable,	 impotent,	you	cannot	do	anything.	A	self-condemnation
will	arise.	You	will	feel	guilty.
And	guilt	is	the	only	sin.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	7:	An	Ecstasy	Is	Born
	
Their	cessation	is	brought	about	by	persistent
inner	effort	and	non-attachment
Of	these	two,	abhyasa,	the	inner	practice,
is	the	effort	to	be	firmly	established	in	oneself.
It	becomes	firmly	grounded	when	continued	for	a	long
time,	without	interruption	and	with	reverent	devotion.
Man	is	not	only	his	conscious	mind.	He	has	also	nine	times	more	than	the
conscious	 –	 the	 unconscious	 layer	 of	 the	 mind.	 Not	 only	 that,	 man	 has	 the
body,	the	soma,	in	which	this	mind	exists.	The	body	is	absolutely	unconscious.
Its	working	is	almost	non-voluntary.	Only	the	surface	of	the	body	is	voluntary;
the	inner	sources	are	non-voluntary,	you	cannot	do	anything	about	them,	your
will	is	not	effective.
This	pattern	of	man’s	existence	has	 to	be	understood	before	one	can	enter
into	oneself.	And	the	understanding	should	not	remain	only	intellectual.	It	must
go	deeper,	 it	must	penetrate	 the	unconscious	 layers;	 it	must	 reach	 to	 the	very
body	itself.
Hence,	the	importance	of	abhyasa,	constant	inner	practice.	These	two	words
are	 very	 significant:	 abhyasa	 and	 vairagya.	 Abhyasa	 means	 constant	 inner
practice,	 and	 vairagya	 means	 non-attachment,	 desirelessness.	 The	 coming
sutras	of	Patanjali	are	concerned	with	these	two	most	significant	concepts,	but
before	we	enter	 the	sutras	 it	has	 to	be	 firmly	grasped	 that	 this,	 the	pattern	of
human	personality,	is	not	totally	intellectual.
If	it	were	only	intellect	then	there	would	be	no	need	for	abhyasa	–	constant,
repetitive	 effort.	 You	 can	 understand	 anything	 immediately	 if	 it	 is	 rational,
through	 the	mind,	 but	 just	 that	 understanding	won’t	 do.	You	 can	 understand
easily	that	anger	is	bad,	poisonous,	but	this	understanding	is	not	enough	for	the
anger	to	leave	you,	to	disappear.	In	spite	of	your	understanding	the	anger	will
continue,	because	 the	anger	exists	 in	many	 layers	of	your	unconscious	mind,
and	not	only	in	the	mind,	but	in	your	body	also.
The	body	cannot	understand	just	by	verbal	communication.	Only	your	head
can	 understand;	 the	 body	 remains	 unaffected.	 And	 unless	 understanding
reaches	 to	 the	 very	 roots	 of	 the	 body	 you	 cannot	 be	 transformed.	 You	 will
remain	 the	 same.	 Your	 ideas	 may	 go	 on	 changing	 but	 your	 personality	 will
persist.	And	then	a	new	conflict	will	arise	and	you	will	be	in	more	turmoil	than
ever,	because	now	you	can	see	what	is	wrong	and	still	you	persist	in	doing	it,
you	go	on	doing	it.	A	self-guilt	and	condemnation	is	created.	You	start	hating
yourself,	you	start	thinking	yourself	a	sinner.	And	the	more	you	understand,	the
more	 condemnation	 grows,	 because	 you	 see	 how	 difficult	 it	 is,	 almost
impossible,	to	change	yourself.
Yoga	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 intellectual	 understanding.	 It	 believes	 in	 bodily
understanding,	 in	a	 total	understanding	 in	which	your	wholeness	 is	 involved.
Not	only	do	you	change	in	your	head,	but	the	deep	sources	of	your	being	also
change.
How	can	they	change?	Constant	repetition	of	a	particular	practice	becomes
non-voluntary.	 If	 you	 do	 a	 particular	 practice	 constantly,	 just	 repeating	 it
continuously,	by	and	by	it	drops	from	the	conscious,	reaches	to	the	unconscious
and	 becomes	 part	 of	 it.	 Once	 it	 becomes	 part	 of	 the	 unconscious	 it	 starts
functioning	from	that	deep	source.
Anything	 can	 become	unconscious	 if	 you	 go	 on	 repeating	 it	 continuously.
For	example,	your	name	has	been	repeated	so	constantly	from	your	childhood
that	now	it	is	not	part	of	the	conscious,	it	has	become	part	of	the	unconscious.
You	may	be	 sleeping	with	 one	 hundred	 persons	 in	 a	 room,	 and	 if	 somebody
comes	 and	 calls	 “Ram?	 Is	 Ram	 there?”	 ninety-nine	 persons	 who	 are	 not
concerned	with	the	name	will	go	on	sleeping.	They	will	not	be	disturbed.	But
the	person	who	has	the	name	Ram	will	suddenly	ask,	“Who	is	calling	me?	Why
are	you	disturbing	my	sleep?”
Even	 in	sleep,	he	knows	his	name	 is	Ram.	How	has	 this	name	reached	so
deep?	 –	 just	 by	 constant	 repetition.	 Everybody	 is	 repeating	 his	 name,
everybody	is	calling	it;	and	he	himself,	 introducing	himself	–	continuous	use.
Now	it	is	not	conscious,	it	has	reached	to	the	unconscious.
The	 language,	 your	 mother	 tongue,	 becomes	 a	 part	 of	 the	 unconscious.
Whatsoever	else	you	learn	later	on	will	never	be	so	unconscious,	it	will	remain
conscious.	That’s	why	your	unconscious	language	will	continuously	affect	your
conscious	language.	If	a	German	speaks	English	it	is	different,	if	a	Frenchman
speaks	English	 it	 is	 different,	 if	 an	 Indian	 speaks	English	 it	 is	 different.	 The
difference	 is	not	 in	English,	 the	difference	 is	 in	 their	 innermost	patterns.	The
Frenchman	 has	 a	 different	 pattern,	 unconscious	 pattern	 that	 affects	 it.	 So
whatsoever	you	learn	later	on	will	be	affected	by	your	mother	tongue.	And	if
you	fall	unconscious,	then	only	your	mother	tongue	can	penetrate.
I	 remember	 one	 of	 my	 friends	 who	 was	 a	 Maharashtrian.	 He	 was	 in
Germany	for	twenty	years,	or	even	more.	For	twenty	years	he	used	the	German
language.	 He	 had	 completely	 forgotten	 his	 own	mother	 tongue,	Marathi.	 He
couldn’t	read	it,	he	couldn’t	talk	it.	Consciously,	the	language	was	completely
forgotten	because	it	was	not	used.
Then	 he	 became	 ill,	 and	 in	 that	 illness	 sometimes	 he	 would	 become
unconscious.	Whenever	he	would	become	unconscious,	a	totally	different	type
of	personality	would	evolve.	He	would	start	behaving	in	a	different	way.	In	his
unconscious	he	would	utter	words	from	Marathi,	not	 from	German.	When	he
was	 unconscious	 then	 he	 would	 utter	 words	 which	 are	 from	 the	 Marathi
language.	 And	 after	 his	 unconsciousness,	 when	 he	 would	 come	 back	 to	 the
conscious,	for	a	few	minutes	he	would	not	be	able	to	understand	German.
Constant	repetition	in	childhood	goes	deeper,	because	the	child	really	has	no
conscious.	He	 has	more	 of	 the	 unconscious	 just	 near	 the	 surface;	 everything
enters	 into	 the	unconscious.	As	he	 learns,	 as	 he	gets	 educated,	 the	 conscious
will	 become	 a	 thicker	 layer,	 and	 then	 there	will	 be	 less	 and	 less	 penetration
towards	the	unconscious.
Psychologists	 say	 that	 almost	 fifty	 percent	 of	 your	 learning	 is	 finished	 by
your	 seventh	 year	 of	 age.	 By	 the	 seventh	 year	 of	 your	 life	 you	 have	 known
almost	half	of	the	things	that	you	are	ever	going	to	know.	Half	your	education
is	finished,	and	this	half	is	going	to	be	the	base.	Now	everything	else	will	just
be	imposed	on	it	and	the	deeper	pattern	of	childhood	will	remain.
That’s	why	modern	psychology,	modern	psychoanalysis,	psychiatry,	all	 try
to	 penetrate	 into	 your	 childhood,	 because	 if	 you	 are	mentally	 ill,	 somewhere
the	seed	is	to	be	found	in	your	childhood.	The	pattern	must	be	located	there	in
your	childhood.	Once	that	deep	pattern	is	located,	then	something	can	be	done
and	you	can	be	transformed.
But	how	to	penetrate	it?	Yoga	has	a	method.	That	method	is	called	abhyasa.
Abhyasa	 means	 the	 constant,	 repetitive	 practice	 of	 a	 certain	 thing.	 Why,
through	 repetition,	 does	 something	 become	 unconscious?	 There	 are	 a	 few
reasons	for	it.
If	you	want	to	learn	something	you	will	have	to	repeat	it.	Why?	If	you	read	a
poem	just	once,	you	may	remember	a	few	words	here	and	there.	But	if	you	read
it	twice,	thrice,	many	more	times,	then	you	can	remember	lines,	paragraphs.	If
you	repeat	it	a	hundred	times	then	you	will	remember	it	as	a	whole	pattern.	If
you	repeat	it	even	more	then	it	may	continue,	persist	in	your	memory	for	years.
You	may	not	be	able	to	forget	it.
What	is	happening?	When	you	repeat	a	certain	thing,	the	more	you	repeat,
the	more	 it	 is	 engraved	on	 the	brain	cells.	A	constant	 repetition	 is	 a	 constant
hammering.	Then	it	is	ingrained,	it	becomes	a	part	of	your	brain	cells.	And	the
more	 it	 becomes	 a	part	 of	 your	brain	 cells,	 the	 less	 consciousness	 is	 needed.
Your	consciousness	can	move;	now	it	is	not	needed.
So	whatsoever	 you	 learn	 deeply,	 you	 need	 not	 be	 conscious	 for	 it.	 In	 the
beginning	if	you	learn	how	to	drive	a	car,	 then	it	 is	a	conscious	effort.	That’s
why	it	is	so	much	trouble,	because	you	have	to	be	alert	continuously	and	there
are	so	many	 things	 to	be	aware	of	–	 the	 road,	 the	 traffic,	 the	mechanism,	 the
wheel,	the	accelerator,	the	brakes	and	the	rules	and	regulations	of	the	road.	You
have	to	be	constantly	alert	about	everything.	As	you	are	so	much	involved	in	it,
it	becomes	arduous,	it	becomes	a	deep	effort.
But	 by	 and	by	you	will	 be	 able	 to	 completely	 forget	 everything.	You	will
drive,	driving	will	become	unconscious.	You	need	not	bring	your	mind	to	it	–
you	can	go	on	thinking	anything	you	like,	you	can	be	anywhere	you	like	and
the	car	will	move	unconsciously.	Now	your	body	has	learned	it.	Now	the	whole
mechanism	knows	it.	It	has	become	an	unconscious	learning.
Whenever	something	becomes	so	deep	that	you	need	not	be	conscious	about
it,	 it	 falls	 into	 the	 unconscious.	 And	 once	 a	 thing	 has	 fallen	 into	 the
unconscious	it	will	start	changing	your	being,	your	life,	your	character.	And	the
change	 will	 be	 effortless	 now,	 you	 need	 not	 be	 concerned	 with	 it.	 You	 will
simply	move	in	the	directions	where	the	unconscious	is	leading	you.
Yoga	has	worked	very	much	on	abhyasa,	constant	repetition.	This	constant
repetition	 is	 just	 to	 bring	 your	 unconscious	 into	 work.	 And	 when	 the
unconscious	 starts	 functioning	 you	 are	 at	 ease.	 No	 effort	 is	 needed,	 things
become	natural.	It	is	said	in	old	scriptures	that	a	sage	is	not	one	who	has	a	good
character,	because	even	that	consciousness	shows	that	the	“anti”	still	exists,	the
opposite	 still	 exists.	A	 sage	 is	one	who	cannot	do	bad,	 cannot	 think	about	 it.
The	 goodness	 has	 become	 unconscious,	 it	 has	 become	 like	 breathing.
Whatsoever	he	does	will	be	good.	It	has	become	so	deep	in	his	being	that	no
effort	is	needed,	it	has	become	his	life.	So	you	cannot	say	a	sage	is	a	good	man.
He	doesn’t	know	what	is	good,	what	is	bad.	Now	there	is	no	conflict.	The	good
has	penetrated	so	deeply	that	there	is	no	need	to	be	aware	about	it.
If	you	are	aware	about	your	goodness,	the	badness	still	exists	side	by	side.
There	is	a	constant	struggle.	And	every	time	you	have	to	move	into	action	you
have	to	choose:	“I	have	to	do	good,	I	have	not	to	do	bad.”	And	this	choice	is
going	to	be	a	deep	turmoil,	a	struggle,	a	constant	inner	violence,	inner	war.	And
if	there	is	conflict	you	cannot	be	at	ease,	at	home.
Now	we	should	enter	the	sutra.	The	cessation	of	mind	is	Yoga,	but	how	can
the	mind	cease?
Their	cessation	is	brought	about	by	persistent
inner	practice	and	non-attachment.
Two	 things:	 how	 can	 the	 mind	 cease	 with	 all	 its	 modifications?	 –	 first,
abhyasa,	 persistent	 inner	 practice,	 and	 second,	 non-attachment.	 Non-
attachment	will	create	the	situation,	and	persistent	practice	is	the	technique	to
be	used	in	that	situation.	Understand	both.
Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 you	 do	 because	 you	 have	 certain	 desires.	 And	 those
desires	can	be	 fulfilled	only	by	doing	certain	 things.	Unless	 those	desires	are
dropped	your	activities	cannot	be	dropped.	You	have	some	investment	in	those
activities,	in	those	actions.	This	is	one	of	the	dilemmas	of	human	character	and
mind	–	 that	you	may	want	 to	 stop	certain	actions	because	 they	 lead	you	 into
misery.
But	why	do	you	do	 them?	You	do	 them	because	you	have	certain	desires,
and	 those	 desires	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled	 without	 doing	 them.	 So	 there	 are	 two
things.	One,	you	have	to	do	certain	things.	For	example,	anger.	Why	do	you	get
angry?	 You	 get	 angry	 only	 when	 somewhere,	 somehow,	 someone	 creates	 a
hindrance.	 You	 are	 going	 to	 achieve	 something	 and	 someone	 creates	 a
hindrance.	Your	desire	is	obstructed;	you	get	angry.
You	can	get	angry	even	with	things.	If	you	are	moving	and	you	are	trying	to
reach	 somewhere	 immediately	 and	 a	 chair	 comes	 in	 the	way,	 you	 get	 angry
with	 the	 chair.	 You	 try	 to	 unlock	 the	 door	 and	 the	 key	 is	 not	 working,	 you
become	angry	with	 the	door.	 It	 is	absurd,	because	 to	be	angry	with	a	 thing	is
nonsense.	Anything	that	creates	any	type	of	obstruction	creates	anger.
You	have	a	desire	to	reach,	to	do,	to	achieve	something.	Whosoever	comes
in	 between	 you	 and	 your	 desire	 appears	 to	 be	 your	 enemy,	 and	 you	want	 to
destroy	him.	This	is	what	anger	means:	you	want	to	destroy	the	obstacles.	But
anger	leads	to	misery,	anger	becomes	an	illness	so	you	want	not	to	be	angry.
But	how	can	you	drop	anger	if	you	have	desires,	goals?	If	you	have	desires
and	goals,	then	anger	is	bound	to	be	there	because	life	is	complex;	you	are	not
alone	here	on	this	earth.	Millions	of	people	are	striving	for	their	own	desires;
they	 criss-cross	 each	 other,	 they	 come	 into	 each	 other’s	 path.	 If	 you	 have
desires	 then	 anger	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 there,	 frustration	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 there,
violence	is	bound	to	be	there.	And	your	mind	will	think	to	destroy	whosoever
comes	in	your	path.
This	 attitude	 to	 destroy	 the	 obstacle	 is	 anger.	 But	 anger	 creates	 misery,
because	you	have	been	angry	for	millions	of	years.	It	has	become	a	deep-rooted
so	you	want	not	 to	be	angry.	But	 just	wanting	not	 to	be	angry	will	not	be	of
much	help,	because	anger	is	part	of	a	greater	pattern	–	of	a	mind	which	desires,
a	mind	which	has	goals,	a	mind	which	wants	to	reach	somewhere.	You	cannot
drop	anger.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 not	 to	 desire.	 Then	 half	 of	 the	 possibility	 of	 anger	 is
dropped;	the	base	is	dropped.	But	then	too,	it	is	not	that	anger	will	necessarily
disappear	because	you	have	been	angry	for	millions	of	years.	It	has	become	a
deep-rooted	habit.	You	may	drop	desires	but	anger	will	still	persist.	It	will	not
be	 so	 forceful,	but	 it	will	persist	because	now	 it	 is	 a	habit.	 It	 has	become	an
unconscious	 habit.	 For	 many,	 many	 lives	 you	 have	 been	 carrying	 it.	 It	 has
become	your	heredity.	 It	 is	 in	your	cells,	 the	body	has	 taken	 it,	and	 it	 is	now
chemical	 and	 physiological.	 Just	 by	 dropping	 your	 desires	 your	 body	 is	 not
going	 to	 change	 its	pattern.	The	pattern	 is	very	old;	you	will	 have	 to	 change
this	pattern	also.
For	that	change,	repetitive	practice	will	be	needed.	Just	to	change	the	inner
mechanism,	repetitive	practice	will	be	needed	–	a	reconditioning	of	the	whole
body-mind	pattern.	But	this	is	possible	only	if	you	have	dropped	desiring.
Look	at	it	from	another	point	of	view.	One	man	came	to	me	and	he	said,	“I
don’t	want	to	be	sad,	but	I	am	always	sad	and	depressed.	Sometimes	I	cannot
even	 feel	 why	 I	 am	 sad,	 but	 I	 am	 sad.	 No	 visible	 cause,	 nothing	 that	 I	 can
pinpoint:	”This	is	the	reason.”	It	seems	that	it	has	just	become	my	style	to	be
sad.	I	don’t	remember,”	he	said,	“that	I	was	ever	happy.	And	I	don’t	want	to	be
sad.	It	is	a	dead	burden.	I	am	the	unhappiest	person.	So	how	I	can	drop	it?”
So	I	asked	him,	“Have	you	got	any	investment	in	your	sadness?”
He	 said,	 “Why	 should	 I	 have	 any	 investment?”	 But	 he	 had.	 I	 knew	 the
person	well.	I	had	known	the	person	for	many	years,	but	he	was	not	aware	that
there	was	some	vested	interest	in	it.	So	he	wants	to	drop	sadness,	but	he	is	not
aware	 why	 the	 sadness	 is	 there.	 He	 has	 been	 maintaining	 it	 for	 some	 other
reasons	which	he	cannot	connect.
He	needs	love,	but	to	be	loved	you	need	to	be	loving.	If	you	ask	for	love	you
have	to	give	love,	and	you	have	to	give	more	than	you	can	ask	for.	But	he	is	a
miser,	 he	 cannot	 give	 love.	 Giving	 is	 impossible	 to	 him;	 he	 cannot	 give
anything.	Just	the	word	giving,	and	he	will	shrink	within	himself.	He	can	only
take,	he	cannot	give.	He	is	closed	as	far	as	giving	is	concerned.
But	without	love	you	cannot	flower.	Without	love	you	cannot	attain	any	joy,
you	 cannot	 be	 happy.	 And	 he	 cannot	 love	 because	 love	 looks	 like	 giving
something.	 It	 is	 a	 giving,	 a	wholehearted	 giving	 of	 all	 that	 you	 have	 –	 your
being	also.	He	cannot	give	love,	he	cannot	receive	love.	Then	what	to	do?	But
he	hankers,	 as	 everybody	hankers,	 for	 love.	 It	 is	 a	basic	need,	 just	 like	 food.
Without	food	your	body	will	die,	and	without	love	your	soul	will	shrink.	It	is	a
must.
He	has	created	a	substitute,	and	 that	 substitute	 is	 sympathy.	He	cannot	get
love	because	he	cannot	give	love,	but	he	can	get	sympathy.	Sympathy	is	a	poor
substitute	 for	 love.	 So	 he	 is	 sad:	when	 he	 is	 sad	 people	 give	 him	 sympathy.
Whosoever	 comes	 to	 him	 feels	 sympathetic	 because	 he	 is	 always	 crying	 and
weeping.	 His	 mood	 is	 always	 that	 of	 a	 very	miserable	man.	 But	 he	 enjoys!
Whenever	you	give	him	sympathy	he	enjoys	 it.	He	becomes	more	miserable,
because	the	more	he	is	miserable,	the	more	he	can	get	this	sympathy.
So	I	told	him,	“You	have	a	certain	investment	in	your	sadness.	This	whole
pattern	of	 sadness	cannot	be	dropped,	 it	 is	 rooted	somewhere	else.	Don’t	ask
for	sympathy.	But	you	can	stop	asking	for	sympathy	only	when	you	start	giving
love,	because	it	is	a	substitute.	And	once	you	start	giving	love,	love	will	happen
to	you.	Then	you	will	be	happy.	Then	a	different	pattern	is	created.”
I	have	heard…
	
A	man	 entered	 a	 car	 park.	He	was	 in	 a	 very	 ridiculous	 posture.	 It	 looked
almost	impossible	to	walk	as	he	was	walking,	because	he	was	crouching	as	if
he	was	driving	 a	 car,	 his	 hands	moving	on	 some	 invisible	wheel,	 his	 feet	 on
some	 invisible	 accelerator,	 and	 he	 was	 walking.	 And	 it	 was	 so	 difficult,	 so
impossible,	how	he	was	walking.	A	crowd	gathered.	He	was	doing	something
impossible	and	they	asked	the	attendant,	“What	is	the	matter?	What	is	this	man
doing?”
The	attendant	said,	“Don’t	ask	so	loudly!	This	man	loved	cars	in	his	past.	He
was	one	of	the	best	drivers.	He	has	even	won	a	national	prize	in	car	racing.	But
now,	due	to	some	mental	deficiency,	he	has	been	debarred.	He	is	not	allowed	to
drive	a	car,	but	the	old	hobby	remains.”
The	 crowd	 said,	 “If	 you	 know	 that	 then	why	 don’t	 you	 say	 to	 him,	 ‘You
don’t	have	a	car.	What	are	you	doing	here?’”
The	man	said,	“That’s	why	I	said	don’t	speak	so	loudly!	That	I	cannot	do,
because	 he	 gives	me	 one	 rupee	 per	 day	 to	wash	 the	 car.	 That	 I	 cannot	 do;	 I
cannot	say,	‘You	have	no	car.’	He	is	going	to	park	the	car	and	then	I	will	wash
it.”
	
That	 one-rupee	 investment	 is	 there.	 You	 have	 many	 investments	 in	 your
misery	 also,	 in	 your	 anguish	 also,	 in	 your	 illness	 also.	 And	 then	 you	 go	 on
saying,	“We	don’t	want	–	we	don’t	want	to	be	angry,	we	don’t	want	to	be	this
and	that.”	But	unless	you	come	to	know	how	all	these	things	have	happened	to
you,	unless	you	see	the	whole	pattern,	nothing	can	be	changed.
The	 deepest	 pattern	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 desire.	 You	 are	 whatsoever	 you	 are
because	 you	 have	 certain	 desires,	 a	 group	 of	 desires.	 Patanjali	 says	 the	 first
thing	is	non-attachment.	Drop	all	desire,	don’t	be	attached	and	then,	abhyasa.
For	 example,	 someone	 comes	 to	me	 and	 he	 says,	 “I	 don’t	want	 to	 collect
more	fat	on	my	body,	but	I	go	on	eating.	I	want	to	stop	it	but	I	go	on	eating.”
The	wanting	 is	 superficial;	 there	 is	a	pattern	 inside,	 the	 reason	he	goes	on
eating	more	and	more.	And	 if	he	stops	even	for	a	 few	days,	 then	again,	with
more	gusto,	he	eats.	And	he	will	collect	more	weight	than	he	has	lost	through	a
few	days	fasting	or	dieting.	And	this	has	been	continuous,	 for	years.	 It	 is	not
just	a	question	of	eating	less.	Why	is	he	eating	more?	The	body	doesn’t	need	it,
then	somewhere	 in	 the	mind	food	has	become	a	substitute	 for	something.	He
may	be	afraid	of	death.	People	who	are	afraid	of	death	eat	more	because	eating
seems	 to	 be	 the	 base	 of	 life.	 The	more	 you	 eat,	 the	more	 alive	 –	 this	 is	 the
arithmetic	 in	 their	mind	 –	 because	 if	 you	 don’t	 eat	 you	 die.	 So	 not	 eating	 is
equivalent	 to	death	 and	more	 eating	 is	 equivalent	 to	more	 life.	So	 if	 you	 are
afraid	of	death	you	will	eat	more,	or	if	nobody	loves	you,	you	will	eat	more.
Food	can	become	a	substitute	for	 love	because	 the	child,	 in	 the	beginning,
comes	to	associate	food	and	love.	The	first	thing	the	child	is	going	to	be	aware
of	is	the	mother,	the	food	from	the	mother	and	the	love	from	the	mother.	Love
and	food	enter	his	consciousness	simultaneously.	And	whenever	the	mother	is
loving	she	gives	more	milk.	The	breast	is	given	happily.	But	whenever	mother
is	angry,	non-loving,	she	snatches	the	breast	away.
Food	is	taken	away	whenever	mother	is	not	loving,	food	is	given	whenever
she	is	loving:	love	and	food	become	one.	In	the	mind,	in	the	child’s	mind,	they
become	 associated.	 So	whenever	 the	 child	 gets	more	 love	 he	will	 reduce	 his
food,	because	the	love	is	so	much	that	the	food	is	not	needed.	Whenever	love	is
not	there	he	will	eat	more,	because	a	balance	has	to	be	kept.	If	there	is	no	love
at	all	then	he	will	fill	his	belly.
You	may	be	surprised	to	know	that	whenever	two	persons	are	in	love	they
lose	fat.	That’s	why	girls	start	gathering	fat	the	moment	they	are	married.	When
love	is	settled,	they	start	getting	fat	because	now	there	is	no	need.	Love	and	the
world	of	love	are,	in	a	way,	finished.
In	the	countries	where	divorce	has	become	more	prevalent,	the	women	have
better	 figures.	 In	 the	 countries	where	 divorce	 is	 not	 prevalent,	 women	 don’t
bother	 at	 all	 about	 their	 figures	 because	 when	 divorce	 is	 possible	 then	 the
women	will	have	to	find	new	lovers;	they	are	figure	conscious.	The	search	for
love	helps	the	figure.	When	love	is	settled,	it	is	finished	in	a	way.	You	need	not
worry	about	the	body,	you	need	not	take	any	care.
So	this	person	may	be	afraid	of	death.	Maybe	he	is	not	in	any	deep,	intimate
love	with	anyone.	And	these	two	are	again	connected:	if	you	are	in	deep	love
you	 are	 not	 afraid	 of	 death.	Love	 is	 so	 fulfilling	 that	 you	 don’t	 care	what	 is
going	 to	 happen	 in	 the	 future.	 Love	 itself	 is	 the	 fulfillment.	 Even	 if	 death
comes	it	can	be	welcomed.	But	if	you	are	not	in	love	then	death	creates	a	fear
because	you	have	not	even	loved	yet	and	death	is	approaching	near.	Death	will
finish	it,	and	there	will	be	no	time	and	no	future	after	it.
If	there	is	no	love	the	fear	of	death	will	be	more.	If	there	is	love	there	will	be
less	 fear	 of	 death.	 If	 there	 is	 total	 love,	 death	 disappears.	 These	 are	 all
connected	inside.	Even	very	simple	things	are	deeply	rooted	in	greater	patterns.
	
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	standing	before	his	veterinary	doctor	with	his	dog	and
insisting,	“Cut	off	the	tail	of	my	dog!”
The	doctor	was	 saying,	 “But	why,	Nasruddin?	 If	 I	 cut	 off	 the	 tail	 of	 your
dog,	this	beautiful	dog	will	be	destroyed.	He	will	look	ugly.	And	why	are	you
insisting?”
Nasruddin	said,	“Between	you	and	me	–	don’t	say	this	to	anybody	–	I	want
the	dog’s	tail	to	be	cut	off	because	my	mother-in-law	is	going	to	come	soon	and
I	 don’t	want	 any	 sign	 of	welcome	 in	my	 house.	 I	 have	 removed	 everything.
Only	this	dog	with	his	wagging	tail	can	welcome	my	mother-in-law.”
	
Even	a	dog’s	 tail	has	a	pattern	of	many	 relationships.	 If	Nasruddin	cannot
welcome	 his	mother-in-law	 even	 through	 his	 dog	 then	 he	 cannot	 be	 in	 love
with	 his	 wife,	 it	 is	 impossible.	 If	 you	 are	 in	 love	 with	 your	 wife	 you	 will
welcome	the	mother-in-law,	you	will	be	loving	towards	her.
Things	that	are	simple	on	the	surface	are	deeply	rooted	in	complex	things,
and	 everything	 is	 interrelated.	 So	 just	 by	 changing	 a	 thought	 nothing	 is
changed.	Unless	you	go	to	the	complex	pattern,	uncondition	it,	recondition	it,
create	 a	 new	 pattern,	 only	 then	 can	 a	 new	 life	 arise	 out	 of	 it.	 So	 these	 two
things	have	to	be	done.
Non-attachment,	non-attachment	about	everything	–	 that	doesn’t	mean	that
you	stop	enjoying.	That	misunderstanding	has	been	there,	and	Yoga	has	been
misinterpreted	in	many	ways.	One	is	this:	it	seems	as	if	Yoga	is	saying	that	you
die	to	life	because	non-attachment	means	then	you	don’t	desire	anything.	If	you
don’t	 desire	 anything,	 if	 you	 are	 not	 attached	 to	 anything,	 if	 you	 don’t	 love
anything,	then	you	will	be	just	a	dead	corpse.	No,	that	is	not	the	meaning.
Non-attachment	 means	 don’t	 be	 dependent	 on	 anything,	 and	 don’t	 make
your	life	and	happiness	dependent	on	anything.	Preference	is	okay,	attachment
is	not	okay.	When	I	say	preference	is	okay	I	mean	you	can	prefer	–	you	have	to
prefer.	If	many	people	are	there,	you	have	to	love	someone,	you	have	to	choose
someone,	you	have	to	be	friendly	with	someone.	Prefer	someone,	but	don’t	get
attached.
What	is	the	difference?	If	you	get	attached	then	it	becomes	an	obsession:	if
the	 person	 is	 not	 there	 you	 are	 unhappy.	 If	 you	miss	 the	 person,	 you	 are	 in
misery.	And	attachment	is	such	a	disease	that	if	the	person	is	not	there	you	are
in	misery	 and	 if	 the	person	 is	 there	 you	 are	 indifferent.	Then	 it	 is	 okay,	 it	 is
taken	 for	 granted.	 If	 the	 person	 is	 there	 it	 is	 okay,	 no	more	 than	 that;	 if	 the
person	is	not	there	then	you	are	in	misery	–	this	is	attachment.
Preference	is	just	the	reverse:	if	the	person	is	not	there	you	are	okay,	if	the
person	is	there	you	feel	happy,	thankful.	If	the	person	is	there	you	don’t	take	it
for	granted.	You	are	happy,	you	enjoy	it,	you	celebrate	it.	But	if	the	person	is
not	there,	you	are	okay.	You	don’t	demand,	you	are	not	obsessed,	you	can	also
be	alone	and	happy.	You	would	have	preferred	 that	 the	person	was	 there,	but
this	is	not	an	obsession.
Preference	 is	 good,	 attachment	 is	 disease.	 And	 a	 man	 who	 lives	 with
preference	 lives	 life	 in	deep	happiness,	you	cannot	make	him	miserable.	You
can	only	make	him	happy;	you	cannot	make	him	miserable.	A	person	who	lives
with	 attachment	 cannot	 be	 made	 happy,	 you	 can	 only	 make	 him	 more
miserable.	And	you	know	this,	you	know	this	well.	If	your	friend	is	there	you
don’t	enjoy	him	much,	if	the	friend	is	not	there	you	miss	him.
A	girl	came	to	me	a	few	days	ago.	She	had	seen	me	two	months	ago,	with
her	boyfriend.	And	they	were	constantly	fighting	with	each	other,	and	the	fight
had	become	just	an	illness,	so	I	told	them	to	be	separate	for	a	few	weeks.	They
said	it	was	impossible	to	live	together	so	I	sent	them	away	separately.
The	girl	was	here	on	Christmas	Eve	and	she	said,	“These	two	months,	I	have
missed	my	boyfriend	so	much.	I	am	thinking	of	him	constantly.	He	has	started
to	appear	even	in	my	dreams.	This	has	never	happened	before.	When	we	were
together	 I	never	 saw	him	 in	my	dreams;	 in	my	dreams	 I	was	making	 love	 to
other	men.	But	now	my	boyfriend	is	constantly	in	my	dreams.	Now	allow	us	to
live	together	again.”
So	 I	 told	 her,	 “It	 is	 okay	 with	 me,	 you	 can	 live	 together	 again.	 But	 just
remember	 this:	 you	were	 living	 together	 just	 two	months	 ago	 and	 you	were
never	happy.”
Attachment	 is	a	disease.	When	you	are	 together	you	are	not	happy.	 If	you
have	riches	you	are	not	happy,	you	will	be	miserable	if	you	are	poor.	If	you	are
healthy	you	never	feel	thankfulness.	If	you	are	healthy	you	never	feel	grateful
to	existence,	but	if	you	are	ill	you	are	condemning	the	whole	life	and	existence;
everything	is	meaningless	and	there	is	no	God.
Even	an	ordinary	headache	is	enough	to	cancel	all	Gods.	But	when	you	are
happy	 and	healthy	you	never	 feel	 like	 going	 to	 a	 church	or	 a	 temple,	 just	 to
give	thanks:	“I	am	happy	and	I	am	healthy,	and	I	have	not	earned	these.	These
are	simply	gifts	from	you.”
	
Mulla	Nasruddin	once	fell	in	a	river,	and	he	was	about	to	drown.	He	was	not
a	 religious	man,	 but	 suddenly,	 at	 the	 verge	of	 death,	 he	 cried	 loudly,	 “Allah,
God,	please	save	me,	help	me,	and	from	today	I	will	now	pray	and	I	will	do
whatsoever	is	written	in	the	scripture.”
While	 he	 was	 saying	 this	 “God	 help	 me,”	 he	 caught	 hold	 of	 a	 branch
overhanging	the	river.	And	when	he	grabbed	and	came	towards	safety	he	felt
relaxed,	and	he	said,	“Now	it	is	okay.	Now	you	need	not	worry.”
Again	he	said	to	God,	“Now	you	need	not	worry.	Now	I	am	safe.”
Suddenly	the	branch	broke	and	he	fell	again.	So	he	said,	“Can’t	you	take	a
simple	joke?”
	
But	this	is	how	our	minds	are	moving.
Attachment	will	make	you	more	and	more	miserable;	preference	will	make
you	 more	 and	 more	 happy.	 Patanjali	 is	 against	 attachment,	 not	 against
preference.	Everybody	has	to	prefer.	You	may	like	one	food,	you	may	not	like
another,	but	this	is	just	a	preference.	If	the	food	of	your	liking	is	not	available
then	 you	will	 take	 your	 second	 choice.	And	 you	will	 be	 happy	 because	 you
know	the	first	was	not	available,	and	whatsoever	is	available	had	to	be	enjoyed.
You	will	not	cry	and	weep.	You	will	accept	life	as	it	happens	to	you.
But	 a	 person	 who	 is	 constantly	 attached	 with	 everything	 never	 enjoys
anything	and	always	misses.	The	whole	 life	becomes	a	continuous	misery.	 If
you	 are	 not	 attached	 you	 are	 free,	 you	 have	 much	 energy,	 you	 are	 not
dependent	 on	 anything.	You	 are	 independent,	 and	 this	 energy	 can	 be	moved
into	 inner	 effort.	 It	 can	 become	 a	 practice;	 it	 can	 become	 abhyasa.	What	 is
abhyasa?	 Abhyasa	 is	 fighting	 the	 old	 habitual	 pattern.	 Every	 religion	 has
developed	many	practices,	but	the	base	is	this	sutra	of	Patanjali.
For	 example,	 whenever	 you	 get	 angry,	 make	 it	 a	 constant	 practice	 that
before	entering	 into	anger	you	will	 take	 five	deep	breaths.	A	simple	practice,
apparently	not	related	to	anger	at	all.	And	somebody	can	even	laugh:	“How	is	it
going	to	help?”	But	it	is	going	to	help.	Whenever	you	feel	anger	arising,	before
you	express	it	take	five	deep	exhalations	and	inhalations.
What	will	it	do?	It	will	do	many	things.	Anger	can	be	there	only	if	you	are
unconscious	 –	 and	 this	 is	 a	 conscious	 effort.	 Just	 before	 anger	 arises,
consciously	breathe	in	and	out	five	times:	this	will	make	your	mind	alert,	and
with	alertness	anger	cannot	enter.	This	will	not	only	make	your	mind	alert,	 it
will	also	make	your	body	alert,	because	the	more	oxygen	there	is	in	the	body,
the	more	alert	the	body	becomes.	In	this	alert	moment	suddenly	you	will	feel
that	the	anger	has	disappeared.
Secondly,	 your	 mind	 can	 only	 be	 one-pointed.	Mind	 cannot	 think	 of	 two
things	simultaneously,	it	is	impossible	for	the	mind.	It	can	change	from	one	to
another	 very	 swiftly	 but	 it	 cannot	 have	 two	 points	 together	 in	 the	 mind
simultaneously.	One	 thing	 at	 a	 time	–	mind	has	 a	 very	narrow	window,	only
one	thing	at	a	time.	So	if	anger	is	there,	anger	is	there.	If	you	breathe	in	and	out
five	 times	 suddenly	 the	mind	 is	with	 the	breathing.	 It	 has	diverted,	now	 it	 is
moving	 in	 a	 different	 direction.	 And	 even	 if	 you	 again	 move	 to	 anger,	 you
cannot	be	the	same	again	because	the	moment	has	been	lost.
Gurdjieff	 says,	 “When	my	 father	was	dying	he	 told	me	 to	 remember	only
one	 thing:	 ‘Whenever	 you	 are	 angry,	wait	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 and	 then	do
whatsoever	you	like.	Even	if	you	want	to	murder,	go	and	murder	–	but	wait	for
twenty-four	hours.’”
Twenty-four	hours	is	too	long;	twenty-four	seconds	will	do.	Just	the	waiting
changes	 you.	 The	 energy	 that	 was	 flowing	 towards	 anger	 has	 taken	 a	 new
route.	It	is	the	same	energy	–	it	can	become	anger,	it	can	become	compassion.
Just	give	it	a	chance.
So	 the	 old	 scriptures	 say,	 “If	 a	 good	 thought	 comes	 to	 your	 mind	 don’t
postpone	 it,	 do	 it	 immediately.	 And	 if	 a	 bad	 thought	 comes	 to	 your	 mind
postpone	 it,	 never	 do	 it	 immediately.”	 But	we	 think	we	 are	 very	 cunning	 or
very	clever	–	whenever	a	good	thought	comes	we	postpone	it.
Mark	Twain	has	written	in	his	memoirs	that	he	was	listening	to	a	priest	in	a
church	for	 ten	minutes.	The	 lecture	was	 just	wonderful	and	he	 thought	 in	his
mind,	“Today	I	am	going	to	donate	ten	dollars.	This	priest	 is	wonderful.	This
church	must	be	helped!”	He	decided	he	was	going	 to	donate	 ten	dollars	after
the	lecture.	Ten	minutes	more	and	he	started	thinking	that	ten	dollars	would	be
too	much,	five	would	do.	Ten	minutes	more	and	he	thought,	“This	man	is	not
even	worth	five	dollars.”
Now	he	was	not	listening,	now	he	was	worried	about	those	ten	dollars.	He
had	 not	 told	 anybody,	 but	 now	 he	was	 convincing	 himself	 that	 this	was	 too
much.	 He	 says,	 “By	 the	 time	 the	 lecture	 finished,	 I	 decided	 not	 to	 give
anything.	And	when	 the	man	came	before	me	 to	 take	 the	donations,	 the	man
who	was	moving	around,	I	even	thought	to	take	a	few	dollars	and	escape	from
the	church!”
Mind	is	continuously	changing.	It	 is	never	static,	 it	 is	a	flow.	If	something
bad	 is	 there,	wait	 a	 little.	You	 cannot	 fix	 the	mind,	mind	 is	 a	 flow.	You	 just
wait!	Just	wait	a	 little	and	you	will	not	be	able	 to	do	wrong.	If	some	good	is
there	and	you	want	to	do	it,	do	it	 immediately,	because	mind	is	changing	and
after	a	few	minutes	you	will	not	be	able	to	do	it.	So	if	it	 is	a	loving	and	kind
act,	 don’t	 postpone	 it.	 If	 it	 is	 something	 violent	 or	 destructive,	 postpone	 it	 a
little.
If	anger	comes,	postpone	it	even	for	five	breaths	and	you	will	not	be	able	to
act	on	it.	This	will	become	a	practice.	Every	time	anger	comes	first	breathe	five
times	in	and	out	then	you	are	free	to	act.	Go	on	continuously	and	it	becomes	a
habit,	 you	 need	 not	 even	 think:	 the	moment	 anger	 enters,	 immediately	 your
mechanism	 will	 start	 breathing	 fast,	 deep.	 Within	 years	 it	 will	 become
absolutely	impossible	for	you	to	be	angry.	You	will	not	be	able	to	be	angry.
Any	practice,	any	conscious	effort,	can	change	your	old	patterns.	And	this	is
not	a	work	which	can	be	done	immediately,	it	will	take	time.	Because	you	have
created	your	pattern	of	habits	in	many,	many	lives,	if	even	in	one	life	you	can
change	it,	it	is	too	soon.
My	sannyasins	come	to	me	and	they	say,	“When	will	it	happen?”	and	I	say,
“Soon.”	And	they	say,	“What	do	you	mean	by	your	‘soon’?	–	because	for	years
you	have	been	telling	us	‘soon.’”
If	 even	 in	 one	 life	 it	 happens,	 it	 is	 soon.	 Whenever	 it	 happens	 it	 has
happened	 before	 its	 time,	 because	 you	 have	 created	 this	 pattern	 in	 so	many
lives.	They	have	to	be	destroyed	and	recreated.	So	any	amount	of	time	–	even
lives	–	is	not	too	late.
Their	cessation	is	brought	about	by	persistent
inner	practice	and	non-attachment.
Of	these	two,	abhyasa,	the	inner	practice,
is	the	effort	to	be	firmly	established	in	oneself.
The	essence	of	abhyasa	 is	 to	be	centered	 in	oneself.	Whatsoever	happens,
you	 should	 not	move	 immediately.	 First	 you	 should	 be	 centered	 in	 yourself,
and	from	that	centering	you	should	look	around	and	then	decide.
Someone	 insults	 you	 and	 you	 are	 pulled	 by	 his	 insult.	 You	 have	 moved
without	 consulting	 your	 center.	 You	 have	 moved	 without	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment	going	back	to	the	center,	and	then	moving.
Abhyasa	means	inner	practice.	Conscious	effort	means,	“Before	I	move	out,
I	must	move	within.	First,	movement	must	be	toward	my	center.	First,	I	must
be	 in	 contact	with	my	 center.	Centered	 there,	 I	will	 look	 at	 the	 situation	 and
then	decide.”	And	this	is	such	a	tremendous,	transforming	phenomenon.	Once
you	 are	 centered	 within	 everything	 appears	 different,	 the	 perspective	 is
changed:	it	may	not	look	like	an	insult,	the	man	may	just	look	stupid.	Or	if	you
are	 really	 centered,	 you	will	 come	 to	 know	 that	 he	 is	 right:	 “This	 is	 not	 an
insult.	He	has	not	said	anything	wrong.”
I	have	heard	–	I	don’t	know	whether	it	is	true	or	not,	but	I	have	heard	this
anecdote:
	
One	 newspaper	 was	 continuously	 writing	 against	 Richard	 Nixon,
continuously	defaming	him,	 condemning	him.	So	Richard	Nixon	went	 to	 the
editor	and	said,	“What	are	you	doing?	You	are	 telling	 lies	about	me	and	you
know	it	well!”
The	editor	said,	“Yes,	we	know	that	we	are	telling	lies	about	you.	But	if	we
start	telling	truths	about	you,	you	will	be	in	more	trouble!”
	
So	if	someone	is	saying	something	about	you	he	may	be	lying,	but	just	look
again:	 if	 he	were	 really	 true,	 it	might	 be	worse.	Or,	whatsoever	 he	 is	 saying
may	 apply	 to	 you.	 But	 when	 you	 are	 centered,	 you	 can	 also	 look
dispassionately	about	yourself.
Patanjali	says	that	of	these	two,	abhyasa,	the	inner	practice,	is	the	effort	to
become	 firmly	 established	 in	oneself.	Before	moving	 into	 an	 act,	 any	 sort	 of
act,	move	within	yourself.	First	be	established	there,	even	if	for	only	a	single
moment,	 and	 your	 action	 will	 be	 totally	 different.	 It	 cannot	 be	 the	 same
unconscious	 pattern	 of	 old.	 It	 will	 be	 something	 new,	 it	 will	 be	 an	 alive
response.	 Just	 try	 it.	 Whenever	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 going	 to	 act	 or	 to	 do
something	 first	 move	 within	 –	 because	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 been	 doing	 up
until	now	has	become	robot-like,	mechanical.	You	go	on	doing	it	continuously,
in	a	repetitive	circle.
For	thirty	days	just	note	down	in	a	diary,	from	the	morning	to	the	evening,
for	thirty	days,	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	the	pattern.	You	are	moving	like	a
machine,	you	are	not	a	man.	Your	 responses	are	dead.	Whatsoever	you	do	 is
predictable.	 And	 if	 you	 study	 your	 diary	 penetratingly,	 you	 may	 be	 able	 to
decipher	the	pattern:	that	Monday,	every	Monday,	you	are	angry,	every	Sunday
you	 feel	 sexual,	 every	Saturday	 you	 are	 fighting.	Or	 in	 the	morning	 you	 are
good,	in	the	afternoon	you	feel	bitter,	by	the	evening	you	are	against	the	whole
world	–	you	may	see	 the	pattern.	Once	you	see	 the	pattern	 then	you	can	 just
observe	that	you	are	working	like	a	robot.	And	being	a	robot	is	what	misery	is.
You	have	to	be	conscious,	not	a	mechanical	thing.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say,	“As	he	is,	man	is	a	machine.”	You	become	man	only
when	 you	 become	 conscious.	 And	 this	 constant	 effort	 to	 be	 established	 in
oneself	will	make	 you	 conscious,	will	make	 you	 non-mechanical,	 will	make
you	unpredictable,	will	make	you	free.	Then	someone	can	insult	you	and	you
can	 still	 laugh;	 you	 have	 never	 laughed	 before.	 Someone	 can	 insult	 you	 and
you	can	feel	love	for	the	man;	you	have	not	felt	that	before.	Someone	can	insult
you	and	you	can	be	thankful	towards	him.	Something	new	is	being	born;	now
you	are	creating	a	conscious	being	within	yourself.
But	the	first	thing	to	do	before	moving	into	an	act	is	to	first	be	established,
because	to	act	means	moving	outward,	moving	without,	moving	toward	others,
going	away	from	the	self.	Every	act	is	a	going	away	from	the	self.	Before	you
go	away	have	a	look,	have	a	contact,	have	a	dip	into	your	inner	being.	First	be
established.
Before	every	movement,	 let	 there	be	a	moment	of	meditation:	 this	 is	what
abhyasa	is.	Whatsoever	you	do,	before	doing	it	close	your	eyes,	remain	silent,
move	within.	Just	become	dispassionate,	non-attached,	so	you	can	 look	as	an
observer,	unprejudiced,	as	if	you	are	not	involved,	you	are	just	a	witness.	And
then	move!
	
One	day,	just	in	the	morning,	Mulla	Nasruddin’s	wife	said	to	Mulla,	“In	the
night,	while	you	were	asleep,	you	were	 insulting	me.	You	were	saying	 things
against	 me,	 swearing	 against	 me.	 What	 do	 you	 mean?	 You	 will	 have	 to
explain.”
Mulla	Nasruddin	 said,	 “But	who	 says	 that	 I	was	asleep?	 I	was	not	 asleep.
Just	 that	 the	 things	 I	want	 to	 say,	 I	 cannot	 say	 in	 the	day.	 I	 cannot	gather	 so
much	courage.”
	
In	your	dreams,	in	your	waking,	you	are	constantly	doing	things,	and	those
things	 are	 not	 done	 consciously.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 are	 being	 forced	 to	 do	 them.
Even	in	your	dreams	you	are	not	free.	This	constant	mechanical	behavior	is	the
bondage.	So	how	to	be	established	in	oneself?	–	through	abhyasa.
Sufis	 use	 it	 continuously	whatsoever	 they	 say	 or	 do;	 they	 sit,	 they	 stand,
whatsoever	 they	do.	Before	 a	Sufi	 disciple	 stands	he	will	 take	Allah’s	name,
first	he	will	take	God’s	name.	He	will	sit,	he	will	take	God’s	name.	An	action	is
to	be	done	–	even	sitting	is	an	action	–	sitting	he	will	say,	“Allah,”	standing,	he
will	say,	“Allah.”	If	it	is	not	possible	to	say	it	loudly	he	will	say	it	inside.	Every
action	 is	 done	 through	 remembrance,	 and	 by	 and	 by,	 this	 remembrance
becomes	a	constant	barrier	between	him	and	the	action.	A	division	is	created,	a
gap.
And	the	more	this	gap	grows,	the	more	he	can	look	at	his	own	action	as	if	he
is	 not	 the	 doer.	 With	 continuous	 repetition	 of	 “Allah,”	 by	 and	 by	 he	 starts
seeing	that	only	Allah	is	the	doer:	“I	am	not	the	doer.	I	am	just	a	vehicle	or	an
instrument.”	And	 the	moment	 this	gap	grows,	 all	 that	 is	 evil	 falls	 away.	You
cannot	do	evil.	You	can	do	evil	only	when	 there	 is	no	gap	between	 the	actor
and	the	action.	Then	the	good	flows	automatically.
The	 greater	 the	 gap	 between	 the	 actor	 and	 the	 action,	 the	 more	 good
happens.	Life	becomes	a	sacred	thing.	Your	body	becomes	a	temple.	Anything
that	makes	you	alert,	established	within	yourself,	is	abhyasa.
Of	these	two,	abhyasa,	the	inner	practice,
is	the	effort	to	be	firmly	established	in	oneself.
It	becomes	firmly	grounded	when	continued	for	a	long
time,	without	interruption	and	with	reverent	devotion.
…when	 continued	 for	 a	 long	 time…	 How	 long?	 It	 will	 depend.	 It	 will
depend	on	you,	on	each	person,	how	long.	The	length	of	time	will	depend	on
the	 intensity.	 If	 the	 intensity	 is	 total	 then	 it	 can	 happen	 very	 soon,	 even
immediately.	If	the	intensity	is	not	so	deep	then	it	will	take	a	longer	period.
I	have	heard…
	
A	Sufi	mystic,	Junnaid,	was	taking	a	walk	outside	his	village	one	morning.
A	 man	 came	 running	 and	 asked	 Junnaid,	 “The	 capital	 of	 this	 kingdom	 is
where?	I	want	 to	reach	 the	capital.	How	long	will	 I	still	have	 to	 travel?	How
much	time	will	it	take?”
Junnaid	 looked	 at	 the	 man	 and,	 without	 answering	 him,	 again	 started
walking.	 And	 the	 man	 was	 also	 going	 in	 the	 same	 direction,	 so	 the	 man
followed.	The	man	thought,	“This	old	man	seems	to	be	deaf,”	so	a	second	time
he	asked	more	 loudly,	“I	want	 to	know	how	much	time	it	will	 take	for	me	to
reach	the	capital!”
But	Junnaid	still	continued	walking.	After	walking	two	miles	with	that	man,
Junnaid	said,	“You	will	have	to	walk	at	least	ten	hours.”
The	man	said,	“But	you	could	have	said	that	before.”
Junnaid	said,	“How	can	I	say	it?	First	I	must	know	your	speed.	It	depends	on
your	 speed.	So	 for	 these	 two	miles	 I	was	watching	what	your	 speed	 is.	Only
now	can	I	answer.”
It	depends	on	your	intensity,	your	speed.
	
There	are	two	things	to	be	remembered.	The	first	thing	is:	…when	continued
for	 a	 long	 time,	 without	 interruption…	 This	 has	 to	 be	 remembered.	 If	 you
interrupt,	if	you	do	it	for	some	days	and	then	leave	it	for	some	days,	the	whole
effort	is	lost.	And	when	you	start	again	it	is	again	a	beginning.
If	 you	 are	 meditating	 and	 then	 you	 say,	 “For	 a	 few	 days	 there	 is	 no
problem…”	You	feel	lazy,	you	feel	like	sleeping	in	the	morning	and	you	say,	“I
can	postpone,	 I	can	do	 it	 tomorrow.”	Even	one	day	missed,	you	have	undone
the	work	of	many	days.	Because	you	are	not	doing	meditation	 today	but	you
will	be	doing	many	other	 things,	and	 those	many	other	 things	belong	 to	your
old	pattern,	so	a	layer	is	created.	Your	yesterday	and	your	tomorrow	are	cut	off.
Today	has	become	a	 layer,	a	different	 layer.	The	continuity	 is	 lost,	 and	when
you	start	again	tomorrow	it	 is	again	a	beginning.	I	see	many	persons	starting,
stopping,	again	starting.	The	work	that	can	be	done	within	months	then	takes
years.
So	this	is	to	be	remembered:	…without	interruption…	Whatsoever	practice
you	choose,	then	choose	it	for	your	whole	life,	and	just	go	on	hammering	on	it,
don’t	 listen	 to	 the	mind.	Mind	will	 try	 to	 persuade	 you,	 and	mind	 is	 a	 great
seducer.	 It	 can	 give	 all	 kinds	 of	 reasons:	 that	 today	 it	 is	 a	must	 not	 to	 do	 it
because	you	are	feeling	ill,	 there	is	headache,	you	couldn’t	sleep	in	the	night,
you	have	been	so	very	tired	so	you	can	just	rest	today.	These	are	tricks	of	the
mind.
Mind	wants	to	follow	its	old	pattern.	Why	does	the	mind	want	to	follow	its
old	 pattern?	 –	 because	 there	 is	 least	 resistance,	 it	 is	 easier.	 And	 everybody
wants	to	follow	the	easier	path,	the	easier	course.	It	is	easy	for	the	mind	just	to
follow	the	old,	the	new	is	difficult.
So	mind	 resists	 everything	 that	 is	 new.	 If	 you	 are	 in	 practice,	 in	abhyasa,
don’t	listen	to	the	mind,	just	go	on	doing.	By	and	by	this	new	practice	will	go
deep	 in	 the	mind,	and	mind	will	stop	resisting	 it	because	 then	 it	will	become
easier.	Then	for	mind	it	will	be	an	easy	flow.	Unless	it	becomes	an	easy	flow,
don’t	 interrupt.	You	 can	undo	 a	 long	 effort	 by	 a	 little	 laziness,	 so	 it	must	 be
uninterrupted.
And	the	second	thing	to	be	remembered:	…with	reverent	devotion.	You	can
do	a	practice	mechanically,	with	no	 love,	no	devotion,	no	 feeling	of	holiness
about	 it,	 then	 it	will	 take	 very	 long.	 Through	 love	 things	 penetrate	 easily	 in
you.	Through	devotion	you	are	open,	more	open,	seeds	fall	deeper.
With	no	devotion	you	can	do	the	same	thing.	For	instance,	in	a	temple	you
can	 have	 a	 hired	 priest.	 He	 will	 say	 prayers	 continuously	 for	 years	 with	 no
result,	with	no	fulfillment	through	it.	He	is	doing	as	it	is	prescribed,	but	it	is	a
work	with	no	devotion.	He	may	show	devotion,	but	he	is	just	a	servant.	He	is
interested	in	his	salary,	not	in	the	prayer,	not	in	the	puja,	not	in	the	ritual.	It	is
to	be	done,	it	is	a	duty,	it	is	not	a	love.	So	he	will	do	it	for	years.	Even	for	his
whole	life	he	will	be	just	a	hired	priest,	a	salaried	man.	In	the	end	he	will	die	as
if	he	has	never	prayed.	He	may	die	in	the	temple,	praying,	but	he	will	die	as	if
he	has	never	prayed	because	there	was	no	devotion.
So	 don’t	 do	 abhyasa,	 a	 practice,	 without	 devotion,	 because	 then	 you	 are
unnecessarily	wasting	 energy.	Much	 can	 come	 out	 of	 it	 if	 devotion	 is	 there.
What	 is	 the	 difference?	 The	 difference	 is	 between	 duty	 and	 love.	 Duty	 is
something	you	have	 to	do,	you	don’t	 enjoy	doing	 it.	You	have	 to	 carry	 it	 on
somehow,	you	have	to	finish	 it	soon.	It	 is	 just	an	outward	work.	If	 this	 is	 the
attitude	then	how	can	it	penetrate	in	you?
A	love	is	not	a	duty	–	you	enjoy	it.	There	is	no	limit	to	its	enjoyment,	there
is	no	hurry	 to	 finish	 it.	The	 longer	 it	 lasts,	 the	better.	 It	 is	never	enough;	you
always	 feel	 something	 more,	 something	 more	 can	 be	 done.	 It	 is	 always
unfinished.	If	this	is	the	attitude	then	things	go	deep	in	you.	The	seeds	reach	to
the	deeper	 soil.	Devotion	means	you	are	 in	 love	with	a	particular	abhyasa,	 a
particular	practice.
I	 observe	 that	 with	many	 of	 the	 people	 I	 work	 with	 this	 division	 is	 very
clear.	Those	who	practice	meditation	as	if	they	are	doing	just	a	technique	can
do	it	for	years	with	no	change	happening.	It	may	help	a	little,	bodily.	They	may
be	healthier,	 their	 physiques	will	 get	 some	benefits	out	of	 it,	 but	 it	 is	 just	 an
exercise.	And	then	they	come	to	me	and	they	say,	“Nothing	is	happening.”
Nothing	 will	 happen,	 because	 the	 way	 they	 are	 doing	 it	 is	 something
outside,	just	like	work	–	as	if	they	go	to	the	office	at	eleven	and	leave	the	office
at	 five.	 They	 can	 go	 to	 the	 meditation	 hall	 with	 no	 involvement.	 They	 can
meditate	 for	one	hour	and	come	back,	with	no	 involvement.	 It	 is	not	 in	 their
heart.
The	other	category	is	of	those	people	who	do	it	with	love.	It	is	not	a	question
of	doing	something.	It	 is	not	quantitative,	 it	 is	qualitative:	how	much	you	are
involved,	how	deeply	you	love	it,	how	much	you	enjoy	it	–	not	the	goal,	not	the
end,	not	the	result,	but	the	very	practice.
Sufis	say,	“Repetition	of	the	name	of	God,	repetition	of	the	name	of	Allah,	is
in	 itself	 the	 bliss.”	They	go	on	 repeating	 and	 they	 enjoy.	This	 becomes	 their
whole	life,	just	the	repetition	of	the	name.
Nanak	 says,	 “Nam	 smaran”	 –	 remembering	 the	 name	 is	 enough.	 You	 are
eating,	you	are	going	to	sleep,	you	are	taking	your	bath,	and	continuously	your
heart	is	filled	with	the	remembrance.	Just	go	on	repeating	“Ram”	or	“Allah”	or
whatsoever,	not	as	a	word,	but	as	a	devotion,	as	a	love.	Your	whole	being	feels
filled,	vibrates	with	it,	it	becomes	your	deeper	breath.	You	cannot	live	without
it.	And	by	and	by	it	creates	an	inner	harmony,	a	music.	Your	whole	being	starts
falling	into	harmony;	an	ecstasy	is	born.
You	are	filled	with	a	humming	sensation,	a	sweetness	surrounds	you,	and	by
and	 by	 this	 sweetness	 becomes	 your	 nature.	 Then	 whatsoever	 you	 say,	 it
becomes	the	name	of	Allah.	Whatsoever	you	say,	it	becomes	the	remembrance
of	the	divine.
Any	 practice	…without	 interruption	 and	 with	 reverent	 devotion,	 is	 very
difficult	 for	 the	 Western	 mind.	 They	 can	 understand	 practice,	 they	 cannot
understand	“reverent	devotion.”	They	have	completely	forgotten	that	language,
and	without	 that	 language	practice	 is	 just	 dead.	Western	 seekers	 come	 to	me
and	they	say,	“Whatsoever	you	say	we	will	do,”	and	they	follow	it	exactly	as	it
is	 said.	But	 they	work	on	 it	 just	as	 if	 they	were	working	on	any	other	know-
how,	a	technique.	They	are	not	in	love	with	it,	they	have	not	become	mad,	they
are	not	lost	in	it.	They	remain	manipulating.
They	are	the	master	and	they	go	on	manipulating	the	technique	just	as	they
would	manipulate	any	mechanical	device.	Just	as	you	can	push	a	button	and	the
fan	starts	–	there	is	no	need	for	any	reverent	devotion	for	the	button	or	for	the
fan.	And	you	do	everything	 in	 life	 like	 that,	but	abhyasa	cannot	be	done	 that
way.	You	have	 to	be	so	deeply	related	with	your	abhyasa,	 your	practice,	 that
you	become	secondary	and	the	practice	becomes	primary,	that	you	become	the
shadow	and	the	practice	becomes	the	soul	–	as	if	it	is	not	you	who	is	doing	the
practice,	 but	 the	 practice	 is	 going	 on	 by	 itself	 and	 you	 are	 just	 a	 part	 of	 it,
vibrating	with	it.	Then	it	may	be	that	no	time	is	needed.
With	deep	devotion,	results	can	follow	immediately.	In	a	single	moment	of
devotion	you	can	undo	many	lives	of	the	past.	In	a	deep	moment	of	devotion
you	can	become	completely	free	from	the	past.
But	it	is	difficult	to	explain	that	reverent	devotion.	There	is	friendship,	there
is	love	–	and	there	is	a	different	quality	of	friendship	plus	love	which	is	called
reverent	devotion.	Friendship	and	love	exist	between	equals.	Love	is	between
opposite	sexes,	friendship	is	with	the	same	sex	but	on	the	same	level;	you	are
equals.
Compassion	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 reverent	 devotion.	 Compassion	 exists
from	 a	 higher	 source	 towards	 a	 lower	 source.	 Compassion	 is	 like	 a	 river
flowing	from	the	Himalayas	to	the	ocean.	A	buddha	is	compassion.	Whosoever
comes	 to	 him,	 his	 compassion	 is	 flowing	 downwards.	 Reverence	 is	 just	 the
opposite	–	as	if	the	Ganges	is	flowing	from	the	ocean	towards	the	Himalayas,
from	the	lower	to	the	higher.
Love	 is	 between	 equals,	 compassion	 is	 from	 the	 higher	 to	 the	 lower,
devotion	is	from	the	lower	to	the	higher.	Compassion	and	devotion	have	both
disappeared	 and	 only	 friendship	 remains.	 And	 without	 compassion	 and
devotion,	friendship	is	just	hanging	in	between,	dead,	because	the	two	poles	are
missing.	And	it	can	exist,	living,	only	between	those	two	poles.
If	 you	 are	 in	 devotion	 then	 sooner	 or	 later	 compassion	 will	 start	 flowing
towards	you.	 If	you	are	 in	devotion	 then	some	higher	peak	will	 start	 flowing
towards	you.	But	 if	you	are	not	 in	devotion	compassion	cannot	 flow	 towards
you,	you	are	not	open	to	it.
All	abhyasa,	all	practice,	is	to	become	the	lowest	so	the	highest	can	flow	in
you.	 Become	 the	 lowest.	 As	 Jesus	 says,	 “Only	 those	 who	 stand	 last	 will
become	the	first	in	my	kingdom	of	God.”
Become	 the	 lowest,	 the	 last.	 Suddenly,	 when	 you	 are	 the	 lowest,	 you	 are
capable	of	 receiving	 the	highest.	And	only	 to	 the	 lowest	depth	 is	 the	highest
attracted,	pulled.	It	becomes	the	magnet.
“With	devotion”	means	you	are	the	lowest.	That	is	why	Buddhists	choose	to
be	beggars.	Sufis	have	chosen	 to	be	beggars	–	 just	 the	 lowest,	 the	beggars	–
and	we	have	seen	 that	 in	 those	beggars	 the	highest	has	happened.	But	 this	 is
their	choice.	They	have	put	themselves	in	the	last.	They	are	the	last	ones,	not	in
competition	with	anybody,	just	valley-like,	low,	lowest.
That’s	why	in	the	old	Sufi	sayings	it	is	said,	“Become	a	slave	of	God”	–	just
a	 slave,	 repeating	 his	 name,	 constantly	 thanking	 him,	 constantly	 feeling
gratitude,	constantly	filled	with	so	many	blessings	that	he	has	poured	upon	you.
And	 with	 this	 reverence,	 devotion;	 uninterrupted	 abhyasa,	 practice:
Patanjali	 says	 these	 two,	vairagya	and	abhyasa,	 help	 the	mind	 to	 cease.	And
when	mind	ceases,	for	the	first	time	you	are	really	that	which	you	are	meant	to
be,	that	which	is	your	destiny.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	8:	Stop,	and	It	Is	Here!
	
The	first	question:
Osho,
Patanjali	has	stressed	the	importance	of	non-attachment,	that	is,	cessation	of	desire,	for
being	rooted	in	oneself.	But	is	non-attachment	really	at	the	beginning	of	the	journey	or	at
the	very	end?
The	beginning	and	the	end	are	not	two	things.	The	beginning	is	the	end,	so
don’t	divide	them	and	don’t	think	in	terms	of	duality.	If	you	want	to	be	silent	in
the	 end,	 you	will	 have	 to	 begin	with	 silence	 from	 the	very	beginning.	 In	 the
beginning	the	silence	will	be	like	a	seed,	in	the	end	it	will	become	a	tree.	But
the	tree	is	hidden	in	the	seed,	so	the	beginning	is	just	the	seed.
Whatsoever	the	ultimate	goal,	it	must	be	hidden	here	and	now,	just	in	you,	in
the	very	beginning.	If	it	is	not	there	in	the	beginning	you	cannot	achieve	it	in
the	end.	Of	course	there	will	be	a	difference:	in	the	beginning	it	can	only	be	a
seed,	in	the	end	it	will	be	the	total	flowering.	You	may	not	be	able	to	recognize
it	when	 it	 is	 a	 seed,	but	 it	 is	 there	whether	you	 recognize	 it	 or	not.	So	when
Patanjali	 says	non-attachment	 is	needed	 in	 the	very	beginning	of	 the	 journey,
he	is	not	saying	that	it	will	not	be	needed	in	the	end.
Non-attachment	in	the	beginning	will	be	with	effort,	non-attachment	in	the
end	will	be	spontaneous.	In	the	beginning	you	will	have	to	be	conscious	about
it,	in	the	end	there	will	be	no	need	to	be	conscious	about	it.	It	will	be	just	your
natural	flow.
In	the	beginning	you	have	to	practice	it.	Constant	alertness	will	be	needed.
There	will	be	a	struggle	with	your	past,	with	your	patterns	of	attachment;	there
will	be	fight.	 In	 the	end	there	will	be	no	fight,	no	alternative,	no	choice.	You
will	simply	flow	in	the	direction	of	desirelessness.	That	will	have	become	your
nature.
But	 remember,	 whatsoever	 is	 the	 goal	 has	 to	 be	 practiced	 from	 the	 very
beginning.	The	first	step	is	also	the	last,	so	one	has	to	be	very	careful	about	the
first	step.	If	the	first	is	in	the	right	direction,	only	then	will	the	last	be	achieved.
If	you	miss	the	first	step	you	have	missed	all.
This	 will	 come	 again	 and	 again	 to	 your	 mind,	 so	 understand	 it	 deeply
because	Patanjali	will	 say	many	 things	which	 look	 like	 ends.	Nonviolence	 is
the	end,	when	a	person	becomes	so	compassionate,	 so	deeply	 love-filled	 that
there	is	no	violence,	no	possibility	of	violence.	Love	or	nonviolence	is	the	end,
but	Patanjali	will	say	to	practice	it	from	the	very	beginning.
The	goal	has	to	be	in	your	view	from	the	very	beginning.	The	first	step	of
the	journey	must	be	absolutely	devoted	to	the	goal,	directed	to	the	goal,	moving
towards	the	goal.	It	cannot	be	the	absolute	thing	in	the	beginning,	neither	does
Patanjali	 expect	 it.	You	 cannot	 be	 totally	 non-attached,	 but	 you	 can	 try.	 The
very	effort	will	help	you.
You	will	fall	many	times,	you	will	again	and	again	get	attached.	And	your
mind	is	such	that	you	may	even	get	attached	with	non-attachment.	Your	pattern
is	so	unconscious,	but	effort,	conscious	effort,	will	by	and	by	make	you	alert
and	aware.	And	once	you	start	feeling	the	misery	of	attachment	then	there	will
be	less	need	for	the	effort,	because	no	one	wants	to	be	miserable,	no	one	wants
to	be	unhappy.
We	are	unhappy	because	we	don’t	know	what	we	are	doing,	but	the	longing
in	 every	 human	 being	 is	 for	 happiness.	No	 one	 longs	 for	misery;	 everybody
creates	 misery	 because	 we	 don’t	 know	 what	 we	 are	 doing.	 Or	 we	 may	 be
moving	in	desires	towards	happiness,	but	 the	pattern	of	our	mind	is	such	that
we	actually	move	towards	misery.
From	 the	 very	 beginning,	 when	 a	 child	 is	 born,	 is	 brought	 up,	 wrong
mechanisms	are	fed	into	his	mind,	wrong	attitudes	are	fed	in.	No	one	is	trying
to	make	him	wrong,	but	wrong	people	are	all	around.	They	cannot	be	anything
else,	they	are	helpless.
A	 child	 is	 born	 without	 any	 pattern.	 There	 is	 just	 a	 deep	 longing	 for
happiness	but	he	doesn’t	 know	how	 to	 achieve	 it;	 the	how	 is	unknown.	This
much	is	certain:	he	knows	that	happiness	is	to	be	attained.	He	will	struggle	his
whole	 life	 but	 he	 doesn’t	 know	 the	 means,	 the	 methods	 of	 how	 it	 is	 to	 be
achieved,	where	it	is	to	be	achieved,	where	he	should	go	to	find	it.	The	society
teaches	him	how	to	achieve	happiness,	and	the	society	is	wrong.
A	child	wants	happiness,	but	we	don’t	know	how	to	teach	him	to	be	happy.
And	whatsoever	we	teach	him	becomes	the	path	towards	misery.	For	example,
we	 teach	 him	 to	 be	 good.	We	 teach	 him	 not	 to	 do	 certain	 things	 and	 to	 do
certain	things,	without	ever	thinking,	“Is	it	natural	or	unnatural?”	We	say,	“Do
this,	don’t	do	that.”	Our	“good”	may	be	unnatural	–	and	if	whatsoever	we	teach
as	good	is	unnatural,	then	we	are	creating	a	pattern	of	misery.
For	example,	a	child	 is	angry	and	we	say,	“Anger	 is	bad,	don’t	be	angry.”
But	anger	is	natural,	and	just	by	saying	“Don’t	be	angry”	we	are	not	destroying
anger,	we	 are	 just	 teaching	 the	 child	 to	 suppress	 it.	Suppression	will	 become
misery	because	whatsoever	is	suppressed	becomes	poisonous.	It	moves	into	the
very	chemicals	of	the	body,	it	is	toxic.	And	by	continuously	teaching	“Don’t	be
angry”	we	are	teaching	him	to	poison	his	own	system.
One	 thing	we	are	not	 teaching	him	 is	how	not	 to	be	angry.	We	are	simply
teaching	him	how	to	suppress	the	anger.	And	we	can	force	him	because	he	is
dependent	 on	 us.	 He	 is	 helpless;	 he	 has	 to	 follow	 us.	 If	 we	 say,	 “Don’t	 be
angry,”	 then	he	will	smile,	but	 that	smile	will	be	 false.	 Inside	he	 is	bubbling,
inside	he	is	in	turmoil,	inside	there	is	fire	and	he	is	smiling	outside.
We	are	making	a	hypocrite	out	of	a	small	child.	He	 is	becoming	false	and
divided.	He	knows	that	his	smile	is	false.	His	anger	is	real	but	the	real	has	to	be
suppressed	and	the	unreal	has	to	be	forced.	He	will	be	split.	And	by	and	by	the
split	 will	 become	 so	 deep,	 the	 gap	 will	 become	 so	 deep,	 that	 whenever	 he
smiles	he	will	smile	a	false	smile.
And	if	he	cannot	be	really	angry	then	he	cannot	be	really	anything,	because
reality	 is	 condemned.	 He	 cannot	 express	 his	 love,	 he	 cannot	 express	 his
ecstasy:	he	has	become	afraid	of	the	real.	If	you	condemn	one	part	of	the	real
the	whole	reality	is	condemned,	because	reality	cannot	be	divided	and	a	child
cannot	divide.
One	 thing	 is	 certain:	 the	 child	 has	 come	 to	 understand	 that	 he	 is	 not
accepted.	As	he	is,	he	is	not	acceptable.	The	real	is	somehow	bad,	so	he	has	to
be	 false.	He	has	 to	use	 faces,	masks.	Once	he	has	 learned	 this	 the	whole	 life
will	move	in	a	false	dimension.	And	the	false	can	only	lead	to	misery;	the	false
cannot	 lead	 to	 happiness.	 Only	 the	 true,	 authentically	 real,	 can	 lead	 you
towards	ecstasy,	towards	the	peak	experiences	of	life:	love,	joy	and	meditation,
whatsoever	you	name	them.
Everybody	 is	 brought	 up	 in	 this	 pattern,	 so	 you	 long	 for	 happiness	 but
whatever	you	do	creates	misery.	The	first	step	 towards	happiness	 is	 to	accept
oneself.	 The	 society	 never	 teaches	 you	 to	 accept	 yourself.	 It	 teaches	 you	 to
condemn	 yourself,	 to	 be	 guilty	 about	 yourself,	 to	 cut	 out	 many	 parts	 of
yourself.	It	cripples	you,	and	a	crippled	man	cannot	reach	to	the	goal.	And	we
are	all	crippled.
Attachment	is	misery.	But	from	the	very	beginning	attachment	is	demanded
of	the	child.	The	mother	says	to	the	child,	“Love	me,	I	am	your	mother.”	The
father	says,	“Love	me,	I	am	your	father,”	as	if	someone	automatically	becomes
lovable	if	he	is	a	father	or	she	is	a	mother.
Just	being	a	biological	mother	doesn’t	mean	much	or	just	being	a	biological
father	doesn’t	mean	much.	To	be	a	father	is	to	pass	through	a	great	discipline:
one	has	to	be	lovable.	To	be	a	mother	is	not	just	to	reproduce:	to	be	a	mother
means	a	great	training,	a	great	inner	discipline,	one	has	to	be	lovable.
If	the	mother	is	lovable	then	the	child	will	love	without	any	attachment.	And
wherever	he	will	find	that	someone	is	lovable,	he	will	love.	But	mothers	are	not
lovable,	fathers	are	not	lovable;	they	have	never	thought	in	those	terms	–	that
love	is	a	quality.
You	have	to	create	it,	you	have	to	become	it.	You	have	to	grow.	Only	then
can	you	create	love	in	others.	It	cannot	be	demanded.	If	you	demand	it,	it	can
become	an	attachment,	but	not	love.
So	the	child	will	love	the	mother	because	she	is	his	mother.	The	mother	or
the	 father	 becomes	 the	 goals.	 These	 are	 relationships,	 not	 love.	 Then	 he
becomes	attached	 to	 the	 family,	and	 the	 family	 is	a	destructive	 force	because
the	 family	 of	 the	 neighbor	 is	 separate;	 it	 is	 not	 lovable	 because	 you	 don’t
belong	to	it.	Then	your	community,	your	nation…but	the	neighboring	nation	is
the	enemy.
You	cannot	love	the	whole	humanity:	your	family	is	the	root	cause.	And	the
family	has	not	been	bringing	you	up	to	be	a	lovable	person	and	a	loving	person,
it	is	forcing	some	relationships.	Attachment	is	a	relationship,	and	love	is	a	state
of	mind.	Your	father	will	not	say	to	you,	“Be	loving,”	because	if	you	are	loving
you	 can	 be	 loving	 to	 anybody.	 Even	 sometimes	 the	 neighbor	 may	 be	 more
lovable	than	your	father,	but	the	father	cannot	accept	this,	that	anybody	can	be
more	 lovable	 than	 him,	 because	 he	 is	 your	 father.	 So	 relationship	 has	 to	 be
taught,	not	love.
This	is	my	country,	that’s	why	I	have	to	love	this	country.	If	simply	love	is
taught,	then	I	can	love	any	country.	But	the	politician	will	be	against	it	because
if	I	love	any	country,	if	I	love	this	earth,	then	I	cannot	be	dragged	into	war.	So
the	politicians	will	teach,	“Love	this	country.	This	is	your	country,	you	are	born
here.	You	belong	to	this	country,	your	life,	your	death,	belongs	to	this	country”
–	so	he	can	sacrifice	you	for	it.
The	whole	society	is	teaching	you	relationships,	attachments,	not	love.	Love
is	dangerous	because	 it	 knows	no	boundaries.	 It	 can	move,	 it	 is	 freedom.	So
your	wife	will	 tell	 you,	 “Love	me	 because	 I	 am	your	wife.”	The	 husband	 is
telling	 the	wife,	 “Love	me	because	 I	 am	your	 husband.”	Nobody	 is	 teaching
love.
If	simply	love	is	taught,	then	the	wife	can	say,	“But	the	other	person	is	more
lovable.”	If	the	world	were	really	free	to	love,	then	just	being	a	husband	could
carry	any	meaning,	and	just	being	a	wife	wouldn’t	mean	anything.	Then	love
would	freely	flow.	But	 that	 is	dangerous	–	society	cannot	allow	it,	 the	family
cannot	allow	it,	the	religions	cannot	allow	it.	So	in	the	name	of	love	they	teach
attachment,	and	then	everybody	is	in	misery.
When	 Patanjali	 says	 non-attachment,	 he	 is	 not	 anti-love.	Really,	 he	 is	 for
love.	Non-attachment	means	be	natural,	loving,	flowing,	but	don’t	get	obsessed
and	addicted.	Addiction	 is	 the	problem.	Then	 it	 is	 like	a	disease.	You	cannot
love	anybody	except	your	child	–	this	is	addiction.	Then	you	will	be	in	misery.
Your	child	can	die,	 then	 there	 is	no	possibility	 for	your	 love	 to	 flow.	Even	 if
your	child	is	not	going	to	die,	he	will	grow.	And	the	more	he	grows	the	more	he
will	become	 independent.	And	 then	 there	will	be	pain.	Every	mother	 suffers,
every	father	suffers.
The	child	will	become	an	adult,	he	will	fall	in	love	with	some	woman.	And
then	 the	 mother	 suffers,	 a	 competitor	 has	 entered.	 But	 this	 is	 because	 of
attachment.	 If	 a	 mother	 really	 loves	 the	 child	 she	 will	 help	 him	 to	 be
independent.	She	will	help	him	to	move	in	the	world	and	to	make	as	many	love
contacts	as	possible,	because	the	more	you	love	the	more	you	are	fulfilled.	And
when	her	child	 falls	 in	 love	with	a	woman	she	will	be	happy,	 she	will	dance
with	joy.
Love	 never	 gives	 you	misery,	 because	 if	 you	 love	 someone	 you	 love	 his
happiness.	 If	 you	 are	 attached	 to	 someone	you	don’t	 love	his	happiness,	 you
love	only	your	selfishness;	you	are	concerned	only	with	your	own	egocentric
demands.
Freud	discovered	many	things.	One	of	them	is	mother	or	father-fixation.	He
says	the	most	dangerous	mother	is	the	one	who	forces	the	child	to	love	her	so
much	that	he	becomes	fixated	and	he	will	not	be	able	to	love	anybody	else.	So
there	are	millions	of	people	suffering	because	of	such	fixations.
As	far	as	I	have	been	trying	to	study	many	people,	I	have	found	that	almost
all	the	husbands,	at	least	ninety-nine	percent,	are	trying	to	find	their	mothers	in
their	wives.	Of	course,	you	cannot	find	your	mother	in	your	wife;	your	wife	is
not	 your	 mother.	 But	 a	 deep	 fixation	 with	 the	 mother,	 and	 then	 they	 are
dissatisfied	with	the	wife	because	she	is	not	mothering	them.	And	every	wife	is
searching	for	the	father	in	the	husband,	and	no	husband	is	your	father.	And	if
she	is	not	satisfied	with	the	fathering	then	she	is	dissatisfied.
These	 are	 fixations.	 In	 Patanjali’s	 language,	 he	 calls	 them	 attachments.
Freud	calls	them	fixations.	The	words	differ	but	the	meaning	is	the	same.	Don’t
get	fixed,	be	flowing.	Non-attachment	means	you	are	not	fixed.	Don’t	be	like
ice	cubes,	be	like	water,	flowing.	Don’t	be	frozen.
Every	attachment	becomes	a	frozen	thing,	dead.	It	is	not	vibrating	with	life,
it	is	not	a	constantly	moving	response.	It	is	not	alive	moment	to	moment,	it	is
fixed.	You	love	a	person:	if	it	is	love	then	you	cannot	predict	what	is	going	to
happen	 the	 next	 moment.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 predict,	 moods	 change	 like
weather.	You	cannot	say	the	next	moment	also	that	your	lover	will	be	loving	to
you.	He	may	not	feel	like	loving	the	next	moment,	you	cannot	expect	it.
If	he	also	loves	you	the	next	moment	it	is	good,	you	are	thankful.	If	he	is	not
loving	in	the	next	moment	nothing	can	be	done,	you	are	helpless.	You	have	to
accept	the	fact	that	he	is	not	in	the	mood.	Nothing	to	cry	about,	simply	there	is
no	 mood	 for	 love!	 You	 accept	 the	 situation.	 You	 don’t	 force	 the	 lover	 to
pretend,	because	pretension	is	dangerous.
If	I	feel	loving	towards	you	I	say,	“I	love	you,”	but	the	next	moment	I	can
say,	 “No,	 I	 don’t	 feel	 any	 love	 in	 this	 moment.”	 So	 there	 are	 only	 two
possibilities:	either	you	accept	my	non-loving	mood,	or	you	force:	whether	you
love	me	or	not,	at	least	show	that	you	love	me.”	If	you	force	me	then	I	become
false	and	the	relationship	becomes	a	pretension,	a	hypocrisy.	Then	we	are	not
true	to	each	other.	And	how	can	two	persons	who	are	not	true	to	each	other	be
in	love?	Their	relationship	will	have	become	a	fixation.
Wife	and	husband	are	fixed,	dead,	everything	is	certain.	They	are	behaving
towards	each	other	as	 if	 they	are	 things.	When	you	come	to	your	home,	your
furniture	 will	 be	 the	 same	 as	 when	 you	 left	 because	 furniture	 is	 dead.	 Your
house	will	be	the	same	because	the	house	is	dead.	But	you	cannot	expect	your
wife	to	be	the	same,	she	is	alive,	a	person.	And	if	you	expect	her	to	be	the	same
as	she	was	when	you	left	the	house	then	you	are	forcing	her	to	be	just	furniture,
just	a	thing.	Attachment	forces	the	related	persons	to	be	things	and	love	helps
the	persons	to	be	freer,	to	be	more	independent,	to	be	truer.	But	truth	can	only
be	in	constant	flow,	it	can	never	be	frozen.
When	 Patanjali	 says	 non-attachment	 he	 is	 not	 saying	 to	 kill	 your	 love.
Rather,	on	the	contrary,	he	is	saying,	“Kill	all	that	poisons	your	love,	kill	all	the
obstacles,	 destroy	 all	 the	 obstacles	 that	 kill	 your	 love.”	 Only	 a	 yogi	 can	 be
loving;	the	worldly	person	cannot	be	loving,	he	can	only	be	attached.
Remember	this:	attachment	means	fixation	and	you	cannot	accept	anything
new	in	it,	only	the	past.	You	don’t	allow	the	present;	you	don’t	allow	the	future
to	change	anything.	And	life	is	change,	only	death	is	unchanging.
If	 you	 are	 unattached,	 then	 moment	 to	 moment	 you	 move	 without	 any
fixation.	Every	moment	 life	will	bring	new	happinesses,	new	miseries.	There
will	be	dark	nights	and	there	will	be	sunny	days,	but	you	are	open,	you	don’t
have	 a	 fixed	 mind.	 When	 you	 don’t	 have	 a	 fixed	 mind	 even	 a	 miserable
situation	cannot	give	you	misery	because	you	don’t	have	anything	to	compare
with	 it.	 You	 were	 not	 expecting	 something	 against	 it	 so	 you	 cannot	 be
frustrated.
You	get	frustrated	because	of	your	demands.	You	think	that	when	you	come
home,	your	wife	will	be	just	standing	outside	to	welcome	you.	And	if	she	is	not
standing	 there	 outside	 to	welcome	you,	 you	 cannot	 accept	 it.	This	 gives	 you
frustration	 and	misery.	You	demand,	 and	 through	demand	you	 create	misery.
And	 demand	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 are	 attached.	 You	 cannot	 demand	 with
persons	who	are	strangers	to	you.	Only	with	attachment	does	demand	come	in;
that	is	why	all	attachments	become	hellish.
Patanjali	 says	 be	 non-attached.	 That	 means	 be	 flowing,	 accepting
whatsoever	 life	 brings.	 Don’t	 demand	 and	 don’t	 force.	 Life	 is	 not	 going	 to
follow	you;	 you	 cannot	 force	 life	 to	be	 according	 to	you.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 flow
with	 the	 river	 rather	 than	 pushing	 it.	 Just	 flow	with	 it,	 and	much	 happiness
becomes	 possible.	 There	 is	 already	much	 happiness	 all	 around	 you,	 but	 you
cannot	see	it	because	of	your	wrong	fixations.
But	in	the	beginning	this	non-attachment	will	only	be	a	seed;	in	the	end	non-
attachment	 becomes	 desirelessness.	 In	 the	 beginning	 non-attachment	 means
non-fixation,	in	the	end	non-attachment	will	mean	desirelessness,	no	desire.	In
the	beginning	no	demand,	in	the	end	no	desire.
But	if	you	want	to	reach	to	this	end	of	no-desire,	start	from	no-demand.	Try
Patanjali’s	 formula	 even	 for	 twenty-four	 hours,	 just	 for	 twenty-four	 hours,
flowing	 with	 life,	 not	 demanding	 anything.	 Whatsoever	 life	 gives,	 feeling
grateful,	 thankful.	 Just	 moving	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 in	 a	 prayerful	 state	 of
mind,	 not	 asking,	 not	 demanding,	 not	 expecting,	 and	 you	 will	 have	 a	 new
opening.	Those	 twenty-four	hours	will	 become	a	new	window.	And	you	will
feel	how	ecstatic	you	can	become.
But	 you	will	 have	 to	 be	 alert	 in	 the	 beginning.	 It	 cannot	 be	 expected	 that
non-attachment,	for	the	seeker,	can	be	a	spontaneous	act.
	
The	second	question:
Osho,
How	is	it	that	an	enlightened	one	gives	of	himself	to	one	only,	as	Lord	Buddha	did	in	the
case	of	Mahakashyapa?	Really,	this	Buddhist	tradition	of	one	disciple	receiving	the	light
continued	for	eight	generations.	Was	it	not	possible	for	a	group	to	be	its	recipient?
No,	it	is	never	possible,	because	the	group	has	no	soul,	the	group	has	no	self.
Only	 the	 individual	 can	 be	 the	 recipient,	 the	 receiver,	 because	 only	 the
individual	has	the	heart.	A	group	is	not	a	person.
You	are	here,	 I	am	talking,	but	 I	am	not	 talking	 to	 the	group	because	with
the	group	there	can	be	no	communication.	I	am	talking	to	each	individual	here.
You	have	gathered	in	a	group	but	you	are	not	hearing	me	as	a	group,	you	are
hearing	 me	 as	 individuals.	 Really,	 the	 group	 doesn’t	 exist,	 only	 individuals
exist.	Group	is	just	a	word;	it	has	no	reality,	no	substance.	It	is	just	the	name	of
a	collectivity.
You	 cannot	 love	 a	 group,	 you	 cannot	 love	 a	 nation,	 you	 cannot	 love
humanity.	 But	 there	 are	 persons	 who	 claim	 that	 they	 love	 humanity.	 They
deceive	themselves	because	there	is	no	one	like	humanity	anywhere,	there	are
only	human	beings.	Go	and	search:	you	will	never	find	humanity	somewhere.
Really,	 the	 persons	 who	 claim	 that	 they	 love	 humanity	 are	 the	 persons	 who
cannot	 love	 a	 person.	They	 are	 incapable	 of	 being	 in	 love	with	 a	 person.	So
they	use	big	names	–	humanity,	nation,	universe.	They	may	even	love	God	but
they	cannot	love	a	person,	because	to	love	a	person	is	arduous,	difficult;	it	is	a
struggle.
You	have	to	change	yourself.	To	love	humanity	presents	no	problem.	There
is	no	humanity,	you	are	alone.	Truth,	beauty,	love	or	anything	that	is	significant
always	belongs	to	the	individual,	only	individuals	can	be	recipients.
Ten	 thousand	 monks	 were	 there	 when	 Buddha	 poured	 his	 being	 into
Mahakashyapa,	but	the	group	was	incapable.	No	group	can	be	capable,	because
consciousness	is	individual,	awareness	is	individual.	Mahakashyapa	rose	to	the
peak	where	 he	 could	 receive	Buddha.	Other	 individuals	 can	 also	 rise	 to	 that
peak,	but	no	group.
Religion	basically	remains	individualistic,	and	it	cannot	be	otherwise.	That
is	 one	 of	 the	 basic	 fights	 between	 Communism	 and	 religion.	 Communism
thinks	in	terms	of	groups,	societies,	collectivities,	and	religion	thinks	in	terms
of	 the	 individual	person,	 the	 self.	Communism	 thinks	 that	 the	 society	 can	be
changed	 as	 a	 whole,	 and	 religion	 thinks	 only	 individuals	 can	 be	 changed.
Society	cannot	be	changed	as	a	whole	because	society	has	no	soul,	it	cannot	be
transformed.	In	fact	there	is	no	society,	only	individuals.
Communism	 says	 there	 are	 no	 individuals,	 only	 society.	 Communism	 and
religion	are	absolutely	antagonistic,	and	this	is	the	antagonism.	If	Communism
becomes	prevalent,	then	individual	freedom	disappears.	Then	only	the	society
exists.	The	individual	is	not	allowed	really	to	be	there.	He	can	exist	only	as	a
part,	as	a	cog	in	the	wheel.	He	cannot	be	allowed	to	be	a	self.
I	have	heard…
	
A	man	reported	in	a	Moscow	police	station	that	his	parrot	was	missing,	so
he	was	directed	to	the	clerk	concerned.	The	clerk	wrote,	and	he	asked,	“Does
the	parrot	speak	also?	He	talks?”
The	man	became	afraid,	a	 little	 troubled,	uncomfortable.	He	said,	“Yes,	he
talks.	 But	whatsoever	 political	 opinion	 he	 expresses,	 those	 political	 opinions
are	strictly	his	own.”
	
A	 parrot!	 This	 individual	 was	 afraid	 because	what	 a	 parrot	 speaks	means
those	political	opinions	must	belong	to	his	master.	A	parrot	simply	imitates.	No
individuality	 is	 allowed	 in	 Communism,	 you	 cannot	 have	 your	 opinions.
Opinions	are	 the	concern	of	 the	state,	 the	group	mind,	and	 the	group	mind	 is
the	lowest	thing	possible.	Individuals	can	reach	to	the	peaks.	No	group	has	ever
become	Buddha-like	or	Jesus-like;	only	an	individual	peaks.
Buddha	is	giving	his	whole	life’s	experience	to	Mahakashyapa	because	there
is	 no	 other	 way.	 It	 cannot	 be	 given	 to	 any	 group;	 it	 cannot	 be,	 it	 is	 just
impossible.	Communication,	communion	can	only	be	between	two	individuals.
It	is	a	personal,	deeply	personal	faith.	The	group	is	impersonal.	And	remember
that	 a	 group	 can	 do	 many	 things:	 madness	 is	 possible	 with	 the	 group,	 but
buddhahood	 is	 not	 possible.	 A	 group	 can	 be	 mad	 but	 a	 group	 cannot	 be
enlightened.
The	 lower	 the	 phenomenon	 the	 more	 the	 group	 can	 participate	 in	 it.	 All
great	 sins	 are	 committed	by	 the	group,	not	by	 individuals.	An	 individual	 can
murder	 a	 few	 people,	 but	 an	 individual	 cannot	 become	 “fascism,”	 he	 cannot
murder	millions.	Fascism	can	murder	millions,	and	with	good	conscience!
After	the	Second	World	War	all	the	war	criminals	proclaimed	that	they	were
not	 responsible,	 that	 they	were	 just	 following	 orders	 from	 above.	They	were
just	part	of	 the	group.	Even	Hitler	and	Mussolini	were	very	sensitive	 in	 their
private	 lives.	Hitler	used	 to	 listen	 to	music,	he	 loved	music.	He	even	used	 to
paint	 sometimes,	he	 loved	painting.	Seems	 impossible,	Hitler	 loving	painting
and	 music;	 so	 sensitive,	 and	 killing	 millions	 of	 Jews	 without	 any
inconvenience,	without	any	discomfort	in	his	conscience,	not	even	a	prick.	He
was	“not	responsible.”	Then	he	was	just	the	leader	of	a	group.
When	 you	 are	moving	 in	 a	 crowd	 you	 can	 commit	 anything	 because	 you
feel,	“The	crowd	is	doing	it.	I	am	just	part	of	it.”	Alone	you	would	think	thrice
whether	 to	 do	 it	 or	 not.	 In	 the	 crowd	 responsibility	 is	 lost,	 your	 individual
thinking	 is	 lost,	 your	discrimination	 is	 lost,	 your	 awareness	 is	 lost.	You	have
become	 just	 a	 part	 of	 a	 crowd.	 Crowds	 can	 go	 mad.	 Every	 country	 knows,
every	period	knows	crowds	can	go	mad,	and	then	they	can	do	anything,	but	it
has	never	been	heard	that	crowds	can	become	enlightened.
The	 higher	 states	 of	 consciousness	 can	 be	 achieved	 only	 by	 individuals.
More	 responsibility	 has	 to	 be	 felt,	 more	 individual	 responsibility,	 more
conscience.	The	more	you	feel	you	are	responsible,	the	more	you	feel	you	have
to	be	aware,	the	more	you	become	individual.
Buddha	communicates	his	 silent	experience	with	Mahakashyapa,	his	 silent
sambodhi,	his	silent	enlightenment,	because	Mahakashyapa	has	also	become	a
peak,	a	height,	and	two	heights	could	now	meet.	And	this	will	always	be	so.	So
if	you	want	to	reach	higher	peaks	don’t	think	in	terms	of	groups,	think	in	terms
of	 your	 own	 individuality.	 A	 group	 can	 be	 helpful	 in	 the	 beginning,	 but	 the
more	you	grow	the	less	and	less	a	group	can	be	helpful.
A	 point	 comes	when	 the	 group	 cannot	 be	 of	 any	 help,	 you	 are	 left	 alone.
And	when	you	are	 totally	alone	and	you	start	growing	 in	your	 loneliness,	 for
the	first	time	you	are	crystallized.	You	have	become	a	soul,	a	self.
	
The	third	question:
Osho,
Practice	is	a	sort	of	conditioning	at	the	physical	and	mental	levels,	and	it	is	through
conditioning	that	society	makes	man	its	slave.	In	that	case,	how	can	Patanjali’s	practice	be
an	instrument	of	liberation?
Society	conditions	you	to	make	a	slave	out	of	you,	an	obedient	member,	so
the	 question	 seems	 valid:	 how	 can	 a	 continuous	 reconditioning	 of	 the	 mind
make	you	liberated?	The	question	seems	valid	only	because	you	are	confusing
two	types	of	conditioning.
You	have	come	to	me,	you	have	traveled	a	path.	When	you	go	back	you	will
travel	 the	 same	path	 again.	The	mind	 can	 ask,	 “The	path	which	brought	 you
here,	how	can	the	same	path	take	you	back?”	The	path	will	be	the	same;	your
direction	will	be	different,	quite	the	opposite.	While	you	were	coming	towards
me	 you	 were	 facing	 towards	 me,	 when	 going	 back	 you	 will	 be	 facing	 the
opposite	direction,	but	the	path	will	be	the	same.
The	society	conditions	you	to	make	you	an	obedient	member,	to	make	you	a
slave;	it	is	just	a	path.	The	same	path	has	to	be	traveled	to	make	you	free,	only
the	 direction	 will	 be	 the	 opposite.	 The	 same	 method	 has	 to	 be	 used	 to
“uncondition”	you.
I	remember	one	parable…
	
Once	Buddha	went	to	his	monks,	he	was	going	to	deliver	a	sermon.	He	sat
under	 his	 tree.	 He	 had	 a	 handkerchief	 in	 his	 hand.	 He	 looked	 at	 the
handkerchief,	the	whole	congregation	also	looked	at	what	he	was	doing.	Then
he	tied	five	knots	in	the	handkerchief	and	then	he	asked	two	questions:	one,	“Is
the	handkerchief	the	same	as	when	there	were	no	knots	in	it	or	is	it	different?”
One	bhikkhu,	one	monk,	said,	“In	a	sense	it	is	the	same	because	the	quality
of	the	handkerchief	has	not	changed.	Even	with	knots	it	remains	the	same,	the
same	handkerchief.	The	inherent	nature	remains	the	same.	But	in	a	sense	it	has
changed	because	something	new	has	appeared:	knots	were	not	there,	now	knots
are	 there.	So	 superficially	 it	 has	 changed	but	 deep	down	 it	 has	 remained	 the
same.”
Buddha	said,	“This	is	the	situation	of	the	human	mind:	deep	down	it	remains
unknotted	but	the	quality	remains	the	same.”
When	 you	 become	 a	 buddha,	 an	 enlightened	 one,	 you	 will	 not	 have	 a
different	 consciousness.	The	quality	will	 be	 the	 same.	The	difference	 is	 only
that	now	you	are	a	knotted	handkerchief,	your	consciousness	has	a	few	knots.
A	 second	 thing	 Buddha	 asked:	 “What	 should	 I	 do	 to	 unknot	 this
handkerchief?”
Another	monk	 said,	 “Unless	we	 know	what	 you	 have	 done	 to	 knot	 it	 we
cannot	say	anything,	because	the	reverse	process	will	have	to	be	applied.	The
way	you	have	knotted	it	has	to	be	known	first,	because	that	will	again	be	the
way,	in	the	reverse	order,	to	unknot	it.”
So	Buddha	 said,	 “This	 is	 the	 second	 thing.	How	you	 have	 come	 into	 this
bondage	has	to	be	understood.	How	you	are	conditioned	in	your	bondage	has	to
be	 understood,	 because	 the	 same	 will	 be	 the	 process,	 in	 reverse	 order,	 to
uncondition	you.”
	
If	 attachment	 is	 the	 conditioning	 factor,	 then	 non-attachment	will	 become
the	 unconditioning	 factor.	 If	 expectation	 leads	 you	 into	 misery,	 then	 non-
expectation	will	lead	you	out	of	your	misery.	If	anger	creates	a	hell	within	you,
then	compassion	will	create	a	heaven.	So	whatsoever	the	process	of	misery,	the
reverse	will	 be	 the	 process	 of	 happiness.	Unconditioning	means	 you	 have	 to
understand	 the	 whole	 knotted	 phenomenon	 of	 human	 consciousness	 as	 it	 is.
This	 whole	 process	 of	 Yoga	 will	 be	 nothing	 but	 understanding	 the	 complex
knots	 and	 then	 unknotting	 them,	 unconditioning	 them.	 It	 is	 not	 a
reconditioning,	remember.	It	 is	simply	unconditioning;	it	 is	negative.	If	 it	 is	a
reconditioning	 then	 you	will	 become	 a	 slave	 again,	 a	 new	 type	 of	 slave	 in	 a
new	 imprisonment.	 So	 this	 difference	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	 it	 is
unconditioning,	not	reconditioning.
Because	of	 this,	many	problems	have	arisen.	Krishnamurti	says	that	 if	you
do	anything	 it	will	become	a	 reconditioning,	 so	don’t	do	anything.	 If	you	do
anything	 it	will	 become	 a	 reconditioning:	 you	may	be	 a	 better	 slave	but	 you
will	remain	a	slave.	Listening	to	him	many	people	have	stopped	all	efforts,	but
that	 doesn’t	make	 them	 liberated.	 They	 are	 not	 liberated,	 the	 conditioning	 is
there.	 They	 are	 not	 reconditioning.	 Listening	 to	 Krishnamurti,	 they	 have
stopped,	they	are	not	reconditioning,	but	they	are	also	not	unconditioning.	They
remain	slaves.
So	I	am	not	for	reconditioning,	neither	is	Patanjali	for	reconditioning.	I	am
for	unconditioning,	and	Patanjali	is	also	for	unconditioning.	Just	understand	the
mind,	whatsoever	its	disease.	Understand	the	disease,	diagnose	it,	and	move	in
the	reverse	order.
What	is	the	difference?	Take	some	actual	example.	You	feel	anger:	anger	is
a	conditioning,	you	have	learned	it.	Psychologists	say	that	it	is	a	learning,	it	is	a
programmed	thing.	Your	society	teaches	it	to	you.	There	are	societies	even	now
which	never	get	angry,	the	members	never	get	angry.	There	are	societies,	small
tribal	 clans	 still	 in	 existence,	which	have	never	 known	any	 fight,	 have	never
fought	a	war.
In	the	Philippines,	a	small	aboriginal	tribe	exists.	For	three	thousand	years	it
has	not	known	any	 fight,	not	a	 single	murder,	not	a	 single	 suicide.	What	has
happened	 to	 it?	 They	 are	 the	 most	 peace-loving	 people	 and	 the	 happiest
possible.	 From	 the	 very	 beginning	 their	 society	 never	 conditions	 them	 for
anger.	In	that	tribe,	if	even	in	your	dream	you	kill	someone,	you	have	to	go	and
ask	 his	 forgiveness	 –	 even	 in	 a	 dream!	 If	 you	 are	 angry	 with	 someone	 and
fighting,	 the	 next	 day	 you	 have	 to	 declare	 to	 the	 village	 that	 you	 have	 done
something	wrong.	Then	 the	village	will	gather	 together,	and	 the	wise	men	of
the	village	will	diagnose	your	dream	and	they	will	suggest	what	is	to	be	done
now.	Even	small	children!
I	 was	 reading	 their	 dream	 analyses.	 They	 seem	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	 most
penetrating	people.	A	small	child	dreams,	and	in	a	dream	he	sees	the	boy	of	the
neighbor	looking	very	sad.	So	he	tells	the	dream	to	his	father	in	the	morning:	“I
have	seen	the	boy	of	the	neighbor	looking	very	sad.”
So	the	father	thinks	over	it,	closes	his	eyes,	meditates,	and	then	he	says,	“If
you	have	seen	him	sad,	that	means	somehow	his	sadness	is	related	to	you.	No
one	 else	 has	 dreamed	 about	 him	 that	 he	 is	 sad,	 so	 either	 knowingly	 or
unknowingly	you	have	done	 something	which	creates	his	 sadness.	Or,	 if	 you
have	 not	 done,	 in	 the	 future	 you	 are	 going	 to	 do.	 So	 the	 dream	 is	 just	 a
prediction	for	the	future.	Go	with	many	sweets,	gifts.	Give	sweets	and	gifts	to
the	 boy	 and	 ask	 for	 his	 forgiveness	 for	 something	 done	 in	 the	 past	 or	 for
something	which	you	are	going	to	do	in	the	future.”
So	 the	 boy	 goes,	 gives	 the	 fruits,	 sweets,	 gifts,	 and	 asks	 his	 forgiveness
because	 somehow,	 in	 the	 dream,	 he	 is	 responsible	 for	 his	 sadness.	 From	 the
very	beginning	the	children	are	brought	up	in	this	way.	If	this	tribe	has	existed
without	strife,	fight,	murder,	suicide,	there	is	no	wonder.	They	cannot	conceive
of	it.	A	different	type	of	mind	is	functioning	there.
Psychologists	say	that	hate	and	anger	are	not	natural.	Love	is	natural:	hate
and	anger	are	just	created.	They	are	hindrances	in	love,	and	society	conditions
you	 for	 them.	Unconditioning	means	whatsoever	 the	 society	 has	 done	 it	 has
done;	 there	 is	 no	 use	 to	 go	 on	 condemning	 it,	 it	 is	 already	 the	 case.	And	by
simply	 saying	 that	 the	 society	 is	 responsible,	 you	are	not	helped.	 It	 has	been
done.	Now,	right	now,	what	can	you	do?	–	you	can	uncondition.	So	whatsoever
your	problems,	look	deep	in	the	problem,	penetrate	it,	analyze	it,	and	see	how
you	are	conditioned	for	it.
For	example,	there	are	societies	which	never	feel	competitive.	Even	in	India
there	are	aboriginal	tribes	where	no	competition	exists.	Of	course	they	cannot
be	 very	 progressive	 in	 our	 measurement,	 because	 our	 progress	 can	 only	 be
through	 competition.	 They	 are	 not	 competitive.	 Because	 they	 are	 not
competitive	they	are	not	angry,	they	are	not	jealous,	they	are	not	so	hate-filled,
they	are	not	so	violent.	They	don’t	expect	much,	and	whatsoever	their	life	gives
to	them	they	feel	happy	and	grateful.
But	no	matter	what	life	gives	to	you,	you	will	never	feel	grateful.	You	will
always	be	frustrated	because	you	can	always	ask	for	more.	And	there	is	no	end
to	your	expectations	and	desires.	So	if	you	feel	miserable	look	into	the	misery
and	 analyze	 it.	 What	 are	 the	 conditioning	 factors	 which	 are	 creating	 the
misery?	And	it	is	not	very	difficult	to	understand	it.	If	you	can	create	misery,	if
you	are	so	capable	of	creating	misery,	there	is	no	difficulty	in	understanding	it.
If	you	can	create	it	you	can	understand	it.
Patanjali’s	 whole	 standpoint	 is	 this:	 looking	 into	 the	misery	 of	 man,	 it	 is
found	that	man	himself	is	responsible.	He	is	doing	something	to	create	it.	That
doing	has	become	habitual,	 so	he	goes	on	doing	 it.	 It	 has	become	 repetitive,
mechanical,	robotic.	If	you	become	alert	you	can	drop	out	of	it.	You	can	simply
say,	“I	will	not	cooperate.”	The	mechanism	will	start	working.
Someone	 insults	 you:	 just	 stand	 still,	 remain	 silent	 –	 the	mechanism	will
start,	 it	will	bring	 the	past	pattern.	The	anger	will	be	coming,	 the	smoke	will
arise	and	you	will	feel	just	on	the	verge	of	getting	mad.	But	stand	still.	Don’t
cooperate	and	just	look	at	what	the	mechanism	is	doing.	You	will	feel	wheels
within	 wheels	 within	 you,	 but	 they	 are	 impotent	 because	 you	 are	 not
cooperating.
Or	if	you	feel	it	is	impossible	to	remain	in	such	a	still	state,	then	close	your
door,	move	 into	 the	 room,	 have	 a	 pillow	 before	 you	 and	 beat	 the	 pillow,	 be
angry	with	the	pillow.	And	when	you	are	beating,	getting	angry	and	mad	with
the	pillow,	just	go	on	watching	what	you	are	doing,	what	is	happening,	how	the
pattern	is	repeating	itself.
If	you	can	stand	still,	 that’s	 the	best.	 If	you	feel	 it	 is	difficult,	 that	you	are
pulled,	 then	move	 into	a	 room	and	be	angry	on	 the	pillow.	Because	with	 the
pillow	your	madness	will	be	totally	visible	to	you,	it	will	become	transparent.
And	the	pillow	is	not	going	to	react:	you	can	watch	more	easily	and	there	is	no
danger,	no	safety	problem.	You	can	watch:	slowly,	the	rising	of	the	anger	and
the	decline	of	the	anger.
Watch	both,	 the	rhythm.	When	your	anger	 is	exhausted	and	you	don’t	 feel
like	 beating	 the	 pillow	 anymore,	 or	 you	 have	 started	 laughing	 or	 you	 feel
ridiculous,	 then	 close	 your	 eyes,	 sit	 on	 the	 floor,	 and	 meditate	 on	 what	 has
happened.	Do	you	still	feel	anger	for	the	person	who	has	insulted	you,	or	it	is
thrown	onto	the	pillow?	You	will	 feel	a	certain	calmness	falling	on	you.	And
you	will	not	feel	angry	now	with	the	person	concerned.	Rather,	you	may	even
feel	compassion	for	him.
One	 young	American	 boy	was	 here	 two	 years	 ago.	 He	 had	 escaped	 from
America	 because	 of	 only	 one	 problem,	 one	 obsession:	 he	 was	 continuously
thinking	of	murdering	his	father.	The	father	must	have	been	a	dangerous	man,
must	 have	 suppressed	 this	 boy	 too	much.	 In	 his	 dreams	 he	 was	 thinking	 of
murdering	his	father,	in	his	daydreams	also	he	was	thinking	of	murdering	him.
He	escaped	from	his	home	just	to	separate	from	the	father.	Otherwise,	any	day,
something	could	happen.	The	madness	was	there,	it	could	erupt	any	moment.
He	 was	 here	 with	 me	 and	 I	 told	 him,	 “Don’t	 suppress	 it.”	 I	 gave	 him	 a
pillow	and	said,	“This	is	your	father.	Now	do	whatsoever	you	like.”	At	first	he
started	laughing,	 laughing	in	a	mad	way.	And	he	said,	“It	 looks	ridiculous.”	I
told	him,	“Let	it	be	ridiculous.	But	it	is	in	the	mind,	let	it	come	out.”	For	fifteen
days	continuously	he	was	beating	and	tearing	the	pillow.	And	doing	it,	on	the
sixteenth	day	he	came	with	a	knife.	I	had	not	told	him	to,	so	I	asked	him,	“Why
this	knife?”
He	said,	“Now	don’t	stop	me.	Let	me	kill.	Now	the	pillow	is	not	a	pillow	for
me.	The	pillow	has	actually	become	my	father.”	That	day	he	killed	his	father.
And	then	he	started	crying,	 tears	came	to	his	eyes.	He	became	calmed	down,
relaxed,	 and	 he	 told	 me,	 “I	 am	 feeling	 much	 love	 for	 my	 father,	 much
compassion.	Now	allow	me	to	go	back.”
He	 is	 back	 there	 now.	 The	 relationship	 has	 totally	 changed.	 What	 has
happened?	–	just	a	mechanical	obsession	has	been	released.
If	you	can	stand	still	when	some	old	pattern	grips	your	mind,	it	is	good.	If
you	 cannot,	 then	 allow	 it	 to	 happen	 in	 a	 dramatic	 way,	 but	 alone,	 not	 with
someone.	Because	whenever	 you	 enact	 your	 pattern,	 allow	your	 pattern	with
someone,	it	creates	new	reactions	and	it	is	a	vicious	circle.
The	most	significant	point	is	to	be	watchful	of	the	pattern.	Whether	you	are
standing	silently	or	acting	out	your	anger	and	hate,	be	watchful,	looking	at	how
it	uncoils.	And	if	you	can	see	the	mechanism	you	can	undo	it.
All	these	steps	in	Yoga	are	just	for	undoing	something	which	you	have	been
doing.	They	are	negative,	nothing	new	is	to	be	created.	Only	the	wrong	is	to	be
destroyed,	 the	 right	 is	 already	 there.	 Nothing	 positive	 is	 to	 be	 done,	 only
something	negative.	The	positive	is	hidden	there.	It	is	just	like	a	stream	is	there,
hidden	 under	 a	 rock.	 You	 are	 not	 to	 create	 the	 stream.	 It	 is	 already	 there,
knocking;	it	wants	to	be	released	and	to	become	free	and	flowing.	Just	a	rock	is
there,	and	 this	 rock	has	 to	be	 removed.	Once	 the	 rock	 is	 removed	 the	stream
starts	flowing.
Bliss,	happiness,	 joy,	or	whatsoever	you	call	 it,	 is	already	 there	 flowing	 in
you.	 Only	 some	 rocks	 are	 there:	 those	 rocks	 are	 the	 conditionings	 of	 the
society.	Uncondition	them.	If	you	feel	attachment	is	the	rock	then	make	efforts
for	 non-attachment.	 If	 you	 feel	 anger	 is	 the	 rock	 then	make	 efforts	 for	 non-
anger.	If	you	feel	greed	is	the	rock	then	make	efforts	for	non-greed.	Just	do	the
opposite.	 Don’t	 suppress	 greed,	 just	 do	 the	 opposite,	 do	 something	which	 is
non-greed.	Don’t	just	suppress	anger,	do	something	which	is	non-anger.
In	 Japan,	 when	 someone	 gets	 angry,	 they	 have	 a	 traditional	 teaching.	 If
someone	gets	angry,	immediately	he	has	to	do	something	which	is	non-anger.
And	 the	 same	 energy	which	was	 going	 to	move	 into	 anger	moves	 into	 non-
anger.	Energy	is	neutral.	If	you	feel	angry	with	someone	and	you	want	to	slap
his	face,	give	him	a	flower	and	see	what	happens.
You	wanted	 to	 slap	his	 face,	you	wanted	 to	do	something:	 that	was	anger.
Give	him	a	flower	and	just	watch	what	is	happening	within	you;	you	are	doing
something	which	 is	 of	 non-anger.	And	 the	 same	 energy	which	was	 going	 to
move	your	hand	will	move	your	hand;	and	the	same	energy	which	was	going	to
hit	him	is	now	going	to	give	the	flower	but	the	quality	has	changed.	You	have
done	something,	and	the	energy	has	become	neutral;	if	you	don’t	do	something
then	 you	 suppress,	 and	 suppression	 is	 poisonous.	Do	 something,	 but	 just	 the
opposite.	And	this	is	not	a	new	conditioning;	it	 is	 just	to	uncondition	the	old.
When	the	old	has	disappeared,	the	knots	have	disappeared,	you	need	not	worry
for	anything	to	do.	Then	you	can	flow	spontaneously.
	
The	last	question:
Osho,
You	said	that	the	spiritual	endeavor	may	take	twenty	to	thirty	years,	or	even	lives,	and
even	then	it	is	early.	But	the	Western	mind	seems	to	be	result-oriented,	impatient	and	too
practical.	It	wants	instantaneous	results.	Religious	techniques	come	and	go	like	other	fads
in	the	West.	Then	how	do	you	intend	to	introduce	Yoga	to	the	Western	mind?
I	am	not	interested	in	the	Western	mind	or	the	Eastern	mind:	these	are	just
two	aspects	of	one	mind.	I	am	interested	in	the	mind.	And	this	Eastern–Western
dichotomy	is	not	very	meaningful,	not	even	significant	now.	There	are	Eastern
minds	in	the	West	and	there	are	Western	minds	in	the	East.	And	now	the	whole
thing	has	become	a	mess.	The	East	 is	 now	also	 in	 a	hurry.	The	old	East	 has
disappeared	completely.
I	am	reminded	of	one	Taoist	anecdote…
	
Three	Taoists	were	meditating	in	a	cave.	One	year	passed.	They	were	silent,
sitting,	meditating.	One	day	a	horseman	passed	nearby.	They	 looked.	One	of
the	 three	 hermits	 said,	 “The	 horse	 he	was	 riding	was	white.”	 The	 other	 two
remained	silent.
After	 one	 year	 again,	 the	 second	 hermit	 said,	 “The	 horse	 was	 black,	 not
white.”
Then	one	more	year	passed	again.	The	third	hermit	said,	“If	there	are	going
to	be	discussions,	 I	 am	 leaving.	 If	 there	 is	 going	 to	be	 some	bickering,	 I	 am
leaving.	I	am	leaving!	You	are	disturbing	my	silence.”
	
What	did	it	matter	whether	the	horse	was	white	or	black?	Three	years!	But
this	was	the	flow	in	the	East.	Time	was	not.	The	East	was	not	conscious	of	time
at	 all.	The	East	 lived	 in	 eternity,	 as	 if	 time	was	 not	 passing.	Everything	was
static.
But	that	East	no	longer	exists;	the	West	has	corrupted	everything.	The	East
has	disappeared;	through	Western	education	everybody	is	now	Western.	There
are	only	a	few	people,	like	in	the	islands,	who	are	“Eastern”	–	they	can	be	in
the	West,	they	can	be	in	the	East.	Now	they	are	not	in	any	way	confined	to	the
East.	But	the	world	as	a	whole,	the	earth	as	a	whole,	has	become	Western.
Yoga	 says	 –	 and	 let	 it	 penetrate	 you	 very	 deeply	 because	 it	 will	 be	 very
meaningful	 –	 Yoga	 says	 the	 more	 impatient	 you	 are,	 the	 more	 time	 will	 be
needed	 for	 your	 transformation.	 The	more	 in	 a	 hurry,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 be
delayed.	Hurry	itself	creates	such	confusion	that	delay	will	result.	The	less	in	a
hurry,	 the	 earlier	 will	 be	 the	 results.	 If	 you	 are	 infinitely	 patient,	 this	 very
moment	transformation	can	happen.	If	you	are	ready	to	wait	forever,	you	may
not	wait	 even	 for	 this	next	moment.	This	very	moment	 the	 thing	can	happen
because	it	is	not	a	question	of	time,	it	is	a	question	of	the	quality	of	your	mind.
Infinite	patience,	simply	not	hankering	for	the	result	gives	you	much	depth.
Hurry	makes	 you	 shallow.	You	 are	 in	 such	 a	 hurry	 that	 you	 cannot	 be	 deep.
This	moment,	you	are	not	interested	here	in	this	moment	but	in	what	is	going	to
happen	in	the	next.	You	are	interested	in	the	result.	You	are	moving	ahead	of
yourself;	your	movement	is	mad.	So	you	may	run	too	much,	you	may	travel	too
much	–	you	will	not	reach	anywhere	because	the	goal	to	be	reached	is	just	here.
You	have	to	drop	into	it,	not	to	reach	anywhere.	And	the	dropping	is	possible
only	if	you	are	totally	patient.
I	will	tell	you	one	Zen	anecdote…
	
A	Zen	monk	is	passing	through	a	forest.	Suddenly	he	becomes	aware	that	a
tiger	 is	 following	him,	 so	he	 starts	 running.	But	his	 running	 is	 also	of	 a	Zen
type,	 he	 is	 not	 in	 a	 hurry.	 He	 is	 not	 mad;	 his	 running	 also	 is	 smooth,
harmonious.	He	is	enjoying	it.	And	it	is	said	that	the	monk	thought	in	the	mind,
“If	the	tiger	is	enjoying	it,	then	why	not	I?”
And	 the	 tiger	was	 following	 him.	 Then	 he	 came	 near	 a	 precipice.	 Just	 to
escape	the	tiger	he	hung	from	the	branch	of	a	tree.	And	then	he	looked	down
and	saw	that	a	lion	was	standing	there	in	the	valley,	waiting	for	him.	Now	the
tiger	had	arrived;	he	was	standing	just	near	 the	 tree	on	the	hilltop.	The	monk
was	hanging	 in	 between,	 just	 holding	 a	 branch,	 and	 the	 lion	was	waiting	 for
him	deep	down	in	the	valley.
He	 laughed.	Then	he	 looked	–	 two	mice	were	 just	 eating	 that	branch,	one
white,	one	black.	Then	he	laughed	very	loudly.	He	said,	“This	is	life.	Day	and
night,	white	and	black	mice	cutting.	And	wherever	I	go	death	is	waiting.	This	is
life!”	 And	 it	 is	 said	 that	 he	 achieved	 a	 satori,	 the	 first	 glimpse	 of
enlightenment.
This	is	life!	Nothing	to	worry	about,	this	is	how	things	are.	Wherever	you	go
death	is	waiting,	and	even	if	you	don’t	go	anywhere	day	and	night	are	cutting
your	life.	So	he	laughs	loudly.
Then	he	looks	around,	because	now	it	is	fixed.	Now	there	is	no	worry.	When
death	 is	 certain,	 what	 is	 the	 worry?	 Only	 in	 uncertainty	 is	 there	 worry.	 If
everything	is	certain	there	is	no	worry,	now	it	has	become	destiny.	So	he	looks
for	how	to	enjoy	these	few	moments.	He	becomes	aware	of	some	strawberries
just	 by	 the	 side	of	 the	branch,	 so	he	picks	 a	 few	 strawberries	 and	eats	 them.
They	are	 the	best	of	his	 life!	He	enjoys	 them,	and	 it	 is	 said	 that	he	becomes
enlightened	in	that	moment.
He	has	become	a	buddha,	because	death	is	so	near	and	even	then	he	is	not	in
any	hurry.	He	can	enjoy	a	 strawberry.	 It	 is	 sweet,	 the	 taste	of	 it	 is	 sweet.	He
thanks	God.	 It	 is	said	 in	 that	moment	 that	everything	disappeared	–	 the	 tiger,
the	lion,	the	branch,	he	himself.	He	had	become	the	cosmos.
	
This	is	patience,	absolute	patience.	Wherever	you	are,	in	that	moment,	enjoy
not	asking	for	the	future.	No	futuring	in	the	mind,	just	the	present	moment,	the
nowness	 of	 the	moment,	 and	 you	 are	 satisfied.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go
anywhere.	Wherever	you	are,	from	that	very	point	you	will	drop	into	the	ocean,
you	will	become	one	with	the	cosmos.
But	 the	 mind	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 here	 and	 now.	 The	 mind	 is	 interested
somewhere	in	the	future,	in	some	results.	So	the	question	is,	in	a	way,	relevant
for	 such	 a	 mind	 –	 it	 will	 be	 better	 to	 call	 it	 the	 modern	 mind	 rather	 than
Western	–	the	modern	mind	which	is	constantly	obsessed	with	the	future,	with
the	result,	not	with	the	here	and	now.
How	can	this	mind	be	taught	Yoga?	This	mind	can	be	taught	Yoga	because
this	 future	 orientation	 is	 leading	 nowhere.	 And	 this	 future	 orientation	 is
creating	constant	misery	for	the	modern	mind.	We	have	created	a	hell,	and	we
have	created	too	much	of	it.	Now	either	man	will	have	to	disappear	from	this
planet	Earth,	or	he	will	have	to	transform	himself.	Either	humanity	will	have	to
die	completely	because	this	hell	cannot	be	continued	anymore,	or	we	will	have
to	go	through	a	mutation.
Hence,	Yoga	 can	 become	 very	meaningful	 and	 significant	 for	 the	modern
mind	because	Yoga	can	save.	It	can	teach	you	again	how	to	be	here	and	now,
how	to	forget	past	and	how	to	forget	future	and	how	to	remain	in	the	present
moment	 with	 such	 intensity	 that	 this	 moment	 becomes	 timeless.	 The	 very
moment	becomes	eternity.
Patanjali	can	become	more	and	more	significant.	As	 this	century	comes	 to
its	closure,	techniques	about	human	transformation	will	become	more	and	more
important.	They	are	already	becoming,	all	over	 the	world	–	whether	you	call
them	 Yoga	 or	 Zen,	 or	 you	 call	 them	 Sufi	 methods	 or	 you	 call	 them	 Tantra
methods.	 In	many,	many	ways,	 all	 the	 old	 traditional	 teachings	 are	 erupting.
Some	deep	need	is	there,	and	those	who	are	thinking	–	anywhere,	in	any	part	of
the	world	–	have	become	interested	in	again	finding	out	how	humanity	existed
in	 the	 past	with	 such	beautitude,	 such	 bliss.	With	 such	poor	 conditions,	 how
have	such	rich	men	existed	in	the	past?	And	we,	with	such	a	rich	situation,	why
are	we	so	poor?
This	 is	 a	 paradox,	 the	modern	 paradox:	 for	 the	 first	 time	 on	 the	 earth	we
have	created	rich,	scientific	societies,	and	yet	they	are	the	most	ugly	and	most
unhappy.	 And	 in	 the	 past	 there	 was	 no	 scientific	 technology,	 no	 affluence,
nothing	of	comfort,	but	humanity	was	existing	in	such	a	deep,	peaceful	milieu,
happy,	thankful.	What	has	happened?	We	could	be	happier	than	anyone,	but	we
have	lost	contact	with	existence.
That	existence	is	here	and	now,	and	an	impatient	mind	cannot	be	in	contact
with	 it.	 Impatience	 is	 like	a	 feverish,	mad	state	of	mind.	You	go	on	 running,
and	 even	 if	 the	 goal	 comes,	 you	 cannot	 stand	 there	 because	 the	 running	 has
become	just	a	habit.	Even	if	you	reach	the	goal	you	will	miss	it,	you	will	pass
it,	because	you	cannot	stop.	If	you	can	stop,	the	goal	is	not	to	be	sought,	it	is
there.
Zen	master	Hui-Hai	has	said,	“Seek	and	you	will	 lose,	don’t	seek	and	you
can	get	it	immediately.	Stop,	and	it	is	here.	Run,	and	it	is	nowhere.”
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	9:	This	Very	Life,	the	Ultimate	Joy
	
The	first	state	of	vairagya,	desirelessness:	cessation
from	self-indulgence	in	the	thirst	for	sensuous
pleasures,	with	conscious	effort.
The	last	state	of	vairagya,	desirelessness:	cessation
of	all	desiring	by	knowing	the	innermost	nature	of
purush,	the	supreme	self.
Abhyasa	and	vairagya	–	constant	inner	practice	and	desirelessness:	these	are
the	two	foundation	stones	of	Patanjali’s	Yoga.	Constant	inner	effort	 is	needed
not	 because	 something	 has	 to	 be	 achieved	 but	 because	 of	wrong	 habits.	 The
fight	 is	 not	 against	 nature,	 the	 fight	 is	 against	 habits.	 Nature	 is	 there,	 every
moment	 available	 to	 flow	 in,	 to	 become	 one	 with	 it,	 but	 you	 have	 a	 wrong
pattern	of	habits.	Those	habits	create	barriers.	The	fight	is	against	these	habits,
and	 unless	 they	 are	 destroyed,	 the	 nature,	 your	 inherent	 nature,	 cannot	 flow,
cannot	move,	cannot	reach	to	the	destiny	for	which	it	is	meant.
So	remember	the	first	thing:	the	struggle	is	not	against	nature.	The	struggle
is	against	wrong	nurture,	wrong	habits.	You	are	not	fighting	yourself,	you	are
fighting	 something	 else	 which	 has	 become	 fixed	 with	 you.	 If	 this	 is	 not
understood	 rightly,	 then	 your	whole	 effort	 can	 go	 in	 a	wrong	 direction.	You
may	start	fighting	with	yourself,	and	once	you	start	fighting	with	yourself	you
are	fighting	a	losing	battle.	You	can	never	be	victorious.	Who	will	be	victorious
and	who	will	be	defeated?	You	are	both,	 the	one	who	is	 fighting	and	 the	one
with	whom	you	are	fighting.	 If	both	my	hands	start	 fighting,	who	is	going	 to
win?
Once	you	start	 fighting	with	yourself	you	are	 lost,	and	so	many	people,	 in
their	 endeavors,	 in	 their	 seeking	 for	 spiritual	 truth,	 fall	 into	 that	 error.	 They
become	victims	 of	 this	 error,	 and	 start	 fighting	with	 themselves.	 If	 you	 fight
with	yourself	you	will	go	more	and	more	insane.	You	will	be	more	and	more
divided,	split,	you	will	become	schizophrenic.	This	is	what	is	happening	in	the
West.
Christianity	–	not	Christ,	Christianity	–	has	 taught	 to	fight	with	oneself,	 to
condemn	 oneself,	 to	 deny	 oneself.	 Christianity	 has	 created	 a	 great	 division
between	the	lower	and	the	higher;	there	is	nothing	lower	and	nothing	higher	in
you.	Christianity	talks	about	the	lower	self	and	the	higher	self,	or	the	body	and
the	soul.	But	somehow	Christianity	divides	you	and	then	creates	a	fight.	This
fight	is	going	to	be	endless,	it	will	not	lead	you	anywhere.	The	ultimate	result
can	only	be	self-destruction,	a	schizophrenic	chaos.	That’s	what	is	happening	in
the	West.
Yoga	never	divides	you,	but	still	there	is	a	fight.	The	fight	is	not	against	your
nature.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 the	 fight	 is	 foryour	 nature.	 You	 have	 accumulated
many	habits;	those	habits	are	your	achievement	of	many	lives’	wrong	patterns.
And	because	of	those	wrong	patterns	your	nature	cannot	move	spontaneously,
cannot	flow	spontaneously,	cannot	reach	to	its	destiny.	These	habits	have	to	be
destroyed.	 And	 these	 are	 only	 habits	 –	 they	 may	 look	 like	 nature	 to	 you
because	 you	 are	 so	 addicted	 to	 them.	You	may	 have	 become	 identified	with
them,	but	they	are	not	you.
This	distinction	has	to	be	clearly	maintained	in	the	mind,	otherwise	you	can
misinterpret	 Patanjali.	 Whatsoever	 has	 come	 into	 you	 from	 without	 and	 is
wrong	has	 to	 be	destroyed	 so	 that	which	 is	within	you	 can	 flow,	 can	 flower.
Abhyasa,	constant	inner	practice,	is	against	habits.
The	second	thing,	 the	second	foundation	stone,	 is	vairagya,	desirelessness.
That	too	can	lead	you	in	a	wrong	direction.	And,	remember,	these	are	not	rules,
these	are	simple	directions.	When	I	say	these	are	not	rules	I	mean	they	are	not
to	 be	 followed	 like	 an	 obsession,	 their	 meaning	 and	 significance	 has	 to	 be
understood,	and	that	significance	has	to	be	carried	in	one’s	life.
It	is	going	to	be	different	for	everyone	so	it	is	not	a	fixed	rule.	You	are	not	to
follow	it	dogmatically.	You	have	to	understand	its	significance	and	then	allow
it	 to	 grow	 within	 you.	 The	 flowering	 is	 going	 to	 be	 different	 with	 each
individual.	So	 these	are	not	dead,	dogmatic	rules,	 these	are	simple	directions.
They	indicate	the	direction,	they	don’t	give	you	the	detail.
	
I	 remember,	 once	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 was	 working	 as	 a	 doorkeeper	 in	 a
museum.	The	 first	 day	he	was	 appointed	he	 asked	 for	 the	 rules:	 “What	 rules
have	 to	 be	 followed?”	 So	 he	 was	 given	 the	 book	 of	 rules	 that	 were	 to	 be
followed	 by	 the	 doorkeeper.	 He	memorized	 them,	 he	 took	 every	 care	 not	 to
forget	a	single	detail.
And	 the	 first	day	when	he	was	on	duty,	 the	 first	visitor	came.	He	 told	 the
visitor	to	leave	his	umbrella	there	outside	with	him	at	the	door.	The	visitor	was
amazed.	He	said,	“But	I	don’t	have	any	umbrella.”
So	 Nasruddin	 said,	 “In	 that	 case,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 go	 back.	 Bring	 an
umbrella	 because	 this	 is	 the	 rule.	 Unless	 a	 visitor	 leaves	 his	 umbrella	 here
outside,	he	cannot	be	allowed	in.”
	
And	 there	 are	 many	 people	 who	 are	 rule-obsessed.	 They	 follow	 blindly.
Patanjali	is	not	interested	in	giving	you	rules.	Whatsoever	he	is	going	to	say	are
simply	 directions,	 not	 to	 be	 followed	 but	 to	 be	 understood.	 And	 out	 of	 that
understanding,	following	will	come.	The	reverse	cannot	happen:	if	you	follow
the	 rules,	 understanding	 will	 not	 come.	 If	 you	 understand	 the	 rules,	 the
following	will	come;	will	come	automatically,	as	a	shadow.
Desirelessness	 is	 a	 direction.	 If	 you	 follow	 it	 as	 a	 rule	 then	 you	will	 start
killing	your	desires.	Many	have	done	that,	millions	have	done	that	–	they	start
killing	 their	 desires.	 Of	 course	 this	 is	 mathematical,	 this	 is	 logical.	 If
desirelessness	is	to	be	achieved	then	the	best	way	is	to	kill	all	desires.	Then	you
will	be	without	desires	but	you	will	also	be	dead.	You	have	followed	the	rule
exactly,	but	if	you	kill	all	desires	you	are	killing	yourself,	you	are	committing
suicide	because	desires	 are	not	only	desires,	 they	are	 the	 flow	of	 life	 energy.
Desirelessness	is	 to	be	achieved	without	killing	anything.	Desirelessness	is	 to
be	achieved	with	more	life,	with	more	energy,	not	less.
For	example,	you	can	kill	sex	easily	if	you	starve	the	body,	because	sex	and
food	are	deeply	related.	Food	is	needed	for	your	survival,	for	the	survival	of	the
individual,	and	sex	is	needed	for	the	survival	of	the	race,	of	the	species.	They
are	both	food,	in	a	way.	Without	food	the	individual	cannot	survive	and	without
sex	the	race	cannot	survive,	but	the	primary	is	the	individual.	If	the	individual
cannot	survive	then	there	is	no	question	of	the	race.
So	if	you	starve	your	body,	 if	you	give	so	little	food	to	your	body	that	 the
energy	created	by	it	is	exhausted	in	day-to-day	routine	work,	walking,	sitting,
sleeping;	 if	no	extra	energy	accumulates,	 then	sex	will	disappear.	Sex	can	be
there	only	when	 the	 individual	 is	gathering	extra	energy,	more	 than	he	needs
for	his	survival.	Then	the	body	can	think	of	the	survival	of	the	race.
If	you	are	in	danger	then	the	body	simply	forgets	about	sex;	hence	so	much
attraction	 for	 fasting,	 because	 if	 you	 fast	 sex	 disappears.	 But	 this	 is	 not
desirelessness,	this	is	just	becoming	more	and	more	dead,	less	and	less	alive.	In
India,	Jaina	monks	have	been	fasting	continuously	just	for	this	end,	because	if
you	 fast	 continuously	 and	 you	 are	 constantly	 on	 a	 starvation	 diet,	 sex
disappears.	 Nothing	 else	 is	 needed,	 no	 transformation	 of	 the	 mind,	 no
transformation	 of	 the	 inner	 energy,	 simply	 starving	 helps.	 Then	 you	 become
habituated	 to	 starvation.	 And	 if	 you	 continuously	 do	 it	 for	 years,	 you	 will
simply	forget	that	sex	exists.	No	energy	is	created,	no	energy	moves	to	the	sex
center.	 There	 is	 no	 energy	 to	move!	 The	 person	 exists	 just	 as	 a	 dead	 being.
There	is	no	sex.
But	 this	 is	 not	 what	 Patanjali	 means.	 This	 is	 not	 a	 desireless	 state.	 It	 is
simply	an	impotent	state,	energy	is	not	there.	If	you	give	food	to	the	body,	even
though	you	may	have	starved	the	body	for	thirty	or	forty	years,	once	you	give
the	right	food	to	the	body,	sex	reappears	immediately.	You	are	not	changed,	the
sex	is	 just	hidden	there	waiting	for	energy	to	flow.	Whenever	energy	flows	it
will	become	alive	again.
So	what	is	the	criterion?	The	criterion	has	to	be	remembered:	be	more	alive,
be	more	 filled	 with	 energy,	 vital,	 and	 become	 desireless.	 Only	 then,	 if	 your
desirelessness	makes	you	more	alive	have	you	followed	the	right	direction.	If	it
simply	 makes	 you	 a	 dead	 person	 you	 have	 followed	 the	 rule.	 It	 is	 easy	 to
follow	the	rule	because	no	intelligence	is	required.	It	is	easy	to	follow	the	rule
because	 simple	 tricks	 can	 do	 it.	 Fasting	 is	 a	 simple	 trick.	 Nothing	 much	 is
implied	in	it,	no	wisdom	is	going	to	come	out	of	it.
There	 was	 an	 experiment	 in	 Oxford.	 For	 thirty	 days	 a	 group	 of	 twenty
students,	young	healthy	boys,	were	totally	starved.	After	the	seventh	or	eighth
day	they	started	losing	interest	in	girls.	Nude	pictures	were	given	to	them	and
they	 were	 indifferent.	 And	 this	 indifference	 was	 not	 just	 bodily,	 even	 their
minds	were	not	interested.
There	are	now	methods	to	judge	the	mind.	Whenever	a	young	boy,	a	healthy
boy,	looks	at	a	nude	picture	of	a	girl,	the	pupils	of	his	eyes	become	big.	They
are	more	open	to	receive	the	nude	figure.	And	you	cannot	control	your	pupils,
they	are	not	voluntary.	So	you	may	say	that	you	are	not	interested	in	sex,	but	a
nude	picture	will	show	whether	you	are	interested	or	not.	And	you	cannot	do
anything	voluntarily;	you	cannot	control	the	pupils	of	your	eyes.	They	expand,
because	something	so	 interesting	has	come	before	 them	that	 they	open	more,
the	shutters	open	more	to	take	more	in.	Now,	women	are	not	interested	in	nude
men,	they	are	interested	in	small	babies,	so	if	a	beautiful	baby’s	picture	is	given
to	them	their	eyes	expand.
In	 the	Oxford	 experiment,	 every	 precaution	was	 taken	 to	 see	whether	 the
boys	were	interested,	and	there	was	no	interest.	By	and	by	the	interest	declined
more.	Even	 in	 their	 dreams	 they	 stopped	 seeing	 girls,	 sexual	 dreams.	By	 the
second	week,	 the	 fourteenth	or	 fifteenth	day,	 they	were	 simply	dead	corpses.
Even	 if	 a	 beautiful	 girl	 came	nearby	 they	would	not	 look.	 If	 someone	 said	 a
dirty	joke	they	would	not	laugh.	For	thirty	days	they	were	starved,	and	on	the
thirtieth	day	the	whole	group	was	sexless.	There	was	no	sex	in	their	minds,	in
their	bodies.
Then	food	was	given	to	them	again:	on	the	very	first	day	they	again	became
as	 they	 were.	 The	 next	 day	 they	 were	 interested,	 and	 the	 third	 day	 all	 that
starving	 for	 thirty	 days	 had	 disappeared.	Now	not	 only	were	 they	 interested,
they	were	 obsessively	 interested,	 as	 if	 this	 gap	 had	 helped.	 For	 a	 few	weeks
they	were	obsessively	sexual,	only	thinking	of	girls	and	nothing	else.	When	the
food	was	in	the	body,	girls	became	important	again.
But	this	has	been	done	in	many	countries	all	over	the	world.	Many	religions
have	followed	this	fasting.	And	then	people	start	thinking	that	they	have	gone
beyond	sex.	You	can	go	beyond	sex,	but	fasting	is	not	the	way.	That’s	a	trick.
And	this	can	be	done	in	every	way.	If	you	are	on	a	fast	you	will	be	less	angry,
and	 if	 fasting	 becomes	 habitual	 then	many	 things	 from	your	 life	will	 simply
drop	because	the	base	has	dropped:	food	is	the	base.
When	you	have	more	energy	you	move	in	more	dimensions.	When	you	are
filled	with	overflowing	energy,	your	overflowing	energy	leads	you	into	many,
many	 desires.	 Desires	 are	 nothing	 but	 outlets	 for	 energy.	 Two	 ways	 are
possible:	one	is	that	your	desire	changes	and	the	energy	remains,	or	energy	is
removed	and	the	desire	remains.	Energy	can	be	removed	very	easily.	You	can
simply	be	operated	on,	castrated,	and	then	sex	disappears.	Some	hormones	can
be	removed	from	your	body.	And	that’s	what	fasting	is	doing	–	some	hormones
disappear,	then	you	can	become	sexless.
But	this	is	not	the	goal	of	Patanjali.	Patanjali	says	that	energy	should	remain
and	 desire	 disappears.	 Only	 when	 desire	 disappears	 and	 you	 are	 filled	 with
energy	 can	 you	 achieve	 that	 blissful	 state	 that	 Yoga	 aims	 at.	 A	 dead	 person
cannot	reach	to	the	divine.	The	divine	can	be	attained	only	through	overflowing
energy,	abundant	energy,	an	ocean	of	energy.
So	this	is	the	second	thing	to	remember	continuously:	don’t	destroy	energy,
destroy	desire.	 It	will	 be	 difficult.	 It	 is	 going	 to	 be	 hard,	 arduous,	 because	 it
needs	a	total	transformation	of	your	being.	But	Patanjali	is	for	it.	So	he	divides
his	vairagya,	his	desirelessness,	into	two	steps.	We	will	enter	the	sutra.
The	first	sutra:
The	first	state	of	vairagya	–	desirelessness:	cessation
from	self-indulgence	in	the	thirst	for	sensuous
pleasures,	with	conscious	effort.
Many	things	are	implied	and	have	to	be	understood.	One:	the	indulgence	in
sensuous	 pleasures.	Why	 do	 you	 ask	 for	 sensuous	 pleasures?	Why	 does	 the
mind	constantly	think	about	indulgence?	Why	do	you	move	again	and	again	in
the	same	pattern	of	indulgences?
For	Patanjali,	and	for	all	those	who	have	known,	the	reason	is	that	you	are
not	blissful	inwardly,	hence	the	desire	for	pleasure.	The	pleasure-oriented	mind
means	 that	 as	 you	 are,	 in	 yourself,	 you	 are	 unhappy.	 That’s	 why	 you	 seek
happiness	 somewhere	 else.	A	 person	who	 is	 unhappy	 is	 bound	 to	move	 into
desires.	 Desires	 are	 the	 way	 for	 the	 unhappy	 mind	 to	 seek	 happiness.	 Of
course,	nowhere	can	 this	mind	find	happiness.	At	 the	most	he	can	find	a	few
glimpses;	 those	 glimpses	 appear	 as	 pleasure.	 Pleasure	 means	 glimpses	 of
happiness.	And	the	fallacy	is	that	this	pleasure-seeking	mind	thinks	that	these
glimpses	and	 the	pleasure	are	coming	from	somewhere	else.	 It	always	comes
from	within.
Let	us	try	to	understand.	You	are	in	love	with	a	person,	you	move	into	sex.
Sex	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	pleasure,	it	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	happiness.	For	a
single	 moment	 you	 feel	 at	 ease.	 All	 the	 miseries	 have	 disappeared,	 all	 the
mental	 agony	 is	 gone.	For	 a	 single	moment	you	are	here	 and	now,	you	have
forgotten	all.	For	a	single	moment	there	is	no	past	and	no	future	–	because	of
this	there	is	no	past	and	no	future.	And	for	a	single	moment	you	are	here	and
now;	from	within	you	the	energy	flows.	Your	inner	self	flows	in	this	moment
and	you	have	a	glimpse	of	happiness.
But	you	think	that	the	glimpse	is	coming	from	the	partner,	from	the	woman
or	 from	 the	 man.	 It	 is	 not	 coming	 from	 the	 man	 or	 from	 the	 woman,	 it	 is
coming	from	you!	The	other	has	simply	helped	you	to	fall	into	the	present,	to
fall	 out	 of	 future	 and	 past.	 The	 other	 has	 simply	 helped	 to	 bring	 you	 to	 the
nowness	of	this	moment.
If	 you	 can	 come	 to	 this	 nowness	without	 sex,	 sex	by	 and	by	will	 become
useless,	it	will	disappear.	Then	it	will	not	be	a	desire.	If	you	want	to	move	in	it
you	can	move	into	it	as	fun,	but	not	as	a	desire.	Then	there	is	no	obsession	in	it
because	you	are	not	dependent	on	it.
Sit	under	a	tree	some	day,	just	in	the	morning	when	the	sun	has	not	risen	and
watch	what	happens	in	your	body	–	because	with	the	sun’s	rising	your	body	is
disturbed	and	it	is	difficult	to	be	at	peace	within.	That	is	why	in	the	East	they
have	 always	 been	 meditating	 before	 sunrise.	 They	 have	 called	 it
brahmamuhurt,	the	moments	of	the	divine.	And	they	are	right,	because	with	the
sun,	 energies	 rise	 and	 they	 start	 flowing	 in	 the	 old	 pattern	 that	 you	 have
created.
Just	in	the	morning,	the	sun	has	not	yet	come	on	the	horizon,	everything	is
silent	 and	 nature	 is	 fast	 asleep:	 the	 trees	 are	 asleep,	 the	 birds	 are	 asleep,	 the
whole	world	 is	asleep;	your	body	also	 inside	 is	asleep.	You	have	come	 to	sit
under	a	tree.	Everything	is	silent.	Just	try	to	be	here	in	this	moment.	Don’t	do
anything,	 don’t	 even	 meditate,	 don’t	 make	 any	 effort.	 Just	 close	 your	 eyes,
remain	 silent	 in	 this	 silence	 of	 nature.	 Suddenly	 you	 will	 have	 the	 same
glimpse	which	 has	 been	 coming	 to	 you	 through	 sex	 or	 even	 greater,	 deeper.
Suddenly	 you	will	 feel	 a	 rush	 of	 energy	 flowing	 from	within.	And	 now	you
cannot	be	deceived	because	there	is	no	“other”;	it	is	certainly	coming	from	you,
it	 is	 certainly	 flowing	 from	within.	Nobody	 else	 is	 giving	 it	 to	 you,	 you	 are
giving	it	to	yourself.
But	 the	 right	 situation	 is	 needed,	 a	 silence,	 energy	 not	 in	 excitement,	 not
doing	anything,	just	being	there	under	a	tree.	Then	you	will	have	the	glimpse
and	this	will	not	really	be	pleasure,	it	will	be	happiness,	because	now	you	are
looking	at	the	right	source,	the	right	direction.	Once	you	know	it	then	through
sex	you	will	immediately	recognize	that	the	other	was	just	a	mirror;	you	were
reflected	 in	 him	 or	 in	 her.	And	 you	were	 the	mirror	 for	 the	 other.	You	were
helping	 each	 other	 to	 fall	 into	 the	 present,	 to	move	 away	 from	 the	 thinking
mind	to	a	non-thinking	state	of	being.
The	more	mind	is	filled	with	chattering,	the	more	sex	has	appeal.	In	the	East
sex	was	never	such	an	obsession	as	it	has	become	in	the	West.	Films,	stories,
novels,	 poetry,	 magazines,	 everything	 has	 become	 sexual.	 You	 cannot	 sell
anything	unless	you	can	create	a	sex	appeal.	If	you	have	to	sell	a	car	you	can
sell	 it	 only	 as	 a	 sex	 object.	 If	 you	want	 to	 sell	 toothpaste	 you	 can	 sell	 only
through	some	sex	appeal.	Nothing	can	be	sold	without	sex.	It	seems	that	only
sex	has	the	market,	nothing	else	has	this	significance.
Every	significance	comes	through	sex,	the	whole	mind	is	obsessed	with	sex.
Why?	Why	has	this	never	happened	before?	This	is	something	new	in	human
history.	And	the	reason	is	now	the	West	is	totally	absorbed	in	thoughts	with	no
possibility	 of	 being	 here	 and	 now,	 except	 in	 sex.	 Sex	 has	 remained	 the	 only
possibility,	and	even	that	is	going.
For	the	modern	man	it	has	even	become	possible	that	while	making	love	he
can	think	of	other	things.	And	once	you	become	so	capable	that	while	making
love	you	can	go	on	thinking	of	something	–	your	bank	accounts,	talking	with	a
friend,	 or	 being	 somewhere	 else	 while	 making	 love	 here	 –	 sex	 will	 also	 be
finished.	Then	it	will	just	be	boring,	frustrating,	because	sex	was	not	the	thing.
The	 thing	 was	 only	 this:	 that	 because	 sexual	 energy	 is	 moving	 so	 fast	 your
mind	comes	to	a	stop,	the	sex	takes	over.	The	energy	flows	so	fast,	so	vitally,
that	your	ordinary	patterns	of	thinking	stop.
I	have	heard…
	
Once	 it	 happened	 that	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	 passing	 through	 a	 forest.	 He
came	upon	a	skull.	Just	curious,	as	he	always	was,	he	asked	the	skull,	“What
brought	you	here,	sir?”
And	he	was	amazed	because	the	skull	said,	“Talking	brought	me	here,	sir.”
He	couldn’t	believe	it,	but	he	had	heard	it	so	he	ran	to	the	court	of	the	king.
He	told	them	there,	“I	have	seen	a	miracle!	A	skull,	a	talking	skull,	lying	just
near	our	village	in	the	forest!”
The	 king	 also	 couldn’t	 believe,	 but	 he	 was	 curious.	 The	 whole	 court
followed.	They	went	into	the	forest.	Nasruddin	went	near	the	skull	and	asked
again	the	same	question,	“What	brought	you	here,	sir?”	But	the	skull	remained
silent.	He	asked	again	and	again	and	again,	but	the	skull	was	dead	silent.
The	king	said,	“I	knew	before,	Nasruddin,	that	you	are	a	liar.	But	now	this	is
too	much.	You	have	played	such	a	joke	that	you	will	have	to	suffer	for	it.”	He
ordered	his	guard	to	cut	off	his	head	and	throw	the	head	near	the	skull	for	the
ants	 to	 eat.	 When	 everybody	 went	 –	 the	 king,	 his	 court	 –	 the	 skull	 started
talking	again.	And	he	asked,	“What	brought	you	here,	sir?”
Nasruddin	 answered,	 “What	 brought	 me	 here?	 Talking	 brought	 me	 here,
sir.”
	
Talking	has	brought	man	to	this	situation	that	is	today.	A	constant	chattering
mind	does	not	allow	any	happiness,	any	possibility	of	happiness,	because	only
a	 silent	 mind	 can	 look	 within,	 only	 a	 silent	 mind	 can	 hear	 the	 silence,	 the
happiness	that	is	always	bubbling	there.	But	it	is	so	subtle	that	with	the	noise	of
the	mind	you	cannot	hear	it.
Only	in	sex	the	noise	sometimes	stops.	I	say	sometimes,	because	if	you	have
become	 habitual	 in	 sex	 also,	 as	 husbands	 and	 wives	 become,	 then	 it	 never
stops.	 The	 whole	 act	 becomes	 automatic	 and	 the	 mind	 goes	 on	 on	 its	 own.
Then	sex	is	also	a	boredom.
Anything	has	appeal	if	it	can	give	you	a	glimpse.	The	glimpse	may	appear	to
be	coming	from	the	outside;	it	always	comes	from	within.	The	outside	can	only
be	 just	 a	 mirror.	When	 happiness	 flowing	 from	within	 is	 reflected	 from	 the
outside,	 it	 is	 called	pleasure.	This	 is	Patanjali’s	 definition:	 happiness	 flowing
from	within	 reflected	 from	somewhere	 in	 the	outside,	 the	outside	 functioning
as	a	mirror.	And	if	you	think	that	this	happiness	is	coming	from	the	outside,	it
is	called	pleasure.	We	are	in	search	of	happiness,	not	in	search	of	pleasure,	so
unless	 you	 can	 have	 glimpses	 of	 happiness	 you	 cannot	 stop	 your	 pleasure-
seeking	efforts.	Indulgence	means	the	search	for	pleasure.
A	conscious	effort	is	needed	for	two	things.	One,	whenever	you	feel	there	is
a	moment	of	pleasure,	 transform	it	 into	a	meditative	situation.	Whenever	you
feel	you	are	feeling	pleasure,	happy,	joyful,	close	your	eyes	and	look	within	at
where	 it	 is	coming	 from.	Don’t	 lose	 this	moment,	 this	 is	precious.	 If	you	are
not	conscious	you	may	continue	thinking	that	it	comes	from	without,	and	that’s
the	fallacy	of	the	world.
If	you	are	conscious,	meditative,	if	you	search	for	the	real	source,	sooner	or
later	you	will	come	to	know	it	is	flowing	from	within.	Once	you	know	that	it
always	flows	from	within,	it	is	something	that	you	have	already	got,	indulgence
will	 drop,	 and	 this	will	 be	 the	 first	 step	 of	 desirelessness.	 Then	 you	 are	 not
seeking,	not	hankering.	You	are	not	killing	desires,	you	are	not	 fighting	with
desires,	 you	 have	 simply	 found	 something	 greater.	The	 desires	 don’t	 look	 so
important	now,	they	wither	away.
Remember	 this:	 they	are	not	 to	be	killed	and	destroyed,	 they	wither	away.
You	 simply	 neglect	 them	 because	 you	 have	 a	 greater	 source,	 you	 are
magnetically	attracted	towards	it.	Now	your	whole	energy	is	moving	inwards.
The	 desires	 are	 simply	 neglected.	You	 are	 not	 fighting	 them.	 If	 you	 fight
with	 them	 you	 will	 never	 win.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 you	 had	 some	 stones,	 colored
stones,	 in	 your	 hand	 and	 now	 suddenly	 you	 have	 come	 to	 know	 about
diamonds	–	and	they	are	lying	about.	You	throw	away	the	colored	stones	just	to
create	 space	 for	 the	 diamonds	 in	 your	 hand.	You	 are	 not	 fighting	 the	 stones.
When	 there	 are	 diamonds	 you	 simply	 drop	 the	 stones,	 they	 have	 lost	 their
meaning.
Desires	must	 lose	 their	meaning.	 If	 you	 fight,	 the	meaning	 is	 not	 lost.	Or
even,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 just	 through	 fight	 you	may	 give	 them	more	meaning.
Then	 they	become	more	 important.	This	 is	 happening.	Those	who	 fight	with
any	desire,	 that	desire	becomes	the	center	of	 their	mind.	If	you	fight	sex,	sex
becomes	 the	 center.	Then	 you	 are	 continuously	 engaged,	 occupied	with	 it.	 It
becomes	 like	 a	 wound.	 And	 wherever	 you	 look	 that	 wound	 immediately
projects,	and	whatsoever	you	see	becomes	sexual.
Mind	has	a	mechanism,	an	old	survival	mechanism,	of	 fight	or	 flight.	The
ways	 of	 the	 mind	 are	 two:	 either	 you	 can	 fight	 with	 something	 or	 you	 can
escape.	If	you	are	strong	then	you	fight,	 if	you	are	weak	then	you	take	flight,
then	you	simply	escape,	but	in	both	ways	the	other	is	important,	the	other	is	the
center.	You	can	fight	or	you	can	escape	from	the	world,	from	the	world	where
desires	are	possible.	You	can	go	to	the	Himalayas:	that	too	is	a	fight,	the	fight
of	the	weak.
I	have	heard…
	
Once	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	shopping	in	a	village.	He	left	his	donkey	on	the
street	and	went	into	a	shop	to	purchase	something.	When	he	came	out	he	was
furious.	Someone	had	painted	his	donkey	completely	red,	bright	red.	So	he	was
furious,	and	he	inquired,	“Who	has	done	this?	I	will	kill	that	man!”
A	 small	 boy	was	 standing	 there.	He	 said,	 “A	man	 has	 done	 this,	 and	 that
man	has	just	gone	inside	the	pub.”
So	Nasruddin	went	there,	rushed	there,	angry,	mad.	He	said,	“Who	has	done
this?	Who	the	hell	has	painted	my	donkey?”
A	very	big	man,	very	strong,	stood	and	he	said,	“I	did.	What	about	it?”
So	Nasruddin	said,	“Thank	you,	sir.	You	have	done	such	a	beautiful	 job.	 I
just	came	to	tell	you	that	the	first	coat	is	dry.”
	
If	you	are	strong	then	you	are	ready	to	fight.	If	you	are	weak	then	you	are
ready	to	flee,	to	take	flight.	But	in	both	cases	you	are	not	becoming	stronger.	In
both	 cases	 the	 other	 has	 become	 the	 center	 of	 your	mind.	These	 are	 the	 two
attitudes,	fight	or	flight	–	and	both	are	wrong	because	through	both	the	mind	is
strengthened.
Patanjali	says	there	is	a	third	possibility:	don’t	fight	and	don’t	escape,	just	be
alert.	 Just	be	conscious.	Whatsoever	 is	 the	case,	 just	be	a	witness.	Conscious
effort	 means	 first,	 searching	 for	 the	 inner	 source	 of	 happiness,	 and	 second,
witnessing	the	old	pattern	of	habits,	not	fighting	it,	just	witnessing	it.
The	first	state	of	vairagya,	desirelessness:	cessation
from	self-indulgence	in	the	thirst	for	sensuous
pleasures,	with	conscious	effort.
Conscious	 effort	 is	 the	 key.	 Consciousness	 is	 needed,	 and	 effort	 is	 also
needed.	And	the	effort	should	be	conscious,	because	there	can	be	unconscious
efforts.	 You	 can	 be	 trained	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 you	 can	 drop	 certain	 desires
without	knowing	that	you	have	dropped	them.
For	 example,	 if	 you	 are	 born	 in	 a	 vegetarian	 home	 you	 will	 be	 eating
vegetarian	 food.	 Non-vegetarian	 food	 is	 simply	 not	 the	 question.	 You	 never
dropped	 it	 consciously;	 you	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that
unconsciously	it	has	dropped	by	itself.	But	this	is	not	going	to	give	you	some
integrity,	 this	 is	not	going	 to	give	you	some	spiritual	strength.	Unless	you	do
something	consciously,	it	is	not	gained.
Many	societies	have	tried	this	for	their	children,	to	bring	them	up	in	such	a
way	 that	 certain	wrong	 things	 simply	don’t	 enter	 into	 their	 lives.	They	don’t
enter,	 but	 nothing	 is	 gained	 through	 it	 because	 the	 real	 thing	 to	 gain	 is
consciousness.	And	consciousness	can	be	gained	through	effort.	If	something	is
conditioned	on	you	without	your	effort,	it	is	not	a	gain	at	all.
So	 in	 India	 there	are	many	vegetarians.	Jainas,	brahmins,	many	people	are
vegetarians.	Nothing	is	gained	because	being	a	vegetarian	just	by	being	born	in
a	Jaina	family	means	nothing.	 It	 is	not	a	conscious	effort,	you	have	not	done
anything	about	it.	If	you	were	born	in	a	non-vegetarian	family	you	would	have
taken	to	non-vegetarian	food	in	the	same	way.
Unless	 some	 conscious	 effort	 is	 done	 your	 crystallization	 never	 happens.
You	have	to	do	something	on	your	own.	When	you	do	something	on	your	own
you	gain	something.	Nothing	is	gained	without	consciousness,	remember	it.	It
is	 one	 of	 the	 ultimates	 –	 nothing	 is	 gained	without	 consciousness!	You	may
become	a	perfect	saint,	but	if	you	have	not	become	through	consciousness	it	is
futile,	useless.	You	must	struggle,	inch	by	inch,	because	through	struggle	more
consciousness	 will	 be	 needed.	 And	 the	more	 consciousness	 you	 practice	 the
more	 conscious	 you	 become.	And	 a	moment	 comes	when	 you	 become	 pure
consciousness.
The	first	step	is:
…cessation	from	self-indulgence	in	the	thirst	for	sensuous	pleasures,	with	conscious	effort.
What	to	do?	Whenever	you	are	in	any	state	of	pleasure	–	sex,	food,	money,
power,	anything	that	gives	you	pleasure	–	meditate	on	it.	Just	try	to	find	where
it	is	coming	from.	Are	you	the	source,	or	is	the	source	somewhere	else?	If	the
source	 is	 somewhere	 else	 then	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 transformation
because	you	will	remain	dependent	on	the	source.
But	 fortunately,	 the	 source	 is	 not	 anywhere	 else,	 it	 is	 within	 you.	 If	 you
meditate	 you	 will	 find	 it.	 It	 is	 knocking	 from	 within	 every	 moment,	 “I	 am
here!”	Once	you	have	the	feeling	that	it	is	there	knocking	every	moment,	and
you	 were	 only	 creating	 situations	 outside	 in	 which	 it	 was	 happening,	 it	 can
happen	without	situations.	Then	you	need	not	depend	on	anybody,	not	on	food,
on	sex,	on	power,	on	anything.	You	are	enough	unto	yourself.	Once	you	have
come	 to	 this	 feeling,	 the	 feeling	 of	 enoughness,	 indulgence	 –	 the	 mind	 that
indulges,	the	indulgent	mind	–	disappears.
That	doesn’t	mean	you	will	not	enjoy	food.	You	will	enjoy	more,	but	now
food	 is	 not	 the	 source	 of	 your	 happiness,	 you	 are	 the	 source.	 You	 are	 not
dependent	on	food,	you	are	not	addicted	to	it.
That	doesn’t	mean	you	will	not	enjoy	sex.	You	can	enjoy	more,	but	now	it	is
fun,	play,	it	is	just	a	celebration.	But	you	are	not	dependent	on	it,	it	is	not	the
source.	 And	 once	 two	 persons,	 two	 lovers,	 realize	 that	 the	 other	 is	 not	 the
source	of	their	pleasure,	they	stop	fighting	with	the	other.	They	start	loving	the
other	for	the	first	time.
You	cannot	 love	a	person	upon	whom	you	are	dependent	 in	any	way.	You
will	hate,	because	he	is	your	dependence.	Without	him	you	cannot	be	happy.	So
he	has	the	key,	and	a	person	who	has	the	key	to	your	happiness	is	your	jailer.
Lovers	fight	because	they	see	that	the	other	has	the	key	and,	“He	can	make	me
happy	or	unhappy.”	Once	you	come	to	know	that	you	are	 the	source,	and	the
other	is	the	source	of	his	own	happiness…	You	can	share	your	happiness,	that’s
another	 thing,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 dependent.	 You	 can	 share,	 you	 can	 celebrate
together.	 That’s	 what	 love	 means:	 celebrating	 together,	 sharing	 together,	 not
deriving	from	each	other,	not	exploiting	each	other,	because	exploitation	cannot
be	love.	Then	you	are	using	the	other	as	a	means,	and	whomsoever	you	use	as	a
means	will	hate	you.
Lovers	hate	each	other	because	 they	are	using,	 exploiting	each	other.	And
love,	which	should	be	the	deepest	ecstasy,	becomes	the	ugliest	hell.	But	once
you	know	that	you	are	the	source	of	your	happiness,	no	one	else	is	the	source,
you	can	share	it	freely.	Then	the	other	is	not	your	enemy,	not	even	an	intimate
enemy.	For	the	first	time	friendship	arises,	you	can	enjoy	anything.
You	 will	 be	 able	 to	 enjoy	 only	 when	 you	 are	 free.	 Only	 an	 independent
person	can	enjoy.	A	person	who	is	mad	and	obsessed	with	food	cannot	enjoy.
He	may	fill	his	belly,	but	he	cannot	enjoy.	His	eating	is	violent,	it	 is	a	sort	of
killing.	He	is	killing	the	food,	he	is	destroying	the	food.	And	lovers	who	feel
that	 their	happiness	depends	on	 the	other	are	 fighting,	 trying	 to	dominate	 the
other,	 trying	 to	 kill	 the	 other,	 to	 destroy	 the	 other.	You	will	 be	 able	 to	 enjoy
everything	more	when	you	know	that	the	source	is	within.	Then	the	whole	life
becomes	a	play	and	moment	to	moment	you	can	go	on	celebrating,	infinitely.
This	 is	 the	 first	 step:	 with	 effort,	 consciousness	 and	 effort,	 you	 achieve
desirelessness.	 Patanjali	 says	 this	 is	 the	 first,	 because	 even	 effort,	 even
consciousness	 is	 not	 good	 because	 it	 means	 some	 struggle,	 some	 hidden
struggle,	is	still	on.
The	second	and	last	step	of	vairagya,	the	last	state	of	desirelessness:
…cessation	of	all	desiring	by	knowing	the	innermost	nature	of	purush,	the	supreme	self.
First,	you	have	to	know	that	you	are	the	source	of	all	happiness	that	happens
to	you.	Second,	you	have	to	know	the	total	nature	of	your	inner	self.	First,	you
are	the	source.	Second,	“What	is	this	source?”	First,	just	this	much	is	enough	–
that	you	are	the	source	of	your	happiness.	And	second,	what	this	source	is	in	its
totality,	what	this	purush,	this	inner	self	is	–	“Who	am	I?”	–	in	its	totality.
Once	 you	 know	 this	 source	 in	 its	 totality	 you	 have	 known	 all.	 Then	 the
whole	universe	is	within.	Not	only	happiness,	all	that	exists,	exists	within,	not
only	 happiness.	 Then	 God	 is	 not	 somewhere	 sitting	 in	 the	 clouds,	 he	 exists
within.	Then	you	are	the	source,	the	root	source	of	all.	Then	you	are	the	center.
And	once	you	become	the	center	of	existence,	once	you	know	that	you	are
the	 center	 of	 existence,	 all	 misery	 has	 disappeared.	 Now	 desirelessness
becomes	spontaneous,	sahaj.	No	effort,	no	striving,	no	maintaining	is	needed.
It	is	so;	it	has	become	natural.	You	are	not	pulling	it	or	pushing	it.	Now	there	is
no	“I”	who	can	pull	and	push.
Remember	this:	struggle	creates	ego.	If	you	struggle	in	the	world	it	creates	a
gross	 ego:	 “I	 am	 someone	 with	 money,	 with	 prestige,	 with	 power.”	 If	 you
struggle	within	it	creates	a	subtle	ego:	“I	am	pure,	I	am	a	saint,	I	am	a	sage”	–
but	“I”	remains	with	struggle.	So	there	are	pious	egoists	who	have	a	very	subtle
ego.	They	may	not	be	worldly	people	–	they	are	not,	they	are	other-worldly	–
but	 there	 is	 struggle.	 They	 have	 achieved	 something:	 that	 achievement	 still
carries	the	last	shadow	of	“I.”
The	 second	 step,	 and	 the	 final	 state	of	desirelessness	 for	Patanjali,	 is	 total
disappearance	of	the	ego:	just	nature	flowing,	no	“I,”	no	conscious	effort.	That
doesn’t	mean	you	will	not	be	conscious;	you	will	be	perfect	consciousness,	but
no	effort	implied	of	being	conscious.	There	will	be	no	self-consciousness.	Pure
consciousness	means	you	have	accepted	yourself	and	existence	as	it	is.
A	total	acceptance:	this	is	what	Lao	Tzu	calls	Tao,	the	river	flowing	towards
the	sea.	It	is	not	making	any	effort,	it	is	not	in	any	hurry	to	reach	the	sea.	Even
if	 it	 doesn’t	 reach	 it	will	 not	 get	 frustrated.	 Even	 if	 it	 reaches	 in	millions	 of
years,	 everything	 is	 okay.	The	 river	 is	 simply	 flowing	 because	 flowing	 is	 its
nature.	There	is	no	effort,	it	will	go	on	flowing.
When	for	the	first	time	desires	are	noted	and	observed,	effort	arises,	a	subtle
effort.	Even	the	first	step	is	a	subtle	effort.	You	start	trying	to	be	aware:	“Where
is	my	happiness	coming	from?”	You	have	to	do	something,	and	that	doing	will
create	 the	 ego.	That’s	why	Patanjali	 says	 that	 is	 only	 the	beginning,	 and	you
must	 remember	 that	 is	 not	 the	 end.	 In	 the	 end	 not	 only	 have	 desires
disappeared,	you	also	have	disappeared.	Only	the	inner	being	has	remained	in
its	flow.
This	spontaneous	flow	is	the	supreme	ecstasy,	because	no	misery	is	possible
for	it.	Misery	comes	through	expectation,	demand.	There	is	no	one	to	expect,	to
demand,	 so	 whatsoever	 happens	 is	 good.	Whatsoever	 happens	 is	 a	 blessing.
You	cannot	compare	with	anything	else	–	it	is	the	case.	And	because	there	is	no
comparing	with	the	past	and	with	the	future	–	there	is	no	one	to	compare	–	you
cannot	 look	 at	 anything	 as	 misery,	 as	 pain.	 Even	 if	 pain	 happens	 in	 that
situation	it	will	not	be	painful.	Try	to	understand	this.	This	is	difficult.
Jesus	is	being	crucified.	Christians	have	painted	Jesus	very	sad.	They	have
even	said	that	he	never	laughed,	and	in	their	churches	they	have	the	sad	figure
of	 Jesus	 everywhere.	 This	 is	 human,	we	 can	 understand	 it	 because	 a	 person
who	is	being	crucified	must	be	sad,	he	must	be	in	inner	agony,	he	must	be	in
suffering.
So	Christians	say	that	Jesus	suffered	for	our	sins	–	but	he	suffered.	This	is
absolutely	wrong!	 If	 you	ask	Patanjali	 or	me,	 this	 is	 absolutely	wrong.	 Jesus
cannot	suffer.	It	is	impossible	for	Jesus	to	suffer.	And	if	he	suffers	then	there	is
no	difference	between	you	and	him.
Pain	is	there,	but	he	cannot	suffer.	This	may	look	mysterious,	but	this	is	not;
this	is	simple.	Pain	is	there.	As	far	as	we	can	see	from	the	outside	he	is	being
crucified,	insulted,	his	body	is	destroyed.	Pain	is	there	but	Jesus	cannot	suffer
because	 in	 this	 moment	 when	 Jesus	 is	 crucified,	 he	 cannot	 ask.	 He	 has	 no
demand.	 He	 cannot	 say,	 “This	 is	 wrong.	 This	 should	 not	 be	 so.	 I	 must	 be
crowned	and	I	am	crucified.”
If	he	has	in	his	mind	that	“I	must	be	crowned	and	I	am	crucified,”	then	there
will	be	pain.	If	he	has	no	“futuring”	in	his	mind	that,	“I	should	be	crowned,”	no
expectation	 for	 the	 future,	 no	 fixed	 goal	 to	 reach,	 wherever	 he	 has	 found
himself	 is	 then	 the	 goal.	And	 he	 cannot	 compare.	 This	 cannot	 be	 otherwise.
This	is	the	present	moment	that	has	been	brought	to	him.	This	crucifixion	is	the
crown.
And	 he	 cannot	 suffer	 because	 suffering	means	 resistance.	You	must	 resist
something,	 only	 then	 can	you	 suffer.	Try	 it.	 It	will	 be	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 be
crucified,	but	there	are	daily	crucifixions,	small	ones,	but	they	will	do.
You	have	a	pain	in	the	leg,	or	in	the	head	you	have	a	headache.	You	may	not
have	observed	 the	mechanism	of	 it:	you	have	a	headache	and	you	constantly
struggle	and	resist.	You	don’t	want	 it.	You	are	against	 it,	you	divide.	You	are
somewhere	 standing	 within	 the	 head	 and	 the	 headache	 is	 there.	 You	 are
separate	and	the	headache	is	separate.	You	insist	 that	 it	should	not	be	so,	and
this	is	the	real	problem.
Try	once	not	 to	 fight,	 flow	with	 the	headache,	become	 the	headache.	And
say,	 “This	 is	 the	 case.	 This	 is	 how	 my	 head	 is	 at	 this	 moment,	 and	 at	 this
moment	nothing	is	possible.	It	may	go	away	in	the	future,	but	in	this	moment
the	headache	 is	 there.”	Don’t	 resist.	Allow	 it	 to	happen,	become	one	with	 it.
Don’t	 pull	 yourself	 separate,	 flow	 into	 it.	 And	 then	 there	 will	 be	 a	 sudden
upsurge	of	a	new	type	of	happiness	that	you	have	not	known.	When	there	is	no
one	 to	 resist,	 even	 a	 headache	 is	 not	 painful.	The	 fight	 creates	 the	pain.	The
pain	means	always	fighting	against	the	pain	–	that’s	the	real	pain.
Jesus	accepts:	 this	 is	how	his	 life	has	 led	 to	 the	cross.	This	 is	 the	destiny.
This	 is	 what	 in	 the	 East	 they	 have	 always	 called	 fate,	 bhagya,	 the	 kismet.
Sothere	 is	no	point	 in	arguing	with	your	 fate,	 there	 is	no	point	 in	 fighting	 it.
You	cannot	do	anything,	it	is	happening.	Only	one	possibility	is	there	for	you	–
you	 can	 flow	with	 it	 or	 you	 can	 fight	 with	 it.	 If	 you	 fight	 it	 becomes	more
agony.	If	you	flow	with	it	the	agony	is	less.	And	if	you	can	flow	totally,	agony
disappears.	You	become	the	flow.
Try	 it	when	you	have	 a	headache,	 try	 it	when	you	have	 an	 ill	 body,	 try	 it
when	you	have	some	pain	–	just	flow	with	it.	And	if	you	can	allow,	you	will
come	to	one	of	the	deepest	secrets	of	life:	that	pain	disappears	if	you	flow	with
it.	And	if	you	can	flow	totally,	pain	becomes	happiness.
But	 this	 is	not	something	logical	 to	be	understood.	You	can	comprehend	it
intellectually,	 but	 that	 won’t	 do.	 Try	 it	 existentially.	 There	 are	 everyday
situations,	every	moment	something	is	wrong.	Flow	with	it,	and	see	how	you
transform	the	whole	situation.	And	through	that	 transformation	you	transcend
it.
A	Buddha	can	never	be	 in	pain,	 that	 is	 impossible.	Only	an	ego	can	be	 in
pain.	 To	 be	 in	 pain,	 ego	 is	 a	 must.	 And	 if	 the	 ego	 is	 there	 you	 can	 also
transform	your	 pleasures	 into	 pain;	 if	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 there	 you	 can	 transform
your	pains	into	pleasures.	The	secret	lies	with	the	ego.
The	last	state	of	vairagya,	desirelessness:	cessation	of	all	desiring	by	knowing	the
innermost	nature	of	purush,	the	supreme	self.
How	does	it	happen?	–	just	by	knowing	the	innermost	core	of	yourself,	the
purush,the	dweller	within.	Just	by	knowing	it!	Patanjali	says,	Buddha	says,	Lao
Tzu	says,	just	by	knowing	it	all	desires	disappear.
This	is	mysterious,	and	the	logical	mind	is	bound	to	ask	how	it	can	happen
that	just	by	knowing	themselves	all	desires	disappear.	It	happens,	because	not
knowing	 themselves	all	desires	have	arisen.	Desires	are	simply	 the	 ignorance
of	 the	self.	Why?	All	 that	you	are	seeking	 through	desires	 is	 there,	hidden	 in
the	self.	If	you	know	the	self,	desires	will	disappear.
For	 example,	 you	 are	 asking	 for	 power.	 Everybody	 is	 asking	 for	 power.
Power	 creates	madness	 in	 everybody.	 It	 seems	 to	 be	 just	 human:	 society	 has
existed	in	such	a	way	that	everybody	is	power-addicted.
The	child	is	born	helpless,	and	this	is	the	first	feeling	all	of	you	carry	with
you	always.	The	child	is	born,	he	is	helpless,	and	a	helpless	child	wants	power.
That’s	natural	because	everybody	 is	more	powerful	 than	he	 is.	The	mother	 is
powerful,	 the	 father	 is	 powerful,	 the	 brothers	 are	 powerful,	 everybody	 is
powerful,	 and	 the	 child	 is	 absolutely	 helpless.	Of	 course	 the	 first	 desire	 that
arises	 is	 to	 have	 power,	 to	 grow	 powerful,	 to	 be	 dominating.	 And	 the	 child
starts	 being	 political	 from	 that	 very	moment.	He	 starts	 learning	 the	 tricks	 of
how	to	dominate.
If	he	cries	too	much	he	comes	to	know	that	he	can	dominate	through	crying.
He	can	dominate	the	whole	house	just	by	crying.	He	learns	crying.	And	women
continue	 it	 even	when	 they	are	no	 longer	 children.	The	child	has	 learned	 the
secret	 and	 he	 continues	 it.	 And	 he	 has	 to	 continue	 it	 because	 he	 remains
helpless	–	that’s	power	politics.
He	 knows	 a	 trick,	 he	 can	 create	 a	 disturbance,	 and	 he	 can	 create	 such	 a
disturbance	 that	 you	 have	 to	 accept	 and	 compromise	 with	 him.	 And	 every
moment	 he	 feels	 deeply	 that	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 power,	 more
power.	 He	 will	 learn,	 he	 will	 go	 to	 school,	 he	 will	 grow,	 he	 will	 love,	 but
behind	everything	–	his	education,	 love,	play	–	he	will	be	finding	out	how	to
get	more	power.	Through	education	he	will	want	to	dominate,	to	come	first	in
his	class	so	he	can	be	dominating;	to	get	more	money	so	he	can	be	dominating,
to	go	on	growing	in	influence	and	the	territory	of	domination.	His	whole	life	he
will	be	after	power.
Many	 lives	 are	 simply	wasted.	 And	 even	 if	 you	 get	 power,	 what	 are	 you
going	 to	 do?	 Simply	 a	 childish	 wish	 is	 fulfilled.	 So	 when	 you	 become	 a
Napoleon	 or	 a	Hitler,	 suddenly	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 the	whole	 effort	 has
been	useless,	futile.	Just	a	childish	wish	has	been	fulfilled,	that’s	all.	Now	what
to	do?	What	to	do	with	this	power?	If	the	wish	is	fulfilled	you	are	frustrated,	if
the	wish	is	not	fulfilled	you	are	frustrated.	And	it	cannot	be	fulfilled	absolutely,
because	no	one	can	be	so	powerful	that	he	can	feel,	“Now	it	 is	enough”	–	no
one!	The	world	 is	so	complex	 that	even	a	Hitler	 feels	powerless	 in	moments,
even	 a	 Napoleon	will	 feel	 powerless	 in	moments.	 Nobody	 can	 feel	 absolute
power,	and	nothing	can	satisfy	you.
But	when	one	comes	to	know	one’s	self,	one	comes	to	know	the	source	of
absolute	power.	Then	the	desire	for	power	disappears	because	you	were	already
a	 king	 and	 you	 were	 only	 thinking	 that	 you	 were	 a	 beggar.	 And	 you	 were
struggling	to	be	a	bigger	beggar,	a	greater	beggar,	and	you	were	already	a	king.
Suddenly	 you	 come	 to	 realize	 that	 you	 don’t	 lack	 anything.	 You	 are	 not
helpless.	You	are	the	source	of	all	energies;	you	are	the	very	source	of	life.	That
childhood	feeling	of	powerlessness	was	created	by	others.	And	it	 is	a	vicious
circle	they	created	in	you	because	it	was	created	in	them	by	their	parents,	and
so	on	and	so	forth.
Your	parents	are	creating	 the	 feeling	 in	you	 that	you	are	powerless.	Why?
Because	 only	 through	 this	 can	 they	 feel	 powerful.	You	may	 be	 thinking	 that
you	 love	 children	 very	 much.	 That	 doesn’t	 seem	 to	 be	 the	 case.	 You	 love
power,	and	when	you	get	children,	when	you	become	mothers	and	fathers,	you
are	 powerful.	 Nobody	 may	 be	 listening	 to	 you,	 you	 may	 be	 nothing	 in	 the
world,	but	at	least	in	the	boundaries	of	your	home	you	are	powerful.	You	can	at
least	torture	small	children.
Look	 how	 fathers	 and	mothers	 torture!	And	 they	 torture	 in	 such	 a	 loving
way	that	you	cannot	even	say	to	them,	“You	are	torturing!”	They	are	torturing,
“For	their	own	good”	–	for	the	children’s	own	good!	They	are	helping	them	to
grow.	 They	 feel	 powerful.	 Psychologists	 say	 that	 many	 people	 go	 into	 the
teaching	profession	 just	 to	feel	powerful,	because	with	 thirty	children	at	your
disposal	you	are	just	a	king.
	
It	 is	 reported	 that	 Aurangzeb	 was	 imprisoned	 by	 his	 son.	 When	 he	 was
imprisoned	he	wrote	 a	 letter	 and	he	 said,	 “If	you	can	 fulfill	 only	one	wish	 it
will	be	good,	and	I	will	be	very	happy.	Just	send	thirty	children	to	me	so	that	I
can	teach	them	in	my	imprisonment.”
The	 son	 is	 reported	 to	have	 said,	 “My	 father	has	 always	 remained	a	king,
and	he	cannot	lose	his	kingdom.	So	even	in	the	prison	he	needs	thirty	children
so	he	can	teach	them.”
	
Look!	 Go	 into	 any	 school!	 The	 teacher	 sitting	 on	 his	 chair	 has	 absolute
power,	 just	 the	 master	 of	 everything	 that	 is	 happening	 there.	 People	 want
children	not	because	they	love,	because	if	they	really	loved	the	world	would	be
totally	different.	 If	you	 loved	your	child	 the	world	would	be	 totally	different.
You	would	not	help	him	to	be	helpless,	to	feel	helpless.	You	would	give	him	so
much	love	that	he	would	feel	he	is	powerful.	If	you	give	love	then	he	will	never
be	asking	for	power.	He	will	not	become	a	political	leader,	he	will	not	try	to	get
elected	to	anything.	He	will	not	try	to	accumulate	money	and	go	mad	after	it,
because	he	knows	 it	 is	useless	–	he	 is	 already	powerful;	 love	 is	 enough.	But
nobody	is	giving	love,	so	he	will	create	substitutes.
All	 your	 desires,	 whether	 for	 power,	 money,	 prestige,	 all	 show	 that
something	 had	 been	 taught	 to	 you	 in	 your	 childhood,	 something	 has	 been
conditioned	 in	 your	 biocomputer,	 and	 you	 are	 following	 that	 conditioning
without	 looking	 inside	 to	 find	 that	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 asking	 for	 is	 already
there.
Patanjali’s	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 put	 your	 biocomputer	 into	 silence	 so	 that	 it
doesn’t	interfere.	This	is	what	meditation	is.	It	is	putting	your	biocomputer,	for
certain	 moments,	 into	 silence,	 into	 a	 non-chattering	 state,	 so	 you	 can	 look
within	and	hear	your	deepest	nature.	 Just	 a	glimpse	will	 change	you	because
then	 this	biocomputer	 cannot	deceive	you.	This	biocomputer	goes	on	 saying,
“Do	this,	do	that!”	It	goes	on	continuously	manipulating	you:	“You	must	have
more	power,	otherwise	you	are	nobody.”
If	you	look	within,	 there	is	no	need	to	be	anybody.	There	is	no	need	to	be
somebody.	You	are	already	accepted	as	you	are.	The	whole	existence	accepts
you,	is	happy	about	you.	You	are	a	flowering,	an	individual	flowering,	different
from	any	other,	unique.	And	God	welcomes	you,	otherwise	you	could	not	be
here.	You	are	here	only	because	you	are	accepted.	You	are	here	only	because
God	 loves	 you	 or	 the	 universe	 loves	 you	 or	 existence	 needs	 you.	 You	 are
needed.
Once	 you	 know	 your	 innermost	 nature,	 what	 Patanjali	 calls	 the	 purush	 –
purush	means	the	inner	dweller,	the	body	is	just	a	house,	the	inner	dweller,	the
inner-dwelling	consciousness,	 is	purush	 –	once	you	know	 this	 inner-dwelling
consciousness,	nothing	is	needed.	You	are	enough,	more	than	enough,	you	are
perfect	 as	 you	 are.	 You	 are	 absolutely	 accepted,	 welcomed.	 The	 existence
becomes	a	blessing.	Desires	disappear;	they	were	part	of	self-ignorance.	With
self-knowledge	they	disappear,	they	evaporate.
Abhyasa,constant	inner	practice,	conscious	effort	to	be	more	and	more	alert,
to	be	more	and	more	master	of	oneself,	to	be	less	and	less	dominated	by	habits,
by	mechanical,	robot-like	mechanisms,	and	vairagya,	desirelessness:	these	two
attained,	one	becomes	a	yogi.	These	two	attained,	one	has	attained	the	goal.
I	will	repeat:	don’t	create	a	fight.	Allow	all	 this	happening	to	be	more	and
more	 spontaneous.	Don’t	 fight	with	 the	 negative.	Rather,	 create	 the	 positive.
Don’t	fight	with	sex,	with	food,	with	anything.	Rather,	find	out	what	it	is	that
gives	you	happiness,	from	where	it	comes;	move	in	that	direction.	Desires,	by
and	by,	go	on	disappearing.
And	be	more	and	more	conscious.	Whatsoever	 is	happening,	be	more	and
more	 conscious.	And	 remain	 in	 that	moment	 and	 accept	 that	moment.	Don’t
ask	for	something	else.	Then	you	will	not	be	creating	misery.	If	pain	is	there,
let	it	be	there.	Remain	in	it	and	flow	in	it.	The	only	condition	is,	remain	alert.
Knowingly,	watchfully,	move	into	it,	flow	into	it,	don’t	resist.
When	pain	disappears	the	desire	for	pleasure	also	disappears.	When	you	are
not	 in	 anguish	 you	 don’t	 ask	 for	 indulgence.	 When	 anguish	 is	 not	 there
indulgence	 becomes	meaningless,	 and	 you	 go	 on	 falling	 into	 the	 inner	 abyss
more	 and	 more.	 And	 it	 is	 so	 blissful,	 it	 is	 such	 a	 deep	 ecstasy,	 that	 even	 a
glimpse	 of	 it	 and	 the	 whole	 world	 becomes	 meaningless.	 Then	 all	 that	 this
world	can	give	to	you	is	of	no	use.
This	 should	 not	 become	 a	 fighting	 attitude.	 You	 should	 not	 become	 a
warrior,	you	should	become	a	meditator.	If	you	are	meditating,	spontaneously
things	will	 happen	 to	 you	which	will	 go	 on	 transforming	 and	 changing	 you.
Start	fighting	and	you	have	started	suppression.	And	suppression	will	lead	you
into	more	and	more	misery.
And	you	cannot	deceive.	There	are	many	people	who	are	not	only	deceiving
others,	they	are	deceiving	themselves.	They	think	they	are	not	in	misery.	They
go	 on	 saying	 they	 are	 not	 in	 misery	 but	 their	 whole	 existence	 is	 miserable.
When	 they	are	saying	 that	 they	are	not	 in	misery	 their	 faces,	 their	eyes,	 their
heart,	everything,	is	in	misery.	I	will	tell	you	one	anecdote,	and	then	finish.
I	have	heard…
	
Once	it	happened	that	twelve	ladies	reached	purgatory.	The	officiating	angel
asked	them,	“Were	any	of	you	unfaithful	 to	your	husbands	while	on	earth?	If
someone	was	unfaithful	to	her	husband,	she	should	raise	her	hand.”	Blushingly,
hesitating,	by	and	by,	eleven	ladies	raised	their	hands.
The	officiating	angel	 took	his	phone,	called	 into	 the	phone,	“Hello!	Is	 that
hell?	Have	 you	 got	 room	 for	 twelve	 unfaithful	wives	 there?	 –	One	 of	 them,
stone	deaf!”
	
It	isn’t	needed	for	you	to	say	it	or	not	–	your	face,	your	very	being,	shows
everything.	You	may	say	you	are	not	miserable	but	the	way	you	say	it,	the	way
you	are,	shows	you	are	miserable.	You	cannot	deceive.	And	there	 is	no	point
because	no	one	can	deceive	anybody	else,	you	can	only	deceive	yourself.
Remember,	 if	you	are	miserable,	you	have	created	all	 this.	Let	 it	penetrate
deep	 into	 your	 heart	 that	 you	 have	 created	 your	 sufferings,	 because	 this	 is
going	to	be	the	formula,	the	key.	If	you	have	created	your	sufferings,	only	then
can	you	destroy	them.	If	someone	else	has	created	them,	you	are	helpless.	You
have	 created	 your	 miseries;	 you	 can	 destroy	 them.	 You	 have	 created	 them
through	wrong	habits,	wrong	attitudes,	addictions,	desires.
Drop	this	pattern.	Look	afresh,	and	this	very	life	 is	 the	ultimate	 joy	that	 is
possible	to	human	consciousness.
Enough	for	today.
	
Chapter	10:	The	End	Is	in	the	Beginning
	
The	first	question:
Osho,
How	is	it	that	you	describe	the	life	that	is	really	ours,	and	which	you	have	transcended,	so
correctly	and	in	every	detail,	while	we	remain	so	ignorant	of	it?	Is	it	not	paradoxical?
It	looks	paradoxical;	it	is	not.	But	you	can	understand	only	when	you	have
transcended.	While	 you	 are	 in	 a	 certain	 state	 of	mind	you	 cannot	 understand
that	state	of	mind;	you	are	so	involved	in	it,	you	are	so	identified	with	it.	For
understanding,	space	is	needed,	a	distance	is	needed;	and	there	is	no	distance.
When	you	transcend	a	state	of	mind,	only	then	you	become	able	to	understand
it	because	then	there	is	distance.	You	are	standing	aloof,	separate.	Now	you	can
look,	unidentified.	Now	there	is	perspective.
While	you	are	in	love	you	cannot	understand	love.	You	may	feel	it	but	you
cannot	 understand	 it.	 You	 are	 too	 much	 in	 it,	 and	 for	 understanding,	 an
aloofness,	detached	aloofness	is	needed.	For	understanding,	you	need	to	be	an
observer.	While	you	are	in	love	the	observer	is	lost,	you	have	become	a	doer.
You	are	a	lover,	you	cannot	be	a	witness	to	it.	Only	when	you	transcend	love,
when	 you	 are	 enlightened	 and	 have	 gone	 beyond	 love,	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to
understand	it.
A	 child	 cannot	 understand	what	 childhood	 is.	When	 childhood	 is	 lost	 you
can	 look	back	 and	understand.	Youth	 cannot	 understand	what	 youth	 is.	Only
when	 you	 have	 become	 old	 and	 are	 capable	 of	 looking	 back	with	 aloofness,
distance,	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 it.	 Whatsoever	 is	 understood,	 is
understood	 only	 by	 transcendence.	 Transcendence	 is	 the	 base	 of	 all
understanding.	 That’s	 why	 it	 happens	 every	 day:	 you	 can	 give	 advice,	 good
advice,	to	somebody	else	who	is	in	trouble;	if	you	are	in	the	same	trouble	you
cannot	give	that	good	advice	to	yourself.
Somebody	 else	 is	 in	 trouble,	 you	 have	 space	 to	 look,	 observe;	 you	 can
witness.	You	can	give	good	advice.	When	you	are	in	the	same	trouble	you	will
not	be	so	capable.	You	can	be,	if	even	then	you	can	be	detached.	You	can	be,	if
even	 then	you	 can	 look	 at	 the	 problem	as	 if	 you	 are	 not	 in	 the	 problem,	 but
outside,	standing	on	a	hill	and	looking	down.
Any	problem	can	be	solved	if	even	for	a	single	moment	you	are	out	of	it	and
can	 look	 at	 it	 as	 a	witness.	Witnessing	 solves	 everything.	But	while	 you	 are
deep	 in	 any	 state	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 be	 a	 witness	 because	 you	 are	 so	 much
identified.	While	 in	 anger	 you	become	anger.	No	one	 is	 left	 behind	who	can
see,	 observe,	 watch,	 decide.	 No	 one	 is	 left	 behind.	 While	 in	 sex	 you	 have
moved	completely,	now	there	is	no	uninvolved	center.
In	the	Upanishads	it	is	said	that	a	person	who	is	watching	himself	is	like	a
tree	upon	which	two	birds	are	sitting:	one	bird	just	jumping,	enjoying,	eating,
singing,	and	the	other	bird	just	sitting	on	the	top	of	the	tree	looking	at	the	first
bird.
If	you	can	have	a	witnessing	self	on	 the	 top	which	goes	on	 looking	at	 the
drama	below,	where	you	are	the	actor,	where	you	participate,	dance	and	jump
and	sing	and	talk	and	think	and	get	involved;	if	somebody	deep	in	you	can	go
on	looking	at	this	drama,	if	you	can	be	in	a	state	where	you	are	playing	as	an
actor	 on	 the	 stage	 and	 simultaneously	 sitting	 in	 the	 audience	 looking	 at	 it;	 if
you	can	be	the	actor	and	the	audience	both,	then	witnessing	has	come	in.	This
witnessing	will	make	you	capable	of	knowing,	of	understanding,	of	wisdom.
So	it	looks	paradoxical.	If	you	go	to	Buddha	he	can	move	into	deep	details
of	your	problems	not	because	he	is	in	the	problem,	only	because	he	is	not	in	the
problem.	He	can	penetrate	you.	He	can	put	himself	 in	your	situation	and	still
remain	a	witness.
So	those	who	are	in	the	world	cannot	understand	the	world.	Only	those	who
have	gone	beyond	it	can	understand	it.	So	whatsoever	you	want	to	understand,
go	 beyond	 it.	 This	 appears	 paradoxical.	 Whatsoever	 you	 want	 to	 know,	 go
beyond	it;	only	then	will	knowledge	happen.	Moving	as	an	insider	in	anything
you	may	collect	much	information,	but	you	will	not	become	a	wise	man.
You	can	practice	it	moment	to	moment.	You	can	do	both:	be	the	actor	and	be
the	audience.	When	you	are	angry	you	can	shift	 the	mind.	This	 is	a	deep	art,
but	if	you	try	you	will	be	able;	you	can	shift.
For	a	single	moment	you	can	be	angry.	Then	get	detached,	look	at	the	anger,
at	 your	 own	 face	 in	 the	mirror.	Look	 at	what	 you	 are	 doing,	 look	 at	what	 is
happening	around	you,	look	at	what	you	have	done	to	others	and	how	they	are
reacting.	Look	for	a	moment,	then	again	allow	the	anger,	move	into	the	anger.
Then	again	become	an	observer.	This	can	be	done,	but	then	very	deep	practice
is	needed.
Try	 it.	While	eating,	 for	one	moment	become	the	eater.	Enjoy,	become	the
food,	become	the	eating;	forget	 that	 there	 is	anyone	who	can	 look	at	 it.	Then
for	a	single	moment	move	away.	Go	on	eating	but	start	looking	at	the	food,	the
eater,	and	you	standing	above	looking	at	it.
Soon	you	will	become	efficient	and	you	can	shift	the	gears	of	the	mind	from
the	actor	 to	 the	 audience,	 from	 the	participant	 to	 the	onlooker.	And	 then	 this
will	 be	 revealed	 to	 you:	 that	 through	 participation	 nothing	 is	 known.	 Only
through	observation	do	things	become	revealed	and	known.	That’s	why	those
who	have	left	the	world	have	become	the	guides.	Those	who	have	gone	beyond
have	become	the	masters.
Freud	 used	 to	 say	 to	 his	 disciples…	 It	 is	 very	 difficult,	 because	 Freud’s
disciples,	the	psychoanalysts,	are	not	men	who	have	transcended.	They	live	in
the	 world,	 they	 are	 just	 experts.	 But	 even	 Freud	 has	 suggested	 to	 them	 that
while	 listening	 to	 a	 patient,	 to	 someone	 who	 is	 ill,	 mentally	 ill,	 “Remain
detached.	Don’t	get	emotionally	involved.	If	you	get	involved	then	your	advice
is	futile.	Just	remain	a	spectator.”
It	looks	very	cruel.	Somebody	is	crying,	weeping,	and	you	can	also	feel	sad
because	 you	 are	 a	 human	 being.	 But	 Freud	 said,	 “If	 you	 are	 working	 as	 a
psychiatrist,	as	a	psychoanalyst,	remain	uninvolved.	Look	at	the	person	as	if	he
is	just	a	problem.	Don’t	look	at	him	as	if	he	is	a	human	being.	If	you	look	at
him	 as	 a	 human	 being	 you	 are	 immediately	 involved,	 you	 have	 become	 a
participant;	 then	 you	 cannot	 advise.	 Then	 whatsoever	 you	 say	 will	 be
prejudiced.	Then	you	are	not	outside	it.”
It	is	difficult,	very	difficult,	so	Freudians	have	been	doing	it	 through	many
ways.	 The	 Freudian	 psychoanalyst	will	 not	 face	 the	 patient	 directly,	 because
when	you	face	a	person	it	is	difficult	to	remain	uninvolved.	If	you	look	in	the
eyes	of	a	person,	you	enter	him.	So	 the	Freudian	psychoanalyst	 sits	behind	a
curtain	and	the	patient	lies	on	a	couch.
That	 too	 is	 very	 significant,	 because	 Freud	 came	 to	 understand	 that	 if	 a
person	is	lying	down	and	you	are	sitting	or	standing,	not	looking	at	him,	there
is	less	possibility	to	get	involved.	Why?	A	person	who	is	lying	down	becomes
“a	problem,”	as	if	on	the	surgeon’s	table;	you	can	dissect	him.	And	ordinarily
this	 never	 happens.	 If	 you	 go	 to	meet	 a	 person	 he	will	 not	 talk	 to	 you	 lying
down	and	you	sitting	unless	he	is	a	patient,	unless	he	is	in	the	hospital.
So	 Freud	 insists	 that	 his	 patient	 should	 lie	 down	 on	 the	 couch.	 So	 the
psychoanalyst	 goes	 on	 feeling	 that	 the	 person	 is	 a	 patient,	 ill;	 he	 has	 to	 be
helped.	He	is	not	really	a	person	but	a	problem,	and	you	need	not	get	involved
with	him.	Also	the	psychoanalyst	should	not	face	the	patient	but	listen	to	him
while	 hiding	 behind	 a	 curtain.	 Freud	 says	 don’t	 touch	 the	 patient,	 because	 if
you	touch,	if	you	take	the	patient’s	hand	in	your	hand,	there	is	a	possibility	you
may	get	involved.
These	 precautions	 have	 been	 taken	 because	 psychoanalysts	 are	 not
enlightened	persons.	But	if	you	go	to	a	buddha	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	lie
down,	there	is	no	need	for	a	curtain.	There	is	no	need	for	a	buddha	to	remain
conscious	so	that	he	does	not	get	involved;	he	cannot	get	involved.	Whatsoever
the	case,	he	remains	uninvolved.
He	 can	 feel	 compassion	 for	 you	 but	 he	 cannot	 be	 sympathetic,	 remember
this.	And	try	to	understand	the	distinction	between	sympathy	and	compassion.
Compassion	 is	 from	 a	 higher	 source.	 A	 buddha	 can	 remain	 compassionate
towards	 you.	 He	 understands	 you,	 that	 you	 are	 in	 a	 difficulty,	 but	 he	 is	 not
sympathetic	with	you	because	he	knows	it	is	because	of	your	foolishness	that
you	are	in	difficulty,	it	is	your	stupidity	that	you	are	in	difficulty.
He	has	compassion:	he	will	try	in	every	way	to	help	you	to	come	out	of	your
stupidity,	 but	 your	 stupidity	 is	 not	 something	 with	 which	 he	 is	 going	 to
sympathize.	So	 in	a	way	he	will	be	very	warm	and	 in	a	way	he	will	be	very
cold.	He	will	be	warm	as	 far	as	his	compassion	 is	concerned,	and	he	will	be
absolutely	cold	as	far	as	sympathy	is	concerned.
And	ordinarily,	 if	you	go	to	a	buddha	you	will	feel	he	is	cold	because	you
don’t	 know	 what	 compassion	 is	 and	 you	 don’t	 know	 the	 warmth	 of
compassion.	 You	 have	 known	 only	 the	 warmth	 of	 sympathy,	 and	 he	 is	 not
sympathetic.	He	looks	cruel,	cold.	If	you	cry	and	weep	he	is	not	going	to	cry
and	weep	with	you.	And	 if	he	 cries	 then	 there	 is	no	possibility	 that	help	can
come	from	him	to	you;	he	is	in	the	same	position.	He	cannot	cry,	but	you	will
feel	hurt:	“I	am	crying	and	weeping	and	he	remains	just	like	a	statue,	as	if	he
has	 no	 heart.”	 He	 cannot	 sympathize	 with	 you.	 Sympathy	 is	 from	 the	 same
mind	towards	the	same	mind,	compassion	is	from	a	higher	source.
He	can	look	at	you.	You	are	transparent	to	him,	totally	naked.	And	he	knows
why	you	are	suffering	–	you	are	the	cause.	And	he	will	try	to	explain	the	cause
to	you,	and	if	you	can	listen	to	him	the	very	act	of	listening	will	have	helped
you	much.
It	looks	paradoxical,	it	is	not.	A	buddha	has	also	lived	like	you.	If	not	in	this
life,	then	in	some	previous	lives	he	has	moved	through	the	same	struggles.	He
has	been	stupid	 like	you,	he	has	suffered	 like	you,	he	has	struggled	 like	you.
For	many,	many	lives	he	was	on	the	same	path.	He	knows	all	the	agony,	all	the
struggle,	 the	conflict,	 the	misery.	He	 is	aware,	more	aware	 than	you,	because
now	all	the	past	lives	are	before	his	eyes,	and	not	only	his,	but	your	lives	also.
He	has	lived	all	the	problems	that	any	human	mind	can	live,	so	he	knows.	And
he	 has	 transcended	 them,	 so	 now	he	 knows	what	 the	 causes	 are	 and	 he	 also
knows	how	they	can	be	transcended.
He	will	help	in	every	way	to	make	you	understand	that	you	are	the	cause	of
your	miseries.	This	is	very	hard.	This	is	the	most	difficult	thing	to	understand,
that	“I	am	the	cause	of	my	miseries.”	This	hits	deep,	one	feels	hurt.	Whenever
someone	says	someone	else	 is	 the	cause	you	 feel	okay	and	 that	person	 looks
sympathetic.	If	he	says,	“You	are	a	sufferer,	a	victim,	and	others	are	exploiting
you,	 others	 are	 doing	 damage,	 others	 are	 violent,”	 you	 feel	 good.	 But	 this
goodness	is	not	going	to	last.	It	is	a	momentary	consolation,	and	dangerous,	at
a	very	great	cost,	because	he	is	helping	the	cause	of	your	misery.
So	 those	 who	 look	 sympathetic	 towards	 you	 are	 really	 your	 enemies,
because	their	sympathy	helps	your	cause	to	be	strengthened.	The	very	source	of
misery	 is	 strengthened.	 You	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 okay	 and	 the	 whole	 world	 is
wrong:	misery	comes	from	somewhere	else.
If	 you	 go	 to	 a	 buddha,	 to	 an	 enlightened	 person,	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 hard,
because	he	will	force	you	to	see	the	fact	that	you	are	the	cause.	And	once	you
start	feeling	that	you	are	the	cause	of	your	hell,	the	transformation	has	already
started.	 The	 moment	 you	 feel	 this,	 half	 the	 work	 is	 already	 done.	 You	 are
already	on	 the	path,	you	have	already	moved.	A	great	change	has	come	over
you.
Half	the	miseries	will	suddenly	disappear	once	you	understand	that	you	are
the	cause,	because	then	you	cannot	cooperate.	Then	you	will	not	be	so	ignorant
to	 help	 strengthen	 the	 cause	 which	 creates	 miseries.	 Your	 cooperation	 will
break.	Miseries	will	still	continue	for	a	while	just	because	of	old	habits.
	
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	once	forced	to	go	to	court	because	he	had	been	found
drunk	on	the	street.	The	magistrate	said,	“Nasruddin,	I	remember	seeing	you	so
many	 times	 for	 this	 same	 offense.	 Have	 you	 got	 any	 explanation	 for	 your
habitual	drunkenness?”
Nasruddin	 said,	 “Of	 course,	 your	 Honor.	 I	 have	 an	 explanation	 for	 my
habitual	drunkenness.	This	is	my	explanation:	habitual	thirst.”
	
Even	if	you	become	alert,	the	habitual	pattern	will	force	you	for	a	while	to
move	 in	 the	 same	 direction.	 But	 it	 cannot	 persist	 for	 long,	 the	 energy	 is	 no
longer	 there.	 It	may	 continue	 as	 a	 dead	 pattern,	 but	 by	 and	 by	 it	will	wither
away.	It	needs	to	be	fed	every	day,	it	needs	every	day	to	be	strengthened.	Your
cooperation	is	needed	continuously.
Once	 you	 become	 alert	 that	 you	 are	 the	 cause	 of	 your	 miseries,	 the
cooperation	drops.	So	whatsoever	 I	 say	 to	you	 is	 just	 to	make	you	alert	 of	 a
single	fact:	that	wherever	you	are,	whatsoever	you	are,	you	are	the	cause.	And
don’t	 get	 pessimistic	 about	 it,	 this	 is	 very	 hopeful	 –	 if	 somebody	 else	 is	 the
cause	then	nothing	can	be	done.
Because	 of	 this,	 Mahavira	 denies	 God.	 Mahavira	 says	 there	 is	 no	 God,
because	if	there	is	God	then	nothing	can	be	done:	“Because	if	he	is	the	cause	of
everything,	 then	what	 can	 I	do?	Then	 I	 become	 helpless.	He	 has	 created	 the
world,	he	has	created	me.	If	he	is	the	creator	then	only	he	can	destroy.	And	if	I
am	miserable	 then	he	 is	 responsible	and	 I	 cannot	do	anything.”	So	Mahavira
says,	 “If	 there	 is	God	 then	man	 is	 helpless.”	 So	 he	 says,	 “I	 don’t	 believe	 in
God.”	And	 the	 reason	 is	 not	 philosophical,	 the	 reason	 is	 very	 psychological.
The	reason	is	so	that	you	cannot	make	anybody	responsible	for	you.	Whether
God	exists	or	not	is	not	the	question.
Mahavira	 says,	 “I	 want	 you	 to	 understand	 that	 you	 are	 the	 cause	 of
whatsoever	 you	 are.”	And	 this	 is	 very	 hopeful.	 If	 you	 are	 the	 cause	 you	 can
change	it.	If	you	can	create	hell,	you	can	create	heaven.	You	are	the	master.
So	don’t	feel	hopeless.	The	more	you	make	others	responsible	for	your	life
the	more	you	are	a	slave.	If	you	say,	“My	wife	is	making	me	angry,”	then	you
are	a	slave.	If	you	say	your	husband	is	creating	trouble	for	you,	then	you	are	a
slave.	Even	if	your	husband	is	creating	trouble,	you	have	chosen	that	husband.
And	you	wanted	this	trouble,	this	type	of	trouble	is	your	choice.	If	your	wife	is
making	hell,	remember	that	you	have	chosen	this	wife.
	
Somebody	asked	Mulla	Nasruddin,	“How	did	you	come	to	know	your	wife?
Who	introduced	you?”
He	said,	“It	just	happened.	I	cannot	blame	anybody.”
	
Nobody	can	blame	anybody.	And	it	is	not	just	a	happening,	it	is	a	choice.	A
particular	type	of	man	chooses	a	particular	type	of	woman,	it	is	not	an	accident.
And	he	chooses	for	particular	reasons.	If	this	woman	dies	he	will	again	choose
the	 same	 type	of	woman.	 If	 he	divorces	 this	woman	again	he	will	marry	 the
same	type	of	woman.	You	can	go	on	changing	wives,	but	unless	 the	husband
changes	there	can	be	no	real	change,	only	names	change.	Because	this	man	has
a	choice:	he	likes	a	particular	face,	he	likes	a	particular	nose,	he	likes	particular
eyes,	he	likes	a	particular	behavior.
And	that’s	a	complex	thing.	If	you	like	a	particular	nose…because	a	nose	is
not	just	a	nose:	it	carries	anger,	it	carries	ego,	it	carries	silence,	it	carries	peace,
it	carries	many	things.	If	you	like	a	particular	nose,	you	may	like	a	person	who
can	force	you	to	be	angry.	An	egoistic	person	carries	a	different	type	of	nose.	It
may	look	beautiful	only	because	you	are	in	search	of	somebody	who	can	create
a	hell	around	you.	And	sooner	or	later	things	will	follow;	you	may	not	be	able
to	connect,	you	may	not	be	able	to	link.	Life	is	complex,	and	you	are	so	much
involved	in	it	that	you	cannot	connect.	You	will	be	able	to	see	only	when	you
transcend.
It	is	just	like	when	you	fly	in	an	aircraft	over	and	above	Mumbai,	then	the
whole	of	Mumbai	appears,	the	whole	pattern.	If	you	live	in	Mumbai	and	move
in	 the	 streets,	 you	 cannot	 look	 at	 the	 whole	 pattern.	 The	 whole	 of	Mumbai
cannot	be	seen	by	those	who	live	in	Mumbai,	it	can	be	seen	only	by	those	who
fly	 above.	 Then	 the	 whole	 pattern	 appears,	 things	 fall	 into	 a	 pattern.
Transcendence	means	going	beyond	human	problems.	Then	you	can	enter	and
see.
I	have	 looked	 through	many,	many	persons.	Whatsoever	 they	do,	 they	are
not	aware	of	what	they	are	doing.	They	become	aware	only	when	results	come.
They	go	on	dropping	the	seed	in	the	soil	–	they	are	not	aware	–	only	when	they
will	have	 to	reap	will	 they	become	aware.	And	they	cannot	connect	 that	 they
are	the	source	and	they	are	the	reapers.
Once	you	understand	that	you	are	the	cause,	you	have	moved	onto	the	path.
Now	 many	 things	 become	 possible.	 Now	 you	 can	 do	 something	 about	 the
problem	that	is	your	life.	You	can	change	it.	Just	by	changing	yourself,	you	can
change.
A	woman	who	belongs	to	a	very	rich	family,	a	very	good	family,	cultured,
refined,	educated,	came	to	me.	She	asked	me,	“If	I	start	meditating,	will	 it	 in
any	 way	 disturb	 my	 relationship	 with	 my	 husband?”	 And	 she	 herself	 said,
before	I	answered	her,	“I	know	it	is	not	going	to	disturb	it	because	if	I	become
better,	more	silent	and	more	loving,	how	can	it	disturb	my	relationship?”
But	 I	 told	 her,	 “You	 are	wrong.	The	 relationship	 is	 going	 to	 be	 disturbed.
Whether	you	become	good	or	bad,	that	is	irrelevant.	You	change	–	one	partner
changes	–	the	relationship	is	going	to	be	disturbed.	And	this	is	the	miracle:	that
if	 you	 become	 bad	 the	 relationship	 will	 not	 be	 disturbed	 so	 much.	 If	 you
become	good	and	better	the	relationship	is	just	going	to	be	shattered,	because
when	 one	 partner	 falls	 down	 and	 becomes	 bad,	 the	 other	 feels	 better,
comparatively.	It	is	not	a	hurt	to	the	ego;	rather,	it	is	ego-satisfying.”
So	 a	 wife	 feels	 good	 if	 the	 husband	 starts	 drinking,	 because	 now	 she
becomes	a	moral	preacher.	Now	she	dominates	him	more.	Now	whenever	he
enters	 in	 the	 house	 he	 enters	 like	 a	 criminal.	 And	 just	 because	 he	 drinks,
everything	that	he	is	doing	becomes	wrong.	That	much	is	enough,	because	the
wife	can	bring	that	argument	again	and	again	from	anywhere,	so	everything	is
condemned.
But	 if	 a	 husband	 or	 a	wife	 becomes	meditative,	 then	 there	will	 be	 deeper
problems	because	 the	other’s	ego	will	be	hurt.	One	 is	becoming	superior	and
the	other	will	try	in	every	way	not	to	allow	this	to	happen.	He	will	create	all	the
troubles	possible.	And	even	if	 it	happens	he	will	 try	not	 to	believe	 that	 it	has
happened.	He	will	prove	that	this	has	not	happened	yet.	He	will	go	on	saying
that,	“You	are	meditating	for	years	and	nothing	has	happened.	What	is	the	use
of	 it?	Useless!	You	 still	 get	 angry,	 you	 still	 do	 this	 and	 that,	 you	 remain	 the
same.”	 The	 other	 will	 try	 to	 force	 it	 that	 nothing	 is	 happening.	 This	 is	 a
consolation.
And	if	really	something	has	happened,	if	the	wife	or	the	husband	has	really
changed,	 then	 this	 relationship	 cannot	 continue.	 It	 is	 impossible	 unless	 the
other	 is	 also	 ready	 to	 change.	 And	 to	 get	 ready	 to	 change	 oneself	 is	 very
difficult	 because	 it	 hurts	 the	 ego,	 it	means	 that	whatsoever	 you	 are,	 you	 are
wrong.	Only	then	is	a	need	for	change	felt.
So	 nobody	 ever	 feels	 that	 he	 has	 to	 change:	 “The	 whole	 world	 has	 to
change,	not	I.	I	am	the	right,	the	absolute	right,	and	the	world	is	wrong	because
it	 doesn’t	 fit	 to	me.”	All	 the	 effort	 of	 all	 the	buddhas	 is	 very	 simple:	 it	 is	 to
make	you	aware	that	wherever	you	are,	whatsoever	you	are,	you	are	the	cause.
	
The	second	question:
Osho,
Why	do	so	many	persons	on	the	path	of	Yoga	adopt	an	attitude	of	fight,	struggle,	over-
concern	with	keeping	strict	rules	and	warrior-like	ways?	Is	this	necessary	in	order	to	really
be	a	yogi?
It	 is	 absolutely	 unnecessary.	 Not	 only	 unnecessary,	 it	 creates	 all	 types	 of
hindrances	 on	 the	 path	 of	 Yoga.	 The	 warrior-like	 attitude	 is	 the	 greatest
hindrance	possible	because	there	is	no	one	to	fight	with.	Inside,	you	are	alone.
If	you	start	fighting	you	are	splitting	yourself.
This	is	the	greatest	disease:	to	be	divided,	to	become	schizophrenic.	And	the
whole	struggle	is	useless	because	it	is	not	going	to	lead	anywhere.	No	one	can
win.	You	are	on	both	sides,	so	at	the	most	you	can	play,	you	can	play	a	game	of
hide	and	seek.	Sometimes	part	A	wins,	 sometimes	part	B	wins,	 again	part	A,
again	part	B.	In	this	way	you	can	move.	Sometimes	that	which	you	call	good
wins.	 But	 fighting	 with	 the	 bad,	 winning	 over	 the	 bad,	 the	 good	 part	 has
become	exhausted	and	the	bad	part	has	gathered	energy.	So	sooner	or	later	the
bad	part	will	come	up,	and	this	can	go	on	infinitely.
But	 why	 does	 this	 warrior-like	 attitude	 happen?	 Why,	 with	 most	 people,
does	 fighting	 start?	 The	 moment	 they	 think	 of	 transformation	 they	 start
fighting.	Why?	–	because	you	know	only	one	method	of	winning,	and	 that	 is
fight.
In	the	world	outside,	in	the	outside	world,	there	is	one	way	to	be	victorious
and	 that	 is	 fight;	 fight	 and	 destroy	 the	 other.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 be
victorious	 in	 the	outside	world.	And	you	have	 lived	 in	 this	outside	world	 for
millions	and	millions	of	years	and	you	have	been	fighting,	sometimes	getting
defeated	if	you	don’t	fight	well,	sometimes	being	victorious	if	you	fight	well.	It
has	become	a	built-in	program	to	“Fight	strongly”;	there	is	only	one	way	to	be
victorious	and	that	is	a	hard	fight.
When	 you	 move	 within	 you	 carry	 the	 same	 program	 because	 you	 are
acquainted	only	with	this.	And	in	the	world	within,	just	the	reverse	is	the	case:
fight	 and	 you	will	 be	 defeated,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 one	 to	 fight	with.	 In	 the
inner	 world,	 let-go	 is	 the	 way	 to	 be	 victorious,	 surrender	 is	 the	 way	 to	 be
victorious,	 allowing	 the	 inner	 nature	 to	 flow,	 not	 fighting,	 is	 the	 way	 to	 be
victorious.	Letting	the	river	flow,	not	pushing	it,	is	the	way	as	far	as	the	inner
world	 is	concerned;	 this	 is	 just	 the	reverse.	But	you	are	acquainted	only	with
the	outside	world,	so	this	is	bound	to	be	so	in	the	beginning.	Whoever	moves
within	will	carry	the	same	weapons,	the	same	attitudes,	the	same	fighting,	the
same	defense.
Machiavelli	 is	 for	 the	outside	world;	Lao	Tzu,	Patanjali	or	Buddha	are	 for
the	inside	world.	And	they	teach	different	things.	Machiavelli	says	attack	is	the
best	defense:	“Don’t	wait.	Don’t	wait	for	the	other	to	attack,	because	then	you
are	already	losing.	Already	you	have	lost,	because	the	other	has	started.	He	has
already	gained	so	 it	 is	always	better	 to	start.	Don’t	wait	 to	defend,	always	be
the	 aggressor.	 Before	 somebody	 else	 attacks	 you,	 you	 attack	 him.	And	 fight
with	as	much	cunningness	as	possible,	with	as	much	dishonesty	as	possible.	Be
dishonest,	 be	 cunning	 and	 be	 aggressive.	 Deceive,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only
way.”	These	 are	 the	means	 that	Machiavelli	 suggests.	And	Machiavelli	 is	 an
honest	man,	that’s	why	he	suggests	exactly	whatsoever	is	needed.
But	if	you	ask	Lao	Tzu,	Patanjali	or	Buddha,	they	are	talking	of	a	different
type	 of	 victory	 –	 the	 inner	 victory.	 There,	 cunningness	 won’t	 do,	 deceiving
won’t	do,	fighting	won’t	do,	aggression	won’t	do,	because	whom	are	you	going
to	deceive?	Whom	are	you	going	to	defeat?	You	alone	are	there.	In	the	outside
world	you	are	never	alone,	“the	others”	are	there;	they	are	the	enemies.	In	the
inside	 world	 you	 alone	 are	 there,	 there	 is	 no	 other.	 There	 is	 no	 enemy,	 no
friend.	This	is	a	totally	new	situation	for	you.	You	will	carry	the	old	weapons,
but	those	old	weapons	will	become	the	cause	of	your	defeat.	When	you	change
the	world	from	without	to	within,	leave	all	that	you	have	learned	from	without;
that	is	not	going	to	help.
Somebody	asked	Ramana	Maharshi,	“What	should	I	learn	to	become	silent,
to	know	myself?”	Ramana	Maharshi	is	reported	to	have	said,	“For	reaching	to
the	 inner	 self	 you	 need	 not	 learn	 anything.	 You	 need	 unlearning.	 Learning
won’t	help,	it	helps	you	to	move	without.	Unlearning	will	help.”
Whatsoever	 you	 have	 learned,	 unlearn	 it,	 forget	 it,	 drop	 it.	 Move	 inside
innocently,	 childlike,	 not	with	 cunningness	 and	 cleverness	 but	 childlike	 trust
and	innocence;	not	thinking	in	terms	that	someone	is	going	to	attack	you.	There
is	 no	 one,	 so	 don’t	 feel	 insecure	 and	 don’t	make	 any	 arrangements	 for	 your
defense.	 Remain	 vulnerable,	 receptive,	 open.	 That’s	 what	 shraddha,	 trust,
means.
Doubt	 is	 needed	 on	 the	 outside	 because	 the	 other	 is	 there.	 He	 may	 be
thinking	 to	 deceive	 you,	 so	 you	 have	 to	 doubt	 and	 be	 skeptical.	 Inside,	 no
doubt,	 no	 skepticism	 is	 needed.	 Nobody	 is	 there	 to	 deceive	 you,	 you	 can
remain	there	just	as	you	are.
That’s	why	everybody	carries	this	warrior-like	attitude,	but	it	is	not	needed.
It	 is	 a	 hindrance,	 the	 greatest	 hindrance.	Drop	 it	 outside.	You	 can	make	 it	 a
point	to	remember	that	whatsoever	is	needed	outside	will	become	a	hindrance
inside	–	whatsoever,	I	say,	unconditionally.	And	just	the	reverse	has	to	be	tried.
If	doubt	helps	on	the	outside,	 in	scientific	research,	 then	faith	will	help	on
the	 inside,	 in	 religious	 inquiry.	 If	 aggressiveness	 helps	 on	 the	 outside	 in	 the
world	 of	 power,	 prestige,	 others,	 then	 non-aggressiveness	 will	 help	 on	 the
inside.	 If	 a	 cunning,	 calculating	mind	helps	on	 the	outside,	 then	an	 innocent,
non-calculating,	childlike	mind	will	help	on	the	inside.
Remember	this:	whatsoever	helps	on	the	outside,	just	the	reverse	will	do	on
the	inside.	So	read	Machiavelli’s	The	Prince;	that	is	the	way	for	outside	victory.
And	just	make	a	reverse	of	Machiavelli’s	The	Prince,and	you	can	reach	inside.
Just	make	Machiavelli	 stand	upside-down	and	he	becomes	Lao	Tzu	–	 just	 in
shirshasan,	 in	 the	 headstand.	 Machiavelli	 standing	 on	 his	 head	 becomes
Patanjali.
So	 read	 his	 book	The	 Prince:it	 is	 beautiful,	 the	 clearest	 statement	 for	 the
outside	 victory.	 And	 then	 read	 Lao	 Tzu’s	 Tao	Te	Ching	 or	 Patanjali’s	 Yoga
Sutras	 or	 Buddha’s	 Dhammapada	 or	 Jesus’	 Sermon	 on	 the	 Mount:they	 are
contradictory,	just	the	reverse,	just	the	opposite.
Jesus	 says,	 “Blessed	are	 those	who	are	meek	because	 they	will	 inherit	 the
earth”	–	meek,	innocent,	weak,	not	strong	in	any	sense	–	“Blessed	are	the	poor
because	they	will	enter	the	kingdom	of	God.”	And	Jesus	makes	it	clear:	“poor
in	spirit.”	They	have	nothing	to	claim.	They	cannot	say,	“I	have	got	this.”	They
don’t	 possess	 anything	 –	 knowledge,	 wealth,	 power,	 prestige.	 They	 don’t
possess	anything,	they	are	poor,	they	cannot	claim,	“This	is	mine.”
We	go	on	claiming,	“This	 is	mine,	 that	 is	mine.	The	more	I	can	claim,	the
more	I	feel,	‘I	am’.”	In	the	outside	world	the	greater	the	territory	of	your	mind,
the	more	you	are.	In	the	inner	world	the	less	the	territory	of	mind,	the	greater
you	are.	And	when	the	territory	disappears	completely	and	you	have	become	a
zero,	 then	you	are	 the	greatest.	Then	you	are	 the	victor.	Then	 the	victory	has
happened.
Warrior-like	 attitudes	 –	 struggle,	 fight,	 over-concern	 with	 strict	 rules,
regulations,	 calculations,	 planning	 –	 this	 mind	 is	 carried	 inside	 because	 you
have	 learned	 it	 and	 you	 don’t	 know	 anything	 else;	 hence	 the	 necessity	 of	 a
master.	Otherwise	you	will	go	on	trying	your	ways	which	are	absolutely	absurd
there.
This	is	why	initiation	is	necessary.	Initiation	means	somebody	can	show	you
the	 path	 where	 you	 have	 never	 traveled;	 somebody	 can	 give	 you	 a	 glimpse
through	him	of	a	world,	of	a	dimension,	that	is	absolutely	unknown	to	you.	You
are	almost	blind	to	it.	You	cannot	see	it,	because	eyes	can	see	only	whatsoever
they	have	learned	to	see.
If	you	come	here	and	you	are	a	tailor,	then	you	don’t	look	at	faces,	you	look
at	 dresses.	Faces	don’t	mean	much;	 just	 looking	 at	 the	dress	you	know	what
type	of	man	is	there.	You	know	a	language.
If	you	are	a	shoemaker	you	need	not	even	look	at	the	dress,	just	shoes	will
do.	And	a	shoemaker	can	just	go	on	looking	on	the	street,	 just	 looking	at	 the
shoe,	and	he	knows	who	is	passing,	whether	he	is	a	great	leader	or	whether	he
is	an	artist,	a	bohemian,	a	hippie,	a	rich	man,	cultured,	educated,	uneducated,	a
villager.	He	knows	who	he	is	just	by	looking	at	the	shoe,	because	a	shoe	gives
all	 the	 indications.	He	 knows	 the	 language.	 If	 the	man	 is	winning	 in	 his	 life
then	the	shoe	has	a	different	shine.	If	he	is	defeated	in	life,	the	shoe	is	defeated:
then	the	shoe	is	sad,	not	cared	for.	And	the	shoemaker	knows	it.	He	need	not
look	at	your	face,	the	shoe	will	tell	everything	that	he	wants	to	know.
Everything	we	learn,	we	become	fixed	 in	 it.	Then	that’s	what	we	see.	You
have	learned	something,	and	you	have	wasted	many	lives	in	learning	it.	And	it
is	now	deep-rooted,	imprinted;	it	has	become	part	of	your	brain	cells.	So	when
you	move	within	 there	 is	 simply	darkness,	nothing,	you	cannot	 see	anything.
The	whole	world	that	you	know	has	disappeared.
It	is	just	like	you	know	one	language	and	suddenly	you	are	transported	to	a
land	 where	 no	 one	 understands	 your	 language	 and	 you	 cannot	 understand
anybody	else’s	 language.	And	people	 are	 talking	 and	 chattering	 and	you	 feel
that	they	are	simply	mad.	It	looks	as	if	they	are	talking	gibberish,	and	it	looks
very	 noisy	 because	 you	 cannot	 understand.	And	 they	 seem	 to	 be	 talking	 too
loudly.	If	you	can	understand	it	then	the	whole	thing	changes,	you	become	part
of	it.	Then	it	is	not	gibberish,	it	becomes	meaningful.
When	 you	 enter	 within	 you	 know	 the	 language	 of	 the	 without.	 There	 is
darkness	 within.	 Your	 eyes	 cannot	 see,	 your	 ears	 cannot	 hear,	 your	 hands
cannot	feel.	Somebody	is	needed,	somebody	to	initiate	you,	to	take	your	hand
in	 his	 hand	 and	 to	 move	 you	 onto	 this	 unknown	 path	 until	 you	 become
acquainted,	until	you	start	feeling,	until	you	become	aware	of	some	light,	some
meaning,	some	significance	around	you.
Once	you	have	 the	 first	 initiation	 things	will	 start	happening.	But	 the	 first
initiation	 is	a	difficult	 thing	because	 this	 is	quite	an	about-turn,	a	 total	about-
turn.	Suddenly	your	world	of	meaning	disappears;	you	are	in	a	strange	world.
You	don’t	understand	anything	–	where	to	move,	what	to	do	and	what	to	make
out	of	this	chaos.	A	master	only	means	someone	who	knows.	And	this	chaos,
this	inside	chaos,	is	not	chaos	for	him;	it	has	become	an	order,	a	cosmos,	and
he	can	lead	you	into	it.
Initiation	means	looking	into	the	inner	world	through	someone	else’s	eyes.
Without	trust	it	is	impossible	because	you	won’t	allow	your	hand	to	be	taken,
you	won’t	allow	anybody	 to	 lead	you	 into	 the	unknown.	And	he	cannot	give
you	any	guarantee,	no	guarantee	will	be	of	any	use.	Whatsoever	he	says,	you
have	to	take	it	on	trust.
In	the	old	days,	when	Patanjali	was	writing	his	sutras,	 trust	was	very	easy,
because	 in	 the	outside	world	 also	–	particularly	 in	 the	East	 and	 especially	 in
India	 –	 they	 had	 also	 created	 an	 outside	 pattern	 of	 initiation.	 For	 example,
trades,	 professions,	 belonged	 to	 families	 through	 heredity.	 A	 father	 would
initiate	the	child	into	the	profession,	and	a	child	naturally	believes	in	his	father.
The	father	would	take	the	child	to	the	farm	if	he	was	a	peasant	and	a	farmer,
and	 he	 would	 initiate	 him	 into	 his	 farming.	 Whatsoever	 trade,	 whatsoever
business	he	was	doing,	he	would	initiate	the	child.
In	 the	outside	world	 also,	 there	was	 initiation	 in	 the	East.	Everything	was
done	 by	 an	 initiation;	 someone	who	knew	would	 take	 you.	This	 helped	 very
much	because	you	were	acquainted	with	initiation,	with	someone	leading	you.
So,	when	the	time	came	for	inner	initiation,	you	could	trust.
And	 trust,	 shraddha,faith,	 was	 easier	 in	 a	 world	 which	 was	 non-
technological.	A	technological	world	needs	cunning,	calculation,	mathematics,
cleverness;	not	innocence.	In	a	technological	world	if	you	are	innocent	you	will
look	 foolish,	 if	 you	 are	 cunning	 you	 will	 look	 clever,	 intelligent.	 Our
universities	 are	 doing	 nothing	 but	 this:	 they	 make	 you	 clever,	 cunning,
calculating.	The	more	calculating,	the	more	cunning,	the	more	successful	you
will	be	in	the	world.
In	the	East	quite	the	reverse	was	the	case	in	the	past:	if	you	were	cunning	it
was	impossible	for	you	to	succeed	even	in	the	outside	world.	Only	innocence
was	 accepted.	 Technique	was	 not	 valued	much	 but	 inner	 quality	was	 valued
very	much.
In	the	East,	in	the	past,	if	a	person	was	cunning	and	he	made	a	better	shoe,
nobody	would	go	to	him.	They	would	go	to	the	person	who	was	innocent.	He
might	 not	make	 such	 good	 shoes,	 but	 they	would	 go	 to	 the	 person	who	was
innocent	 because	 a	 shoe	 is	 not	 just	 something,	 it	 carries	 the	 quality	 of	 the
person	 who	 has	 made	 it.	 So	 if	 there	 was	 a	 cunning	 and	 clever	 technician
nobody	would	go	to	him.	He	would	suffer,	he	would	be	a	failure.	But	if	he	was
a	man	 of	 qualities,	 of	 character,	 of	 innocence,	 then	 people	would	 go	 to	 him
even	for	worse	things;	people	would	value	his	things	more.
Kabir	 was	 a	 weaver,	 and	 he	 remained	 a	 weaver.	 Even	 when	 he	 attained
enlightenment	he	continued	weaving.	And	he	was	so	ecstatic	that	his	weaving
could	 not	 have	 been	 very	 good.	 He	 was	 singing	 and	 dancing	 and	 weaving!
There	were	many	mistakes	and	many	errors,	but	his	things	were	valued,	super-
valued.
Many	people	would	just	wait	for	Kabir	to	bring	something:	that	was	not	just
a	 thing,	 a	 commodity,	 it	 was	 from	 Kabir.	 The	 very	 thing	 in	 itself	 had	 an
intrinsic	quality	as	it	had	come	from	Kabir’s	hands,	Kabir	had	touched	it.	And
Kabir	was	dancing	around	it	while	he	was	weaving	it.	And	he	was	continuously
remembering	the	divine,	so	the	thing	–	the	cloth	or	the	dress	or	anything	–	had
become	sacred,	holy.	The	quantity	was	not	 the	question,	but	 the	quality!	The
technical	side	was	secondary,	the	human	side	was	primary.
So	in	the	East,	even	in	the	outside	world	they	had	managed	a	pattern	so	that
when	 you	 turned	 inward	 you	 would	 not	 be	 totally	 unacquainted	 with	 that
world.	You	would	know	something,	you	had	 some	guidelines,	 some	 lights	 in
your	hand.	You	would	not	be	moving	into	total	darkness.
This	 trust	 in	 outside	 relationships	 was	 everywhere.	 A	 husband	 couldn’t
believe	that	his	wife	could	be	unfaithful.	It	was	almost	impossible.	And	if	the
husband	 died,	 the	 wife	 would	 die	 with	 him	 because	 life	 was	 such	 a	 shared
phenomenon.	Now	it	was	meaningless	to	live	without	someone	with	whom	life
had	become	such	a	shared	thing.
It	became	ugly	later	on,	but	in	the	beginning	it	was	one	of	the	most	beautiful
things	 that	 has	 ever	 happened	 on	 earth.	 You	 loved	 someone	 and	 he	 has
disappeared;	you	would	like	to	disappear	with	him.	To	be	without	him	would
be	worse	than	death.	Death	was	better	and	worth	choosing	–	such	was	the	trust
in	outside	things	also.	The	relationship	of	wife	and	husband	is	an	outside	thing.
The	whole	 society	was	moving	 around	 trust,	 faith,	 authentic	 sharing.	Then	 it
was	helpful.	When	once	the	time	came	to	move	within,	all	these	things	would
help	him	to	be	initiated	easily,	to	trust	someone,	to	surrender.
Fight,	struggle,	aggressiveness	are	hindrances.	Don’t	carry	them.	When	you
move	inward,	leave	them	at	the	door.	If	you	carry	them	you	will	miss	the	inner
temple,	you	will	never	reach	it.	With	those	things	you	cannot	move	inward.
	
The	third	question:
Osho,
Is	not	vairagya,	non-attachment	or	desirelessness,	enough	in	itself	to	free	one	from	worldly
bondage?	What	then	is	the	use	of	yogic	discipline,	abhyasa?
Vairagya	is	enough,	desirelessness	is	enough.	Then	no	discipline	is	needed.
But	where	is	that	desirelessness?	It	is	not	there.	To	help	it,	discipline	is	needed.
Discipline	 is	 needed	only	because	 that	 desirelessness	 is	 not	within	you	 in	 its
wholeness.
If	desirelessness	is	there	then	there	is	no	question	of	practicing	anything:	no
discipline	is	needed.	You	will	not	come	to	listen	to	me,	you	will	not	go	to	read
Patanjali’s	sutras.	If	desirelessness	is	complete	Patanjali	is	useless.	Why	waste
your	time	with	Patanjali’s	sutras?	I	am	useless,	why	come	to	me?
You	 are	 in	 search	 of	 a	 discipline.	 You	 are	 moving	 in	 search	 of	 some
discipline	which	can	 transform	you.	You	are	a	disciple,	 and	disciple	means	 a
person	who	 is	 in	search	of	a	discipline.	And	don’t	deceive	yourself	–	even	 if
you	go	to	Krishnamurti	you	are	 in	search	of	a	discipline,	because	one	who	is
not	 in	need	will	not	go.	Even	 if	Krishnamurti	 says	 that	no	one	needs	 to	be	a
disciple	 and	 no	 discipline	 is	 needed,	 why	 are	 you	 there?	 These	 words	 will
become	 your	 discipline,	 and	 you	 will	 create	 a	 pattern	 and	 you	 will	 start
following	that	pattern.
Desirelessness	 is	 not	 there,	 so	 you	 are	 in	 suffering.	 And	 nobody	 likes	 to
suffer,	and	everybody	wants	to	transcend	suffering.	How	to	transcend	it?	This
is	what	discipline	will	help	you	to	do.	Discipline	only	means	to	make	you	ready
for	the	jump,	for	the	jump	of	desirelessness.	Discipline	means	a	training.
You	 are	 not	 yet	 ready.	You	have	 a	 very	 gross	mechanism.	Your	 body	 and
your	 mind	 are	 gross,	 they	 cannot	 receive	 the	 subtle.	 You	 are	 not	 tuned.	 To
receive	the	subtle	you	will	have	to	be	tuned,	your	grossness	has	 to	disappear.
Remember	this:	 to	receive	the	subtle	you	will	have	to	become	subtle.	As	you
are,	the	divine	may	be	around	you	but	you	cannot	be	in	touch	with	it.
It	is	just	like	a	radio	lying	here	in	this	room	but	not	functioning.	Some	wires
are	wrongly	connected,	or	some	wires	are	broken	or	some	knob	is	missing.	The
radio	 is	 here,	 the	 radio	waves	 are	 continuously	 passing,	 but	 the	 radio	 is	 not
tuned	and	it	cannot	become	receptive.
You	are	 just	 like	a	 radio	 that	 is	not	 in	a	state	where	 it	can	 function.	Many
things	 are	 missing,	 many	 things	 are	 wrongly	 joined.	 A	 discipline	 means	 to
make	your	radio	functioning,	receptive,	tuned.	The	divine	waves	are	all	around
you;	once	you	are	tuned	they	become	manifest.	And	they	can	become	manifest
only	 through	you,	 and	unless	 they	become	manifest	 through	you,	you	cannot
know	 them.	 They	 may	 have	 become	 manifest	 through	 me,	 they	 may	 have
become	 manifest	 through	 Krishnamurti	 or	 anybody	 else,	 but	 that	 cannot
become	your	transformation.
You	cannot	really	know	what	is	happening	in	a	Krishnamurti,	in	a	Gurdjieff,
what	 is	 happening	 inside,	 what	 type	 of	 tuning	 is	 happening,	 how	 their
mechanism	has	 become	 so	 subtle	 that	 it	 receives	 the	 subtlest	message	 of	 the
universe,	the	existence	starts	manifesting	itself	through	it.
Discipline	 means	 to	 change	 your	 mechanism,	 to	 tune	 it,	 to	 make	 it	 a	 fit
instrument	 to	be	expressive,	 receptive.	Sometimes	without	discipline	 this	 can
also	accidentally	happen.	The	radio	can	fall	from	the	table.	Just	by	falling,	just
by	accident,	some	wires	may	get	connected	or	disconnected.	Just	by	falling	the
radio	may	get	connected	to	a	station.	Then	it	will	start	expressing	something,
but	it	will	be	a	chaos.
It	has	happened	many	times.	Sometimes	through	accident	people	have	come
to	know	the	divine	and	feel	the	divine.	But	then	they	go	mad	because	they	are
not	disciplined	to	receive	such	a	great	phenomenon.	They	are	not	ready.	They
are	so	small,	and	such	a	great	ocean	falls	 in	 them.	This	has	happened.	 In	 the
Sufi	system	they	call	such	persons	“madmen	of	God,”they	call	them	masts.
Many	 people,	 through	 some	 accident,	 through	 some	 master,	 through	 the
grace	of	 some	master	or	 just	 through	 the	presence	of	 some	master,	get	 tuned
sometimes	without	discipline.	Their	whole	mechanism	is	not	ready	but	a	part
starts	functioning.	Then	they	are	out	of	order.	Then	you	will	feel	they	are	mad,
because	they	will	start	saying	things	which	look	irrelevant.	And	they	can	also
feel	that	they	are	irrelevant,	but	they	cannot	do	anything.	Something	has	begun
in	them,	they	cannot	stop	it.	They	feel	a	certain	happiness.	That’s	why	they	are
called	 masts,	 the	 happy	 ones.	 But	 they	 are	 not	 buddha-like,	 they	 are	 not
enlightened.	And	it	is	said	that	for	masts,	for	these	happy	ones	who	have	gone
mad,	a	very	great	master	is	needed	because	now	they	cannot	do	anything	with
themselves.	They	are	just	in	confusion	–	happily	in	it,	but	they	are	a	mess.	And
now	they	cannot	do	anything	on	their	own.
In	 the	old	days	great	Sufi	masters	would	move	 all	 around	 the	 earth.	They
would	go	whenever	 they	heard	 that	somewhere	 there	was	a	mast,	a	madman;
they	would	go	and	they	would	just	help	that	man	to	get	tuned.
In	 this	century	only	Meher	Baba	has	done	 that	work	–	a	great	work	of	 its
own	type,	a	rare	work.	Continuously,	for	many	years,	he	traveled	all	over	India,
and	 the	places	he	visited	were	madhouses,	 because	many	masts	 are	 living	 in
madhouses.	But	you	cannot	make	any	distinction,	who	is	mad	and	who	is	mast
–	 they	 are	 both	mad.	Who	 is	 really	mad	 and	 who	 is	 mad	 just	 because	 of	 a
divine	 accident,	 because	 of	 some	 tuning	 that	 has	 happened	 through	 some
accident?	You	cannot	make	any	distinction.
There	 are	 many	 masts.	 Meher	 Baba	 traveled	 and	 he	 would	 live	 in	 the
madhouses,	and	he	would	help	and	serve	the	masts,	 the	mad	ones.	And	many
of	 them	 came	 out	 of	 their	 madness	 and	 started	 their	 journey	 toward
enlightenment.
In	the	West	many	people	are	in	madhouses,	mad	asylums,	many	who	don’t
need	 any	 psychiatric	 help,	 because	 psychiatrists	 can	 only	make	 them	normal
again.	They	need	 the	help	of	 someone	who	 is	enlightened,	not	a	psychiatrist.
Because	they	are	not	ill,	or	if	they	are	ill,	they	are	ill	by	a	divine	disease.	Your
health	is	nothing	before	that	illness.	That	illness	is	better,	worth	losing	all	your
health	for.	Discipline	is	needed.
In	 India,	 this	 phenomenon	 has	 not	 been	 as	 great	 as	 it	 has	 been	 in
Mohammedan	countries.	That’s	why	Sufis	have	special	methods	 to	help	mast
people,	the	mad	people	of	God.
But	Patanjali	has	created	such	a	subtle	system	that	 there	 is	no	need	of	any
accident.	The	discipline	is	so	scientific	that	if	you	pass	through	this	discipline
you	will	reach	to	buddhahood	without	going	mad	on	the	path.	It	is	a	complete
system.
Sufism	is	still	not	a	complete	system.	Many	things	are	lacking	in	it,	and	they
are	 lacking	 because	 of	 the	 stubborn	 attitude	 of	 Mohammedans.	 They	 won’t
allow	it	to	evolve	to	its	peak	and	climax.	And	the	Sufi	system	has	to	follow	the
pattern	of	 the	 Islamic	 religion.	Because	of	 the	 structure	of	 the	Mohammedan
religion,	the	Sufi	system	couldn’t	go	beyond.
Patanjali	 follows	no	 religion,	he	 follows	only	 truth.	He	will	not	make	any
compromise	with	Hinduism	or	Mohammedanism	or	any	“ism.”	He	follows	the
scientific	 truth.	Sufis	had	 to	make	compromises	–	 they	had	 to.	Because	 there
were	some	Sufis	who	tried	not	to	make	any	compromise,	for	example,	Bayazid
of	 Bistham	 or	 al-Hillaj	 Mansur	 who	 didn’t	 make	 any	 compromise	 and	 they
were	killed,	they	were	murdered.
So	Sufis	went	 into	hiding.	They	made	 their	 science	 completely	 secret	 and
they	allowed	only	fragments	to	be	known	–	only	those	fragments	which	fit	with
Islam	and	its	pattern.	All	other	fragments	were	hidden.	So	the	whole	system	is
not	known;	it	is	not	working.	So	many	people,	through	fragments,	go	mad.
Patanjali’s	 system	 is	 complete,	 and	discipline	 is	 needed.	Before	you	move
into	 this	 unknown	 world	 of	 the	 within,	 a	 deep	 discipline	 is	 needed	 so	 no
accident	 is	 possible.	 If	 you	 move	 without	 discipline,	 then	 many	 things	 are
possible.
Vairagya	is	enough,	but	that	“enough	vairagya”	is	not	there	in	your	heart.	If
it	is	there,	then	there	is	no	question.	Then	close	Patanjali’s	book	and	burn	it;	it
is	absolutely	unnecessary.	But	that	“enough	vairagya”	is	not	there.	It	is	better
to	move	on	a	disciplined	path,	step	by	step,	so	you	don’t	become	a	victim	of
any	accident.	Accidents	have	happened,	the	possibility	is	there.
Many	systems	are	working	in	the	world,	but	there	is	no	system	as	perfect	as
Patanjali’s	because	no	country	has	worked	for	so	long.	And	Patanjali	is	not	the
originator	 of	 this	 system,	 he	 is	 only	 the	 systematizer.	 The	 system	 was
developed	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 before	 Patanjali;	 many	 people	 worked.
Patanjali	 has	 given	 just	 the	 essence	 of	 thousands	 of	 years’	work.	But	 he	 has
made	it	in	such	a	way	that	you	can	move	safely.
Just	because	you	are	moving	 inward,	don’t	 think	 that	you	are	moving	 in	a
safe	world.	It	can	be	unsafe.	It	is	dangerous	also,	you	can	be	lost	in	it.	And	if
you	are	lost	in	it	you	will	be	mad.	That’s	why	teachers	like	Krishnamurti,	who
insist	 that	 no	 teacher	 is	 needed,	 are	 dangerous,	 because	 people	 who	 are
uninitiated	may	take	their	standpoint	and	may	start	working	on	their	own.
Remember,	even	if	your	wristwatch	goes	wrong,	you	have	the	tendency	and
the	 curiosity	 –	 because	 it	 comes	 from	 the	 monkeys	 –	 to	 open	 it	 and	 do
something.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 resist	 it.	You	cannot	believe	 that	you	don’t	 know
anything	about	 it.	You	may	be	 the	owner,	but	 just	by	being	 the	owner	of	 the
watch	doesn’t	mean	you	know	anything.	Don’t	open	it!	It	is	better	to	take	it	to
the	person	who	knows.	And	a	watch	is	a	simple	mechanism.	The	mind	is	such
a	complex	mechanism:	never	open	it	on	your	own	because	whatsoever	you	do
will	be	wrong.
Sometimes	it	happens	that	your	watch	has	gone	wrong,	you	just	shake	it	and
it	starts,	but	that	is	not	a	science.	Sometimes	it	happens	that	something	you	do,
and	 just	 by	 luck,	 accident,	 you	 feel	 something	 happening.	But	 you	 have	 not
become	a	master.	And	if	it	has	happened	once,	don’t	try	it	again,	because	if	you
next	shake	your	watch	it	may	stop.	This	is	not	a	science.
Don’t	 move	 by	 accidents.	 Discipline	 is	 only	 a	 safeguard.	 Don’t	 move	 by
accidents!	Move	with	a	master	who	knows	what	he	is	doing.	And	he	knows	if
something	goes	wrong	he	can	bring	 it	 to	 the	 right	path:	one	who	 is	aware	of
your	past	and	who	is	also	aware	of	your	future,	and	who	can	join	together	your
past	and	future.
That	is	why	there	is	so	much	emphasis	on	masters	in	Indian	teachings.	And
they	knew,	and	they	meant	it,	because	there	is	no	mechanism	as	complex	as	the
human	mind,	no	computer	as	complex	as	the	human	mind.
Man	has	not	yet	been	able	to	evolve	anything	comparable	to	the	mind,	and	I
think	 it	 is	 not	 ever	 going	 to	 be	 evolved,	 because	 who	will	 evolve	 it?	 If	 the
human	mind	can	evolve	something,	 it	 is	always	going	 to	be	 lower	and	 lesser
than	the	mind	that	creates	it.	At	least	one	thing	is	certain:	that	whatsoever	the
human	mind	 creates,	 that	 created	 thing	 cannot	 create	 a	 human	mind.	 So	 the
human	 mind	 remains	 the	 superior-most,	 the	 supreme-most	 complex
mechanism.
Don’t	do	anything	just	because	of	curiosity	or	just	because	others	are	doing
it.	Get	initiated,	and	move	with	someone	who	knows	the	path	well.	Otherwise
madness	can	be	the	result.	And	it	has	happened	before;	it	is	happening	to	many
people	right	now.
Patanjali	doesn’t	believe	in	accidents,	he	believes	in	a	scientific	order.	So	he
has	 given	 one-by-one	 steps.	 These	 two	 he	 makes	 his	 base:	 vairagya,
desirelessness,	and	abhyasa,	constant,	conscious	inner	practice.	Abhyasa	is	the
means	 and	 vairagya	 is	 the	 goal.	 Desirelessness	 is	 the	 goal	 and	 constant,
conscious	inner	practice	is	the	means.
But	 the	goal	starts	 from	the	very	beginning	and	the	ends	are	hidden	in	 the
beginning.	 The	 tree	 is	 hidden	 in	 the	 seed,	 so	 the	 beginning	 implies	 the	 end.
That’s	 why	 he	 says	 desirelessness	 is	 needed	 in	 the	 beginning	 also.	 The
beginning	has	the	end	in	it	and	the	end	will	also	have	the	beginning	in	it.
So	even	when	a	master	has	become	complete,	total,	he	continues	practicing.
This	 will	 look	 absurd	 to	 you.	 You	 have	 to	 practice	 because	 you	 are	 in	 the
beginning	and	the	goal	has	not	been	achieved	–	but	when	the	goal	is	achieved,
even	then	the	practice	continues.	It	now	becomes	spontaneous,	but	it	continues.
It	never	stops.	It	cannot,	because	the	end	and	the	beginning	are	not	two	things.
If	the	tree	is	in	the	seed,	then	in	the	tree	again	seeds	will	come.
	
One	of	Buddha’s	disciples,	Purnakashyap	asked,	“We	see,	bhante,	that	you
still	follow	a	certain	discipline.”
Buddha?	…still	following	a	certain	discipline?	He	moves	in	a	certain	way,
he	sits	 in	a	certain	way,	he	remains	alert,	he	eats	certain	things,	he	behaves	–
everything	seems	to	be	disciplined.
So	Purnakashyap	said,	“You	have	become	enlightened,	but	we	feel	that	you
still	have	a	certain	discipline.”
Buddha	said,	“It	has	become	so	ingrained	that	now	I	am	not	following	it,	it
is	following	me.	It	has	become	a	shadow.	I	need	not	think	about	it.	It	is	there,
always	there.	It	has	become	a	shadow.”
	
So	 the	 end	 is	 in	 the	 beginning	 and	 the	 beginning	will	 also	 be	 in	 the	 end.
These	are	not	two	things,	but	two	poles	of	one	phenomenon.
Enough	for	today.
	
About	Osho
	
	
Osho	defies	categorization.	His	thousands	of	talks	cover	everything	from	the
individual	quest	for	meaning	to	the	most	urgent	social	and	political	issues	facing
society	today.	Osho’s	books	are	not	written	but	are	transcribed	from	audio	and
video	recordings	of	his	extemporaneous	talks	to	international	audiences.	As	he
puts	it,	“So	remember:	whatever	I	am	saying	is	not	just	for	you…	I	am	talking
also	for	the	future	generations.”
Osho	has	been	described	by	The	Sunday	Times	in	London	as	one	of	the	“1000
Makers	of	the	20th	Century”	and	by	American	author	Tom	Robbins		as	“the
most	dangerous	man	since	Jesus	Christ.”	Sunday	Mid-Day	(India)	has	selected
Osho	as	one	of	ten	people	–	along	with	Gandhi,	Nehru	and	Buddha	–	who	have
changed	the	destiny	of	India.
	
About	his	own	work	Osho	has	said	that	he	is	helping	to	create	the	conditions	for
the	birth	of	a	new	kind	of	human	being.	He	often	characterizes	this	new	human
being	as	“Zorba	the	Buddha”	–	capable	both	of	enjoying	the	earthy	pleasures	of
a	Zorba	the	Greek	and	the	silent	serenity	of	a	Gautama	the	Buddha.
Running	like	a	thread	through	all	aspects	of	Osho’s	talks	and	meditations	is	a
vision	that	encompasses	both	the	timeless	wisdom	of	all	ages	past	and	the
highest	potential	of	today’s	(and	tomorrow’s)	science	and	technology.
	
Osho	is	known	for	his	revolutionary	contribution	to	the	science	of	inner
transformation,	with	an	approach	to	meditation	that	acknowledges	the
accelerated	pace	of	contemporary	life.	His	unique	OSHO	Active	Meditations	are
designed	to	first	release	the	accumulated	stresses	of	body	and	mind,	so	that	it	is
then	easier	to	take	an	experience	of	stillness	and	thought-free	relaxation	into
daily	life.
	
Two	autobiographical	works	by	Osho	are	available:
Autobiography	of	a	Spiritually	Incorrect	Mystic,	St.	Martin’s	Press,	New	York
(book	and	eBook)
Glimpses	of	a	Golden	Childhood,	OSHO	Media	International,	Pune,	India
	
	
OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort
www.osho.com/meditationresort
	
	
	
Each	year	the	OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort	welcomes	thousands	of
people	from	more	than	100	countries.	The	unique	campus	provides	an
opportunity	for	a	direct	personal	experience	of	a	new	way	of	living	–	with	more
awareness,	relaxation,	celebration	and	creativity.	A	great	variety	of	around-the-
clock	and	around-the-year	program	options	are	available.	Doing	nothing	and	just
relaxing	is	one	of	them!
All	programs	are	based	on	Osho’s	vision	of	“Zorba	the	Buddha”	–	a	qualitatively
new	kind	of	human	being	who	is	able	both	to	participate	creatively	in	everyday
life	and	to	relax	into	silence	and	meditation.
	
Location
Located	100	miles	southeast	of	Mumbai	in	the	thriving	modern	city	of	Pune,
India,	the	OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort	is	a	holiday	destination	with	a
difference.	The	Meditation	Resort	is	spread	over	28	acres	of	spectacular	gardens
in	a	beautiful	tree-lined	residential	area.
	
OSHO	Meditations
A	full	daily	schedule	of	meditations	for	every	type	of	person	includes	both
traditional	and	revolutionary	methods,	and	particularly	the	OSHO	Active	Meditations.
The	meditations	take	place	in	what	may	be	the	world’s	largest	meditation	hall,
the	OSHO	Auditorium.
	
OSHO	Multiversity
Individual	sessions,	courses	and	workshops	cover	everything	from	creative	arts
to	holistic	health,	personal	transformation,	relationship	and	life	transition,
transforming	meditation	into	a	lifestyle	for	life	and	work,	esoteric	sciences,	and
the	"Zen"	approach	to	sports	and	recreation.	The	secret	of	the	OSHO
Multiversity’s	success	lies	in	the	fact	that	all	its	programs	are	combined	with
meditation,	supporting	the	understanding	that	as	human	beings	we	are	far	more
than	the	sum	of	our	parts.
	
OSHO	Basho	Spa
The	luxurious	Basho	Spa	provides	for	leisurely	open-air	swimming	surrounded
by	trees	and	tropical	green.	The	uniquely	styled,	spacious	Jacuzzi,	the	saunas,
gym,	tennis	courts…all	these	are	enhanced	by	their	stunningly	beautiful	setting.
	
Cuisine
A	variety	of	different	eating	areas	serve	delicious	Western,	Asian	and	Indian
vegetarian	food	–	most	of	it	organically	grown	especially	for	the	Meditation
Resort.	Breads	and	cakes	are	baked	in	the	resort’s	own	bakery.
	
Night	life
There	are	many	evening	events	to	choose	from	–	dancing	being	at	the	top	of	the
list!	Other	activities	include	full-moon	meditations	beneath	the	stars,	variety
shows,	music	performances	and	meditations	for	daily	life.
Or	you	can	just	enjoy	meeting	people	at	the	Plaza	Café,	or	walking	in	the
nighttime	serenity	of	the	gardens	of	this	fairytale	environment.
	
Facilities
You	can	buy	all	your	basic	necessities	and	toiletries	in	the	Galleria.	The	OSHO
Multimedia	Gallery	sells	a	large	range	of	OSHO	media	products.	There	is	also	a
bank,	a	travel	agency	and	a	Cyber	Café	on-campus.	For	those	who	enjoy
shopping,	Pune	provides	all	the	options,	ranging	from	traditional	and	ethnic
Indian	products	to	all	of	the	global	brand-name	stores.
	
Accommodation
You	can	choose	to	stay	in	the	elegant	rooms	of	the	OSHO	Guesthouse,	or	for
longer	stays	on	campus	you	can	select	one	of	the	OSHO	Living-In	program
packages.	Additionally	there	is	a	plentiful	variety	of	nearby	hotels	and	serviced
apartments.
	
For	More	Information
	
OSHO.com/AllAboutOsho
A	full	selection	of	OSHO	multilingual	online	destinations
	
OSHO.com
The	official	website	of	OSHO	International
	
	
OSHO.com/Library
open	access	OSHO	library	for	your	favorite	topic	searches
	
OSHO.com/Newsletter
monthly	newsletter
	
OSHO.com/Meditation
about	the	OSHO	meditations	and	related	music
	
Facebook.com/OSHO.International
	
Facebook.com/OSHO.International.Meditation.Resort
	
Twitter.com/OSHO
	
YouTube.com/OSHOInternational
	
OSHOtalks.info
OSHO	video	translation	project
	
Thank	you	for	buying	this	OSHO	eBook.
