1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Talks	given	from	1/6/80	to	30/6/80
Darshan	Diary
29	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006015
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	 needs	 the	 greatest	 courage	 in	 life,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 basic
requirement	for	moving	into	the	world	of	love	is	dissolving	your	ego	--	and	that
is	the	hardest	thing	to	do.
We	cling	to	the	ego	like	anything.	We	are	ready	to	die	for	it,	but	we	are	not	ready
to	 let	 it	die	because	 it	defines	us,	 it	gives	us	an	 identity.	 It	gives	us	a	 separate
existence.	It	makes	us	feel	important,	significant.
But	because	basically	the	ego	is	a	false	phenomenon	all	these	feelings	are	rooted
in	a	fallacy;	hence	deep	down	we	are	always	aware	that	the	importance	that	ego
gives	is	bogus,	it	is	phony.	We	know	it	and	yet	we	don't	want	to	know	it.	We	are
aware	of	it	and	yet	we	don't	want	to	know	it.	We	are	aware	of	it	yet	we	want	to
be	oblivious	of	it.	This	is	the	human	dilemma,
To	get	into	love	means	to	get	out	of	this	dilemma,	to	drop	the	fallacy,	to	drop	the
phony	and	the	pseudo	and	 to	be	simply	a	non-entity,	a	nothingness.	But	out	of
that	nothingness	something	of	immense	value	arises.	life	becomes	a	celebration.
With	 ego	 life	 is	 a	 misery,	 because	 if	 you	 are	 rooted	 in	 something	 false	 you
cannot	celebrate.	Only	truth	can	release	the	energies	of	celebration	in	you.	Only
truth	can	become	a	song	in	your	heart.	The	ego	is	the	greatest	lie:	all	other	lies
are	by-products	of	it.	And	because	it	is	a	lie	it	stinks,	because	it	is	a	lie	it	creates
a	 thousand	 and	 one	 problems	 around	 itself.	 It	 hides	 behind	 those	 problems.	 It
creates	a	great	facade	of	misery,	so	many	clouds	of	misery	that	you	get	involved
in	misery	and	you	forget	everything	about	the	root	cause	of	it	all.
The	moment	ego	is	dropped	--	and	it	is	only	a	question	of	your	decision,	if	you
want	to	drop	it	you	can	drop	it	right	now,	nothing	can	prevent	you	from	dropping
it	 except	 yourself	 --	 instantly	 your	 life	 goes	 through	 a	 radical	 change,	 it	 goes
through	a	revolution.	Great	poetry	and	great	music	arises	in	you.
Just	 a	 few	moments	 ago	 I	was	 reading	 these	 lines	 of	Walt	Whitman	 --	 I	 love
these	lines!	He	was	one	of	the	most	significant	poets	who	has	ever	walked	on	the
earth.
He	says:
I	celebrate	myself,	I	sing	myself.
And	what	I	assume	you	shall	assume.
For	every	atom	belonging	to	me	as	good	belongs	to	you.
That's	the	message	of	all	the	seers,	of	all	those	who	have	known,	and	particularly
my	message	is	celebration.
Let	your	whole	heart	say	 'I	celebrate	myself,	I	sing	myself.'	But	remember,	the
self	 is	 not	 the	 ego,	 the	 self	 is	 something	 beyond	 the	 ego.	 The	 ego	 is	 your
creation;	the	self	is	part	of	god,	the	self	is	part	oh	the	supreme	self.	The	self	does
not	make	you	a	separate	individual,	it	does	not	make	an	island	of	you.	It	keeps
you	one	with	the	whole;	hence	the	celebration,	hence	the	joy,	hence	the	ecstasy.
Walt	Whitman's	line	defines	my	sannyas	precisely.	Remember	it.
Love,	bliss,	celebration,	god,	 truth,	 freedom	--	 they	are	different	aspects	of	 the
same	 phenomenon.	 Ego	 dropped,	 you	 enter	 into	 a	 multi-dimensional	 reality
which	contains	all	these	things.	But	one	certainly	needs	courage,	one	needs	guts.
Be	courageous	enough	 to	 live	whole-heartedly	 to	 live	 in	 tune	with	 the	 infinite,
with	the	eternal.
Truth	 is	 beyond	 all	 scriptures	 because	 it	 is	 beyond	mind	 itself.	 Scriptures	 are
products	 of	 the	 mind.	 All	 philosophies,	 all	 ideologies,	 all	 theorisations,	 are
nothing	but	fabrications,	fictions	of	the	mind.
They	 can	 be	 beautiful	 fictions,	 sweet,	 nice	 --	 but	 fictions	 are	 fictions	 all	 the
same.	A	 dream	 can	 be	 a	 nightmare	 or	 a	 dream	 can	 be	 a	 very	 beautiful,	 sweet
dream,	but	a	dream	is	a	dream,	it	is	not	reality.
Yes,	 there	 are	 beautiful	 scriptures	 in	 the	 world	 written	 by	 the	 most	 beautiful
people,	 but	 truth	 cannot	 be	written.	 It	 cannot	 even	 be	 expressed,	 it	 cannot	 be
communicated,	it	cannot	be	transferred	from	one	person	to	another.	Yes,	there	is
a	 certain	 communion	 it	 is	 not	 communication.	 That	 communion	 happens
between	 a	master	 and	 a	 disciple	 in	 total	 silence,	 from	heart	 to	 heart,	 not	 from
mind	 to	 mind.	 The	 master	 says	 nothing,	 the	 disciple	 heard	 nothing,	 yet
everything	is	said	and	everything	is	heard.	Nothing	is	said,	nothing	is	heard	yet
everything	is	understood.
This	 is	 the	 most	 mysterious	 phenomenon	 in	 existence,	 the	 master-disciple
relationship,	mysterious	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
because	it	 is	not	 intellectually	comprehensible.	It	cannot	be	proved	in	a	 logical
way.	It	is	not	logical	at	all.
Hence	 those	who	become	 sannyasins	out	of	 a	 logical	 conviction,	who	 through
listening	 to	me,	 are	 convinced	 that	 what	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 true,	 are	 only	 on	 the
periphery.	The	 true	disciple	has	nothing	 to	do	with	what	 I	 am	saying,	 the	 true
disciple	has	something	to	do	with	what	I	am.	The	true	sannyasin	falls	in	love.	It
is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 conviction.	 It	 is	 something	 far	more,	 something	 far	more
mysterious,	 something	 transcendental;	 hence	 a	 real	 disciple	 cannot	 explain	 to
anybody	else	what	has	happened.	Everybody	will	 think	 that	 he	has	gone	mad,
that	he	has	been	hypnotised,	that	he	is	no	more	in	his	senses.
And	the	people	who	think	like	that	are	not	at	fault	at	all;	 the	whole	fault	is	the
disciple's	--	he	cannot	explain.	But	what	can	the	disciple	do	about	it?	The	whole
fault	lies	with	reality	itself.
There	 are	 things	 which	 are	 not	 explainable.	 There	 are	 things	 which	 elude	 all
rationalisation.	And	in	fact,	life	begins	only	when	you	has	come	in	contact	with
something	which	is	incomprehensible,	inexplicable,	indefinable,	unprovable	and
yet,	somewhere	deep	down	your	heart	says	it	is	so.	It	puts	aside	all	the	arguments
of	the	mind.	It	says	to	the	mind,	 'Keep	quiet.	You	need	not	bother.	Now	I	have
stumbled	into	something	which	is	beyond	you.'	And	nothing	can	be	done	about	it
to	make	it	comprehensible.	It	is	a	communion.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 true	 discipleship.	 It	 is	 not	 belief,	 it	 is	 not	 conviction,	 it	 is	 not
accepting	a	certain	philosophy	of	life.	It	is	falling	totally	in	love	--	and	a	love	too
of	a	very	new	quality.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	so-called	ordinary	love.	Just
one	 thing	 is	 in	 common,	 that	 the	 ordinary	 love	 also	 has	 something
incomprehensible	 in	 it,	 but	 only	 something	 a	 very	 small	 particle	 of	 the
incomprehensible	in	it	--	and	that	is	totally	incomprehensible.	Hence	those	who
have	loved	can	understand	it	a	little	bit.
But	very	few	people	have	ever	loved.	Yes,	they	have	known	lust	and	they	have
called	 it	 love,	but	 it	 is	not	 love.	They	have	known	sex	and	 they	have	called	 it
love,	but	 it	 is	not	 love.	people	are	very	clever	at	giving	beautiful	name	to	ugly
things.	They	have	 to	give	beautiful	names,	otherwise	 things	 look	so	absurd,	so
ridiculous.	Man	tries	to	create	at	least	a	beautiful	facade;	and	behind	the	facade
everything	ugly	can	be	continued.
The	ordinary	love	contains	so	much	jealousy,	so	much	possessiveness,	so	much
enmity,	hatred.	Just	a	little	bit	of	it	belongs	to	the	beyond.	But	those	who	have
known	 even	 that	 little	 bit	 say	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 it	 --	 otherwise	 the
phenomenon	of	disciplehood	is	bound	to	be	ridiculed	by	those	who	have	never
tasted	the	nectar	of	it.
The	disciple	has	 to	be	courageous,	courageous	enough	 to	be	called	a	madman,
courageous	 enough	 to	 be	 called	 blind,	 courageous	 enough	 to	 be	 thought
hypnotised.	 And	 he	 has	 to	 take	 these	 things	 in	 a	 very	 loving	 way.	 He	 has	 to
understand	and	he	has	to	be	compassionate,	kind,	sympathetic,	because	what	can
others	do?
They	are	functioning	according	to	their	minds,	and	this	is	something	not	of	the
mind.
No	scripture	can	be	of	any	help,	only	a	living	master	can	resurrect	you,	Only	a
Jesus	can	call	forth	Lazarus	from	the	dead.	The	Bible	cannot	do	it	--	you	can	try
it.	You	can	put	the	Bible	on	a	dead	man's	chest	and	try	--	the	Bible	is	there	and
the	dead	man	is	there,	but	Lazarus	is	not	going	to	be	resurrected.	The	Bible	itself
is	dead,	so	are	all	the	scriptures.	A	Jesus	is	needed,	that	magic	touch	of	a	living
master	is	needed.
The	parable	is	beautiful.	That's	 the	state	of	every	disciple,	when	he	comes	to	a
master	he	is	dead,	he	is	almost	in	his	grave.	The	master	calls	forth,	 'Come	out,
Lazarus,	come	out	of	your	grave,'	and	the	disciple	has	to	listen,	has	to	learn	how
to	listen	and	has	 to	go	into	 the	beyond	with	 the	master.	 It	 is	a	 journey	into	 the
uncharted,	into	the	unknown,	but	without	it	life	is	not	life.	Without	it	we	live	in
pain,	we	don't	live	at	all.
Only	with	something	of	the	transcendental	penetrating	you	do	you	become	alive,
you	are	reborn.	Jesus	says,	 'Unless	you	are	born	again,	you	shall	not	enter	 into
my	kingdom	of	god.'	This	is	the	rebirth	he	is	talking	about	--	sannyas	is	a	rebirth.
A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	how	to	make	life	a	festivity,	how	to	make	life	a	blissful
festival.	A	sannyasin	has	not	to	be	sad	or	serious.	He	has	to	know	how	to	live,
how	to	love,	how	to	laugh.	He	has	to	become	more	passionate,	more	alive.	He
has	to	go	deeper	into	life,	as	deep	as	possible,	he	has	to	be	as	total	as	possible.
The	 old	 idea	 of	 sannyas,	 of	 monkhood,	 was	 of	 renunciation:	 renounce	 life,
escape	from	life,	don't	live	at	all,	because	life	is	against	god.	That	is	absolutely
stupid!	If	life	is	against	god	what	is	god	doing?	Why	does	he	go	on	creating	life?
Why	did	he	create	life	in	the	first	place?
All	the	religions	of	the	world,	the	so-called	religions,	have	been	teaching	a	great
contradiction.	On	one	hand	they	say	god	created	life.	On	the	other	hand	they	say,
Renounce	life,	it	is	against	god,	unless	you	renounce	you	will	not	reach	god,	if
you	renounce	you	become	beloved	of	god.	The	contradiction	is	so	clear,	even	a
child	can	see	the	contradiction.	It	is	so	ridiculous	if	god	creates	life	he	cannot	be
against	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	 am	 not	 against	 life,	 I	 am	 all	 for	 it.	And	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 not	 to
escape,	 but	 to	 live	 intensely,	 to	 burn	 their	 life's	 torch	 from	 both	 ends
simultaneously.	Even	a	single	moment	of	total	festivity	is	enough;	you	will	have
tasted	eternity	and	you	will	have	known	what	god	is.
Life	is	the	manifest	form	of	god	and	celebration	is	his	only	prayer.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006025
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Gautam	the	Buddha	introduced	the	word	'samyako'.	His	whole	vision	is	based	on
that	single	word.
Everything	can	either	be	right	or	wrong.	There	can	be	right	love	and	wrong	love.
Before	Buddha	nobody	thought	in	that	way,	people	used	to	think	love	is	always
right.	So	it	was	thought	about	will,	resolution,	a	man	of	will	is	always	right.	All
the	cultures	up	to	now	have	been	praising	will-power,	but	Buddha	says	--
and	he	is	tremendously	insightful	--	that	everything	that	can	be	right	can	be	also
be	wrong,	nothing	can	be	absolutely	right.	Will-power	can	be	wrong	if	it	is	used
by	the	ego,	then	it	will	enhance	the	ego.	And	that's	what	happens	in	ninety-nine
cases	out	of	a	hundred.
It	can	be	right,	but	one	has	to	be	very	alert	and	aware.	Will-power	can	be	right
only	 if	 it	 is	 used	 for	 surrender.	 It	 is	 very	 paradoxical	 phenomenon,	 because
ordinarily	we	think	will	and	surrender	are	polar	opposites,	but	there	is	only	one
right	use	of	will,	and	that	is:	its	surrender	to	the	whole	--	call	it	god,	nature,	tao
or	whatsoever	you	like.
Will-power	 in	 the	service	of	 the	person	 is	dangerous,	because	 the	very	 idea	of
the	 person	 is	 false;	 personality	 is	 illusory.	 We	 are	 not	 separate	 t	 the	 whole
universe	is	one	organic	unity.	We	all	exist	together.
Even	 a	 small	 blade	 of	 grass	 is	 connected	 to	 the	 far-away	 star.	 Everything	 is
interlinked,	intertwined.	It	is	like	a	spider's	web	if	you	touch	even	one	thread	of
it,	the	whole	wave	will	be	felt	throughout	the	pattern.
Through	even	a	slight	touch	the	vibration	will	be	felt	throughout	the	web.	So	is
the	case	with	the	universe.
We	are	not	separate,	we	only	appear	separate.	Hence	if	will	is	in	the	service	of
the	person	it	is	a	wrong	kind	of	will.	It	will	lead	you	into	more	and	more	misery,
into	more	and	more	conflict,	violence.
Right	will	means	 in	 the	 service	 of	 god.	But	 then	 you	 are	 no	more.	Right	will
means	 that	 the	will	 gathers	 itself	 and	commits	 a	 suicide.	But	 that	 can	be	done
only	by	a	man	of	will.	Surrender	cannot	be	done	by	people	who	don't	have	any
wills,	who	are	always	lukewarm,	half-hearted,	wavering.	They	cannot	surrender.
Surrender	 needs	 a	 certain	 integrity,	 a	 certain	 resolution,	 in	 fact	 it	 needs	 the
greatest	resolution	possible.
Unless	you	are	 totally	 in	 it,	 it	 is	not	going	 to	happen.	Even	 if	you	are	holding
back	a	little	bit	it	is	not	surrender.	And	through	that	which	you	are	holding	back,
everything	will	return	again;	you	will	be	the	same.
Surrender	has	to	be	irrevocable.	One	has	to	commit	oneself	so	totally	that	there
is	no	going	back.	The	bridge	is	burned,	you	have	thrown	the	ladder.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Right	 will	 mean	 a	 will	 which	 is	 capable	 of	 committing	 suicide.	 It	 is	 a	 very
strange	phenomenon	but	that's	how	life	is;	it	is	very	paradoxical.	First	we	have	to
learn	how	to	create	an	ego	and	then	the	ego	is	ripe,	strong	enough,	then	we	have
to	learn	how	to	drop	it.	One	would	think	it	would	have	been	more	logical	not	to
develop	 it	 at	 all.	But	when	you	would	 never	 know	 the	 soy	of	 dropping	 it,	 the
freedom	 of	 dropping	 it.	 A	 person	 who	 has	 never	 been	 in	 a	 gaol	 has	 no
consciousness	about	being	free;	being	in	a	gaol	is	a	prerequisite	to	know	the	taste
of	freedom.
Life	consists	of	contradictions	--	that	is	its	dialectics.	A	poor	man	never	knows
that	he	is	poor.	He	looks	poor	only	to	the	people	who	are	not	poor.	He	himself
does	not	know	that	he	is	poor,	he	has	nothing	to	compare	his	poverty	with.	To	be
really	poor	first	you	have	to	be	rich	and	then	you	will	know	the	pain	of	 it,	 the
agony	of	it.	To	really	be	a	beggar,	first	you	have	to	be	an	emperor,	otherwise	you
will	not	know	what	it	is	to	be	a	beggar.
The	ego	has	to	be	strengthened	only	to	be	dropped.	The	will	has	to	be	sharpened
only	to	be	surrendered.
Knowledge	 has	 to	 be	 gathered	 only	 to	 be	 unlearned.	 The	 day	 you	 unlearn
whatsoever	you	have	 learned	before,	 you	become	a	 child	 again,	 you	 are	 twice
born.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 the	 same	 childhood,	 because	 the	 first	 childhood	 had	 no
awareness	 of	 being	 knowledgeable;	 now	 you	 know	 what	 it	 means	 to	 be
knowledgeable.
And	 in	 dropping	 it	 you	 will	 feel	 such	 a	 great	 freedom,	 such	 great	 joy,	 such
ecstasy,	in	fact	you	are	not	attaining	anything.
In	 your	 childhood,	 in	 your	 first	 childhood	 you	 were	 the	 same,	 but	 you	 were
completely	unaware	of	it.
This	whole	process	 is	needed	 to	make	you	aware.	Awareness	comes	 through	a
dialectical	process.
So	will	 is	good,	right,	only	when	you	are	capable	of	dropping	it,	 if	you	cannot
drop	 it,	 if	 you	 cling	 to	 it,	 if	 it	 becomes	 your	 whole	 life-pattern	 you	miss	 the
whole	point.	When	it	creates	only	misery	and	hell.	Great	will-power	is	needed	to
create	hell	or	heaven.	If	you	continue	in	it,	it	creates	hell,	if	you	jump	out	of	it,	it
creates	heaven.
The	only	evolution	worth	calling	evolution	is	the	evolution	of	bliss.	If	bliss	is	not
growing	you	are	not	evolving.	If	bliss	is	not	growing	the	society	is	not	evolving.
In	 fact,	 what	 people	 generally	 understand	 by	 evolution	 and	 progress	 is	 sheer
nonsense.
A	 more	 and	 more	 complicated	 technology	 does	 not	 mean	 evolution.	 It	 is	 so
superficial.	 You	 can	 have	 more	 gadgets,	 you	 can	 have	 big	 machines,	 better
aeroplanes,	 better	 trains,	 better	 houses,	 but	 you	 are	 the	 same	 person.	You	 can
reach	 the	moon	or	even	 the	stars	one	day,	but	what	you	are	doing	on	 the	earth
you	will	 do	 on	 the	moon.	 If	 you	 have	 been	 smoking	 cigarettes	 here	 you	will
smoke	them	there.	If	you	have	been	playing	cards	here	you	will	play	cards	there.
If	you	have	been	drinking	beer	here	you	will	carry	beer	to	the	moon.	What	else
will	you	do	there?
If	man	remains	the	same,	there	is	no	evolution.	Then	we	go	on	living	in	a	false
kind	of	 evolution,	 a	 substitute	 evolution	which	gives	 the	 fallacious	appearance
that	 man	 is	 evolving.	 But	 for	 centuries	 man	 has	 not	 evolved.	 Only	 a	 few
individuals	 here	 and	 there	 have	 evolved.	You	 can	 come	 across	 a	Buddha	 or	 a
Jesus	or	a	Zarathustra	or	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Francis,	a	Kabir,	a	Bahauddin;	there	are
very	 few	people.	Those	who	have	 really	 tasted	 the	 nectar	 of	 bliss	 are	 evolved
human	beings.
Evolution	has	happened	only	to	a	few	people.	Just	getting	down	from	the	trees
and	instead	of	walking	on	fours,	walking	on	two,	does	not	make	you	an	evolved
animal.	It	just	makes	you	erect,	vertical,	that's	all.	If	you	look	inside	man's	mind,
he	is	still	a	monkey.	One	need	not	go	very	far,	one	can	simply	close	one's	eyes
and	see	the	mind	and	you	will	find	all	kinds	of	monkeyish	things	going	on.	So
what	evolution	has	happened?	What	nonsense	is	Darwin	talking	about?
The	only	difference	is	 that	monkeys	have	a	few	things	more	that	man	has	lost;
the	 monkeys	 have	 tails,	 and	 beautiful	 tails,	 very	 alive!	 Monkeys	 must	 be
laughing	at	human	beings,	"What	kind	of	monkeys	are	they?	What	happened	to
their	tails?"
And	man	has	become	weaker.	You	cannot	 fight	bare-handed	with	a	monkey	 --
impossible.	Even	a	Mohammed	Ali	will	be	defeated!	No	tactics	of	boxing	will
help;	a	monkey	is	enough	to	kill	any	man!
And	one	can	feel	jealous;	monkeys	jumping	from	one	tree	to	another	tree...	just
see	 their	aliveness	 --	and	 try	 to	do	 it...	you	will	have	multi-fractures!	You	will
wake	up	after	three	days	in	a	hospital!	What	kind	of	evolution	is	this?	This	is	not
real	evolution.
Real	evolution	can	only	be	judged	by	blissfulness.	And	blissfulness	grows	with
consciousness.	They	grow	together,	simultaneously;	they	are	two	aspects	of	the
same	 coin.	 Either	 grow	 consciousness	 and	 you	 become	more	 blissful	 or	 grow
more	blissful	and	you	become	more	conscious.	Start	from	anywhere	--
consciousness	or	bliss	--	and	you	will	be	growing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	 are	 only	 two	 kinds	 of	 paths;	 a	 few	 paths	 are	 of	 consciousness,	 for
example,	Zen,	and	a	few	paths	of	bliss,	for	example,	Sufis.	Sufis	live	blissfully,
and	consciousness	grows	side	by	side.	And	Zen	people	grow	consciousness,	and
bliss	 grows	 side	 by	 side.	 They	 are	 inseparable,	 so	 if	 you	 grow	 one,	 the	 other
grows	of	its	own	accord.	You	need	not	bother	about	the	two	together.
Unless	one	becomes	a	buddha,	a	christ,	one	has	missed	the	great	opportunity	of
evolving.	All	other	progress	is	false,	pseudo,	remember	it.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	in	the	right	direction.	It	really	releases	your	potential	--	and
man	has	infinite	potential.
Man	can	reach	to	the	ultimate	peaks	of	joy.
Wisdom	 does	 not	 come	 from	 knowledge,	 it	 comes	 from	 love.	 Wisdom	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 logic	 but	 it	 has	 everything	 to	 do	 with	 love.	 Knowledge
depends	on	logic	and	knowledge	can	give	you	a	false	notion	of	being,	because
knowledge	is	imitative.	You	can	repeat	beautiful	saying	of	Jesus,	 the	beatitude,
and	if	you	go	on	repeating	them	long	enough	you	will	start	believing,	you	will
auto-hypnotise	yourself	by	constant	repetition.	You	will	start	thinking,	as	if	you
know,	and	you	don't	know	at	all.
Jesus	 is	 talking	 from	 the	 heart	 and	 you	 are	 learning	 from	 the	 head	 --	 and	 the
difference	is	vast.	The	difference	is	almost	unbridgeable,	it	is	so	vast.
Knowledge	is	cheap,	easily	available.	One	can	just	go	on	sitting	in	a	library	and
go	on	collecting	knowledge.	Man	has	so	great	a	memory	that	it	is	said	a	single
man's	memory	system	can	contain	all	the	libraries	of	the	world.	No	computer	has
been	 yet	 evolved	 which	 can	 really	 compete	 with	man's	 memory	 system.	 It	 is
almost	unlimited	and	it	can	create	such	a	great	illusion	of	being	wise.
Wisdom	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	It	comes	through	love,	it	grows	in	the
heart,	it	is	a	heart	flower.	And	the	ways	of	the	heart	are	totally	different	from	the
ways	of	the	head.
Sannyas	is	a	search	for	wisdom.	I	am	not	interested	in	imparting	knowledge	to
you	 here.	 I	 am	 not	 a	 teacher.	 A	 teacher	 imparts	 knowledge,	 a	master	 imparts
being.	A	master	 does	 not	 each	 you,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 he	 helps	 you	 unlearn,	 he
helps	you	 to	unburden,	he	helps	you	 to	 come	 from	 the	head	 to	 the	heart.	And
once	you	are	 centred	 in	 the	heart	 your	 life	pulsates	with	 a	 totally	new	energy.
That	 energy	 is	 love.	 it	 is	 not	 that	 you	 become	more	 loving,	 you	 become	 love
itself.	It	is	not	a	question	of	being	in	a	love	relationship,	it	is	a	question	of	being
in	a	state	of	love.	One	is	constantly	in	a	state	of	love	--	waking,	sleeping,	with
people	or	alone,	with	people	or	with	rocks	--	it	makes	no	difference,	one	goes	on
pulsating,	radiating	love	energy.	It	becomes	one's	natural	perfume.	That	perfume
is	the	first	proof	of	god	and	then	more	and	more	proofs	go	on	coming.
There	is	no	other	proof	for	god	except	love.	Logic	is	impotent,	it	cannot	prove,	it
cannot	disprove.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	love,	hence	theology	is	the	most	stupid
idea.	It	means	logic	about	god,	theology.	There	is	no	logic	about	god.	There	have
been	lovers	of	god;	but	logicians	are	just	befooling	themselves	and	others.
If	a	logician	is	honest	and	sincere	he	is	bound	to	be	an	atheist.	He	has	to	be	an
atheist,	that	is	inevitable.
If	a	 logician	says	 that	he	 is	a	 theist	he	 is	dishonest;	hence	all	 theologicians	are
dishonest.	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan	--	 it	doesn't	matter	 to	what	sect	and
cult	they	belong.
Jesus	is	not	a	theologian,	he	is	a	lover	of	god.	Jalaluddin	is	not	a	logician,	he	is	a
lover	of	god.	 and	 these	 lovers	have	 really	proved	 the	 existence	of	god,	not	by
giving	 an	 argument	 but	 by	 their	 presence,	 by	 their	 very	 being,	 by	 their
transformed	existence,	by	their	luminous	life,	by	their	radiant	love.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006035
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS03
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Truth	 can't	 be	 reached	 by	 thinking.	 Thinking	 can	 only	 arrive	 at	 a	 theory,	 at	 a
hypothesis,	 it	 cannot	know	 the	 truth	 itself.	The	 truth	can	be	known	only	when
thinking	 ceases,	 when	 one	 becomes	 absolutely	 silent	 --	 in	 a	 state	 of	 utter
awareness,	 but	 of	 utter	 thoughtlessness	 too.	 That's	why	 very	 few	 people	 have
arrived	 at	 the	 ultimate	 truth.	 Many	 have	 strived,	 many	 have	 struggled,	 many
have	desired,	 but	 they	were	 all	working	 through	 the	mind.	The	mind	 can	 spin
and	weave	beautiful	fictions	but	it	cannot	give	you	that	which	is.	Mind	is	made
of	the	stuff	dreams	are	made	of.
Dreams	and	thoughts	are	not	different.	Dreams	are	pictorial	thoughts,	dreaming
is	 a	 primitive	 way	 of	 thinking.	 That's	 the	 way	 children	 think.	 That's	 why	 in
children's	books	you	have	 to	have	many	many	pictures,	 colourful	 illustrations,
because	 they	are	 less	 interested	 in	 the	 text	and	more	 interested	 in	 the	pictures,
Slowly	slowly	as	they	grow	up,	pictures	become	less	and	less,	by	the	time	they
reach	their	post-graduation	in	the	university	pictures	disappear;	now	they	are	not
needed.	They	have	moved	from	pictures	to	words.
Thinking	 is	 a	 more	 sophisticated	 way	 of	 dreaming,	 a	 more	 evolved	 way	 of
dreaming,	 more	 eccentric,	 more	 mathematical,	 more	 philosophical.	 But	 deep
down	it	 is	 the	same	process.	Whether	you	think	in	pictures	or	words	makes	no
difference.
There	are	ancient	languages	like	Chinese	which	are	pictograms;	they	don't	have
any	 alphabet.	 They	 are	 the	 most	 ancient	 languages,	 they	 must	 be	 the	 first
languages	ever	developed.	Still	they	carry	that	ancient	primitive	mind.
For	example,	I	have	heard	that	if	you	have	to	write	'war'	in	Chinese	you	have	to
make	a	pictogram:	a	roof	with	two	women	sitting	underneath	--	that	means	one
man	and	two	wives.	That	is	war,	when	one	is	enough	--	two	is	too	much!
Thinking	has	its	own	limitations,	and	the	greatest	limitation	is:	it	can	always	go
round	and	round	in	circles	but	it	can	never	reach	to	the	centre	of	things.	And	the
truth	is	that	which	is.	You	are	not	to	fabricate	it,	you	are	not	to	think	about	it.	It	is
already	there	--	you	have	just	 to	look	at	 it.	And	if	you	are	thinking	you	cannot
look,	 you	 are	 occupied	with	 it.	You	need	 an	unoccupied	 consciousness.	That's
the	whole	process	of	meditation,	becoming	an	unoccupied	consciousness	 --	no
dreams,	 no	 thoughts,	 just	 a	 silent	 awareness,	 nothing	 to	 hinder	 and	 disturb,
nothing	to	interpret,	interfere.	Then	you	see	that	which	is.	And	that	is	satyam,	the
ultimate	truth.
Andreas	 means	 literally	 courageous.	 Truth	 is	 only	 for	 the	 courageous.	 The
greatest	 courage	 is	 to	 drop	 your	 own	mind	 because	 that	 is	 the	 most	 precious
thing	we	think.	We	don't	know	anything	higher	than	that.
Our	 whole	 education	 teaches	 us	 to	 be	 more	 and	 more	 refined	 minds;	 it	 is	 a
process	of	refining	our	mental	processes.	We	devote	almost	one	third	of	our	life
to	 the	 universities	 and	 all	 that	 we	 do	 in	 that	 one	 third	 of	 our	 life	 --	 the	most
precious	time,	because	you	will	never	be	that	young	again.	you	will	never	be	that
fresh	 again,	 you	will	 never	 be	 that	 intelligent	 again,	 you	will	 never	 have	 that
much	energy,	strength	again...
The	most	precious	time	of	 life	 is	devoted	single-heartedly	to	a	simple	purpose,
single	purpose:	the	refinement	of	the	mind.	Then	one	day	when	somebody	says
'Drop	it,'	 it	seems	impossible.	We	have	acquired	it	through	such	hard	effort,	all
those	years	of	 training	and	 those	examinations	and	all	 the	nightmares	 that	one
goes	through	in	those	examinations.	Just	think	of	all	that.	And	then	you	come	to
a	master	 and	he	 says,	 'Drop	 it.'	He	 says,	 'It	 is	 all	 rubbish.	 It	 is	 just	 junk.'	 It	 is
junk!
The	whole	function	of	the	master	is	to	help	you	get	rid	of	your	own	mind.	Great
courage	is	needed	to	efface	all	 those	twenty-five	years	and	the	training	and	the
achievements,	and	all	your	degrees,	Ph.D's	and	D.Lit.'s.	Just	to	close	that	whole
chapter	 certainly	 great	 courage	 is	 needed.	 It	 is	 becoming	 ignorant	 again,	 it	 is
becoming	innocent	again.	Losing	that	grip	of	knowledge,	losing	all	that	you	have
learned	means	you	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
be	in	a	state	of	not-knowing	again.	But	 that's	what	 is	required	for	knowing	the
truth.	The	 state	of	not-knowing	 is	 the	basic	 requirement	 for	knowing	 the	 truth
because	only	the	innocent	ones	can	know	it;	 the	knowledgeable	ones	are	going
to	miss	it,
One	 thing	 more	 to	 remind	 you	 of	 --	 Andreas	 was	 the	 first	 disciple	 called	 by
Jesus.	It	may	have	been	just	a	coincidence	that	it	happened	that	the	man's	name
was	 Andreas,	 but	 not	 it	 has	 become	 significant.	 Such	 coincidences	 become
significant.	Now	 the	 significance	 is	 that	 only	 a	man	 like	Andreas,	 a	man	with
great	courage	can	be	called	by	a	master	like	Jesus	to	be	his	first	disciple,	because
courage	will	be	needed.
Andreas	never	looked	back.	He	did	not	even	ask,	'Where	are	you	leading	me?'	--
he	just	threw	his	net	into	the	lake.	He	was	a	fisherman.	It	was	early	morning,	the
sun	 was	 just	 rising	 on	 the	 horizon.	 Jesus	 came,	 put	 his	 hand	 on	 Andreas's
shoulders	 and	 Andreas	 looked	 back	 at	 him.	 There	 is	 a	 moment	 of	 silence,	 a
moment	of	communion,	a	moment	of	a	great	heart-to-heart	meeting.	Something
transpired.
Jesus	said,	'What	are	you	doing?	How	long	are	you	going	to	go	on	catching	fish?
Come	with	me.	 I	will	 teach	 you	how	 to	 catch	man.'	He	 threw	his	 net	without
uttering	a	single	word,	not	even	asking	'Who	are	you?	And	what	do	you	mean?'
He	 was	 so	 enchanted	 with	 the	 man	 and	 his	 presence	 that	 no	 question	 was
needed,	no	answer	was	needed.	He	had	looked	into	 those	two	beautiful	eyes	--
they	were	far	deeper	than	the	lake.
This	is	the	way	of	the	disciple,	not	to	ask	why.	But	this	certainly	needs	courage.
The	 man	 must	 have	 been	 courageous.	 The	 name	 may	 have	 been	 just	 a
coincidence	but	the	man	was	really	courageous.
Otherwise	one	thinks	a	thousand	and	one	times	before	following	such	a	madman
like	Jesus.
And	what	a	crazy	thing	he	said,	 'How	long	are,	you	going	to	catch	fish?	Come
with	me	and	I	will	teach	you	how	to	catch	men.'	And	in	fact	that	very	moment	he
taught	him	the	first	lesson	because	Jesus	has	caught	Andreas.	Andreas	followed
him	and	never	he	asked	anything	and	never	ha	looked	back.
Remember	 this	 beautiful	 incident.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful	 incidents	 in
Jesus'	life,	in	the	lives	of	his	disciples.
Bliss	 is	 possible	only	 through	great	 intelligence.	Misery	needs	no	 intelligence;
any	 stupid	 person	 is	 capable	 of	 being	miserable.	 That's	 why	 there	 are	 so	 any
miserable	people	in	the	world	--	because	there	are	so	many	stupid	people	in	the
world.
People	have	asked	me	again	and	again,	'Why	don't	we	see	many	blissful	people?'
For	the	simple	reason	that	very	few	people	allow	their	intelligence	to	function	in
their	 life.	 They	 live	 in	 stupidity.	 Stupidity	 pays	 in	 certain	 ways,	 it	 is	 a	 good
investment.
Intelligence	has	always	been	a	trouble.	If	you	are	intelligent	you	will	constantly
be	in	trouble	because	you	will	be	surrounded	by	unintelligent	people,	there	will
be	no	communication	between	you	and	them.	And	they	are	in	the	majority	--	you
will	 be	 all	 alone.	They	 can	 crush	 you,	 they	 can	 kill	 you.	They	 can	 force	 their
ideas	 upon	 you,	 they	 can	manage	 to	 torture	 you	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	ways.
They	don't	allow	individuality.
The	more	the	crowd	wants	you	to	be	part	of	the	crowd.	It	wants	you	to	surrender
your	intelligence	to	the	crowd.
Whatsoever	 the	crowd	believes	 in	 --	Communism	or	Christianity,	Hinduism	or
Mohammedanism	 --	 it	wants	 you,	 to	 follow	 that.	 It	wants	 you	 simply	 to	 be	 a
believer	 --	 and	 belief	 is	 one	 of	 the	 poisons	 that	 kills	 intelligence.	 The	 crowd
wants	you	to	become	a	yea-sayer	 to	all	kinds	of	nonsense,	superstitions,	 rotten
ideas	 which	 have	 no	 meaning,	 no	 significance,	 which	 are	 so	 ridiculous	 and
absurd	that	any	person	who	thinks	twice	will	immediately	see	the	point,	what	he
is	believing	in.
For	example,	Christians	go	on	believing	that	Jesus	is	born	out	of	a	virgin	mother.
Now	it	is	sheer	nonsense,	there	cannot	be	anything	more	absurd.	But	millions	of
people	go	on	believing	it.	In	fact	if	you	take	their	belief	in	the	virginity	of	Mary,
the	whole	of	their	Christianity	topples	down,	It	is	based	on	that	foolish	idea.
Millions	of	people	go	on	believing	 in	 such	 things	 that	 if	 you	 just	 ponder	over
them	 a	 little	 bit	 you	will	 laugh,	 how	 is	 it	 possible	 that	 so	many	 people	 go	 on
believing	in	them?	It	is	because	of	fear	--	the	fear	of	the	crowd,	the	rear	of	the
violence	that	the	crowd	can	do	to	you.
The	crowd	wants	you	to	conform.	That's	the	root	cause	of	peoples'	 intelligence
being	destroyed.	And	when	intelligence	is	destroyed	you	cannot	know	what	bliss
is.
Every	child	is	born	with	intelligence	and	almost	every	child	is	poisoned.	Before
he	can	even	understand	what	he	has	brought	with	him	he	is	paralysed,	crippled
under	 beautiful	 names.	 They	may	 call	 it	 baptism,	 circumcision.	Now	 they	 are
utterly	 foolish	 ideas.	 Mm?	 A	 fool	 is	 just	 sprinkling	 water	 on	 you	 and	 you
become	a	Christian.	The	child	is	crying	because	the	water	is	cold	and	the	child
cannot	understand	what	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
happening.	But	he	has	become	Christian	without	his	consent.,	without	his	even
knowing	what	is	happening	to	him.
Now	he	will	be	conditioned	and	all	kinds	of	things	will	be	forced	upon	him.	By
the	 time	 he	 is	 a	 grown-up	 man	 he	 has	 lost	 all	 his	 intelligence	 on	 the	 way
somewhere,	he	has	become	stupid.	And	he	is	going	to	remain	miserable.
The	 religions	 exploit	 your	 misery,	 first	 they	 make	 you	 stupid	 --	 that	 creates
misery,	 then	 they	 exploit	 your	 misery.	 They	 say,	 'If	 you	 are	 miserable	 that	 is
because	 you	don't	 believe	 in	 god,	 because	 you	have	 sinned	 in	 your	 past	 lives,
because	 you	 are	 not	 virtuous.	 If	 you	 are	 miserable	 then	 confess,	 if	 you	 are
miserable	then	pray.	If	you	are	miserable	then	come	to	the	church	regularly,	then
become	more	religious,	become	a	monk	or	a	nun,	so	that	you	can	be	forgiven	by
god.	And	again	these	things	have	certain	appeal	because	people	want	to	get	rid
of	misery	so	they	are	ready	to	follow	any	idea.
But	 a	 stupid	 person	 cannot	 understand	 what	 he	 is	 doing,	 why	 he	 is	 doing	 it,
where	 he	 is	 going.	 The	 first	 thing	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 release	 of	 his	 imprisoned
intelligence,	then	bliss	is	very	simple;	it	is	a	by-product.
Once	you	know	your	intelligence	you	immediately	start	feeling	a	showering	of
bliss.
Eckhard	 is	made	 of	 two	words.	 'Eck'	means	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 sword	 and	 'hard'
comes	from	hearty,	which	means	victorious	spirit.
Intelligence	is	certainly	like	the	edge,	the	sharp	edge	of	the	sword.	It	is	a	sword;
it	cuts	out	all	 the	problems	of	 life	 like	a	sword,	 in	a	single	blow.	It	 is	 the	only
way	to	attain	victory,	to	become	victorious.
And	 Eckhard	 is	 also	 beautiful	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 man	 Germany	 has
produced	who	can	be	called	a	Buddha	--	the	only	man.	Germany	has	produced
many	other	geniuses,	great	men	of	letters,	great	mathematicians,	great	scholars,
great	 scientists,	 great	 poets,	 great	 painters	 and	 many	 great	 musicians,	 great
dancers	--	geniuses	in	all	fields.	But	as	far	as	enlightened	people	are	concerned,
Eckhard	seems	to	be	the	only	one.	That	too	makes	the	name	significant.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006045
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 becoming	 totally	 conscious.	 Enlightenment	 is	 another
name	for	total	consciousness.	It	simply	means	becoming	full	of	light.
Light	represents	awareness,	darkness	represents	unawareness.	Ordinarily	we	are
a	dark	night	--	inside	all	is	dark	and	it	has	been	so	for	many	lives;	the	sun	has	not
risen	there	at	all.	Outside	there	is	much	light,	inside	there	is	only	darkness.
That's	why	very	 few	people	 go	 inwards.	They	 are	 afraid	 of	 darkness	 and	 they
don't	see	the	point	of	why	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
they	should	go	into	this	darkness,	into	the	dark	tunnel	of	one's	being.	For	what?
They	 listen	 to	 the	 Buddhas	 saying	 'Go	 within,'	 'Know	 thyself,'	 but	 they	 feel
puzzled,	confused,	because	whenever	 they	 look	within	they	don't	find	anything
like	what	the	Buddhas	say.
The	Buddhas	say	'Inside	you	will	find	light,'	but	they	don't	find	it	there,	instead
they	find	darkness.	The	Buddhas	say	'Inside	you	will	find	immortality,'	but	they
don't	find	anything	of	it,	they	simply	find	themselves	surrounded	by	death,	inside
there	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 life	 but	 only	 death.	 In	 darkness	 they	 can	 feel	 death
becoming	almost	tangible.	The	Buddhas	say	'Inside	you	will	find	bliss,'	but	they
don't	find	any	bliss,	they	find	only	suffering	--	nightmares	and	nightmares.	There
seems	to	be	no	silence,	all	is	turmoil,	chaos.
That's	 why	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 in	 all	 ages,	 in	 all	 the	 countries,	 people	 have
decided	 that	 'the	 Buddhas	 belonged	 to	 a	 different	 category:	 maybe	 they	 have
found	 light	 inside	because	 they	are	not	human	beings,	 they	are	divine.	But	we
are	human	beings,	ordinary	human	beings.'
They	cannot	say	they	are	wrong.	It	 is	 impossible	to	deny	those	people	because
what	they	say	you	can	feel	in	their	life.	People	have	seen	Jesus,	Gautam	Buddha,
Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu,	and	they	have	seen	their	bliss	and	their	luminousness	and
they	have	heard	their	song...	It	is	impossible	to	deny	it.	They	have	seen	Jesus	full
of	compassion	and	love	even	for	the	crowd.	Even	for	all	of	those	who	are	killing
him	he	has	only	a	prayer	--	a	prayer	that	they	should	all	be	forgiven	because	they
know	not	what	 they	 are	doing,	 they	 are	unconscious	people.	So	what	 they	 are
doing	 is	almost	expected,	 it	 is	not	unexpected.	They	cannot	do	otherwise,	 they
are	not	at	fault.
The	 last	 words	 of	 Jesus	 are	 a	 prayer	 to	 god	 that	 all	 these	 people	 should	 be
forgiven,	they	should	not	be	punished	because	it	is	a	unfair	to	punish	people	who
are	 behaving	 in	 a	 state	 of	 drunkenness,	 unconsciousness,	 they	 can't	 be	 held
responsible	for	what	they	are	doing.
So	it	is	impossible	to	deny	the	Buddhas.	Then	the	only	logical	way	is	to	create	a
category,	a	separate	category	for	such	people.	Hence	Christians	say	Jesus	is	the
only	begotten	son	of	god.	We	are	ordinary	human	beings,	he	is	not	an	ordinary
human	being;	he	comes	from	above,	he	is	superhuman.	and	the	same	is	the	case
with	all	the	religions:	Mohammed	is	a	prophet	of	god,	the	only	prophet	of	god.
He	is	exceptional,	extraordinary,	hence	we	cannot	hope	 to	achieve	 the	same	as
him.	 He	 carried	 different	 qualities	 of	 being.	 We	 are	 just	 seeds	 and	 he	 is	 a
rosebud.	How	can	we	grow	roses?	--	we	are	just	weeds.	We	can	bow	down	to	the
roses,	we	can	respect	the	roses,	but	we	cannot	expect	that	we	can	become	roses.
This	 is	 just	 a	 logical	 way	 to	 console	 oneself	 that	 this	 is	 natural.	 This	 is	 not
natural.	 This	 whole	 division	 is	 absolutely	 ridiculous.	 They	 belong	 to	 us,	 they
have	 been	 as	 ordinary	 as	 we	 are.	 One	 day	 they	 were	 ordinary,	 one	 day	 they
became	 extraordinary.	 Something	 happened	 --	 that	 something	 can	 happen	 to
everyone.	 They	were	 ordinary	when	 they	were	 just	 seeds.	When	 they	 became
aware	of	 their	potential,	when	 they	started	 transforming	 their	potential	 into	 the
actual	 they	 became	 luminous	 beings,	 beings	 who	 appeared	 to	 come	 from	 the
beyond.	They	became	a	bridge	between	this	world	and	that,	between	this	shore
and	 the	 farther	 shore.	Everyone	 is	 entitled	 to	 the	 same,	 everyone	 is	 carrying	 a
seed	of	Buddhahood	in	himself.
So	never	for	a	moment	think	that	there	are	categories.	Yes,	there	is	a	difference
because	they	are	awakened,	but	the	difference	is	only	of	that	between	somebody
who	 is	asleep	and	somebody	who	 is	awakened.	But	 the	one	who	 is	asleep	can
become	 awakened.	 The	 very	 phenomenon	 of	 sleep	 proves	 that	 he	 has	 the
capacity	to	come	out	of	it.	Unless	one	can	become	awake,	one	cannot	fall	asleep
either,	They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
Entering	 into	 sannyas	 means	 recognising	 the	 potential	 in	 you,	 pouring	 your
attention,	your	efforts,	in	search	of	your	inner	treasure.	Right	now	you	will	find
darkness,	 but	 if	 you	 go	 on	 searching,	 soon	 you	will	 stumble	 upon	 an	 infinite
source	of	light.
First	you	will	find	only	just	thoughts,	imagination,	dreams,	memories,	but	if	you
go	on	digging	 they	 all	 disappear.	Ultimately	only	pure	 consciousness	 remains,
and	in	that	moment	one	becomes	a	Bodhichitta	--
the	 consciousness	 of	 enlightenment.	 And	 in	 that	 very	 moment	 bliss	 starts
showering	on	you.
If	we	are	unaware	we	have	fallen	into	something	unnatural.	It	is	as	if	somebody
is	standing	on	his	head:	it	is	unnatural.	One	can	stand	on	one's	head,	but	the	head
is	not	supposed	 to	be	for	 that.	And	that's	how	people	are	--	upside-down,	 their
whole	life	is	upside-down.	They	are	doing	things	they	should	not	be	doing	and
they	are	not	doing	things	that	they	should	be	doing.	They	are	interested	in	things
which	 are	 futile,	 meaningless,	 and	 they	 are	 absolutely	 uninterested	 in	 things
which	are	really	significant.
People	live	accidentally.	They	don't	have	any	sense	of	direction,	they	don't	have
an	inner	discipline	for	growing,	they	don't	have	a	certain	target.	They	simply	go
on,	not	knowing	why.	Maybe	just	because	they	are	restless	they	go	on	doing	this
and	 that.	Restlessness	 needs	 some	kind	 of	 occupation,	 any	 kind	 of	 occupation
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
will	do.	But	 any	kind	of	occupation	 is	not	going	 to	help	you	 to	grow.	Growth
needs	a	very	selective	life.
Life	is	short,	time	is	very	short,	but	people	are	so	stupid	that	they	will	be	playing
cards	and	chess	and	 if	you	ask	 them	"What	are	you	doing?",	 they	say	 they	are
killing	time	--	as	if	they	have	too	much	time	with	them.	Time	is	killing	you!
Each	moment	you	are	less	and	less	and	less.	Each	moment	you	have	died	a	little
more,	each	moment	death	is	coming	closer.	Time	is	not	something	to	be	killed,
time	 is	 something	 to	 be	 used.	 Time	 is	 a	 great	 opportunity	 --	 it	 has	 not	 to	 be
wasted.	But	 if	you	look	at	people	you	will	be	surprised:	ninety-nine	point	nine
per	 cent	 of	 people	 are	wasting	 their	 time	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 have
never	given	a	 second	 thought	 to	what	 they	are	doing	and	why.	Others	may	be
doing	 it	 so	 they	 are	 just	 imitating.	 People	 are	 almost	 living	 the	 life	 of
sleepwalkers.
I	have	heard:	two	drunkards	were	sitting	in	a	car	and	the	car	was	going	as	far	as
it	could.	One	drunkard	said	to	the	other,	'Now	from	the	next	cross-road	you	have
to	turn	left	and	then	you	have	to	turn	right.'	And	the	other	said,	'Why	do	you	go
on	telling	these	things	to	me	--	you	are	driving!'
But	nobody	is	conscious,	nobody	knows	who	is	driving,	who	is	not	driving	and
why	 people	 are	 going	 in	 a	 certain	 direction.	 Why	 is	 everybody	 interested	 in
money?	 --	 because	 all	 others	 are	 interested.	 Why	 is	 everybody	 interested	 in
fame?	--	because	all	other	fools	are	interested.	And	you	have	to	be	in	tune	with
the	fools	because	you	are	surrounded	by	them.
An	intelligent	person	moves	consciously	moment	to	moment.	Whatsoever	he	is
doing	he	is	doing	for	a	certain	reason.	He	has	an	intrinsic	value	system.	He	lives
according	to	a	certain	inner	discipline	--	not	imposed	by	others	but	by	his	own
awareness.
In	the	beginning	it	is	groping,	but	soon	one	becomes	more	and	more	clear.	Soon
one	goes	astray	less	and	less.	Soon	things	settle	and	one	starts	following	the	right
path	 towards	 inner	growth.	And	 then	one	 thing	becomes	clear,	 that	 as	you	are
moving	closer	to	your	nature,	as	things	are	less	and	less	chaotic	in	your	life	and
they	 start	 becoming	harmonious,	 you	will	 feel	more	 and	more	bliss,	more	 and
more	peace.	That	is	a	clear-cut	indication	that	you	are	on	the	right	track.
If	you	are	feeling	miserable	in	life	that	means	you	are	going	astray.	Misery	is	an
indicator,	so	is	bliss.
They	 are	 real	 indicators:	 if	 people	 are	 miserable	 that	 simply	 shows	 they	 are
upside-down;	if	they	are	blissful	that	(few	words	missing)	into	an	organic	unity.
They	are	no	more	a	crowd.	They	have	created	a	certain	 integration.	They	now
have	 a	 centre,	 they	 are	 rooted,	 grounded...	 And	 then	 bliss	 starts	 happening,
naturally,	 simply.	 It	does	not	come	from	anywhere	else,	 it	 simply	arises	out	of
your	own	inner	being	in	an	accord.
It	is	just	like	a	beautiful	car's	engine	humming.	An	alert	driver	knows	exactly...	if
something	goes	wrong	he	immediately	becomes	aware	because	the	engine	is	no
more	humming	the	same	way;	some	disturbing	note	is	there.	Nobody	else	sitting
int	 he	 car	will	 be	 aware,	 but	 the	 driver	will	 become	 aware,	 immediately	 alert:
something	 is	 wrong,	 something	 has	 gone	 astray,	 something	 is	 not	 functioning
well,	something	is	not	in	tune.
And	 that's	 how	 a	 conscious	 person	 is:	 he	 immediately	 comes	 to	 know	 that
something	has	gone	wrong	and	he	puts	it	right.
Ordinarily	 people	 are	 not	 at	 all	 aware.	 They	 go	 on	 thinking	 that	 others	 are
making	 them	miserable.	That	 is	 a	 strategy	of	 the	mind	 to	 remain	unconscious;
then	what	can	they	do?	It	is	the	wife	who	makes	you	miserable,	it	is	the	children
who	make	you	miserable,	it	is	the	neighbours	who	make	you	miserable.
Jesus	has	two	statements.	One	is:	Love	your	enemy	as	yourself,	and	the	second:
Love	your	neighbour	as	yourself.	 I	 have	always	been	puzzled	about	 these	 two
statements.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	make	 two	 statements	 because	 neighbours	 and
enemies	are	the	same	people!	Just	to	say	 'Love	your	neighbours	as	yourself,'	 is
enough;	enemies	are	included	in	the	neighbours.
But	 we	 go	 on	 throwing	 the	 responsibility	 onto	 anybody.	 If	 we	 cannot	 find
anybody	then	fate,	kismet,	karma,	god,	palmistry,	astrology.	People	have	found
so	many	 beautiful	 excuses.	 They	will	 go	 to	 Tarot	 card	 readers.	 They	will	 not
look	within,	they	will	ask	some	foolish	person	to	read	Tarot	cards	and	tell	them
what	is	wrong	with	them.	Can	you	think	of	a	more	ridiculous	things?	They	will
consult	the	I-Ching.	These	books	are	written	for	stupid	people.
The	simple	fact	is:	if	you	are	miserable,	you	are	responsible,	nobody	else.	And	if
you	are	blissful	it	is	a	reward	of	your	being	alert,	aware,	watchful.
Bliss	if	a	gift,	a	gift	of	nature...	for	those	who	live	consciously.	It	can	be	given
only	 to	 those	 people	 who	 live	 consciously	 because	 only	 they	 will	 be	 able	 to
appreciate	it,	only	they	will	be	able	to	understand	it.	It	cannot	be	given	to	fools	--
they	will	throw	it	away.	You	can't	give	precious	diamonds	to	children.	They	will
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	make	any	distinction	between	the	precious	diamonds	and	coloured	stones.	To
understand	a	precious	stone	you	need	a	jeweller.
As	 one	 becomes	more	 and	more	 conscious,	 one	 starts	 understanding	 the	 great
gift	of	bliss	that	nature	is	always	keeping	ready	for	you.	Whenever	you	are	ripe,
whenever	you	are	ready,	it	is	yours.
Anand	 is	 also	 the	 name	 of	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha's
disciples,	one	of	 the	most	 intimate	and	closest	disciple.	For	 forty-two	years	he
served	Buddha	like	a	shadow.	Nobody	has	served	any	master	in	that	way	for	so
long.	He	served	Buddha	in	such	a	silent	way,	as	if	he	were	absolutely	absent.
Nobody	 would	 feel	 his	 presence:	 he	 would	 come	 silently,	 he	 would	 move
silently,	he	would	do	the	work	silently.	But	by	serving	Buddha,	 just	be	serving
him,	he	became	more	and	more	silent	and	peaceful.	He	became	more	and	more
graceful.	Just	by	being	 in	 that	close	 intimate	relationship,	 remaining	constantly
under	 his	 energy,	 in	 his	 Buddhafield,	 he	 became	 imbued	 with	 his	 spirit.	 He
completely	forgot	about	himself,	so	much	so	that	he	even	forgot	that	he	had	to
become	enlightened.
Buddha	 used	 to	 remind	 him	 again	 and	 again,	 'Anand,	 it	 is	 good	 to	 serve	 the
master,	 I	 am	 immensely	 pleased	 with	 you,	 but	 don't	 forget	 that	 you	 have	 to
become	 enlightened.'	 Anand	 would	 laugh	 and	 he	 would	 say,	 'To	 serve	 you	 is
enough.	Who	cares	about	enlightenment?'
Anand	became	enlightened	only	when	Buddha	died,	and	he	became	enlightened
within	twenty-four	hours.	His	sacrifice	was	immense.	Such	self	--	sacrifice	is	so
rare	 that	 in	 fact	 there	 is	 no	 other	 record	 in	 the	whole	 history	 of	 humanity.	 To
sacrifice	even	one's	enlightenment....
In	 fact,	 many	 times	 anand	 had	 said	 to	 Buddha,	 'Please	 don't	 insist	 on	 my
enlightenment,	because	when	you	order	something	I	have	 to	do	it	--	and	this	is
one	thing	that	I	cannot	do	for	the	simple	reason	that	if	I	become	enlightened	you
will	 send	 me	 away.	 You	 will	 tell	 me	 "Now	 go	 to	 the	 masses,	 help	 others	 to
become	awakened,	spread	my	message."	So	let	me	remain	ignorant,	but	let	me
be	with	you.	Enlightenment	can	happen	later	on	--	what	is	the	hurry?	I	am	fully
contented	just	to	be	with	you.
Many	 times	 he	 had	 seen	 that	whenever	 a	 disciple	 became	 enlightened	 he	was
sent	 away	 because	 now	 he	 was	 ready	 to	 carry	 the	 message,	 to	 become	 the
vehicle.	Sariputra	was	 sent	 away,	Modgalayayan	was	 sent	 away,	Manjusri	was
sent	 away,	 and	 so	 many	 other	 disciples.	 The	 moment	 they	 would	 become
enlightened,	Buddha	would	say,	"Now,	you	are	ready	--	go	to	the	farthest	corner
of	the	world	to	help	people	who	are	fast	asleep.	Wake	them	up!"
Every	night	before	anand	would	go	to	sleep	he	would	pray,	and	he	would	pray	in
such	a	way	 that	Buddha	could	hear	 it,	because	 they	were	sleeping	 in	 the	same
room.	He	would	pray	 to	Buddha:	 "My	 lord,	 help	me	 to	 remain	unenlightened,
because	I	don't	want	to	go	away	from	you."
And	when	just	before	Buddha	died	he	declared	"Today	is	my	last	day,"	Anand
started	crying	and	weeping.	Buddha	said,	"Don't	cry	and	weep,	Anand.	Only	my
death	can	make	you	enlightened,	otherwise	you	will	never	become	enlightened.
When	I	am	gone	there	will	be	nothing	left	for	you	t	cling	to.	I	am	grateful	you
have	served	me	so	long."
And	it	happened	that	way,	within	twenty-four	hours	Anand	became	enlightened.
The	moment	Buddha	died,	Anand	closed	his	eyes	and	didn't	open	his	eyes	until
he	 became	 enlightened.	 People	 asked	 him,	 "Why	 are	 you	 not	 opening	 your
eyes?"	He	said,	"I	have	seen	the	most	beautiful	man	of	the	world	--	now	what	is
there	 left	 for	me	 to	see?	Now	I	can	afford	enlightenment.	My	only	attachment
was	with	Buddha	--	that	too	is	broken."	He	said,	"It	may	be	that	he	has	died	only
for	me,	to	help	me	become	enlightened."
This	is	a	beautiful	story	for	master	and	disciple.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006055
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Prayer	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 language,	with	words,	with	 thoughts,	with	mind
itself.	It	is	a	state	of	no-mind.	What	goes	on	in	the	name	of	prayer	is	not	prayer,
it	 is	 just	 a	 pseudo	 ritual.	 But	 all	 religions	 are	 caught	 in	 rituals	 because	 the
ordinary	unconscious	human	being	does	not	 really	want	 to	be	 transformed.	He
wants	everything,	but	without	any	change	 in	his	being.	Because	of	 this	 foolish
desire	 he	 gets	 caught	 by	 the	 priests,	 he	 is	 being	 exploited.	 He	 himself	 is
responsible.
If	he	is	really	interested	in	going	through	a	change	no	priest	can	exploit	him,	no
ritual	can	satisfy	him,	and	all	that	will	just	look	like	rubbish.	Then	he	will	seek	a
real	master	--	not	a	teacher	who	has	some	philosophy	to	teach,	but	a	master	who
has	attained,	who	has	tasted	of	truth.	Then	he	will	not	be	interested	in	superficial
things.	His	 interest	will	 be	 in	 getting	 totally	 transformed,	whatsoever	 the	 cost.
Even	if	he	has	to	die,	he	will	be	ready	to	die	for	a	new	birth.	In	fact	nobody	can
be	born	again	unless	they	are	ready	to	die.
The	seed	has	to	die	before	it	can	become	a	sprout.
Before	you	can	attain	 to	consciousness	you	will	have	 to	die	as	an	unconscious
being.	And	 the	whole	 process	 of	 this	 death	 and	 resurrection	 is	 the	 process	 of
shifting	your	energy	from	mind	to	no-mind.
Shunya	means	a	state	of	no-mind,	no-thought,	no-feeling,	just	pure	silence,	utter
silence.	But	in	that	very	silence	you	come	into	communion	with	the	divine,	with
the	whole.	That	is	prayer.
To	be	in	communion	with	the	whole	is	prayer.	Nothing	is	said,	nothing	is	heard,
but	everything	is	understood.	It	is	not	a	communication.	It	is	not	that	you	have	to
kneel	down	and	you	have	to	say	certain	words,	certain	cliches	to	god	almighty.
Mm?	--	there	is	no	god	as	a	person.	There	is	godliness	--	the	whole	existence	is
full	 of	 the	 stuff	 called	 godliness	 --	 but	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 hear	 what	 you	 are
saying.	If	you	stop	saying	everything,	if	not	only	words	on	your	lips	but	words	in
your	mind	 disappear,	 you	 fall	 out	 of	 language	 absolutely,	 out	 of	 thought.	You
remain	 alert	 and	aware,	watchful,	witnessing.	 In	 that	witnessing	 the	 individual
melts	into	the	universal.	That	melting	is	prayer,	that	reunion	is	prayer.
Satys	means	in	truth	and	Christiane	means	a	Christian...	but	in	truth,	not	just	an
ordinary	Christian	who	is	Christian	by	an	accident,	the	accident	of	birth.	One	can
be	 born	 in	 a	 Hindu	 family	 and	 will	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 one	 can	 be	 born	 in	 a
Mohammedan	 family	 and	 will	 be	 a	 Mohammedan,	 or	 one	 can	 be	 born	 in	 a
Christian	family	and	will	be	a	Christian.	But	these	are	accidental	things.
Christ	was	born	a	Jew	but	he	never	belonged	to	 that	 tradition.	A	real	Christian
can	never	belong	to	any	tradition,	not	even	the	tradition	called	Christian.
A	real	Christian	has	 to	be	a	 rebel,	 just	 like	Jesus.	A	real	Christian	cannot	be	a
blind	follower,	a	believer.
He	is	a	seeker	and	he	is	ready	to	risk	all.	Jesus	risked	all,	he	risked	his	very	life.
He	died	on	the	cross	when	he	was	only	thirty-three.	He	was	too	young	--	but	his
intensity	for	truth,	his	love	for	truth,	his	passion	was	tremendous.	He	was	ready
to	die	but	he	was	not	ready	to	compromise.
Hence	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 right	 when	 he	 says	 that	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last
Christian	died	on	the	cross.
And	 that	 happened	 two	 thousand	 years	 ago.	 Since	 then	 there	 have	 been	 only
believers,	followers.	These	people	are	not	Christians.	If	they	are	in	a	Communist
country	 they	will	be	Communists.	The	whole	of	Russia	 is	Christian	before	 the
revolution,	and	after	the	revolution,	within	ten	years,	the	whole	country	--	and	it
is	a	vast	country	--	turned	atheistic.	What	kind	of	Christians	were	these	people?
And	 they	were	 really	 the	most	 orthodox	Christians	 in	 the	whole	world,	 Their
church	 was	 called	 the	 Orthodox	 church,	 it	 was	 the	 most	 orthodox	 church
amongst	all	the	churches.	But	it	simply	disappeared,	withered	away,	because	the
people	who	were	believing	in	it	had	not	risked	anything	to	find	it.	It	was	just	a
given	 thing.	 Their	 parents	 had	 conditioned	 them.	 In	 fact	 they	 felt	 good	when
they	became	free	of	all	conditioning.
A	 true	 Christian	 cannot	 be	 a	 Catholic	 or	 a	 Protestant,	 In	 fact	 a	 true	 Christian
cannot	be	a	Christian	in	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ordinary	sense	at	all.	A	true	Christian	can	only	be	a	Christ.	For	that	one	has	to	go
through	a	certain	inner	crucifixion.	One	has	to	die	as	a	mind	and	one	has	to	be
reborn	as	a	consciousness.	And	that	is	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.
Knowledge	 is	 a	 conclusion,	 knowing	 is	 a	 process.	 knowledge	 has	 the	 false
attitude	that	one	has	arrived,	one	already	knows.	Knowing	is	a	pilgrimage,	one	is
always	learning,	moving,	progressing,	evolving.
Knowledge	means	now	there	is	nothing	left	for	you	to	know,	you	have	come	to	a
full	stop.	It	creates	a	kind	of	stagnancy.	knowing	is	dynamic,	it	is	riverlike,	it	is
always	flowing.
A	true	seeker	is	not	after	knowledge,	he	is	after	knowing.	Ho	wants	to	learn	the
very	process	of	learning.
He	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 arriving	 at	 conclusions,	 he	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 goals	 in
fact,	 he	 is	more	 interested	 in	 the	 journey	 itself.	 The	 journey	 is	 also	 beautiful,
each	moment	of	it	is	so	delicious	--	who	cares	about	the	goal?
The	very	idea	of	a	goal	is	created	by	the	lazy	mind	so	that	you	can	rest;	once	it	is
achieved	you	--	are	finished.	So	one	tries	to	find	a	short-cut.	The	people	who	are
interested	 in	 goals	 are	 always	 interested	 in	 short-cuts.	 naturally.	Why	 go	 by	 a
long	route?	The	people	who	are	interested	in	goals	are	prone	to	believe	as	soon
as	possible	so	that	they	can	be	finished	with	it.	They	became	more	interested	in
scriptures	than	in	truth	itself.	They	became	more	and	more	possessed	by	words
because	words	give	a	false	idea	of	knowledge,	they	make	you	knowledgeable	.
The	people	who	are	lazy	cannot	be	true	seekers.	A	true	seeker	has	no	desire,	no
ambition	to	have	a	goal	.
He	is	interested	in	the	moment,	this	moment,	now	and	here.	His	whole	being	is
involved	 in	 living.	 And	 if	 you	 go	 deeper	 into	 any	 experience	 you	 will	 be
surprised:	life	does	not	consist	of	nouns,	it	consists	of	verbs.
But	man's	mind	 is	 so	 cunning	 that	 it	 has	 become	more	 and	more	 attached	 to
nouns.	It	changes	every	verb	into	a	noun.
For	example,	there	is	nothing	in	life	as	love.	There	is	loving	but	there	is	no	love.
In	 fact	 there	 is	 no	 life	 as	 such	 but	 only	 loving.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about
everything	--	the	whole	of	life,	the	whole	of	existence	consists	of	verbs.
Knowledge	 comes	 through	 memory	 and	 knowing	 comes	 through	 awareness.
Knowledge	is	mechanical;	hence	a	computer	can	be	very	knowledgeable,	more
knowledgeable	 than	 human	 minds	 because	 it	 has	 a	 memory	 system.	 You	 can
simply	go	on	feeding;	it	and	it	will	accumulate	all	kinds	of	knowledge	and	you
can	retrieve	any	kind	of	knowledge	whenever	you	want.
Our	brain	is	nothing	but	a	biocomputer.	It	has	taken	millions	of	years	for	nature
to	evolve	the	brain.
What	we	 have	 done	 by	 creating	 the	 computer	 is	 that	we	 have	 simply	made	 a
brain	 outside	 the	 body,	 a	 mechanical	 brain.	 Of	 course,	 computers	 will	 go	 on
growing	more	and	more,	 they	will	become	bigger	and	bigger,	and	 they	will	be
capable	of	doing	miracles.	Even	great	geniuses	like	Albert	Einstein	will	look	like
pygmies	beside	computers	very	soon,	for	the	simple	reason:	How	much	can	you
remember?	--	the	computer	can	be	made	to	remember	any	amount	of	knowledge.
Memory	 is	a	mechanical	phenomenon	but	awareness	 is	non-mechanical,	hence
no	 computer	 can	 ever	 learn	 to	 be	 aware,	 no	 computer	 can	 ever	 be	meditative.
That	is	impossible.	The	computer	can	have	knowledge	but	it	cannot	be	in	a	state
of	knowing.	You	have	to	feed	it	dead	knowledge,	it	can	accumulate.
And	 that's	what	our	 so-called	 scholars,	pundits,	have	been	doing	 for	 centuries.
We	have	respected	them	very	much,	and	they	nothing	but	computers.	Machines
have	been	worshipped,	and	we	are	still	doing	that,	our	universities	are	factories
where	we	create	machines	out	of	men.
My	work	here	consists	in	doing	just	the	opposite,	in	de-automatising	you,	in	de-
conditioning	 you,	 in	 helping	 you	 to	 become	 aware.	When	 you	 become	 amore
aware	you	are	more	open	 to	 existence,	 to	 all	 that	 is	 happening	 all	 around.	All
your	windows	and	doors	are	open;	existence	can	pass	through	you.	You	can	be
more	and	more	sensitive	as	you	become	more	and	more	aware.
But	a	man	of	awareness	never	accumulates	it.	He	goes	on	refining	his	process	of
knowing;	there	is	no	limit	to	it.	He	goes	on	sharpening	his	sword.	But	he	is	not
interested	in	information,	his	interest	is	transformation.	And	through	awareness,
through	knowing,	transformation	happens.	You	become	a	new	man.
Through	 knowledge	 you	 remain	 the	 same	 old	 person	 with	 more	 knowledge
added	 to	 you.	 But	 you	 are	 not	 new,	 you	 are	 the	 same	 old	 person,	 with	 new
acquirements,	that's	all.	With	awareness	you	are	new,	and	you	are	new	in	such	a
way	 that	you	know	how	 to	go	on	 renewing	yourself	every	moment	so	you	are
never	old,	never	dull,	never	insensitive.
That's	 the	way	 of	 sannyas,	 awareness,	meditation,	 knowing,	 loving,	 These	 are
the	key	words,	And	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	not	 just	 to	be	remembered,	you	have	 to	experience	 them,	 then	only	do	you
know.	Otherwise	you	can	 remember	 them,	you	can	 start	 repeating	 them	--	 and
again	 you	 have	 missed	 the	 point,	 again	 you	 have	 transformed	 knowing	 into
knowledge.	Beware	of	that	pitfall.	Almost	everybody	falls	into	it.
Love	 is	 bliss,	 but	 very	 few	 people	 in	 the	world	 are	 loving	 people,	 that's	 why
there	is	so	much	misery.
Everybody	wants	to	be	loving,	everybody	wants	to	be	loved,	but	nobody	learns
the	art	of	 loving.	It	 is	a	great	art.	You	are	born	only	with	 the	potential,	but	 the
potential	has	to	be	transformed	into	the	actual,	it	has	to	be	made	into	reality.	And
the	first	requirement	is	to	become	more	alert,	People	are	unconscious,	hence	they
want	love,	they	want	to	love,	but	because	they	are	unconscious	whatsoever	they
do	 is	 just	 the	 opposite.	 They	 destroy	 their	 own	 love,	 they	 destroy	 all	 the
possibilities	of	 love,	and	 then	 they	are	miserable	 .	And	they	blame	fate,	god	--
they	blame	everything,	except	themselves.
The	alert	person	will	always	blame	himself	because	he	will	become	aware	of	the
fact	 that	 his	 desires	 and	his	 actions	 are	 opposite	 to	 each	other,	 they	 contradict
each	other.
Once	 you	 become	 more	 and	 more	 watchful	 of	 your	 inner	 workings	 things
become	simple.	Then	a	few	things	have	to	be	dropped.	One	has	not	to	be	jealous
if	one	wants	to	be	loving.	It	becomes	so	clear	that	there	is	no	question	about	it;
one	can	simply	see	the	point	that	if	you	are	jealous,	love	is	impossible.	Jealousy
is	 bound	 to	 create	misery.	 Jealousy	 is	 part	 of	 ego,	 the	 shadow	of	 the	 ego,	 the
shadow	of	a	shadow	--	and	love	needs	egolessness.	They	can't	go	together,	they
can't	co-exist.
If	one	chooses	ego	knowingly,	the	one	drops	the	whole	project	of	love	and	once
accepts	the	misery.	But	then	there	is	no	question	of	being	miserable	about	your
misery.	That	is	your	doing,	this	is	your	choice.
There	is	no	point	in	making	any	fuss	about	it.	Either	you	drop	the	ego	and	all	its
companions	--	 jealousy,	domination,	possessiveness	 --	and	 then	 love	flows	and
there	is	bliss	--	or,	you	cling	to	the	ego.	Then	love	disappears,	bliss	disappears,
god	disappears,	and	your	life	is	nothing	but	hell.
The	basic	requirement	is	to	be	aware	--	that's	what	you	have	to	learn	here.	The
art	of	awareness	becomes	the	art	of	love,	becomes	the	art	of	bliss.	It	is	the	whole
of	religion.
Bliss	happens	in	a	profound	silence.	Bliss	is	not	a	not	a	state	of	excitement,	it	is
not	 feverish.	 Pleasure	 is	 feverish,	 happiness	 too	 --	 not	 as	much	 as	 pleasure,	 a
little	milder,	but	it	too	has	its	own	excitement.	Bliss	is	absolutely	cool	--	not	cold
but	cool,	utterly	silent.	And	 to	 receive	 it	one	has	 to	be	very	silent,	because	we
can	be	in	communion	only	with	that	which	we	are	creating	in	ourselves.
A	madman	 can	 be	 in	 communication	 only	with	 other	madmen.	A	Buddha	 can
commune	only	with	other	Buddhas;	otherwise	 the	gap	 is	 so	big,	unbridgeable.
You	 can	 commune	 with	 bliss	 only	 when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 total	 silent	 state,	 when
everything	in	you	has	become	still,	as	if	all	has	disappeared,	as	if	there	is	nobody
inside.	When	your	 temple	 is	absolutely	empty	bliss	comes	dancing.	It	 fills	you
and	it	fulfils	you.
Being	here	 learn	 to	 be	more	 and	more	 silent,	 learn	 to	 be	more	 and	more	 still.
Enjoy	silence	and	stillness.
Those	 are	 the	 basic	 preparations	 for	 the	 ultimate	 guest.	 When	 you	 are	 in	 a
profound	silence	you	are	capable	of	becoming	the	host	to	god.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006065
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
People	 take	 life	 for	 granted,	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 gratitude	 in	 them.	And	without
gratitude	 there	 is	 no	 growth,	 without	 gratitude	 there	 is	 no	 religion,	 without
gratitude	there	is	no	prayer.	Religion	begins	in	gratitude	and	ends	in	gratitude.	It
is	a	journey	from	gratitude	to	gratitude.	In	the	beginning	it	is	a	seed,	in	the	end	it
becomes	a	flower.	But	the	most	fundamental	fact	is	that	life	should	not	be	taken
for	granted.	We	have	not	earned	 it,	 it	 is	a	gift.	 It	 is	 such	a	simple	and	obvious
fact.	Maybe	because	it	is	so	obvious	people	tend	to	forget	about	it.
Religion	does	not	begin	in	the	belief	that	god	exists;	it	begins	in	this	awareness,
that	life	is	a	gift.	We	don't	know	from	whom	--	that	has	to	be	enquired	into	--	but
one	thing	is	certain,	that	it	is	a	gift.	Some	unknown	force,	some	mysterious	force
has	 given	 you	 the	 most	 valuable	 thing.	 And	 once	 this	 feeling	 becomes
crystallised	 in	 you	 then	 the	 enquiry	 starts.	 God	 is	 not	 very	 far	 away	 from
gratitude.
Every	child	is	born	with	great	brilliance,	with	great	intelligence,	but	we	destroy
his	 intelligence.	Our	whole	 structure	 is	 such	 that	we	 can	 allow	 only	mediocre
people	 to	 survive.	 Our	 society,	 our	 state,	 our	 church,	 are	 all	 afraid	 of	 the
intelligent	 person	 because	 intelligence	 is	 basically	 rebellious.	 So	 at	 the	 very
beginning	 we	 start	 paralysing	 the	 intelligence	 of	 the	 child.	 By	 the	 time	 he	 is
grown-up	he	will	be	mediocre
--	 educated,	 maybe	 well-educated,	 with	 university	 degrees,	 with	 a	 Ph.D.	 and
D.Lit.,	 but	 deep	 down	 no	 more	 rebellious,	 no	 more	 intelligent.	 Now	 he	 will
function	like	a	computer	--	and	society	needs	computers,	machines,	slaves.
We	have	 not	 been	 able	 yet	 to	 create	 a	 society	which	 can	 allow	 intelligence	 to
grow	 to	 its	peaks.	We	are	 still	 living	under	a	primitive	 fear,	we	are	 still	 living
with	a	thousand	and	one	taboos	and	superstitions.
Meditation	means	getting	rid	of	all	this	nonsense	that	society	imposes	upon	you,
meditation	means	 freedom	from	all	 structures	 imposed	by	others	on	you..	And
then	again	 the	mirror	 is	 clean,	 again	you	can	 reflect	 that	which	 is.	And	god	 is
another	name	for	that	which	is	--	nothing	else.	Once	the	layers	of	dust	that	have
been	 put	 upon	 your	mirror	 are	 removed,	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 reflecting	 reality.
And	 once	 reality	 is	 reflected	 as	 it	 is	 you	 start	 responding	 to	 it,	 you	 become
responsible	for	the	first	time.
Meditation	 brings	 peace	 naturally.	 Peace	 has	 not	 to	 be	 cultivated,	 it	 is	 a	 by-
product.	If	you	go	deep	into	meditation	peace	comes	of	its	own	accord	and	then
it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.	But	if	you	cultivate	peace	then	it	is	simply	a	facade.
Deep	down	you	are	boiling,	deep	down	you	are	ready	to	be	violent	to	others	or
to	yourself.	Deep	down	you	are	constantly	ready	to	destroy.	Deep	down	you	are
destructive,	you	are	bound	to	be	destructive.
If	 you	 cannot	 be	 destructive	 to	 others	 because	 of	 the	 facade	 that	 you	 have
created,	 then	you	will	be	destructive	 to	yourself.	Either	you	will	be	a	sadist	or
you	 will	 be	 a	 masochist,	 either	 you	 will	 be	 an	 Adolf	 Hitler	 or	 you	 will	 be	 a
Mahatma	Gandhi.	 But	 both	 are	 pathological,	 both	 are	 destructive	 and	 violent.
One	destroys	others,	the	other	destroys	himself.	And	for	thousands	of	years	we
have	worshipped	people	who	are	suicidal,	self-destructive.	We	have	called	them
great	saints,	mahatmas,	sages	--	and	that	is	sheer	nonsense.
They	are	not	sane	people.
And	why	did	they	become	so	masochistic,	self-destructive?	The	simple	reason	is
they	created	a	false	peace	around	themselves.	Now	they	cannot	show	their	real
faces	 outside.	 They	 cannot	 be	 angry	 to	 others	 so	 they	 become	 angry	 with
themselves.	Either	this	is	going	to	happen	or	they	become	hypocrites:	in	public
they	show	one	face,	in	private	they	have	another	face.
The	political	leaders	are	all	hypocrites.	In	public	you	will	see	them	smiling	and
looking	so	graceful,	and	in	their	private	lives	they	are	simply	ugly	and	they	can
do	any	harm	to	anybody;	they	create	all	the	wars	in	the	world.	They	have	double
personalities,	 they	are	 split	 people.	They	 say	one	 thing	and	 they	do	 something
else,	and	of	course	 they	have	to	continuously	hide,	so	deep	down	they	become
deceptive,	dishonest.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 drop	 that	 whole	 idea	 of	 becoming	 peaceful	 through
cultivation.	 Peace	 has	 to	 come	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	 You	 have	 to	 go	 deep	 into
meditation,	you	have	to	become	more	and	more	alert,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
aware,	watchful	--	that's	going	to	be	your	work.	And	if	it	succeeds	peace	will	be
coming.	 Peace	 becomes	 a	 criterion.	 If	 you	 achieve	 peace	 through	 your
meditation	 it	 shows	 that	 meditation	 is	 moving	 in	 the	 right	 direction.	 If	 you
achieve	peace	that	means	you	are	doing	something	worthwhile;	if	you	don't,	then
you	have	to	look	again.	Somewhere	you	have	missed	the	point,	you	have	gone
astray.	In	the	name	of	meditation	you	are	doing	something	else.
So	peace	is	a	by-product,	but	it	can	also	function	as	a	criterion	of	whether	you
are	moving	in	the	right	direction	or	not.	If	you	are	moving	in	the	right	direction
you	are	bound	to	be	peaceful	because	you	are	coming	closer	and	closer	to	god.
That	very	closeness	to	god	becomes	peace.	And	when	you	have	entered	into	god
you	become	absolutely	peaceful.
Meditation	is	human,	it	is	your	work.	Peace	is	divine,	it	is	god's	gift.	And	god	is
very	 fair:	 if	 you	 are	 going	 into	 meditation	 earnestly,	 sincerely,	 you	 will	 be
rewarded.	There	 is	no	question	 about	 it,	 it	 has	 always	happened	 that	way.	But
this	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	 peace	 is	 god's	 gift.	We	 cannot	 do	 anything
about	it	directly	but	we	can	create	the	right	situation	in	which	it	descends	from
above.
It	is	like	flowers:	you	cannot	do	anything	directly	about	the	flowers	but	you	can
prepare	the	ground,	you	can	sow	the	seeds,	you	can	help	the	plant	to	grow,	you
can	sow	the	seeds,	you	can	help	the	plant	to	grow,	and	wait.	In	the	right	season,
at	the	right	moment	the	flowers	will	come;	your	effort	will	be	rewarded.	But	you
cannot	pull	flowers	out	of	a	seed,	neither	can	you	pull	flowers	out	of	a	tree;	you
have	 to	 allow	 them	 to	 happen.	 They	 come	 from	 some	 unknown	 source,	 some
mysterious	source,	but	they	always	come.	One	has	to	be	patient	enough.	One	has
simply	to	do	one's	work	and	trust	that	whenever	the	time	is	ripe	the	flowers	will
come.
They	have	always	come.	They	came	 to	Jesus,	 to	Buddha,	 to	Mohammed;	 they
are	going	to	come	to	you	too.	God	has	no	favorites,	he	is	neither	for	somebody
nor	against	somebody.	God	simply	means	the	ultimate	law	of	nature.	Just	fulfill
your	task	and	nature	immediately	responds.
Knowledge	can	be	acquired,	wisdom	cannot	be	acquired.	There	are	many	ways
to	acquire	knowledge	.
you	 can	 acquire	 it	 through	 books,	 through	 experienced	 people,	 through
universities,	 through	 teachers,	 It	 is	 a	 question	 of	 collecting	 information	 and
memorising	it,	But	it	is	not	possible	to	acquire	wisdom	at	all,	neither	from	books
nor	from	universities	nor	from	teachers.
Wisdom	is	an	inner	growth	--	it	does	not	come	from	the	outside.	For	knowledge
you	have	to	look	for	outside	sources,	from	where	to	get	it.	For	wisdom	you	have
to	 look	 within,	 to	 dig	 within.	 When	 you	 have	 reached	 your	 very	 centre	 it
explodes.	It	is	already	there,	just	waiting	for	you	to	come.
Meditation	 is	 only	 a	method	 of	 digging	withinwards.	Meditation	 is	 absolutely
scientific.	It	does	not	require	belief,	it	does	not	require	that	you	be	a	Christian	or
a	Mohammedan	or	a	Hindu;	it	does	not	even	require	that	you	be	a	theist.	You	can
be	 an	 atheist,	 you	 can	 be	 a	 Communist,	 you	 can	 be	 anybody.	 It	 does	 not	 ask
anything	 to	 change	 from	 the	 beginning.	 It	 simply	 asks	 you	 to	 be	 open,	 to
enquire,	to	be	ready	to	go	d	n.
Only	that	readiness	is	needed,	and	an	open	mind,	unprejudiced.	And	then	it	is	a
very	simple	process.
It	can	be	reduced	to	a	very	simple	maxim:	to	watch	your	thoughts	is	meditation,
because	 through	 your	 watching	 your	 thoughts,	 they	 start	 disappearing,
evaporating.	 When	 your	 watchfulness	 becomes	 really	 intense,	 thoughts
disappear,	 and	 in	 that	 thoughtless	 consciousness	 you	 hit	 upon	 your	 innermost
core...	and	the	explosion.
That	explosion	is	wisdom.	That	explosion	makes	one	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha.	And
my	whole	effort	here	 is	not	 to	make	you	a	Christian	but	a	Christ,	not	 to	make
you	 a	 Buddhist	 but	 a	 Buddha.	 Why	 become	 a	 Christian?	 --	 because	 that	 is
knowledge.	 Why	 not	 become	 Christ?	 --	 that	 is	 wisdom.	 Why	 become	 a
Buddhist?	--	that	is	knowledge.	Become	a	Buddha	--	that	is	wisdom.	Why	settle
for	 secondary	 things?	 Why	 not	 go	 to	 the	 primary	 source	 which	 is	 within
yourself?	Why	settle	for	borrowed	things,	old	and	rotten?	Why	not	go	in	and	get
in	tune	with	truth	freshly,	here	and	now.
Moksha	means	ultimate	freedom,	freedom	from	all	limitations	--	the	limitations
of	 the	 body	 and	 the	 limitations	 of	 the	 mind.	 Your	 consciousness	 has	 no
limitations,	it	is	unbounded,	but	we	have	become	identified	with	the	body,	which
is	limited.	Because	of	that	identification,	think	this	is	all	that	we	are.	We	are	far
more,	immensely	more.	And	we	have	become	identified	with	the	mind	too.
These	are	small	things	and	we	are	as	vast	as	the	sky.	To	experience	that	vastness
is	 moksha.	 That	 is	 real	 freedom.	 And	 the	 only	 way	 is	 meditation,	 because
meditation	destroys	all	 identifications.	 It	makes	you	aware	 that	you	are	not	 the
body,	you	are	not	the	mind	I	you	are	neither	this	nor	that.	Finally	you	are	only
the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
witness.
When	 this	 pure	 witness	 is	 experienced	 you	 have	 reached	 the	 ultimate	 peak.
There	is	nothing	beyond	it.
At	that	peak	you	know	freedom,	you	know	bliss,	you	know	love	--	you	know	all
that	is	worth	knowing.	And	not	only	do	you	know	it,	you	are	it.
The	message	of	sannyas	is	love.	That's	the	first	and	the	most	important	thing	to
understand	about	sannyas.	I	am	not	much	interested	in	god,	in	heaven,	but	I	am
absolutely	 interested	 in	 love,	 because	 the	 person	 who	 knows	 what	 love	 is,	 is
bound	to	know	what	god	is,	but	not	vice	versa.	One	may	go	on	believing	in	god	-
-	 one	 will	 not	 come	 to	 know	 what	 love	 is.	 In	 fact	 the	 believers	 in	 god	 have
created	 so	much	hatred	on	 the	 earth,	 nobody	 else	 has	 done	 so	much	mischief.
Christians,	 Mohammedans,	 Hindus	 --	 they	 are	 all	 participants	 in	 a	 great
conspiracy.
They	 talk	 about	 god,	 about	 peace,	 about	 love	 and	 all	 that	 they	 do	 is	 make
bloodshed	and	nothing	else.
And	for	centuries	that	has	been	going	on.	In	fact	no	sinners	have	done	so	much
sin	as	your	so-called	saints.
They	may	not	have	done	 it	directly	but	 they	have	provoked	people	 to	do	such
things.
Your	 bad	 people	 have	 been	 so	 bad;	 your	 so-called	 good	 people	 have	 really
proved	more	dangerous	culprits.	or	course	 they	 talk	about	beautiful	 things,	but
you	have	to	look	behind	the	beautiful	things.	They	talk	about	god,	but	then	they
have	to	fight	for	god,	then	they	have	to	kill	people	for	god.	Both	the	parties	are
fighting	for	god	and	both	the	parties	are	killing	each	other	for	god.
Now	when	man	becomes	a	little	more	alert	and	aware	this	whole	thing	will	seem
so	ridiculous,	so	primitive,	and	so	stupid.	And	this	has	been	done	in	the	name	of
religion.
Hence	my	 emphasis	 is	 on	 love,	 because	 if	 love	 happens	 then	 everything	 else
happens.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 about	 it.	 A	 loving	 person	 cannot	 avoid
encountering	god	for	long.	Even	if	he	wants	to	escape	he	cannot	escape;	he	will
find	god,	he	is	bound	to	find	him,	it	is	inevitable.
But	to	know	love	needs	one	thing,	and	that	is	readiness	to	dissolve	your	ego.	If
you	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 dissolve	 yourself	 you	 can	 never	 know	what	 love	 is.	 The
dewdrop	 slipping	 into	 the	 ocean	 knows	 what	 love	 is.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 way	 of
sannyas:	be	 a	dewdrop	and	 slip	 into	 the	ocean.	Forget	 that	you	are	 somebody,
from	this	moment	you	are	a	nobody,	a	non-entity,	a	nothingness.
In	 that	nothingness	 the	very	kingdom	of	god	happens.	That	nothingness	opens
the	door	to	all	the	mysteries	of	life.	It	makes	you	aware	of	the	infinite	treasures
of	 your	 being.	Suddenly	 you	 are	 in	 tune	with	 existence.	 It	 is	 the	 ego	 that	 is	 a
jarring	note.	It	never	allows	you	to	commune	with	existence,	it	always	hinders.	It
is	not	a	bridge,	it	is	a	wall	--	it	has	to	be	dropped.
The	only	thing	to	be	renounced	in	my	sannyas	is	the	ego.	And	the	only	thing	to
be	experienced	in	my	sannyas	is	love.	And	they	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin:
dissolve	the	ego	and	you	are	capable,	immediately	capable,	of	entering	into	the
world	of	love.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006075
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	being	consecrated	to	god.	One	cannot	achieve	it	directly
--	the	way	to	bliss	is	via	god.	One	has	to	surrender	to	god.	In	that	very	surrender
bliss	happens.
Misery	is	separation	from	god,	bliss	is	reunion.	And	by	god	I	don't	mean	some
person;	by	god	I	simply	mean	the	whole,	the	existence,	all	that	is.
Man	lives	in	isolation.	He	tries	to	create	a	subtle	wall	around	himself	so	that	he
can	feel	that	he	is	somebody	special.	That	wall,	that	subtle	invisible	wall	is	what
is	called	the	ego,	and	it	is	the	root	cause	of	misery.
It	is	as	if	a	tree	is	trying	to	separate	itself	from	the	earth,	from	the	sky,	from	the
sun,	 from	 the	 air,	 from	 the	 stars,	 from	 the	 moon	 --	 from	 everything	 that
surrounds	it.	The	tree	will	start	dying	because	it	has	to	be	nourished	by	the	earth,
it	has	to	remain	rooted	in	the	earth,	it	has	to	be	nourished	by	the	sun	rays,	It	has
to	understand	that	it	is	not	separate	and	it	cannot	be	separate,	that	it	is	absolutely
intrinsically	part	of	the	organic	unity	of	existence.
But	no	tree	is	as	foolish	as	man	is,	no	animal	either	is	as	foolish	as	man	is.	Man
is	 the	only	 idiotic	animal	on	 the	earth,	but	 that	 idiocy	can	also	be	 transformed
into	a	great	blessing,	because	only	man	can	understand	what	 is	 separation	and
what	is	union.
The	trees,	the	birds,	the	animals,	are	one	with	existence	--	but	unaware.	They	are
blissful	but	they	have	no	idea	of	what	bliss	is,	they	are	not	conscious	of	it.	And	a
bliss	which	is	unconscious	is	not	of	much	value.
You	may	 have	 a	 treasure,	 but	 if	 you	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 it	 what	 is	 the	 point	 of
having	it?
This	distant	call	of	the	cuckoo	is	beautiful	to	us,	but	not	to	the	cuckoo	itself.	The
cuckoo	 has	 no	 idea	 of	 what	 beauty	 is,	 what	 music	 is,	 what	 poetry	 is.	 It	 is
unaware	--	blissful,	but	unaware.
Man	is	not	aware	but	miserable.	But	this	misery	can	be	dropped.	Awareness	has
to	 be	 increased	 a	 little	 more	 and	 man	 has	 to	 drop	 it	 consciously	 and	 has	 to
achieve	a	 reunion	 --	 I	 call	 it	 a	 reunion.	The	 tree	and	 the	cuckoo	and	 the	other
birds	and	the	animals	are	in	a	state	of	union.	Man	has	to	reclaim	it;	he	has	lost
contact	with	it.
Only	man	can	be	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.	Hence	that	foolishness	is	not	just	a	curse,
it	can	also	be	a	blessing.	It	all	depends	on	us,	on	what	we	do	about	our	misery.
We	can	go	on	nursing	it	and	we	can	go	on	creating	more	hell	for	ourselves.	We
can	drop	it	and	can	move	towards	the	whole	for	the	ultimate	merger.
We	can	melt	ourselves	 into	 the	ocean	of	 existence.	And	 then	bliss	 arises.	And
when	 man	 becomes	 blissful,	 his	 bliss	 has	 tremendous	 value.	 The	 cuckoo	 is
blissful	but	its	bliss	has	no	value.
To	be	consecrated	to	god	means	to	be	ready	to	merge	and	melt	into	the	whole	--
then	bliss	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Sannyas	is	an	offering	to	god	out	of	love,	not	out	of	fear,	The	so-called	religious
person	is	religious	because	he	is	afraid.	His	whole	religiousness	is	rooted	in	fear,
is	oriented	in	fear;	hence	his	religiousness	is	not	true,	authentic	religiousness,	it
is	pseudo,	He	creates	the	idea	of	god	out	of	fear,	He	believes	in	god,	he	knows
nothing	of	god.	Only	ignorant	people	believe,	the	knowing	ones	need	not	believe
because	they	know.
If	you	know,	there	is	no	need	to	believe	or	disbelieve.	If	you	don't	know	then	the
question	arises	of	whether	 to	believe	or	not	 to	believe,	So	 ignorant	people	 are
divided	into	two	camps:	the	believers	and	the	disbelievers.	But	both	are	ignorant,
They	 may	 be	 Catholics	 or	 communists,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference.	 The	 knowers
simply	know	 they	have	 experienced,	 they	have	 tasted,	But	 that	 needs	 a	 totally
different	kind	of	orientation.
Your	religion	has	to	be	not	out	of	fear,	but	out	of	love.	Don't	be	afraid	of	hell	--
there	 is	 no	 hell,	 there	 never	 has	 been.	 It	 is	 a	 fiction	 created	 by	 the	 priests	 to
exploit	humanity,	and	they	have	exploited	humanity	for	centuries.	And	there	 is
no	heaven	either.	It	is	the	other	side	of	hell;	the	other	side	of	the	fiction,	That	is
to	exploit	your	greed,
Greed	and	fear	are	not	different	phenomena	but	two	sides	of	the	same	coin;	the
fearful	person	is	always	greedy,	the	greedy	person	is	always	fearful.	In	fact	they
are	not	 two	energies	at	all	but	 two	poles	of	 the	same	energy.	Just	 like	negative
and	positive	poles	of	electricity,	inseparably	together.	There	is	no	heaven	either.
Yes,	there	is	a	certain	kind	of	hell	and	heaven,	but	that	is	psychological,	within
you.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	my	place	somewhere,	below	the	earth	or	above,	in
the	sky.	It	is	not	geographical.
Drop	the	whole	idea	of	heaven	and	hell	--	religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	all	that
nonsense.	Drop	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
idea	of	god	as	a	person.	To	call	god	 the	 father	 is	 simply	 to	provoke	your	 fear,
because	each	child	has	been	afraid	of	 the	 father	 from	 the	very	beginning.	And
that	 fear	 remains	 for	 your	whole	 life.	 Even	 if	 you	 go	 through	 years	 of	 primal
therapy,	it	remains	and	lingers	somewhere,	it	becomes	so	ingrained	that	it	goes	to
your	bones,	 to	your	very	marrow.	To	call	god	 'the	 father'	 is	 simply	 to	 create	 a
childish	fear	in	you	and	a	childish	dependence	in	you.
There	is	no	god	as	a	person	and	there	is	no	super-father	in	heaven.	God	simply
means	the	whole	existence,	it	is	another	name	for	life.
Love	life,	be	devoted	to	life,	live	life	as	totally	as	possible.	That's	what	I	mean
by	offering.	offer	yourself	to	life	totally	without	holding	anything	back	and	then
great	bliss	arises,	a	bliss	that	has	a	beginning	but	not	end.
The	only	 revolution	worth	 calling	 revolution	 happens	 through	meditation.	The
political	 revolutions	 are	 not	 revolutions	 but	 at	 the	 most,	 reforms,	 and	 in	 fact
almost	useless	reforms	because	the	man	remains	the	same,	you	only	change	the
structure.	If	you	change	the	structure	and	the	man	remains	the	same,	nothing	in
fact	changes.	Even	 in	 the	new	structure	he	will	behave	 in	 the	old	ways,	 in	 the
same	old	ways.
For	 example,	 in	Russia,	 the	 revolution,	 the	 political	 revolution	 happened.	 The
Capitalists	disappeared	and	the	old	division	of	the	poor	and	the	rich	disappeared.
A	new	division	has	arisen,	the	people	who	are	in	power	and	the	people	who	are
not	in	power.	It	is	the	same	game.	Now	to	be	a	member	of	the	Communist	party
is	to	be	powerful,	and	to	be	in	the	government	is	to	be	rich,	far	richer	than	the
old	kind	of	capitalists.
They	were	not	as	powerful	and	not	so	rich	either.	In	fact	no	czar	in	Russia	has
been	 as	 powerful	 as	 Josef	 Stalin.	 The	 structure	 has	 changed,	 but	 because	 the
mind	is	the	same	the	mind	creates	its	old	games	again.
It	 is	 as	 if	 we	 take	 a	 whole	 load	 of	 people	 to	 the	 moon:	 everything	 will	 be
different.	The	scenery	will	be	different,	there	will	be	no	trees,	no	mountains,	no
rivers.	But	 these	people	will	continue	 to	do	 the	same	 things	on	 the	moon.	The
husband	and	the	wife	will	go	on	fighting	in	the	same	old	way.	It	will	not	make
any	difference	that	they	are	on	the	moon,	that	now	it	is	not	right	to	fight	in	the
old	ways.	The	thief	will	remain	a	thief	there.	He	will	go	on	stealing	things	from
people.	 Everything	will	 continue	 in	 the	 same	way,	 although	 everything	 on	 the
outside	is	different.
It	is	only	through	meditation	that	your	inner	world	changes	because	meditation
means	going	beyond	the	mind,	getting	rid	of	the	mind.	And	mind	contains	all	the
games	 and	 the	 numbers	 and	 the	 trips.	 Once	 the	mind	 is	 dropped,	 you	 have	 a
totally	 new	 perspective,	 a	 new	 vision,	 a	 new	way	 of	 seeing	 and	 being.	 That's
what	sannyas	is	all	about:	it	is	a	revolution	through	meditation.
The	whole	 art	 of	 being	 blissful	 is	 the	 art	 of	 remaining	 relaxed,	 relaxed	 in	 all
kinds	of	activities	of	life.	I	am	not	teaching	my	people	to	renounce	life	but	I	am
certainly	teaching	them	to	renounce	tensions,	tense	states	of	mind.	Go	on	doing
the	same	thing	that	you	have	been	doing	but	now	do	it	relaxedly.	Action	is	not
important,	how	you	do	it	is	important.
In	the	old	days,	for	centuries	the	idea	has	persisted,	has	been	very	dominant,	that
you	have	 to	drop	out	of	 the	world,	 that	you	have	 to	 leave	 the	world	and	move
into	a	monastery	or	into	the	Himalayas	and	go	to	Tibet
--	only	then	can	you	realise	god.	That	is	sheer	stupidity,	That	is	not	the	way	to
realise	 god,	 because	 god	 is	 as	 much	 here	 in	 the	 marketplace	 as	 he	 is	 in	 the
mountains.	If	you	cannot	find	him	here	you	will	not	find	him	in	the	mountains
either.
So	 the	 real	 thing	 is	 to	 live	 in	a	 relaxed	way,	 to	act	 relaxedly.	Go	on	doing	 the
same	 things	 but	 with	 a	 new	 quality.	 with	 a	 new	 grace,	 a	 new	 beauty,	 a	 new
silence,	a	new	meditativeness,	new	awareness	and	with	no	tensions	in	the	mind.
Don't	be	an	achiever,	don't	be	ambitious.	Just	live	in	the	moment,	and	live	in	the
moment	as	if	this	is	the	first	and	the	last	moment.	So	live	totally,	intensely.	yet
relaxed,	utterly	relaxed.	And	then	bliss	will	follow	you	like	a	shadow.
All	my	meditations	here	are	to	help	you	in	some	way	or	other	to	become	more
and	more	relaxed.
Relaxation	is	the	key,	the	golden	key	that	opens	the	door	to	god.
God	is	the	full-stop.	There	is	nothing	higher	than	that.	God	is	the	ultimate	goal.
If	a	person	makes	god	only	one	of	the	items	on	his	shopping	list	he	will	never	be
able	 to	 taste	 that	 experience.	God	has	 to	 be	 your	 only	 goal,	 all	 other	 items	 or
your	 shopping	 list	 have	 to	 disappear.	 Then	 all	 your	 desires	 become	 one	 deep
intense	longing	for	god.	Then	it	happens	instantly.
We	 are	 divided	 because	 of	 our	 desires.	One	 desire	 is	 pulling	 you	 towards	 the
north,	 the	 other	 is	 pulling	 you	 towards	 the	 south.	 There	 are	 thousands	 of
fragments.	They	have	created	a	crowd	in	you,	they	don't	allow	you	to	be	a	single
individual.	 They	 are	 very	 noisy	 and	 they	 are	 continuously	 fighting	 with	 each
other,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
trying	to	dominate;	each	desire	wants	to	dominate.	There	is	a	constant	civil	war.
Millions	 of	 people	 become	 interested	 in	 god	 but	 that	 is	 only	 one	 of	 their
interests,	that's	why	they	miss.
God	has	 to	be	 the	only	interest,	 then	you	cannot	miss.	And	god	contains	all:	 it
contains	 bliss,	 it	 contains	 peace,	 it	 contains	 truth,	 it	 contains	 consciousness,	 it
contains	 love,	 it	 contains	 compassion.	 It	 contains	 all	 that	 is	 worth	 having,	 so
there	is	no	need	for	any	other	desire.	It	covers	all	that	is	beautiful	and	valuable,
and	all	that	is	left	out	is	worthless.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Deva	Viramo	--	let	it	become	the	meaning	of
your	life	too.	And	now	the	time	has	come	for	you	to	make	a	concentrated	effort
to	put	all	your	desires	 into	one	stream,	not	 into	many	events,	otherwise	energy
gets	dissipated.	Just	pour	yourself	into	one	prayer.	Let	your	whole	being	become
just	one	 thirst,	one	 longing;	 the	 longing	for	god.	And	whenever	 it	 is	 total,	 it	 is
immediately	fulfilled,	not	even	a	single	moment	is	lost.	If	you	have	to	wait	that
simply	means	your	longing	is	still	divided.
So	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	now	make	it	a	point	that	it	is	all	a	means	towards
god.	Eating,	walking,	sleeping	--	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	all	the	arrows	have
to	 point	 towards	 god.	 Not	 even	 a	 single	 fragment	 of	 your	 being	 should	 be
pointing	towards	something	else.	And	the	day	it	happens,	the	moment	it	happens
--
that	your	total	being	is	athirst,	afire	--	that	very	moment...	the	miracle.
Yes,	it	can	only	be	called	the	miracle.	It	transforms	you.	It	takes	you	from	time
to	eternity.	 It	 takes	you	beyond	 the	body	and	 the	mind	 to	your	ultimate	home.
Then	there	is	no	coming	back.	One	is	dissolved	into	the	universal	--	and	that	is
our	real	home.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006085
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
There	is	no	heaven	and	no	hell	outside.	Both	are	within,	and	we	create	them.	If
we	live	unconsciously	we	go	on	creating	misery	for	ourselves.	But	the	strategy
of	 the	 unconscious	mind	 is	 that	 it	 always	 throws	 the	 responsibility	 on	 others;
that's	its	protection.	Then	it	goes	on	working	from	behind.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 take	 the	 total	 responsibility	 upon	 himself.	 It	 is	 hard	 in	 the
beginning	 because	 our	 habit	 is	 to	 throw	 it	 on	 others.	 It	 seems	 convenient	 and
comfortable	that	others	are	making	you	miserable.
But	nobody	can	make	you	miserable;	 it	 is	 always	your	own	work.	Maybe	you
are	not	aware	of	how	you	are	doing	it	you	may	be	completely	oblivious	of	it;	you
may	never	have	looked	into	the	mechanism	of	the	mind	which	creates	misery,
That's	 the	 first	 thing	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 do:	 he	 has	 to	 become	more	 and	more
alert	 about	 the	 functioning	of	his	mind.	Then	 the	 truth	 strikes	home,	 'I	 am	 the
creator	of	my	misery,	of	my	hell.'	And	immediately	another	insight	opens	up:	'If
it	is	so,	then	I	can	also	create	my	own	paradise.'	The	energy	that	becomes	misery
is	the	same	energy	that	becomes	bliss.	When	your	energy	is	not	flowing	in	tune
with	existence	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
creates	misery.	When	 it	 is	attuned	with	existence	 it	 creates	bliss.	Hence	 this	 is
my	definition	of	paradise:	to	be	in	deep	harmony	with	existence,	to	be	so	totally
in	tune	with	existence	that	you	disappear,	that	you	are	no	more	a	separate	entity,
that	you	are	 just	nothingness	and	 the	existence	 is	allowed	 to	 flow	 through	you
without	 any	 interference	 on	 your	 part.	 Then	 great	 joy	 arises.	 Then	 you	 are	 as
blissful	as	the	flowers	and	the	stars.	Then	you	are	as	silent	and	as	full	of	songs	as
existence	itself.
This	is	what	I	mean	by	god-realisation.
Meditation	is	not	something	external,	it	is	not	something	that	has	to	be	added	to
you	 from	 the	 outside.	 It	 is	 not	 extrinsic,	 it	 is	 intrinsic.	 It	 is	 your	 own	 nature
functioning	 in	deep	 inner	harmony.	One	can	 function	as	 a	 chaos,	one	 can	also
function	as	a	cosmos.	One	can	function	as	a	crowd,	as	a	marketplace	--	full	of
noise.
One	 can	 function	 as	 tremendously	 beautiful	 music,	 as	 a	 silent	 shrine	 in	 the
mountains.	It	all	depends	on	how	you	enter	into	your	being.
If	 you	 enter	 through	 the	 gate	 of	 the	 mind	 you	 will	 find	 only	 chaos.	 Mind
functions	like	a	prism,	it	divides.	A	ray	passing	through	a	prism	becomes	divided
into	seven	colours.	Before	entering	the	prism	it	was	white,	it	was	pure	white.	As
it	enters	and	passes	through	the	prism	it	is	no	more	one,	it	is	seven.	That's	how
the	rainbow	is	created	and	that's	how	the	whole	world	is	created.	It	is	the	prism
of	the	mind	that	creates	the	illusion	of	many-ness,	otherwise	we	are	all	one.	But
if	you	enter	through	the	prism	you	cannot	find	ss	anywhere.
There	 is	 another	 door,	 a	 secret	 door.	 That	 door	 is	 called	meditation.	 It	 simply
means	a	state	of	no-mind.
You	can	enter	 into	your	being	 from	a	 state	of	no-mind.	Mind	means	 thoughts,
no-mind	means	thoughtless	consciousness.	Mind	means	many	things;	memories,
imagination,	desires,	dreams,	projections,	past	and	the	future.	No-mind	means	no
desire,	 no	 imagination,	 no	dreams,	 no	projection	 ,	 no	 past,	 no	 future,	 only	 the
present,	just	the	present,	just	this	moment,	here	and	now.	And	then	suddenly,	you
will	find	your	self-nature.	That	is	godliness	and	that	is	bliss,	that	is	peace,	that	is
love,	that	is	going	beyond	time	and	entering	into	eternity.
If	you	live	in	the	mind,	you	live	in	the	fear	of	death.	If	you	start	moving	through
meditation	all	 fear	of	death	disappears.	Suddenly	you	are	 aware	 that	you	have
never	been	born	and	you	can	never	die.	You	have	always	been	here	and	now	and
you	will	always	be	here	and	now.	The	bodies	change	--	those	are	just	forms.
Sometimes	you	may	be	in	a	body	and	sometimes	you	may	not	be	in	a	body.	And
to	be	in	a	body	is	not	such	a	great	thing;	in	fact	it	is	a	confinement.
Hence	 the	whole	mystic	 approach	 towards	 life	 is	 how	 to	 go	beyond	body	 and
mind,	how	to	know	that	which	is	infinite	in	you	--	the	vast,	the	unbounded,	the
oceanic.	It	brings	freedom.
The	 ultimate	 state	 of	 consciousness	 is	 not	 a	 serious	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 not
sombre,	it	is	not	sad.	It	is	full	of	joy,	full	of	laughter,	full	of	celebration,	full	of
song	and	dance,	because	it	is	a	fulfillment:	you	have	come	to	the	ultimate	peak
of	your	being.	And	then	flowering	happens	and	your	perfume	is	released	to	the
winds.	It	can't	be	serious	and	sad.
All	your	saints	look	miserable.	They	don't	seem	to	have	even	touched	on	what	I
am	 talking	 about.	 They	 are	 ascetic	 people,	 and	 asceticism	 is	 a	 kind	 of
masochism,	 it	 is	 self-torture.	 And	 when	 you	 torture	 yourself	 you	 cannot	 be
joyous	 --	 it	 is	 against	 nature.	Nobody	 can	 be	 joyous	 against	 nature.	The	more
natural	you	are,	the	more	joyous;	the	less	natural,	the	less	joyous.
Christians	say	Jesus	never	laughed.	I	cannot	believe	it.	I	know	Jesus	directly	--	I
have	a	direct	line	with	him!	What	these	fools	are	saying	is	absolute	nonsense.	If
Jesus	never	laughed	then	nobody	can	never	laugh.
If	I	had	to	write	 the	gospels,	 the	last	 thing	that	I	would	write	would	be	that	he
laughed	loudly	on	the	cross.
He	must	have	had	the	last	laugh!
That's	exactly	what	happened	in	the	case	of	Al-Hillaj	Mansoor	--	a	Sufi	who	was
killed	by	 the	Mohammedans.	The	 last	 thing	he	did	was	 to	 laugh	 loudly.	For	 a
moment	even	his	enemies	were	shocked.
They	could	not	 believe	 their	 eyes:	 had	he	gone	mad	or	 something?	 --	 because
this	was	not	the	moment	to	laugh.	If	he	had	wept,	cried,	prayed,	it	would	have
been	understandable,	but	this	laughter	was	absolutely	incomprehensible.
Somebody	asked,	"Why	are	you	laughing,	Al-Hillaj?	Have	you	gone	mad?"	He
said,	 "I	 am	 laughing	 because	 I	 am	 not	 the	 one	 that	 you	 are	 killing	 --	 you	 are
killing	somebody	else.	I	am	laughing	at	the	whole	absurdity	of	it.	You	cannot	kill
me,	I	am	beyond	death.	You	are	killing	somebody	else,	some	poor	fellow	who
has	nothing	to	do	with	me.
"And	I	am	also	 laughing	at	God	--	 I	am	telling	him	through	my	laughter,	 'You
can't	deceive	me.	You	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
play	all	kinds	of	tricks	on	me	but	you	cannot	take	my	laughter	away.'	This	is	his
last	test.	He	is	trying	his	last	trick	on	me.	He	wants	to	see	now	if	my	laughter	is
real	or	unreal.	If	I	can	laugh	through	death,	that	means	my	laughter	was	real,	was
authentic."
He	died	laughing.
The	 true	mystic	 is	 not	 an	 ascetic,	 is	 not	 selftorturing.	He	 loves	 life,	 he	 enjoys
life,	 because	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 God	manifest.	 A	 true	mystic	 is	 full	 of	 songs.
Each	 of	 his	words	 is	 a	 song.	 Rightly	 understood,	 each	 of	 his	movements	 is	 a
dance;	rightly	understood,	each	of	his	gestures	is	a	celebration.
This	 happens	 only	 because	 of	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 consciousness.	When	 you
have	 touched	 the	highest	peak,	when	 there	 is	no	more	beyond,	when	you	have
gone	beyond	the	beyond...	when	everything	is	left	behind,	the	body	far	far	away,
down	 in	 the	valley,	mind	also	 somewhere	on	 the	way,	 and	you	are	 just	 a	pure
consciousness,	 just	 a	 pure	 mirror	 reflecting	 nothing,	 no	 content,	 just	 pure
consciousness,	no	object,	just	pure	subjectivity	--	that's	called	samadhi.	And	then
thousands	of	songs	will	start	arising	out	of	your	being,	thousands	of	flowers	will
bloom.	 And	 unless	 that	 happens	 no	 man	 is	 fulfilled,	 no	 man	 can	 ever	 be
contented;	no	man	should	ever	be	contented	before	this	happens.
One	 should	 carry	 a	 divine	 discontent	 within	 one's	 heart.	 One	 should	 go	 on
carrying	 the	 divine	 discontent	 for	 this	 ultimate	 goal.	 One	 should	 become	 an
intense	 longing	 to	 achieve	 samadhi,	 to	 achieve	 superconsciousness.	 It	 is
possible,	because	it	has	happened	to	other	human	beings;	to	Jesus,	to	Buddha,	to
Zarathustra,	to	Lao	Tzu.	It	can	happen	to	you,	it	can	happen	to	everybody.	It	is
everybody's	birthright,	we	just	have	to	claim	it.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 claim,	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
pilgrimage.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006095
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Ulrike)	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Ulrike.	Anand	means	bliss.
The	mystic	approach	 towards	 life	 is	 the	search	 for	 the	ultimate	bliss.	 It	has	no
concern	with	god	as	such,	directly.	Of	course,	god	comes	into	the	experience	of
the	mystic,	but	his	search	is	for	bliss.	When	he	finds	bliss,	he	finds	god	too,	as
the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 coin.	 Hence	 mysticism	 has	 no	 ideology	 of	 atheism	 or
theism,	It	does	not	have	any	beliefs;	 it	 is	simply	an	enquiry	 into	 truth,	 into	 the
very	truth	of	existence.	Anybody	can	be	a	mystic	--	no	belief	is	required.
Buddha	 is	 a	mystic	without	 any	 belief	 in	 god,	without	 even	 any	 belief	 in	 the
soul.	If	one	looks	from	the	outside,	Buddha	is	one	of	the	most	atheistic	persons
who	has	ever	walked	on	the	earth.	But	if	one	looks	from	within	his	being,	then
he	is	the	greatest	theist	ever.	That	is	the	mystery	of	mysticism.
Ordinary	religion	believes	--	 the	mystic	experiences.	And	about	bliss	 there	can
be	no	quarrel,	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
argumentation	everybody	is	seeking	it.	The	theist,	the	atheist,	the	Christian,	the
Hindu,	the	Mohammedan,	the	Catholic,	 the	communist	--	everybody	is	seeking
it.	 And	 only	man,	 animals,	 birds,	 trees	 --	 all	 that	 is,	 is	moving	 towards	 bliss,
knowingly,	 unknowingly.	 The	 mystic	 moves	 knowingly	 --	 that's	 where	 the
difference	comes	in,	the	difference	that	really	makes	a	difference,	because	is	you
are	moving	unknowingly	it	is	almost	impossible	to	achieve	it.	It	is	only	through
deep	deep	consciousness	that	one	can	attain	to	the	ultimate	peak	of	bliss.
Ulrike	(her	name)	is	beautiful.	It	means	wolf.	It	represents	three	things.	The	wolf
is	one	of	the	most	wild	animals.	The	person	who	wants	really	to	be	blissful	has
to	get	 rid	of	 the	so-called	civilisation.	He	has	 to	be	wild,	wild,	 like	a	wolf.	He
has	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 conditionings	 that	 culture	 has	 imposed	 upon	 him,	 culture
means	 conditioning;	 civilisation	 means	 creating	 something	 artificial	 in	 you,
against	nature.
Jesus	says	'Unless	you	are	a	child	again,	you	will	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of
god.'	It	would	have	been	far	more	true	if	he	had	said,	'Unless	you	are	an	animal
again...'	because	an	animal	is	far	more	innocent	than	a	child.	It	is	really	difficult
to	find	a	child	who	is	really	a	child,	absolutely	innocent,	because	even	with	the
first	 breath	 we	 start	 conditioning	 him.	 The	 moment	 he	 opens	 his	 eyes	 the
conditioning	begins.	In	fact,	the	conditioning	begins	even	in	the	womb.
Now	they	have	found	that	a	child	can	be	taught	many	things	while	he	is	in	the
womb.	 And	 they	 are	 working	 on	 it,	 particularly	 in	 Soviet	 Russia.	 They	 are
developing	the	whole	technology	of	how	to	condition	the	child	while	he	is	in	the
womb	so	he	is	a	born	communist;	communism	comes	in	his	blood	and	bones	and
in	his	marrow.	It	is	possible,	it	is	not	difficult	--	it	can	be	done.	And	in	fact	for
centuries	we	have	been	doing	it	in	certain	unconscious	ways.
For	example,	whatsoever	the	mother	goes	through	while	the	child	is	in	the	womb
becomes	 part	 of	 the	 child's	mind.	 If	 she	 continuously	 prays,	 then	 that	 attitude
becomes	part	of	the	child's	inner	structure.	If	she	is	argumentative,	quarrelsome.
always	fighting,	nagging,	if	she	is	mean,	full	of	anger,	jealousy,	then	those	things
are	bound	to	enter	into	the	child	because	the	child	functions	almost	as	part	of	the
mother	 for	nine	months.	Whatsoever	happens	 to	 the	mother	 is	happening	deep
down	in	the	being	of	the	child	too.	He	is	very	vulnerable,	absolutely	vulnerable,
very	delicate.
The	wolf	represents	the	wild	state,	and	man	has	to	be	wild	again.	D.H.	Lawrence
proposed	 one	 thing	 --	 I	 absolutely	 support	 it	 --	 that	 for	 one	 hundred	 years	 all
educational	 systems	should	be	closed:	all	 schools,	colleges,	universities	 should
be	closed	for	one	hundred	years	so	that	man	can	become	uncivilised	again.
That	will	release	the	natural	in	man.	We	have	become	so	suppressed,	burdened,
by	the	unnatural,	and	the	unnatural	is	quantitatively	so	much	that	we	have	started
thinking	that	that	is	our	nature.
Now	our	habits	appear	to	be	our	nature	and	our	nature	seems	to	be	just	a	second
habit,	something	secondary.	Our	values	have	turned	upside-down.
Traditionally	the	wolf	also	represents	two	other	things:	one	is	courage,	the	other
is	 loyalty,	 And	 both	 are	 essential	 for	 a	 sannyasin.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 courageous,
courageous	 to	 drop	 all	 traditions,	 all	 the	 conventions,	 all	 the	 nonsense	 that
centuries	 have	 imposed	upon	us.	One	has	 to	 drop	 out	 of	 history	 --	 that's	what
courage	is.	And	loyalty,..	not	loyalty	to	an	Adolf	Hitler,	not	loyalty	to	Pope	Paul
not	loyalty	to	Ayatollah	Khomeiniac	(sic),	but	loyalty	to	existence	itself	--	not	to
anybody	 in	 particular,	 not	 to	 any	 dogma,	 not	 to	 any	 church,	 but	 to	 existence
itself.	Loyalty	to	the	flowers,	loyalty	to	the	trees,	to	the	rivers,	to	the	mountains,
a	 deep	 trust	 in	 whatsoever	 is	 --	 that's	 what	 makes	 the	 inner-most	 core	 of	 a
sannyasin.
These	three	things	have	to	be	remembered,	then	bliss	is	not	far	away,	it	is	just	by
the	corner.	If	one	can	manage	to	be	natural,	loyal,	courageous,	if	one	is	capable
of	 trust	 and	 surrender	 to	nature,	 then	bliss	happens	of	 its	own	accord.	 It	 starts
showering	 on	 you	 --	 it	 pours	 dogs	 and	 cats!	One	 cannot	 contain	 it.	And	 I	 am
saying	dogs	and	cats	because	a	wolf	can	understand	that	language!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Two	months.
That's	good.	You	will	meet	many	dogs	and	many	cats	--	beware!
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006105
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	 is	 the	most	healing	 force	 in	 the	world,	nothing	goes	deeper	 than	 love.	 It
heals	not	only	the	body,	not	only	the	mind,	but	also	the	soul.	If	one	can	love	then
all	one's	wounds	disappear.	Then	one	becomes	whole	--	and	to	be	whole	is	to	be
holy.
Unless	 one	 is	 whole	 one	 is	 not	 holy.	 The	 physical	 health	 is	 a	 superficial
phenomenon.	 It	 can	 happen	 through	medicine,	 it	 can	 happen	 through	 science.
But	 the	 innermost	 core	of	one's	being	can	be	healed	only	 through	 love.	Those
who	know	 the	 secret	of	 love	know	 the	greatest	 secret	of	 life.	Then	 there	 is	no
misery	for	them,	no	old	age,	no	death.	Of	course	the	body	will	become	old	and
the	body	will	die	but	love	reveals	to	you	the	truth	that	you	are	not	the	body.	you
are	 pure	 consciousness,	 you	 have	 no	 birth,	 no	 death.	And	 to	 live	 in	 that	 pure
consciousness	is	to	live	in	tune	with	god.	Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	living	in	tune
with	god.
Move	deeper	into	the	phenomenon	of	love,	in	the	mystery	of	love.
Ordinarily	people	are	afraid	of	love	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	cannot	fulfil
the	basic	requirement.
The	 basic	 requirement	 becomes	 a	 great	 hindrance	 for	 them.	 The	 basic
requirement	is	dropping	of	the	ego	.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	it	is	surrendering	the	ego.
The	 moment	 you	 surrender	 the	 ego,	 love	 starts	 growing	 in	 you	 because	 the
hindrance	is	removed.	You	start	becoming	more	and	more	loving,	and	ultimately
one	becomes	love	itself.	Then	all	bliss	and	all	truth	is	yours.
Dance	is	one	of	the	deepest	meditations	possible,	for	the	simple	reason	that	when
dance	reaches	to	its	climax	the	dancer	disappears.	There	is	only	dance	--	there	is
nobody	dancing.	If	the	dancer	remains	then	the	peak	has	not	yet	been	achieved,
the	moment	you	achieve	the	peak	you	are	no	more	there	--	that's	the	paradox	of
dance.	Hence	dance	has	been	used	for	centuries	 in	 the	secret	ceremonies	of	all
mystery	schools.
Sufis	have	developed	it	almost	into	a	science,	because	if	one	goes	on	dancing,	at
a	certain	moment	the	body	is	transcended.	But	the	mind	remains.	If	one	still	goes
on	dancing,	at	a	certain	other	moment	the	mind	is	transcended.	But	the	idea	of	'I
am'	 the	 soul	 as	 a	 separate	 entity,	 still	 persists.	 If	 one	 continues	 to	 dance,	 at	 a
certain	moment	even	 the	soul	 is	 transcended.	Then	all	 identities	of	 the	ego	are
dissolved.	The	dance	is	there	and	for	the	first	time	it	is	perfect,	it	is	total.
In	those	moments	one	catches	a	glimpse	for	the	first	time	that	existence	is	full	of
god,	that	god	is	not	a	person	but	a	quality.	It	is	like	a	fragrance	that	surrounds	the
whole	existence.	But	it	happens	only	when	you	disappear.
It	 is	 said	 that	 Jalaluddin	 Rumi,	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 Sufi	 mystics,	 became
enlightened	after	 thirty-six	hours	of	continuous	dancing;	he	danced	and	danced
and	danced.	He	forgot	everything.	People	thought	he	had	gone	mad.	He	was	not
even	 conscious	 of	 the	 passage	 of	 time.	 The	 day	 turned	 into	 night,	 the	 night
turned	 into	 day,	 again	 the	 day	 turned	 into	 night.	Thirty-six	 hours...	 and	 then	 a
moment	came,	the	doors	opened.
Suddenly	he	was	transported	to	another	realm	and	another	dimension	of	being.
That's	how	the	whirling	dervishes	were	born.	Jalaluddin	Rumi	is	the	founder	of
the	school.	They	still	go	on	dancing,	but	now	it	is	simply	a	ritual.	That's	one	of
the	greatest	misfortunes	that	always	happens.
Buddha	became	enlightened	after	seven	days	sitting	silently,	doing	nothing,	not
moving	at	all.	It	is	just	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	other	pole	of	dancing	--	dancing	means	movement.	Hence	Sufism	is	one	pole
and	Zen	another.	They	are	diametrically	opposite	but	leading	to	the	same	point.
After	seven	days	of	continuous	sitting	he	also	forgot	about	time,	the	passage	of
time,	and	then	he	evaporated,	Now	Buddhist	monks	till	go	on	sitting,	but	now	it
is	a	ritual.	They	go	on	looking	at	the	time.	And	that	is	the	basic	requirement	--
that	you	should	forget	time	because	time	means	mind.
Once	a	Buddhist	monk,	bhikshu	Jagdish	Kashyap,	a	very	famous	Buddhist,	came
to	see	me	and	he	said	that	now	he	would	have	to	leave	because	it	was	time	for
his	meditation.	I	said,	'Time?	Has	time	anything	to	do	with	meditation?'	He	said,
'Yes,	every	day	 I	meditate	 for	one	hour.'	 I	 asked	him,	 'How	do	you	manage	 to
know	that	the	one	hour	has	passed?'	He	said,	'I	have	to	look	at	the	watch	two	or
three	 times.'	 said,	 'You	 are	 simply	 befooling	 yourself.	 For	 seven	 days	Buddha
was	not	even	aware	of	when	the	sun	rose,	when	the	sun	set,	when	it	was	day	and
it	was	 night.	He	 became	 completely	 oblivious	 of	 everything,	 then	 he	 attained.
You	 are	 simply	 waiting	 your	 time.	 Do	 something	 else;	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 so
attached	to	time,	then	better	you	do	something	else.'
Meditation	has	nothing	to	do	with	time.	You	cannot	meditate	for	a	time	being;	it
has	 to	 become	 a	 quality	 that	 spreads	 all	 over	 your	 life.	Otherwise	 everything,
becomes	a	ritual.
My	message	 to	my	sannyasins	 is:	 let	dance	be	your	very	quality	of	 life,	or	 let
silence,	inactivity,	be	your	very	quality	of	life.	Even	walking	you	are	still,	calm
and	quiet.
There	are	two	types	of	people:	one	who	will	reach	through	action,	and	one	who
will	 reach	 through	 inaction.	As	 I	 see	 it,	 it	will	 be	 the	 right	 process	 for	 you	 to
move	 through	 the	door	of	dance,	action,	movement,	creativity.	You	will	 find	 it
easier,	in	tune	with	your	being.	But	it	has	to	become	your	life,	and	then	one	day
it	happens.	Without	any	notification,	without	any	message	to	you	that	it	is	going
to	 happen	 now,	 it	 suddenly	 happens.	 You	 are	 taken	 aback,	 you	 are	 in	 for	 a
surprise	when	it	happens.	It	always	happens	like	a	miracle.
Bliss	brings	many	songs	to	your	being,	it	brings	much	celebration.	Just	as	spring
brings	many	flowers	to	the	trees,	bliss	brings	many	songs	to	you.	And	when	they
come	 out	 of	 bliss	 they	 have	 a	 certain	 quality	which	 can	 only	 be	 described	 as
sacred.	It	is	not	of	this	world,	it	belongs	to	the	beyond.	It	is	something	unearthly.
If	bliss	does	not	bring	many	 songs	 to	your	being	 then	your	bliss	 is	 imaginary.
Then	you	have	imagined	that	the	spring	has	come	but	the	proof	will	be	the	trees,
the	 proof	 will	 be	 the	 songs	 that	 will	 start	 arising	 in	 your	 heart.	 Great	 poetry
explodes...	it	is	a	poetic	explosion	-	even	for	people	who	are	very	unpoetic,	who
have	never	thought	of	poetry.
Mohammed	was	never	a	poet	and	he	had	never	 thought	of	poetry,	but	when	 it
happened,	he	burst	out	singing.	That's	how	the	Koran	was	born,	and	it	contains
some	of	the	most	beautiful	poems.	He	was	uneducated,	hence	the	Koran	does	not
have	the	flavor	of	a	cultured	treatise,	it	is	not	a	book	written	by	a	scholar.	He	was
not	 even	 a	 poet	 in	 the	 ordinary	 sense;	 hence	 it	 has	 not	 followed	 any	 rules	 of
poetry	 -	any	 rhythm,	any	meter	 -	but	 still,	 there	 is	nothing	comparable	 to	 it.	 It
carries	 something	of	 his	 bliss.	Those	words	 are	 transmuted.	They	have	passed
through	his	heart,	they	still	beat	with	his	heartbeat.
One	 should	not	 read	 the	Koran,	 one	 should	only	 listen	 to	 it,	 recite	 it.	 It	 is	 not
language,	it	is	not	grammar;	it	is	not	philosophy,	it	is	not	theology.	If	one	looks
for	 theology	 it	 is	 a	 very	 poor	 thing.	 If	 one	 looks	 for	 philosophy	 it	 looks	 very
ordinary.	 But	 if	 one	 simply	 listens	 to	 the	 Koran	 recited,	 one	 can	 be
overwhelmed.	Without	understanding	a	single	word	of	the	Arabic,	it	will	touch
and	move	your	heart	because	then	it	will	penetrate	as	pure	music.
This	 has	 to	 be	 the	 criterion:	 if	 bliss	 really	 happens	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 bring	many
songs	to	you.
Your	so-called	saints	look	so	sad	that	I	cannot	believe	that	they	have	experienced
God;	 they	must	 have	 imagined	 it.	 They	 are	 not	 dancing,	 they	 are	 not	 singing,
they	are	not	celebrating.	They	 look	almost	dead,	dull;	 they	don't	have	any	 joy.
They	 don't	 seem	 to	 have	 any	 life;	 they	 seem	 to	 live	 a	 posthumous	 type	 of
existence.	 They	 look	 ghostly.	Maybe	 the	 holy	 ghost	 has	 visited	 them,	 but	 not
God.	And	 the	holy	ghost	does	not	seem	to	be	very	holy	either!	Ghosts	are	not
known	to	be	holy;	they	are	unholy	people.	One	should	keep	oneself	out	of	their
way.
Your	 saints	 look	 ghostly,	 dead,	 utterly	 dead.	 They	 cannot	 laugh,	 they	 cannot
love,	they	cannot	dance,	they	cannot	sing.	What	kind	of	religion	is	that?	And	this
has	 happened	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 It	 has	 happened	 to	 Christian	 saints,	 it	 has
happened	 to	 Hindu	 saints,	 it	 has	 happened	 to	 Buddhist	 saints.	 It	 seems	 to	 be
something	almost	universal.	But	Buddha	was	not	like	that,	neither	was	Jesus	like
that,	nor	was	Mohammed	like	that.
The	really	religious	people	were	full	of	juice,	full	of	tremendous	life.	They	were
really	alive.	The	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ordinary	people	are	not	alive	compared	to	them.
So	remember	this	is	a	criterion:	meditation	succeeds	only	if	it	brings	bliss.	And
bliss	 is	 true	only	 if	great	celebration	explodes	 in	you	 that	goes	on	and	on,	 that
knows	no	end.	It	knows	only	the	beginning.
Sannyas	is	the	art	of	divine	acting.	You	have	to	live	in	the	world	but	you	have	to
think	of	the	world	only	as	a	big	drama.	I	am	against	renouncing	the	world.	You
have	not	to	escape	from	the	world,	you	have	to	live	in	it,	but	in	a	totally	different
way.	Don't	take	it	seriously,	take	it	very	light-heartedly,	take	it	as	a	cosmic	joke.
It	is	a	cosmic	joke.	In	the	East	we	call	it	god's	play.	If	it	is	god's	play	then	we	are
just	actors	in	it,	and	nobody	takes	acting	seriously.
You	can	be	a	king	in	a	drama,	but	you	don't	take	it	seriously.	As	the	curtain	falls
you	forget	all	about	your	being	a	king;	it	does	not	go	to	your	head.	That's	how	a
sannyasin	has	 to	 take	 the	whole	of	 life.	 If	 you	 are	 rich,	 don't	 let	 it	 go	 to	your
head,	 or	 if	 you	 are	 poor,	 don't	 take	 it	 seriously.	We	 are	 all	 playing	 roles:	 play
them	as	beautifully	as	possible	but	continuously	remember,	that	it	is	all	a	game.
And	when	death	comes	the	final	curtain	drops.	Then	all	actors	disappear.	They
all	disappear	into	one	universal	energy.
If	 one	 can	 live	 in	 the	 world	 remembering	 this,	 one	 is	 totally	 freed	 from	 all
misery.	 Misery	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 taking	 things	 seriously	 and	 bliss	 is	 a	 by-
product	of	taking	things	lightly.	Take	life	as	fun;	rejoice	in	it.
Bliss	is	the	god	of	gods.	The	real	search	of	every	being	is	bliss.	Sannyas	is	not
interested	 in	god	directly	because	 that	creates	unnecessary	complexities.	There
are	believers	and	there	are	non-believers	--	and	even	the	believers	differ.	There
are	three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth	and	almost	three	thousand	sects	within
those	religions.	That	means	there	are	three	thousand	concepts	about	god.	If	one
wants	 to	enquire	 into	god	one	gets	 into	an	unnecessary	puzzle	and	one	cannot
sort	it	out.	It	is	impossible.
My	own	experience	is	a	search	for	bliss	and	you	will	also	find	god.	But	then	it
will	not	be	a	belief,	it	will	be	your	experience.	In	fact	god	will	be	another	name
for	bliss	and	nothing	more.
So	 here,	 everybody	 is	 welcome,	 because	my	 concern	 is	 scientific.	Meditation
does	 not	 require	any	 belief	 in	 fact	 it	 requires	 an	 open	mind,	 unprejudiced.	 A
Christian	 can	 meditate,	 a	 Buddhist	 can	 meditate,	 a	 Hindu	 can	 meditate,	 a
Catholic	can	meditate,	a	communist	can	meditate	--	there	is	no	problem	about	it,
because	 it	 is	 only	 going	 inwards,	 within	 your	 own	 being.	 It	 is	 the	 art	 of
becoming	silent.	Even	the	atheist	cannot	deny	that	there	are	moments	when	he	is
more	 silent.	 He	 has	 to	 concede	 that	 much	 because	 he	 knows	 it	 is	 there	 are
moments	when	he	is	in	a	turmoil	and	there	are	moments	when	he	is	absolutely
calm.
Meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 deepening	 process	 of	 your	 inner	 calm.	Once	 your
inner	silence	has	become	total,	suddenly	you	become	aware	of	the	phenomenon
which	is	called	god.
Seek	bliss	and	you	will	find	god.	Try	to	find	god	and	you	will	simply	find	more
and	more	conflicting	philosophies.	You	will	get	more	and	more	confused.	Rather
than	getting	silence	and	peace,	you	will	be	getting	more	and	more	mad.
So	 let	 this	 be	 clear	 from	 the	 very	 beginning:	 our	 concern	 is	 not	 religious,	 our
concern	 is	 scientific.	Of	course	 it	 leads	 to	 religion,	but	 that	 is	another	 thing.	 It
happens	of	its	own	accord.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006115
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
There	 is	 nothing	 more	 noble	 than	 meditation.	 There	 is	 nothing	 more	 divine
either.	Meditation	is	the	bridge	between	the	earth	and	the	sky,	between	the	dust
and	the	divine,	between	the	base	metal	and	gold.
Meditation	is	the	process	of	rebirth.	It	is	giving	birth	to	yourself.	It	is	a	process	--
magical	in	the	sense	that	it	is	incomprehensible	to	the	intellect,	also	magical	in
the	sense	that	it	is	something	which	is	not	measurable	by	any	scientific	method.
It	is	something	beyond	science.
The	historians	think	that	magic	preceded	science,	that	before	science	came	there
was	magic.	My	own	understanding	is	totally	different.	Science	will	be	succeeded
by	magic,	it	is	not	preceded	by	magic.	When	science	has	fulfilled	all	the	ordinary
needs	of	humanity,	then	only	can	magic	arrive	on	the	scene	--	because	magic	is
something	higher	than	science,	it	is	not	lower.	The	lower	can	precede,	the	higher
succeeds	it.	But	magic	has	not	been	understood	up	till	now.
By	magic	I	don't	mean	that	what	the	ordinary	magicians	go	on	doing	in	the	name
of	magic.	Those	are	all	tricks,	tricks	to	befool	people	--	games,	entertainment.	It
is	not	true	magic.
True	magic	 is	 known	only	 by	 the	Buddhas.	They	 are	 not	 known	as	magicians
because	 their	 magic	 is	 something	 which	 is	 not	 at	 all	 concerned	 with
entertainment,	it	is	concerned	with	transformation.	It	is	only	for	the	chosen	few,
not	for	the	crowds.
When	 science	 has	 fulfilled	 every	 ordinary	 need	 then	 suddenly	 there	will	 be	 a
great	 hunger,	 a	 great	 thirst	 felt	 all	 around	 the	 earth.	 It	 is	 already	being	 felt	 by
affluent	 societies,	 by	 rich	 societies,	 by	 rich	 people	 everywhere,	 because	when
ordinary	needs	are	fulfilled,	extraordinary	needs	arise.
A	man	who	is	hungry	cannot	think	of	meditation;	it	is	impossible.	He	thinks	of
bread	and	butter.	A	man	who	has	no	shelter	thinks	of	shelter,	of	a	house.	A	man
who	 is	 naked	 thinks	 of	 clothes.	 It	 is	 natural.	 But	 when	 all	 these	 needs	 are
fulfilled,	suddenly	one	becomes	aware	that	there	is	something	more	to	life	than
all	the	comforts	and	conveniences	which	science	can	provide,	which	money	can
purchase;	 there	 is	 something	which	cannot	be	possessed.	Which	cannot	be	got
from	the	outside,	which	has	to	be	grown	in	the	inner	consciousness.
For	 the	 first	 time	one	becomes	 interested	 in	meditation.	For	 the	 first	 time	one
feels	 life	 is	 meaningless	 unless	 some	 transcendental	 meaning	 is	 touched,
becomes	available.	Unless	 the	doors	of	 something	unknowable	and	mysterious
are	opened	to	you,	unless	some	splendor	descends	on	you	and	fills	you	and	all
your	emptiness	disappears,	one	feels	on	the	verge	of	committing	suicide.	That's
why	in	rich	societies	more	people	commit	suicide,	more	people	go	insane	than	in
poor	societies.	The	poor	societies	cannot	afford	insanity;	they	are	so	poor,	they
cannot	afford	suicide.	They	don't	even	have	means	to	live,	how	can	they	afford
suicide?	 They	 don't	 have	 any	 feeling	 for	 inner	 meaning.	 Their	 outer	 life	 is
constantly	 taking	 all	 their	 attention.	 Hence	 I	 say,	magic	 is	 not	 something	 that
preceded	science	but	something	that	succeeds	science.
And	the	days	of	magic	are	on	the	way.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 become	 magicians	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 they	 have	 to	 be
meditators	and	they	have	to	learn	the	inner	art	of	giving	birth	to	themselves.
The	 first	 birth	 is	 through	 the	 parents	 --	 it	 is	 biological.	 The	 second	 birth	 is
spiritual.	 It	 is	by	you.	 through	you,	 to	you;	nobody	else	 is	 involved	in	 it	at	all.
Even	the	matter	can	only	indicate	the	way,	then	you	have	to	go	all	alone.
And	by	meditation	I	mean	a	state	of	thoughtless	awareness.	Slowly	slowly	one
has	to	become	so	alert,	watchful	of	the	whole	process	of	thought	that	not	a	single
thought	passes	by	unnoticed.	I	am	not	telling	you	to	fight	with	the	thoughts,	I	am
not	 telling	 you	 to	 push	 them,	 throw	 them	 out,	 I	 am	 not	 telling	 you	 to	 repress
them.	Those	are	not	the	ways	to	transcend.	Just	become	alert	--	nothing	else	has
to	be	done,	nothing	at	all.
Just	watchfulness	is	enough....	And	the	magic,	and	the	miracle.
As	 your	watchfulness	 grows	 your	 thoughts	 are	 reduced,	 automatically.	 If	 your
watchfulness	 is	 one	 per	 cent	 your	 thoughts	 are	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent.	 If	 your
watchfulness	is	ninety-nine	per	cent,	your	thoughts	are	only	one	per	cent.	If	your
watchfulness	is	one	hundred	per	cent	then	there	are	no	thoughts	any	more,	then
the	mirror	is	utterly	empty.	And	only	in	that	mirror	is	god	reflected,	only	in	that
mirror	do	you	encounter	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
reality.	And	that	encounter	transforms,	gives	you	a	new	birth,	for	 the	first	 time
makes	your	life	significant,	meaningful.
Life	is	a	divine	celebration.	For	centuries	religion	has	been	against	life.	Because
of	 that	 it	 could	 attract	 only	 the	 pathological	 people,	 the	 ill	 people,	 the	 people
who	were	not	really	intelligent,	healthy,	loving.	It	attracted	all	kinds	of	third-rate
minds,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 only	 a	 stupid	 person	 can	 be	 against	 life.	An
intelligent	 person	 is	 bound	 to	 feel	 that	 life	 is	 divine,	 that	 life	 is	 god.	 It	 is
impossible	 for	 intelligence	 not	 to	 feel	 it.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 inevitable	 for	 an
intelligent	person	to	see	the	beauty	of	existence,	to	feel	the	music	that	surrounds
nature,	 to	 feel	 the	 stars,	 the	 flowers,	 the	mountains,	 the	 rivers,	 the	 people.	 So
many	expressions	of	the	divine,	so	many	forms	of	the	formless	--	the	intelligent
person	is	bound	to	become	aware	of	it.	Nobody	has	to	tell	him.
Intelligence	means	sensitivity.	All	your	sense	are	 functioning	at	 the	maximum.
Your	 eyes	 see	 totally,	 then	naturally	you	will	 become	aware	of	beauty.	Only	 a
blind	man	is	not	aware	of	beauty.	Your	ears	are	able	to	hear	totally,	then	how	can
you	avoid	the	music	of	the	wind	passing	through	the	pines?	If	your	body	is	alive,
vibrant,	how	can	you	remain	closed	 to	 the	wind,	 to	 the	sun,	 to	 the	rain?	These
are	all	the	ways	god	comes	to	you,	these	are	all	the	ways	of	his	approach	towards
you.	 That's	 how	 he	 comes	 in	 disguise.	 But	 only	 the	 intelligent	 person	 can
understand.	The	stupid	will	not	be	able	to	see.	He	will	only	see	the	veil	and	he
will	not	see	the	veiled	one.
And	it	is	easier	for	the	stupid	to	renounce	because	escaping	from	anything	needs
no	 intelligence,	 it	 needs	 no	 genius.	 I	 have	 seen	 thousands	 of	monks	 --	Hindu,
Christian,	Jaina,	Buddhist	--	and	I	was	struck	by	the	fact	that	almost	all	of	them
were	stupid	people.
When	I	became	aware	of	the	fact	I	was	really	surprised	because	I	thought	that	I
would	be	coming	across	the	most	intelligent	people	of	the	world.	But	the	more	I
came	in	contact	with	the	so-called	saints	--	and	India	is	full	of	them,	no	country
has	as	many	saints	as	India...	Hindus	alone	have	five	thousand	monks,	and	then
there	are	Mohammedans,	and	then	there	are	Christians	and	then	there	are	Jainas
and	Buddhists	and	then	there	are	other	small	sects.	The	whole	country	is	full	of
our	 so-called	mahatmas,	 and	 I	 have	 come	 in	 contact	 with	 almost	 all	 kinds	 of
saints.
Slowly	slowly	I	had	to	come	to	the	conclusion	that	something	is	basically	wrong,
because	why	are	only	 stupid	people	 attracted	 towards	 religion?	The	 intelligent
person	 avoids	 religion.	 If	 he	 is	 courageous	 he	 denies	 religion,	 he	 becomes
against	 religion,	 he	 becomes	 atheistic.	 If	 he	 is	 not	 courageous	 he	 only	 pays
formal	homage	to	religion	--	but	just	formal,	so	that	nobody	takes	note	of	the	fact
that	he	is	not	part	of	the	crowd.	He	does	not	want	to	disturb	his	ordinary	life.	He
wants	the	crowd	to	know	that	he	is	with	them.	But	his	belief	in	god	is	formal,	his
going	to	the	temple	and	the	church	is	formal.	he	goes	because	others	go.	He	goes
because	 it	 is	helpful,	convenient,	otherwise	you	 fall	 apart	 form	 the	crowd,	and
you	have	to	manage	to	be	with	the	crowd.	So	there	is	nothing	wrong	if	for	one
hour	every	Sunday	you	go	 to	 the	church	 to	 listen	 to	 some	stupid	 sermon.	 It	 is
worth	it,	because	it	gives	your	life	a	kind	of	formal	attunement	with	the	crowd.
Those	who	 are	 courageous	 become	 rebels.	But	 both	 are	 against	 religion,	 deep
down.	For	formal	person	is	also	against	religion.	He	believes	because	he	has	to
believe,	otherwise	he	has	no	love	for	it.	The	cause	is	somewhere	in	religion	itself
because	he	(some	words	missing)	it	has	been	life-negative.
I	am	proposing	a	totally	new	approach	towards	religion.	Religion	has	to	be	life-
affirmative.	It	has	to	enhance	your	life,	it	has	to	make	it	more	beautiful;	it	has	to
be	creative,	not	escapist.	 It	has	not	 to	dull	your	senses	but	 to	make	 them	more
sensitive.	To	me	there	is	no	god	other	than	life	itself,	and	there	is	no	temple	other
than	existence	itself.	Then	everything	becomes	a	divine	celebration.	And	when	I
say	 everything,	 I	 mean	 everything:	 life	 is	 a	 celebration,	 death	 is	 celebration;
meeting	is	celebration,	departing	 is	celebration;	childhood	is	celebration,	youth
is	 celebration,	 old	 age	 celebration	 --	 different	 kinds	 of	 celebration.	 And	 my
sannyasins	have	to	learn	to	celebrate	everything.
If	you	start	celebrating	everything	you	become	a	real	worshiper.	And	you	need
not	believe	in	anything;	you	need	not	go	to	any	church	or	temple.	Wherever	you
are,	whatsoever	you	are	doing	becomes	your	prayer,	becomes	your	meditation,
becomes	your	sadhana,	your	discipline.
To	me	a	 sannyasin	 should	become	more	 and	more	 aware	of	 all	 that	 surrounds
him,	 all	 that	 is	within	and	without.	And	 the	more	you	ar	 aware,	 the	more	you
will	be	ready	to	dance	out	of	sheer	joy,	out	of	sheer	gratitude,	out	of	thankfulness
to	the	whole.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006125
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Truth	is	not	achieved	through	thinking.	It	 is	not	a	conclusion	of	 thought	--	 just
the	contrary:	it	 is	 the	experience	of	a	thoughtless	awareness.	Hence	philosophy
cannot	help,	it	has	never	helped	anybody.	It	goes	round	and	round	inc	circles.	It
cannot	penetrate	to	the	centre,	it	remains	on	the	circumference.	It	is	a	peripheral
activity	for	the	simple	reason	that	mind	itself	is	peripheral.	Hence	anything	out
of	mind	is	going	to	remain	peripheral,	it	can	never	be	central.
Mind	is	not	something	intrinsic	to	us.	We	come	into	the	world	without	a	mind.
The	mind	 is	 slowly	 created	by	 the	 society,	 by	 the	 state,	 by	 the	parents,	 by	 the
surroundings,	by	the	climate	--	a	thousand	and	one	things	are	involved	in	it.	But
you	don't	bring	it	with	you.
By	mind	I	simply	mean	all	that	is	given	to	you	by	others	and	which	becomes	part
of	your	memory.	The	memory	system	is	within	you,	but	whatsoever	is	fed	to	that
system	comes	from	the	outside,	and	that	becomes	your	mind.	Mind	cannot	know
the	unknown.	It	can	only	go	round	and	round	within	the	world	of	the	known.	It	is
just	like	a	computer:	whatsoever	you	feed	to	a	computer	you	can	get	out	of	it.
But	truth	is	something	that	is	intrinsic	to	our	being.	We	bring	it	with	us.	Nobody
gives	us	 truth,	nobody	can	give	 it	 to	us,	 it	 is	untransferable.	But	 it	 is	our	very
being.	We	have	to	die	for	it	within	our	own	selves.
And	the	art	of	digging	for	it	is	meditation.	Meditation	simply	means	making	an
effort	to	transcend	mind,	to	transcend	all	that	has	been	given	to	you	by	others	so
that	you	can	be	totally	your	own	nature.	Then	you	are	simply	yourself	you	have
found	 the	 truth.	When	 there	 is	no	 trace	of	anything,	no	 impact	of	anything,	no
impression	left	on	you	from	the	outside,	when	you	are	just	a	tabula	rasa,	a	total
emptiness	 as	 far	 as	 outside	 impressions	 are	 concerned,	 you	 have	 discovered...
you	have	come	home.
Everybody	has	the	truth	within	his	own	being	but	very	few	people	penetrate	to
the	 centre,	 they	 go	 on	 running	 around	 the	 circumference.	 The	 circumferential
activity	is	philosophy,	and	the	jump	from	the	circumference	to	the	centre	is	what
I	call	religion.
Religion	 cannot	 be	 many.	 Philosophies	 can	 be	 many.	 There	 are	 as	 many
philosophies	as	there	are	people,	because	there	are	as	many	philosophies	as	there
are	 minds;	 each	 person	 has	 his	 own	 philosophy.	 But	 truth	 is	 the	 same.	 Your
innermost	 being	 and	 my	 innermost	 being	 are	 not	 two	 separate	 things;	 at	 the
centre	we	all	meet	and	we	are	one.	Only	on	the	surface	are	we	different.
It	is	just	like	the	waves	of	the	ocean:	on	the	surface	each	wave	is	separate	from
the	other	waves,	but	deep	down	there	is	only	one	ocean,	there	are	no	more	any
waves.	That	oceanic	experience,	that	experience	of	oneness	is	truth.
And	the	beauty	 is	 that	you	have	not	 to	go	anywhere	 in	search	of	 it;	one	has	 to
stop	going,	one	has	to	start	sitting.	Hence	one	of	the	most	meditative	traditions	in
the	 world,	 Zen,	 says	 that	 just	 sitting	 is	 enough.	 If	 one	 can	 simply	 sit,	 doing
nothing	--	no	action	of	the	body,	no	action	of	the	mind	--	Just	sitting	in	silence,
one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
achieves	 truth.	 The	 word	 'zen'	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root	 as	 'dhyan';	 it	 is	 a
Japanese	 form	of	 the	Sanskrit	word	 'dhyan'.	The	meaning	 is	 the	 same:	 truth	 is
within	you.
In	Jesus'	words:	The	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you.	That	is	only	a	difference	of
language,	that	is	his	way	of	saying	the	same	thing.	That	has	to	be	remembered:
you	cannot	get	it	from	anyone,	you	cannot	get	it	from	any	scripture;	you	cannot
get	it	even	from	your	won	mind,	but	it	is	already	there.	You	just	have	to	dig	to
the	very	innermost	core	of	your	being.	The	moment	you	touch	your	centre	you
have	arrived.
And	truth	liberates.	Truth	liberates	you	from	all	misery,	from	all	anguish,	from
death,	 from	 fear,	 from	 greed;	 truth	 simply	 liberates	 you	 from	 all	 kinds	 of
problems.	It	solves	everything.	It	simply	makes	your	life	a	moment-to-moment
celebration.
One	can	be	consecrated	to	god	only	in	deep	love;	not	in	fear,	not	in	greed.	And
the	so-called	religious	people	are	religious	out	of	fear,	out	of	greed	...	which	are
not	 different	 things	 but	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 Fear	 and	 greed	 are	 two
polarities	of	the	same	energy.
The	 fearful	 person	 is	 always	 greedy,	 remember;	 the	 greedy	 person	 is	 always
fearful.	 If	you	find	one	you	will	always	find	 the	other.	 It	may	not	be	apparent,
but	if	you	just	look	a	little	deeper	you	are	bound	to	find	it.
If	 one	 disappears	 the	 other	 disappears.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 the	 negative	 and	 positive
poles	of	electricity:	only	both	together	can	create	electricity.
That's	why	all	the	religions	have	created	hell	and	heaven:	they	are	projections	of
fear	and	greed.	Fear	has	created	hell,	greed	has	created	heaven.	And	the	people
who	assemble	in	the	churches,	in	the	temples,	in	the	mosques,	are	there	not	for
love;	 they	 are	 afraid	 --	 afraid	 of	 death,	 afraid	 of	 life,	 afraid	 of	 love,	 afraid	 of
everything.	 They	 want	 god	 as	 a	 protector.	 They	 want	 god	 as	 a	 security,	 as	 a
guarantee.	God	is	a	kind	of	supernatural	insurance	for	them.
Hence	if	fear	disappears	their	god	will	disappear.	Their	god	is	false.	Or	they	are
there	 for	 greed;	 they	 are	 so	 greedy	 that	 they	 are	 always	 asking	 for	more	 and
more.	Not	only	here,	but	even	after	death	they	want	more	and	more.	They	want
the	 same	pleasures	 of	 life	 on	 a	 far	 grander	 scale	 in	 heaven,	 but	 it	 is	 the	 same
greed,	no	difference	at	all.	If	their	greed	disappears	their	god	will	disappear.
Hence	many	religions	have	not	risen	above	human	psychology.	That's	why	I	love
these	two	people,	Lao	Tzu	and	Buddha:	they	are	the	only	persons	in	the	whole
history	of	humanity	who	have	talked	in	terms	of	maturity.
Buddha	 has	 said	 that	 fearlessness	 is	 a	 prerequisite	 for	 a	 real	 religion;
greedlessness	has	to	be	the	foundation	of	a	true	and	authentic	religious	life.	But
one	can	be	fearless	and	greedless	only	If	one	is	full	of	love.	It	is	the	same	energy
that	becomes	fear,	that	becomes	greed,	that	becomes	love.	We	don't	have	many
energies	 --	 remember	 it	 as	 a	 fundamental	 of	 life.	 One	 of	 the	 most	 important
secrets	of	life	is	that	we	have	a	single	energy	source.	You	can	make	anything	out
of	 it.	 It	 is	 like	 gold:	 you	 can	 make	 any	 kind	 of	 ornament	 out	 of	 it,	 but	 all
ornaments	are	made	of	the	same	gold.	Exactly	is	the	case	with	our	energy:	it	is
one	energy	but	if	you	invest	it	in	fear	and	greed	then	of	course	it	is	not	available
for	love.
And	the	love	of	the	people	who	are	full	of	greed	and	fear	is	also	nothing	but	fear
and	greed.	Everything	will	be	contaminated	by	their	fear	and	greed.	They	will	do
everything	 out	 of	 fear.	And	we	 are	 taught	 the	 same.	 Parents	 teach	 children	 to
love	them	and	they	create	fear	in	them:	'If	you	don't	love,	you	will	be	punished.
If	you	love,	you	will	be	rewarded.'	So	they	are	made	to	clearly	understand	that	if
you	want	 punishment	 then	 don't	 love	 your	 parents,	 don't	 respect	 your	 parents.
But	who	wants	punishment?	If	you	want	rewards	then	love	your	parents.	But	this
is	not	true	love.
So	 the	 very	 source	 is	 corrupted;	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 a	 child	 is	 corrupted.
Then	he	will	pretend	 to	 love	his	wife	or	husband	 just	out	of	 fear	and	greed.	 It
may	be	either	greed	fear	--	one	will	be	on	the	surface,	the	other	will	be	hidden
deep	down	behind	it.
There	are	people	 like	Dale	Carnegie	who	are	very	 influential	 in	America.	 It	 is
said	that	Dale	Carnegie's	books	have	been	sold	more	than	anybody	else's	books	-
-	next	only	to	the	Bible.	So	he	seems	to	be	the	most	important	philosopher	of	the
American	approach	to	life.	And	what	does	he	say?	--	he	says,	if	you	cannot	love,
at	least	pretend.	Say	to	your	wife	as	many	times	as	possible	"I	love	you."	Say	to
your	husband	"I	 love	you."	Say	 it	 in	as	many	ways	as	possible:	bring	 flowers,
write	 letters,	 bring	 presents.	 Don't	 forget	 her	 birthday	 --	 that	 will	 make	 her
happy.	And	this	is	all	rubbish!	How	can	pretensions	make	anybody	happy?
But	this	is	what	is	being	taught	to	people.	And	the	same	is	true	about	god.
The	 Talmud	 says:	 Be	 afraid	 of	 god,	 because	 he	 is	 very	 jealous.	 Don't	 love
anybody	 else	 and	 don't	 respect	 anybody	 else.	 Pour	 all	 your	 respect	 and	 love
towards	god	because	god	himself	has	said	'I	am	a	very	jealous	god.'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Now	 god	 jealous?	 --	 that	 is	 absolutely	 contradictory,	 that	 is	 impossible	 to
conceive.	Buddha	would	have	laughed.	Lao	Tzu	would	have	burned	the	Talmud
immediately	for	the	simple	reason	that	this	is	just	creating	fear	in	people.
The	Talmud	says:	God	is	not	nice,	he	is	not	your	uncle;	be	afraid	of	him.	That's
why	 he	 is	 called	 father,	 because	 each	 child	 is	 afraid	 of	 the	 father.	No	 child	 is
afraid	of	the	uncle	--	remember.	Every	child	loves	the	uncle	and	every	uncle	is
nice	to	children.	But	'father'	means	you	have	to	be	afraid:	he	is	the	authority	and
he	shows	his	authority	in	many	ways.	He	does	not	miss	any	opportunity	to	show
you	who	 he	 is,	 to	 cut	 you	 down	 to	 size.	 That's	 why	 god	 is	 called	 father,	 not
uncle...	because	if	you	call	god	uncle	then	there	are	possibilities	to	persuade	him
'Uncle,	let	us	go	to	the	movie	tonight,'	or	you	can	chitchat	with	him	or	you	can
gossip	or	you	can	sit	in	his	lap	and	pull	his	beard.	But	with	'father'	you	have	to
be	alert,	watchful,	respectful.
My	own	experience	is	that	it	is	because	of	fear	and	greed	that	all	religions	have
become	corrupted	--
but	the	priest	lives	on	those	two	things.
The	real	master	has	to	help	his	disciples	to	be	free	of	fear	and	greed.	He	has	to
help	you	to	be	full	of	love,	and	then,	out	of	love	a	totally	different	vision	of	god
arises	 --	 not	 as	 a	 person,	 not	 at	 all.	 Then	 the	 whole	 existence	 starts	 feeling
godlier,	divine.	Then	there	is	real	surrender,	then	one	can	be	consecrated	to	god	-
-	but	 that	comes	out	of	 love.	One	can	die	 joyously	for	 love	because	love	is	far
more	 important	 than	 anything	 else;	 even	 life	 is	 secondary.	 One	 can	 sacrifice
one's	life	if	love	is	there.
So	I	don't	teach	god,	I	teach	love,	because	I	know	love	slowly	opens	the	door	of
the	 divine	 and	 brings	 the	 divine	 into	 your	 life	without	 any	 effort,	without	 any
imposition	from	the	outside.
And	my	kind	of	approach	cannot	be	exploited	by	priests;	it	is	impossible.
Lao	Tzu	has	not	been	exploited	by	 the	priests	 --	 there	are	no	churches	and	no
priesthoods.	 Jesus	 has	 been	 very	 exploited,	 Krishna	 has	 been	 exploited,
Mohammed	has	been	exploited	for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 they	did	not	make	 it
absolutely	 clear	 that	 basically	man	 has	 to	 be	 fearless	 and	 greedless;	 only	 then
can	he	be	religious.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	blissful,	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	poet,	a	singer,	a	dancer,	a
musician;	in	short,	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	creative.
Creativity	means	 love.	Without	 love	 there	 is	 no	 creativity.	And	 creativity	 also
means	that	you	would	like	to	share,	that	you	are	not	miserly,	that	you	would	like
to	pour	yourself	into	existence.	That	is	the	only	true	prayer,	that	is	the	only	true
worship.	 When	 the	 dancer	 disappears	 in	 the	 dance	 there	 is	 prayer,	 when	 the
musician	disappears	in	the	music	there	is	prayer.
And	 I	 am	 using	 dance	 and	 music	 and	 singing	 and	 poetry	 as	 metaphors.
Whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 has	 to	 be	 a	 dance,	 has	 to	 be	 a	 song,	 has	 to	 be	 a
celebration	-	whatsoever	you	are	doing.	It	does	not	matter	what	it	is.
One	of	the	great	Indian	mystics,	Kabir,	was	a	weaver	and	he	continued	to	weave
even	after	he	became	enlightened.	He	would	sing	songs	while	he	was	weaving
and	making	clothes.	And	his	disciples	would	say,
"You	can	stop	it	now	-	whatsoever	you	need,	we	are	ready	to	fulfill."
But	he	would	say,	"That	is	not	the	point.	I	am	a	weaver,	I	know	only	one	art,	and
that	 is	my	way	of	praying,	 that's	my	way	of	dancing	 -	 I	 don't	 know	any	other
dance.	When	I	am	weaving	clothes	I	dissolve	myself	into	existence.	And	when
somebody	comes	to	purchase,	I	know	it	is	god	himself	who	has	come,	because
there	is	nobody	else	except	him.	Only	he	exists."
Another	 great	mystic,	Gora,	was	 a	 potter,	 and	 he	 remained	 a	 potter	 his	whole
life,	 even	 after	 his	 enlightenment.	 He	 had	 thousands	 of	 followers	 but	 he
continued	to	make	pots,	he	insisted	on	it;	even	to	the	very	last	day	of	his	life	he
was	making	pots.	And	while	he	would	be	making	his	pot	 -	mixing,	preparing,
working	 on	 the	 wheel	 -	 he	 would	 be	 singing.	 He	 said,	 "This	 is	 my	 way	 to
contribute	something	to	existence.
God	has	given	me	so	much.	I	am	a	poor	man	-	I	cannot	give	anything	else.	This
is	all	that	I	can	give:	just	a	little	thankfulness,	that's	all.	And	life	is	short,	I	will
soon	be	gone.	Meanwhile	I	should	share	whatsoever	I	can."
So	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	 that	has	 to	become	your	dance.	Religion	 should
not	be	a	separate	activity,	it	should	not	be	apart	from	life,	it	should	become	your
very	 life.	 And	 that's	 what	 my	 whole	 effort	 here	 is	 in	 my	 commune.	 Every
sannyasin	is	working,	but	with	a	different	flavor,	a	different	quality.	Whatsoever
one	is	doing	-	cooking,	washing	clothes,	or	gardening	-	 it	 is	all	prayer,	 it	 is	all
meditation,	it	is	all	celebration.
Everybody	is	contributing	in	his	own	way,	the	way	he	knows	to	contribute.
And	 as	 the	 commune	 grows,	more	 and	more	 sannyasins	will	 be	 participating,
more	 and	 more	 activities	 will	 become	 available,	 so	 all	 kinds	 of	 people	 can
contribute	 in	 their	own	small	ways.	But	a	sannyasin	should	not	be	an	escapist.
When	 religion	 becomes	 something	 apart	 from	 life	 it	 creates	 escapism.	When
religion	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
means	 life	 then	 it	 becomes	 creativity.	And	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 blissful,
cheerful,	 because	 god	 is	 :	 hence	 rejoice!	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 sad,	 to	 be
serious.	Take	life	as	lightly	as	possible.
The	more	lightly	you	take	it,	the	closer	you	will	be	to	enlightenment.	The	more
lightly	you	take	it,	the	more	you	will	become	full	of	light.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006135
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	only	way	to	help	others	 is	first	 to	become	awakened.	If	 those	who	are	not
awakened	yet	try	to	help
...	their	intentions	are	good	but	the	results	are	going	to	be	just	the	opposite.	Their
wishes	are	good	but	 they	cannot	be	 fulfilled;	 they	are	not	 capable	of	 fulfilling
them.	They	have	not	even	been	able	to	help	themselves.
That's	where	all	 the	religions	have	failed.	They	create	missionaries;	 they	create
the	idea	in	peoples'	mind	that	service	is	the	way	to	god.	It	is	true:	service	is	the
way	to	god.	But	the	sleepy	person	cannot	serve,	cannot	love.	It	is	impossible.	We
can	try,	but	he	will	only	create	more	mess.
The	so-called	servants	of	humanity	have	proved	more	mischievous	than	anybody
else.	 They	 have	 been	 the	 cause	 of	 much	 misery,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that
nobody	 told	 them	you	cannot	give	 to	others	what	you	yourself	have	not	got	 in
the	first	place.	If	you	want	to	share	love	you	have	to	be	full	of	love.	If	you	want
to	share	bliss	you	have	to	be	overflowing	with	bliss.	If	you	want	people	to	move
towards	god	you	have	to	be	radiating	god.	Just	words	won't	help,	even	acts	won't
help,	because	they	will	be	just	superficial.
Hence	my	approach	is	totally	different,	I	say	religion	is	basically	selfish.	First	it
teaches	 you	 to	 become	 blissful.	 That	 is	 utter	 selfishness,	 there	 cannot	 be
anything	more	selfish	than	that.	But	out	of	that	selfishness	altruism	is	born.	Out
of	that	selfishness	service	is	born.	Out	of	that	selfishness	you	can	become	a	great
help.
And	people	are	 in	need	of	help,	 in	need	of	 light,	 in	need	of	guidance;	 they	are
groping	in	the	dark.	But	a	person	who	himself	is	asleep	cannot	wake	others;	first
he	has	to	wake	up	himself	--	that	is	my	fundamental
--	 and	 then	 everything	 follows	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	 Hence	 I	 never	 talk	 about
service;	there	is	no	need.
I	talk	only	about	the	rosebush,	how	to	take	care	of	the	rosebush.	The	flowers	will
come	 of	 their	 own	 accord,	 you	will	 be	 full	 of	 roses.	 If	 the	 right	 care	 is	 being
taken	care	of	 the	 rosebush,	 roses	 are	bound	 to	 come	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	natural	 law.
Hence	 I	 never	 talk	 about	 the	 consequences.	 And	 consequences	 cannot	 be	 put
before	the	causes,	the	effects	cannot	precede	the	causes.
The	first	thing	a	sannyasin	has	to	do	is	to	help	himself.	For	the	time	being	forget
the	whole	worlds	all	its	misery,	oppression,	the	darkness	that	is	becoming	darker
and	darker	every	day,	the	impending	third	world	war	which	can	happen	any	day.
Forget	all	about	that	because	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it	right	now.	But	you
can	do	something	about	yourself	right	now	and	that	will	trigger	a	process	in	you
which	may	prove	of	immense	help	to	the	whole	humanity,	to	the	whole	future	of
humanity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	is	a	kind	of	farming	--	inner	farming.	We	have	the	seeds	but	we	have
never	bothered	to	do	anything	about	them	.	We	have	the	soil	but	we	have	never
prepared	it.	Seasons	come	and	go	and	our	inner	landscape	remains	barren	for	the
simple	reason	that	we	never	look	inwards	we	are	focussed	on	the	outside.
Sannyas	means	a	turning	in,	and	then	all	that	you	need	is	already	provided	for,
you	 have	 brought	 it	with	 you.	 It	 is	 intrinsic,	 it	 is	 born	with	 you.	 It	 cannot	 be
taken	 away	 from	 you.	 It	 is	 part	 of	 your	 nature,	 it	 is	 inseparably	 part	 of	 your
being.	But	something	has	to	be	done	about	it	--	it	is	only	potential.	It	has	to	be
transformed	 into	 the	 actual.	 It	 is	 only	 seeds.	 Those	 seeds	 contain	 millions	 of
flowers.
The	soil	is	there,	the	seeds	are	there,	the	sun	rises,	the	seasons	come,	the	clouds
come.	God	goes	on	providing	a	thousand	and	one	opportunities,	but	the	farmer	is
obsessed	with	his	own	being.	He	never	looks	within	his	own	being.
All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a	 one-hundred-and-eighty	 degree	 turn	 and	 you	 are
immediately	transported	into	another	world	--	Jesus	calls	it	the	kingdom	of	god.
Gautam	the	Buddha	has	actually	called	himself	a	farmer	for	a	simple	reason	that
it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 farming.	 It	 transforms	 you,	 it	 brings	 you	 to	 the	 peak	 of	 your
possibilities.	And	when	all	your	possibilities	are	actualised	there	is	 tremendous
joy,	there	is	contentment,	fulfillment,	there	is	celebration.
Love	is	the	greatest	gift	of	God,	but	it	is	given	only	as	a	potential;	you	have	to
actualize	it.	It	is	given	only	as	a	possibility;	if	one	does	not	pay	attention	to	it	one
may	 ever	 known	 one's	 own	 treasures.	 It	 is	 there	waiting	 for	 you,	 but	 you	 are
never	at	the	center	of	your	being,	you	are	running	on	the	circumference.	That's
what	everybody	is	doing.
Our	mind	is	the	circumference	of	our	being,	and	to	go	on	thinking	is	what	I	call
running	around	the	circumference.	One	thought	leads	to	another	thought,	and	so
on,	 so	 forth;	 it	 is	 an	unending	process.	You	have	 to	 jump	out	 of	 it	 to	 find	 the
center	 of	 your	 being.	You	 cannot	 find	 the	 center	 by	 running	 faster	 around	 the
circumference,	because	it	does	not	exist	 there.	So	it	 is	not	a	question	of	speed:
one	has	to	jump	out	of	the	circumference.	It	is	a	quantum	leap.	That's	what	I	call
meditation.	It	is	a	jump	from	mind	to	no-mind,	from	thought	to	no-thought,	from
desire	to	no-desire.	And	immediately	you	are	standing	at	the	Golden	Gate.
That's	what	we	have	been	searching,	for	lives.	And	it	has	never	been	far	away;	it
has	always	been	within	us,	it	has	never	left	us	even	for	a	single	moment.	But	one
can	go	on	missing	the	opportunity.
In	 fact	 missing	 the	 opportunity	 has	 become	 our	 habit.	 We	 have	 become	 so
accustomed	to	thinking	that	it	seems	the	hardest	thing	in	the	world	not	to	think	-
even	for	a	single	moment.	But	it	is	not	as	difficult	as	we	think.	One	just	has	to
try	and	one	has	to	be	a	little	patient,	because	habits	die	hard.
If	one	can	be	patient	and	go	on	watching	the	mind	without	doing	anything	about
it,	 slowly	 slowly	 one	 slips	 out	 of	 the	mind.	 Suddenly	 one	 day	 the	mind	 is	 no
more	 there.	 And	 the	 first	 glimpse	 of	 no-mind	 is	 such	 a	 revelation	 that	 one	 is
never	the	same	again.	One	is	reborn.
Jesus	said	to	Nicodemus,	"Unless	you	are	born	again,	you	shall	not	enter	into	my
kingdom	of	god."	He	is	talking	about	this	rebirth.
My	path	is	the	path	of	bliss.	It	is	not	of	sadness,	it	is	not	of	seriousness.	Sadness
and	seriousness	are	pathological.	The	so-called	saints	who	appear	very	serious,
are	 really	 ill	 people.	 They	 are	 not	 whole.	 They	 have	 become	 incapable	 of
laughter,	 they	have	become	incapable	of	cheerfulness	--	and	to	be	incapable	of
cheerfulness	 and	 laughter	 is	 really	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 They	 have	 committed
suicide.	 But	 we	 have	 worshipped	 these	 people	 for	 centuries	 because	 we	 are
worshippers	of	death,	not	of	life.	And	we	worship	a	person	who	becomes	dead
even	while	 he	 is	 alive,	who	 starts	 living	 a	 kind	 of	 post-humous	 existence.	He
becomes	a	mahatma,	a	sage,	a	saint.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	what	he	needs	is	just	psychological	treatment.	Maybe
ordinary	psychoanalysis	will	not	help	him,	he	may	need	electroshocks.	Nothing
will	bring	him	to	his	senses	unless	he	is	given	really	great	shocks	of	electricity.
That	may	revive	him.
Sometimes	it	happens...	Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	in	the	newspapers,	one
man	had	gone	blind	for	ten	years	and	the	doctors	had	declared	that	his	blindness
was	incurable,	nothing	could	be	done	about	it.
He	was	sitting	outside	his	home	in	the	garden	and	there	was	great	 thunder	and
lightning.	The	 lightning	 struck	his	home,	 it	 destroyed	his	home,	but	 the	 shock
was	 such	 that	he	 started	 seeing.	Something	 inside	his	brain	changed	 its	 tracks.
Some	 nuts	 and	 bolts	 may	 have	 gone	 loose	 became	 tight,	 or	 maybe	 they	 had
become	tight	and	now	they	became	loose	...	and	he	started	seeing!
Doctors	are	puzzled	--	how	did	it	happen?	The	shock	did	something.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sometimes	it	happens	that	a	shock	can	cure	a	person	Or	a	certain	illness.	And	to
me,	the	serious	and	sad	kind	of	religion	is	one	of	the	most	serious	sicknesses.	It
is	 far	 more	 dangerous	 than	 cancer.	 One	 can	 survive	 cancer	 but	 one	 cannot
survive	this	so-called	spirituality.	The	cancer	can	destroy	only	your	body	but	this
so-called	spirituality	destroys	even	your	soul.
My	vision	of	religion	is	totally	different,	diametrically	opposite	to	what	has	been
taught	 to	 people	 for	 centuries.	 I	 believe	 in	 life	 and	 I	 don't	 believe	 in	 anything
else.	To	me	life	 is	god	and	to	me	to	 live	totally	 is	 the	only	religion	and	to	 live
blissfully	is	the	only	prayer.
That	has	to	be	the	path	of	my	sannyasins.	Rejoice,	be	cheerful.	Drop	all	kinds	of
seriousness	 lurking	 anywhere	 in	 your	 mind.	 Simply	 throw	 them	 out,	 cleanse
yourself	 completely.	 And	 once	 you	 start	 living	 cheerfully,	 joyfully,	 once	 you
know	the	taste	of	a	dancing	life,	of	a	singing	life,	no	other	proof	of	god	is	needed
-	 that	 is	 the	 only	 proof	 that	 god	 is,	Only	 bliss	 gives	 you	 the	 proof.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	arguments,	it	is	a	question	of	experiencing.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006145
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	coward	can	not	cross	the	boundaries	of	misery,	it	is	impossible.	Although	he
wants	to,	he	has	no	courage	to	drop	the	known.	Misery	is	all	that	he	knows.	He
clings	to	it,	he	clings	to	his	wounds,	to	his	hurts.
He	 lives	 in	 a	 contradiction.	 The	 contradiction	 is	 that	 he	 does	 not	 want	 to	 be
miserable...	But	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	not	wanting,	it	is	a	question	of	taking
the	courageous	step	of	going	beyond	the	boundaries	of	the	known.	That	courage
is	missing;	hence	he	goes	on	hoping	that	something,	some	miracle	will	happen.
But	 no	 miracle	 ever	 happens	 in	 the	 life	 of	 a	 coward.	 It	 cannot	 happen,	 he
prevents	its	happening.
Miracles	abound	when	you	have	courage.	They	happen	each	moment,	because
each	moment	the	courageous	man	goes	on	dropping	the	known.	That's	what	real
courage	is.	Whatsoever	is	known	has	to	be	dropped.	You	have	lived	it,	you	have
experienced	it;	there	is	no	need	to	cling	to	it.	Clinging	to	it	will	prevent	the	new
from	happening.	The	new	needs	 space;	 if	 the	old	 is	occupying	 the	 space,	 then
where	can	 it	happen?	The	courageous	man	goes	on	dropping	 the	past,	 the	old,
the	known,	and	is	always	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown.	It	needs	guts,	because
one	 never	 knows	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 in	 the	 next	 moment.	 It	 is
unpredictable.	The	familiar	is	predictable.	Even	if	it	is	miserable	you	are	familiar
with	it	and	you	have	become	accustomed	to	it.
Bliss	is	only	for	the	courageous.	Bliss	is	really	the	constant	dropping	of	the	past.
Bliss	is	dying	to	the	past,	being	born	anew	each	moment.	That's	what	bliss	is.
Except	for	meditation	there	is	no	deliverance.	Nobody	else	can	deliver	you	from
your	misery,	from	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ignorance,	from	your	bondage,	it	is	only	you	who	can	save	yourself.	But	people
always	want	somebody	else	to	do	the	work	for	them,	hence	they	go	on	waiting
for	the	messiah	to	come.	That	is	impossible.
Christians	 think	 that	 Jesus	 delivered	 them,	 Jesus	 only	 delivers	 himself	 and	 he
helped	 those	who	were	 ready	 to	go	 into	deep	meditation	with	him.	He	has	not
delivered	humanity	from	its	pain,	limitations,	misery.
And	those	fools	are	again	waiting	for	another	coming	of	Christ,	Jews	have	been
waiting	for	three	thousand	years.	And	the	same	is	the	case	with	the	Hindus:	they
are	waiting	for	god's	incarnation	again.	They	can't	learn	a	simple	lesson,	that	the
past	incarnations	have	been	of	no	use.
Buddha	is	 the	only	person	in	 the	whole	history	of	humanity	who	told	 the	truth
exactly	as	it	is,	He	said,	Be	a	light	unto	yourself;	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.
Of	course,	Buddhas	can	point	the	way,	but	everything	else	you	have	to	do.	It	is
totally	up	to	you	to	be	miserable	or	to	be	blissful,	 to	live	in	ignorance	or	to	be
full	of	light.	And	there	is	no	other	way	to	become	full	of	light	than	meditation.
Pour	your	whole	energy	into	meditation.
Bliss	 is	 the	ultimate	 truth,	 hence	only	 those	who	know	how	 to	be	blissful	 can
know	 the	 truth.	The	miserable	 and	 the	 sad	 and	 the	 serious	 cannot	 find	 it.	 The
first	step	towards	truth	is	cheerfulness,	a	deep	inner	dance.
One	has	 to	 drop	 all	 that	 prevents	 that	 dance,	 one	has	 to	 drop	 all	 that	 prevents
one's	 life	becoming	a	celebration.	And	we	are	all	 carrying	many	conditionings
which	are	against	blissfulness.	In	fact,	religion	has	become	almost	synonymous
with	 seriousness.	Religious	people	 look	 so	dad,	 as	 if	 it	 is	 a	 sin	 to	 laugh.	They
cannot	 sing,	 they	 cannot	 dance,	 they	 cannot	 enjoy	 anything.	 They	 are	 against
life.	That	is	not	the	way	to	find	the	truth.
Love	 life,	 love	 the	 small	 things	of	 life,	 the	very	 small	 things.	Eating,	walking,
sleeping	--	just	the	ordinary	activities	of	life	have	to	be	transformed	into	delight.
They	have	to	be	done	with	such	joy	that	they	all	become	a	dance.	Then	truth	is
not	 far	 away,	 then	 each	 moment	 it	 becomes	 closer	 and	 closer.	 In	 the	 very
moment	your	bliss	is	total,	truth	descends	in	you	--	and	truth	liberates.
Meditation	has	to	be	a	joyous	activity,	it	has	to	be	a	song.	One	has	not	to	do	it	as
a	duty,	one	has	to	enjoy	it	as	fun,	as	play.	If	you	do	meditation	as	a	duty	you	will
miss	the	whole	point.	Then	it	cannot	happen	to	you.	It	can	happen	only	in	a	very
light	 mood,	 in	 a	 very	 non-serious	 mood.	 Seriousness	 is	 heavy,	 and	 anything
heavy	drags	you	downwards.	You	have	to	be	as	light	as	a	small	child	playing	on
the	 beach,	 collecting	 seashells,	 colored	 stones,	 running	 here	 and	 there,	 almost
part	 of	 the	wind	 and	 the	 sea	 and	 the	 sand	 and	 the	 sun.	When	 that	 lightness	 is
there	you	have	wings,	you	can	 fly	upwards.	And	meditation	means	an	upward
movement	of	your	energies.
Science	has	discovered	gravitation	-	that	is	the	downwards	movement	of	things.
Long	before	 the	discovery	of	gravitation	 religion	discovered	a	 totally	different
law;	I	call	it	the	law	of	grace.	To	make	it	appear	more	scientific	you	can	call	it
the	law	of	levitation.	It	uplifts	you,	it	takes	you	upwards.	But	for	that	you	have	to
lose	weight,	and	 the	serious	mind	cannot	 lose	weight.	That's	why	 I	don't	 think
your	 so-called	 saints	 have	 ever	 tasted	 what	 meditation	 is;	 they	 are	 only
pretending.	Out	of	a	hundred	so-called	saints,	ninety-nine	are	pretenders.
And	remember	the	exception	only	proves	the	rule.	That	one	may	be	pretending
seriousness,	that's	all;	deep	down	he	must	be	laughing	and	enjoying.	He	may	be
just	pretending	seriousness	-	sometimes	that	has	to	be	done.
The	 great	German	mystic,	Meister	Eckhart,	 had	 to	 do	 it	 because	 of	 the	 stupid
Christian	 priesthood	 and	 the	 pope	 and	 the	 church.	 They	 were	 so	 foolish	 a
people...	in	fact	only	foolish	people	become	priests	and	popes.	Now	they	cannot
find	anybody	else	-	they	have	found	a	Polack	to	become	a	pope.	This	is	a	great
discovery!
Meister	Eckhart	was	a	man	of	great	joy,	but	he	pretended	on	the	outside	that	he
was	 just	 an	 ordinary	 conventional	 saint.	Only	when	 he	 died	were	 his	writings
discovered.	 His	 writings	 are	 tremendously	 beautiful.	 If	 they	 had	 been	 known
before	he	died	he	would	have	been	killed	like	Jesus,	crucified	by	the	Christians.
The	same	is	true	about	Saint	Francis:	he	was	a	very	light-hearted	man.	Just	think,
he	used	to	talk	to	the	trees	and	to	the	fish	and	even	to	his	donkey;	he	would	say
to	him	"Brother	Donkey,	how	are	you?"
When	he	died	he	thanked	his	disciples;	he	also	thanked	his	donkey,	and	he	said
to	him,	 "You	have	 served	me	with	 such	 love	 that	 I	 am	 immensely	 thankful	 to
you."	Now,	 such	 a	man	 cannot	 be	 serious,	 but	 he	 had	 to	 pretend	 seriousness,
otherwise	those	fools	would	simply	kill	him	-	and	that	would	not	help	anybody.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Real	 saints	 have	 always	 been	men	 of	 love	 and	 laughter.	 Jesus	 says	 again	 and
again	to	his	disciples,
"Rejoice,	rejoice.	I	say	again	and	again,	rejoice!"	That's	my	whole	message.	And
it	 is	only	 in	 rejoicing	 that	you	will	 come	 to	know	what	meditation	 is,	 because
when	you	are	really	rejoicing,	mind	disappears,	and	the	disappearance	of	mind	is
meditation.	You	suddenly	fall	into	a	state	of	no-mind.
There	is	nothing	more	meditative	than	celebration.	And	the	whole	art	of	religion
is	 how	 to	 transform	 your	 life	 into	 a	 constant	 celebration,	 into	 an	 unending
celebration.	Celebrate	 everything,	 then	meditation	 comes	 of	 its	 own	 accord,	 it
follows	you	like	a	shadow.
Love	 is	a	purifying	process;	 it	purifies	you	so	 totally	 that	after	 the	purification
you	are	no	more	the	same	person.	But	because	of	that	many	people	avoid	love.
They	don't	want	 to	change	so	 radically,	 they	want	 to	 remain	as	 they	are.	They
want	 love	also	but	 they	want	 love	as	 they	are;	 they	don't	want	 to	go	 through	a
radical	change.	But	that	is	impossible.
Love	 is	 an	alchemical	 revolution;	hence	very	 few	people	gather	 courage	 to	go
into	 love.	 The	 first	 problem	 arises	with	 the	 ego	 because	 that	 is	 the	most	 ugly
thing.	 Love	 demands	 that	 you	 surrender	 it.	 That	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
purification,	that	is	entering	into	fire.	And	if	you	can	drop	the	ego	then	naturally
you	will	be	able	to	drop	many	more	things.	That	becomes	a	test.	Then	you	will
be	able	to	drop	possessiveness,	you	will	be	able	to	drop	jealousies,	you	will	be
able	to	drop	all	efforts,	gross	and	subtle,	of	dominating.	You	will	be	able	to	drop
all	 politics...	 because	 people	 go	 on	 playing	 all	 kinds	 of	 politics	 in	 their
relationships.
What	they	call	 love	is	only	one	per	cent	 love	and	ninety-nine	per	cent	politics.
Unless	one	is	ready	to	drop	all	that	politics,	love	cannot	happen.	To	allow	love
one	has	to	be	able	to	pass	through	the	fire	of	love.
But	it	is	not	harmful,	Yes,	in	the	beginning	it	is	painful,	because	many	things	that
we	have	 lived	with	 for	 so	 long	 start	 being	burned	by	 the	 fire.	But	 finally	 it	 is
realised	that	those	were	the	things	which	were	the	cause	of	all	our	misery	--	now
there	is	no	more	misery.
Once	 ego,	 possessiveness,	 jealousies,	 dominating	games	 are	 gone,	 nobody	 can
make	you	miserable.
Even	 ii	 the	whole	world	wants	 you	 to	 become	miserable	 it	 is	 impossible,	 you
cannot	be	made	miserable:	bliss	is	yours.	It	is	indestructable.
Love	brings	you	 to	something	eternal.	Call	 it	god,	call	 it	 truth,	call	 it	 freedom,
call	it	your	real	self	--
whatsoever	name	one	chooses,	one	can	choose	--	but	one	has	to	be	ready	to	pass
through	the	fire.
That's	why	I	have	chosen	the	colour	of	fire	for	my	sannyasins.	It	is	symbolic	that
you	are	entering	into	fire,	which	in	the	beginning	will	be	painful	but	in	the	end	is
going	to	give	you	the	greatest	ecstasy	possible.
It	will	 give	 you	 the	 greatest	 dance.	 It	will	 explode	 into	 thousands	 of	 songs	 in
your	heart.	It	will	open	up	something	in	you	which	Buddha	calls	the	inner	lotus.
It	 will	 release	 your	 fragrance,	 and	 that	 very	 release	 fulfils,	 one	 feels	 one	 has
come	home.
Meditation	 is	a	very	strange	phenomenons	on	 the	one	hand	it	makes	you	more
and	more	aware;	on	the	other	hand,	simultaneously,	it	makes	you	more	and	more
drunk.	Hence	it	is	incomprehensible	to	the	mind,	because	mind	can	think	only	in
logical	 ways,	 and	 meditation	 is	 a	 paradox,	 it	 is	 a	 mystery.	 Not	 only	 is	 it	 a
mystery,	it	is	the	door	to	all	other	mysteries	too.	It	is	the	very	key	that	opens	the
doors	of	a	thousand	and	one	mysteries	in	your	life.
The	paradoxical	thing	is	that	you	are	aware,	more	aware	than	ever,	and	yet	more
drunk	than	ever	too	--
drunk	in	the	sense	that	your	life	becomes	ecstatic,	aware	in	the	sense	that	you	are
not	unconscious,	you	are	fully	aware	of	your	ecstasy.	You	are	witnessing	it,	you
know	it	is	there.	You	have	not	fallen	asleep.
It	is	because	of	this	phenomenon	that	many	people,	even	very	intelligent	people
like	Aldous	Huxley,	became	deceived	by	drugs,	because	drugs	can	give	half	of
it.	They	can	give	you	the	ecstatic	feeling,	the	euphoria,	but	they	don't	make	you
aware.	They	make	you	very	joyous,	but	there	is	no	witness	to	the	joy.
And	 when	 the	 witness	 does	 come,	 the	 joy	 is	 only	 a	 memory.	 You	 can	 only
remember	 how	 joyous	 it	 was	 later	 on,	 but	 not	 at	 the	 moment	 when	 it	 was
happening.
Huxley	 thought	 that	LSD	does	 the	same	as	meditation.	He	was	a	 sincere	man,
but	because	of	his	sincerity,	authenticity,	he	created	a	misguidance	for	thousands
of	 young	 people.	 The	 whole	 drug	 scene	 was	 created	 because	 of	 his	 impact.
When	 such	 a	 prominent	 intellectual	 of	 the	 age	 is	 supporting	 drugs,	 then	 there
must	be	something	in	it,	then	others	followed.	And	of	course,	it	gives	you	half	of
it,	and	the	half	can	create	the	deception.	And	it	is	not	new:	the	East	has	known	it
for	centuries.
In	 the	East	 the	pseudo	mystics	have	 always	 taken	drugs,	 it	 is	 a	 five-thousand-
year-old	story	at	least.
They	were	all	deceived	by	 the	 fact	 that	 they	went	 into	 the	same	ecstasy	as	 the
meditator.	From	 the	outside	 they	 look	almost	 the	 same,	 they	both	 look	stoned,
they	both	look	somewhere	far	away,	into	the	beyond,	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
both	 look	 as	 if	 they	 have	 entered	 into	 some	 other	 space,	 into	 some	 other
dimension.	 Their	 joy	 seems	 to	 be	 unbounded.	 There	 is	 a	 difference,	 but	 that
difference	is	inner.	That	can	be	known	only	from	the	insides	nobody	can	observe
it	from	the	outside.
The	real	meditator	is	ecstatic,	but	deep	down	there	is	a	flame	of	awareness,	and
the	person	who	is	under	the	impact	of	drugs	has	no	awareness	at	all.	Because	of
this	 similarity	all	great	 religions	have	been	against	using	drugs:	 it	 can	create	a
deception	in	peoples'	mind;	it	can	give	them	a	cheap	kind	of	mysticism.
Remember	 that	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 meditation,	 dhyan;	 and	 the	 second	 thing	 is
drunkenness.	 It	 should	 come	 out	 of	 meditation,	 not	 out	 of	 any	 chemical,	 It
should	 come	 out	 of	 watching,	 witnessing	 your	 own	 mind	 processes.	 Then	 it
becomes	 something	 which	 is	 not	 a	 momentary	 phenomenon	 because	 it	 is	 not
dependent	on	anything	outside.	You	can	carry	it	with	you	everywhere,	in	every
situation;	 even	 in	death	you	can	carry	 it.	Even	dying	 the	mystic	 remains	alert,
aware,	totally	aware.	He	can	see	death	happening.	And	because	he	can	see	death
happening	he	knows	'I	am	not	dying,	because	I	am	the	seer,	I	am	the	witness,	I
am	the	knower.
Death	is	happening	in	the	body	--	I	am	totally	aloof,	untouched.'
To	know	this	is	to	know	the	most	fundamental	truth	of	life	--	that	we	are	not	the
body	nor	the	mind	but	pure	awareness.
The	 real	 virtue	 arises	 out	 of	 meditation,	 the	 pseudo	 virtue	 is	 cultivated.	 The
pseudo	 virtue	 is	 part	 of	 character,	 the	 real	 virtue	 is	 part	 of	 consciousness.	All
societies	 live	on	pseudo	virtue	because	 it	 is	 easier	 to	 impose	on	 children;	 it	 is
difficult	to	make	them	meditators.	That's	what	people	have	thought	up	to	now.	It
is	not	 true:	children	can	be	taught	 to	be	meditative,	and	more	easily	 than	older
people.
But	 for	 centuries	 the	 idea	 has	 persisted	 that	 they	 are	 children	 --	 how	can	 they
meditate?	Of	course	they	cannot	sit	still	like	an	old	man,	but	there	is	no	need	to
sit	 like	 an	 old	man.	Meditations	 can	 be	 devised	 especially	 for	 them:	 they	 can
dance	 and	 jump	 and	 jog	 and	 run,	 and	 yet	 meditation	 can	 happen.	 Their
meditation	has	to	be	very	active,	it	cannot	be	inactive.
If	children	are	introduced	to	meditation	from	the	very	beginning	they	will	have	a
totally	 different	 kind	 of	 virtue.	Then	 you	 need	 not	 tell	 them	what	 is	 right	 and
what	is	wrong;	they	will	know	it	on	their	own.
And	 that's	my	effort	here:	 to	help	you	 to	know	on	your	own	what	 is	 right	and
what	 is	 wrong,	 I	 never	 say	 what	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong,	 I	 have	 no
commandments,	no	shoulds,	no	should-nots.	I	simply	want	you	to	be	able	to	see,
to	be	clear	like	a	mirror	so	that	you	can	reflect	reality.
Any	action	out	of	that	clarity	is	virtuous.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006155
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	god	protects	you	is	a	blessing,	but	the	blessing	is	possible	only	if	you	are
blissful.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 fundamental	 laws	 of	 life:	 if	 you	 have	 you	will	 get
more,	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 you	will	 lose	 even	 that	 which	 you	 have.	 It	 is	 a	 very
strange	law	but	one	has	to	understand	it.	Nothing	can	be	done	about	it,	one	has	to
follow	it:	it	is	so.
It	is	so	in	the	ordinary	world,	it	is	so	in	the	inner	world.	The	rich	man	gets	richer
because	money	attracts	more	money;	the	poor	man	gets	poorer.	The	same	is	true
in	 the	 inner	 world	 too:	 the	 blissful	 person	 becomes	 more	 blissful;	 all	 god's
blessings	 shower	on	him.	The	miserable	person	becomes	more	miserable.	You
get	only	that	which	you	have	because	that	which	you	have	becomes	a	magnetic
forces	it	attracts	something	similar	to	it.	It	is	as	if	a	drunk	comes	to	the	city,	soon
he	 will	 find	 other	 drunkards.	 If	 a	 gambler	 comes	 into	 the	 city,	 soon	 he	 will
become	acquainted	with	other	gamblers.	If	a	thief	comes	to	the	city	he	will	find
thieves.	 If	 a	 seeker	 of	 truth	 comes	 to	 the	 city	 he	 will	 find	 other	 seekers.
Whatsoever	we	create	in	us	becomes	a	magnetic	centre,	it	creates	a	certain	field
of	energy.	And	in	that	field	of	energy	things	start	happening.
So	if	one	wants	god's	blessings	one	should	create	whatsoever	blissfulness	one	is
capable	 of,	 one	 should	 do	 one's	 utmost,	 and	 then	 a	 thousandfold	 bliss	will	 be
yours.	The	more	you	have,	the	more	will	be	coming.
Once	this	secret	is	understood,	one	goes	on	becoming	richer	and	richer	inwardly,
deeper	and	deeper	is	one's	joy.	And	there	is	no	end	to	ecstasy	--	one	just	has	to
begin	in	th	right	direction.
The	 feeling	 of	 being	 a	 stranger	 has	 to	 be	 transcended	 because	 this	 feeling	 is
basically	wrong.	We	are	part	of	existence,	we	are	not	strangers.	We	are	waves	of
the	 ocean,	we	 are	 not	 strangers	 to	 the	 ocean.	How	 can	we	 be	 strangers	 to	 the
ocean?	--	we	arise	from	it,	we	live	in	it,	one	day	we	disappear	in	it.	We	are	part
of	 it.	 This	 existence	 is	 our	 home.	We	 are	 not	 outsiders;	 even	 if	 we	 want	 we
cannot	be	outsiders,	we	are	insiders.	There	is	nowhere	to	go,	we	cannot	go	out	of
existence	--	everything	is	in.	There	is	no	boundary	where	existence	ends	and	we
can	jump	out	of	it.	The	fish	can	come	out	of	the	ocean	but	we	cannot	come	out
of	existence,	it	is	impossible.	Wherever	we	are,	we	are	rooted	in	existence.
This	is	the	fundamental	religious	feeling.	The	irreligious	person	feels	that	he	is	a
foreigner,	 a	 stranger,	 an	 outsider.	 That	 feeling	 has	 grown	 very	 much	 in	 this
century.	All	over	the	world	all	the	intelligent	people	are	suffering	from	a	strange
kind	of	disease	--	the	disease	can	be	called	the	feeling	of	being	outsiders,	that	we
don't	belong	to	existence,	 that	existence	does	not	belong	to	us,	 that	we	are	just
accidents,	 that	we	 are	 not	 fulfilling	 any	 purpose,	 that	we	 are	 not	 needed,	 that
things	will	go	on	perfectly	well	without	us,	 that	we	are	dispensable.	All	 this	 is
utterly	wrong,	absolutely	wrong.
Even	 a	 small	 grass	 leaf	 is	 intrinsic,	 not	 accidental.	 It	 is	 as	 significant	 as	 the
biggest	 star.	Without	 it	 the	 existence	will	 not	 be	 the	 same,	 something	will	 be
missed,	 there	 will	 be	 n	 gap	 left.	 It	 is	 not	 dispensable,	 nothing	 is	 dispensable.
Once	 this	 is	understood	all	 fear	disappears,	 a	great	 relaxation	comes	naturally.
One	becomes	capable	of	resting,	because	then	this	is	our	home.
To	feel	existence	as	our	home,	to	feel	that	it	is	our	mother,	it	is	our	father,	that
the	trees	and	the	mountains	and	the	stars	are	our	family,	is	exactly	the	meaning
of	the	word	'god'.
God	 is	 sweet	 --	 in	 fact,	 the	 sweetest	 phenomenon,	 the	 most	 delicious
phenomenon	 is	 god.	 Those	who	 have	 tasted	 god	 have	 tasted	 the	 nectar.	 They
become	 immortals,	 they	 know	 nothing	 of	 birth	 and	 death.	 For	 them	 time
becomes	irrelevant,	they	start	living	in	eternity.
As	one	goes	deep	in	meditation,	one's	life	becomes	more	and	more	sweet,	full	of
many	songs,	music,	joy.	A	thousand	and	one	flowers	bloom	and	all	year	round	it
is	spring.	And	everything	becomes	fragrant	with	god,	because	everything	is	full
of	god.	All	that	we	need	is	the	way	to	see	it	-	and	meditation	is	the	way.
My	sannyasins	have	to	live	a	life	of	bliss	--	that	is	their	meditation.	They	have	to
drop	all	seriousness,	they	have	to	become	more	playful.	They	have	to	look	at	life
not	 as	 a	problem	but	 as	a	mystery.	 If	you	 look	at	 it	 as	 a	problem	you	become
serious	because	then	a	great	temptation	arises	to	solve	it	--	and	it	is	insoluble.
It	 will	 lead	 you	 into	more	 and	more	 seriousness	 and	 into	 frustration	 and	 into
sadness.
You	can	never	come	to	a	conclusion.	Yes,	you	may	find	many	answers	but	each
answer	will	 create	more	 questions	 than	 it	 will	 solve.	 That's	 why	 philosophers
become	very	serious,	theologians	become	very	serious.
They	 lose	 all	 playfulness	 They	 forget	what	 it	means	 to	 be	 light	 --	 and	 if	 you
forget	what	it	means	to	be	light	you	will	forget	what	it	means	to	be	delight-full,
because	 they	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 phenomenon.	 To	 be	 light	 is	 a	 basic
requirement	for	delight	to	happen.
Delight	happens	only	 in	 light	moods.	Don't	 take	 life	as	a	problem	--	 it	 is	not	a
problem	at	all.	 It	 is	a	mystery	 to	be	 lived,	not	 to	be	solved	--	enjoyed,	danced,
loved,	sung,	but	not	to	be	solved.	It	is	not	a	riddle,	it	is	not	a	challenge	to	solve
it.	It	is	a	challenge	to	explore	it,	with	wonder,	with	awe,	just	like	a	small	child.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
For	my	 sannyasins	 bliss	 is	meditation,	 and	 the	more	 blissful	 you	 become,	 the
more	 meditative	 you	 become.	 So	 learn	 to	 be	 cheerful;	 take	 things	 as	 fun.
Everything	has	to	be	taken	as	fun	--	even	death	has	to	be	taken	as	fun.
If	you	can	live	life	as	if	it	is	just	a	role	you	are	playing	in	a	drama,	then	you	have
become	a	sannyasin.
Bliss	 is	 god.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 god:	 to	 be	 blissful	 is	 to	 be	 divine.	 But	 for
centuries	god	has	been	worshipped	out	of	fear,	out	of	greed.	Only	 the	cowards
and	the	greedy	have	gathered	in	the	temples	and	the	churches	and	the	mosques.
If	analysed,	all	their	prayers	can	be	reduced	to	two	things:	either	fear	or	greed.
And	fear	and	greed	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
The	fearful	person	is	always	greed.	In	fact	it	is	because	of	fear	that	one	becomes
greedy.	The	 fear	 of	 tomorrow	creates	 greed:	 accumulate	more	money,	 because
who	knows?	--	tomorrow	there	will	be	difficulty.
In	 your	 old	 age	 nobody	may	 support	 you,	 your	 friends	may	 desert	 you,	 your
children	may	not	look	after	you.	It	is	fear.	So	make	every	arrangement	for	every
possibility.	Hope	for	the	best	and	expect	the	worst	--
that	is	peoples'	logic,	the	greedy	peoples'	logic.	It	is	out	of	fear.
But	greed	cannot	destroy	fear.	In	fact	because	it	comes	out	of	fear	it	nourishes	its
source;	 it	 becomes	 a	 vicious	 circle.	 Fear	 creates	 greed,	 the	 greedy	 person
becomes	more	afraid,	afraid	that	he	may	lose	whatsoever	he	has	gained.	Hence
the	more	money	people	have,	the	more	miserly	they	become.	It	is	strange,	poor
people	 are	 not	 so	miserly.	 They	 are	 capable	 of	 sharing,	 they	 can	 easily	 share,
they	can	easily	give,	they	are	not	so	afraid.	But	the	richer	people	are	very	greedy.
There	is	a	Sufi	story...	A	poor	Sufi	mystic	lives	in	a	small	hut.	It	 is	enough	for
him	and	his	wife.	One	night,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	somebody	knocks	on	the
door.	The	Sufi	says	to	the	wife,	'Open	the	door	--
because	 it	 is	 raining,	 it	 is	 dark,	 it	 seems	 somebody	 has	 lost	 his	way.	And	 the
village	 is	 far	 away.'	 But	 the	wife	 says,	 'We	 don't	 have	 enough	 space	 for	 three
persons	 to	 sleep.'	 The	 Sufi	 says,	 'You	will	 never	 understand.	Yes,	 I	 know,	we
don't	have	enough	space	for	three	persons	to	sleep	but	we	have	space	enough	for
three	persons	to	sit.	So	we	will	sit	and	we	will	gossip	and	we	will	tell	stories	and
we	will	joke	and	we	will	laugh	or	we	will	sing	or	I	can	play	on	my	instrument!'
Unwillingly	 the	wife	 opens	 the	 door.	 The	 stranger	 standing	 outside	 has	 heard
everything;	he	comes	inside.	He	is	the	king	of	the	country	but	for	the	first	time
he	feels	that	he	is	poorer	than	this	man.	He	has	a	vast	palace,	but	he	would	not
have	allowed	anybody	in,	even	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	even	if	it	were	raining.
And	he	looks	around:	really,	the	wife	is	right.	He	is	in	disguise,	so	the	Sufi	and
his	wife	 don't	 know	who	 he	 is,	 but	 he	 is	 treated	 like	 a	 king.	He	 is	 afraid	 that
somehow	the	mystic	has	detected	who	he	is,	so	he	asks,	'Have	you	come	to	know
who	I	am?...	because	you	are	treating	me	as	if	I	am	the	king.'
He	 says,	 'No.	 I	 don't	 know	 who	 you	 are,	 but	 we	 treat	 everybody	 as	 a	 king
because	every	guest	is	divine.
We	are	waiting	for	the	ultimate	guest	and	preparing	for	him.	We	are	waiting	for
god	to	knock	on	the	door	one	day.	This	 is	 the	way	we	are	preparing.	He	sends
people	 so	 that	 we	 can	 get	 ready.	 That's	 why	 we	 are	 treating	 you	 like	 this.
Whatsoever	we	have,	eat,	drink,	and	 I	will	play	on	my	 instrument	because	we
don't	have	enough	space	to	sleep.'
So,	 the	king	eats,	drinks	and	 the	Sufi	plays	beautiful	music	on	 the	 instrument.
The	 king	 has	 never	 heard	 such	music	 although	 he	 has	 great	 musicians	 in	 his
court.	 But	 they	 are	 nothing	 compared	 to	 this	 man	 because	 this	 man	 has
something	inner,	some	bliss	to	share.	Those	musicians	are	just	technicians	--	this
is	 a	 real	musician,	 almost	a	Buddha	or	 just	on	 the	 last	 rung	of	 the	 ladder:	one
step	more	and	he	will	be	enlightened.
While	 they	 are	 listening	 to	 the	music	 somebody	 else	 knocks	 on	 the	 door.	The
mystic	says	to	his	wife,
'Open	 the	door.'	But	 there	 is	not	enough	space	 for	 the	wife	 to	move	even.	She
says,	'What	are	you	saying?	I	cannot	move.	I	cannot	even	go	to	the	door	because
the	guest	is	sitting	there,	just	close	to	the	door.'	So	the	mystic	says,	 'Excuse	me
sir,	will	you	be	kind	enough	to	open	the	door	--	somebody	else	has	come.	Maybe
somebody	has	forgotten	his	way,	just	like	you.'
Now	the	king	has	completely	forgotten	that	just	a	few	hours	ago	he	was	in	the
same	situation.	He	says,
'What	are	you	talking	about?	Have	you	gone	mad?	There	is	no	space.	Only	three
persons	can	sit	here.'	The	mystic	says	'I	know	that,	that	only	three	persons	can	sit
here,	 but	 four	 can	 stand:	 we	 will	 stand	 up.	 And	 I	 really	 love	 playing	 on	 my
instrument	standing	up!	And	you	will	enjoy	it	--	don't	be	worried!'
The	king	insists	 'This	 is	stupid!	I	don't	understand.'	And	the	man	says	 'You	are
just	 a	 guest	 --	 I	 am	 the	host!	You	have	 completely	 forgotten.	 I	 am	 telling	you
"Please	open	the	door."'
The	king	has	to	open	the	door.	Now	he	remembers	that	what	he	is	saying	is	not
right	--	who	is	he?	He	opens	the	door;	a	beggar	enters	in;	the	king	is	very	angry.
The	beggar	says	'I	have	forgotten	the	way	to	the	town.'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	is	drenched,	completely	wet,	and	the	mystic	gives	him	clothes.	They	all	stand
up	and	the	king	says
'This	is	stupid	--	I	have	never	seen	such	a	man!'
The	wife	 is	 very	 angry,	 even	 the	 beggar	 cannot	 understand	 this	man,	 because
anybody	in	his	situation	would	have	rejected	him.	The	Sufi	starts	playing	on	the
instrument.
Then	somebody	else	again...	Now	the	beggar	is	very	close	to	the	door,	his	back
is	just	touching	the	door.
The	mystic	 says,	 'Open	 the	 door	 --	 somebody	 else	 has	 come.'	 But	 the	 beggar
says,	 'Are	you	mad?	Where	 is	he	going	 to	stand?	We	don't	even	have	space	 to
stand.'	He	said,	'Yes,	we	will	not	be	able	to	stand	comfortably,	but	we	can	stand,
with	a	little	discomfort.'
The	beggar	says,	'I	don't	understand	you.	Are	you	mad	or	something?'	The	king
also	said,	 'This	 is	 too	much,	 this	 is	going	 too	 far.'	And	 the	mystic	said,	 'Please
open	the	door.	I	am	the	host,	you	are	just	guests.
You	don't	possess	this	hut.	I	possess	this	hut,	I	am	the	owner.	Open	the	door!'
They	open	the	door:	it	is	not	a	man	but	a	donkey!	And	the	mystic	says,	'Come	in,
sir!'	The	king	says,
'What	are	you	doing?'	The	mystic	says,	'To	me	it	is	all	the	same,	it	is	all	divine.
He	is	in	the	same	situation	as	you	were.	For	me	it	makes	no	difference	who	you
are.	 I	never	asked	you	who	you	were.	 I	never	asked	 this	other	man	who	he	 is.
Why	should	I	ask	this	gentleman	"Who	are	you?"	Whosoever	he	is,	he	is	in	the
same	difficulty.	Look	at	him.'
He	dries	the	donkey,	gives	him	food,	and	says	'He	will	also	listen	to	the	music.
Now	there	is	going	to	be	a	little	more	difficulty	in	standing	but	that	is	nothing,
the	morning	is	very	close.	And	if	it	becomes	too	difficult	I	will	go	out.	You	can
all	enjoy.	I	will	play	from	the	outside.	In	fact	I	enjoy	playing	while	it	is	raining!'
In	fact	a	poor	man	can	share	because	he	has	nothing	to	cling	to	in	the	first	place.
The	richer	one	is,	the	more	difficult	does	the	sharing	become.
Fear	leads	to	greed,	greed	leads	to	fear.	It	 is	a	vicious	circle,	it	goes	round	and
round	--	unless	one	jumps	out	of	it.	And	god	is	neither	for	the	afraid	nor	for	the
greedy.	God	is	for	the	fearless	and	for	the	greedless.
God	is	for	the	blissful	ones.	This	mystic	must	have	been	a	blissful	person.
To	me,	those	people	who	have	become	religious	because	of	some	fear	or	some
greed	are	not	really	religious.	Their	religion	is	pseudo,	it	is	plastic.	Real	religion
comes	out	of	blissfulness.	Real	 religion	 is	a	 real	 rose	 flower,	 it	 is	not	a	plastic
flower.
If	you	can	learn	that	you	will	have	entered	into	the	temple	of	god.	Forget	about
god,	remember	bliss.	If	you	can	be	blissful	god	is	yours.	Whether	you	remember
god	or	not	does	not	matter:	if	you	are	blissful	god	is	bound	to	remember	you.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006165
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Pia	is	a	Latin	word.	It	has	two	meanings:	one	is	god-
fearing,	the	other	is	pious,	holy,	virtuous.
In	the	past	both	these	meanings	have	been	thought	to	be	synonymous:	the	god-
fearing	person	has	always	been	 thought	 to	be	pious,	and	vice	versa.	But	 in	my
approach	 towards	 life	 they	 are	 diametrically	 opposite.	 If	 you	 are	 god-fearing,
you	cannot	be	pious;	if	you	are	pious	you	cannot	be	god-fearing.	So	I	will	accept
the	meaning	pious	and	drop	the	meaning	god-fearing.
Fear	can	never	be	pious.	 It	does	not	matter	what	 the	object	of	 fear	 is	 --	 fear	 is
fear.	One	should	be	god-loving,	not	god-fearing.	Piousness	comes	out	of	love.	If
one	 is	 god-fearing	 deep	 down	 one	 will	 hate	 god.	 That	 is	 natural	 and
psychological.	 We	 hate	 the	 person	 we	 fear,	 obviously.	 How	 can	 we	 love	 the
person	 who	 creates	 fear	 in	 us?	 Fear	 cripples,	 paralyses;	 fear	 destroys.	 Fear
reduces	us	 to	 indignity;	 it	 is	 insulting,	 it	 is	humiliating.	Hence	 the	god-fearing
person	is	not	pious,	is	not	holy	--	cannot	be.	He	can	pretend;	yes,	he	can	have	a
mask	of	piousness,	but	if	you	take	off	the	mask	you	will	find	tremendous	hatred.
It	is	because	of	two	thousand	years	of	conditioning	that	one	should	be	afraid	of
god,	 that	 finally	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 asserted,	 'God	 is	 dead	 and	 I	 declare	 that
man	is	free.	Now	there	is	no	need	to	fear.'
It	 is	 not	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 speaking,	 he	 is	 the	 conscience	 of	 the	 whole
humanity.	He	 has	 said	 something	 really	 truthful,	 very	 authentic.	Of	 course	 he
himself	was	shocked,	so	much	so	that	he	went	mad,	because	his	own	upbringing,
his	own	conditioning	was	that	of	a	god-fearing	person;	he	belonged	to	a	family
of	 priests.	 But	 it	 seems	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 collective	 consciousness	 of	 humanity
spoke	 through	 this	man.	He	himself	was	 shocked,	he	himself	went	 through	an
earthquake;	 he	was	 not	 ready	 for	 it.	 He	was	 utterly	 surprised	 at	 what	 he	was
saying,	but	he	had	said	something.	He	has	made	the	most	important	statement	of
this	age.	In	these	last	hundred	years	no	other	statement	has	been	so	significant.
But	 really	 the	 cause	of	 it	 is	 Judaism	and	Christianity.	 It	 is	 the	 Judeo-Christian
tradition	of	making	people	afraid	of	god,	it	is	man's	spirit	longing	for	freedom.
And	man	could	only	be	 free,	Nietzsche	 felt,	 if	god	were	dead.	As	 long	as	god
was	alive	man	could	not	be	free,	he	had	to	be	afraid	of	god.	The	only	way	to	be
free	would	be	if	somehow	god	died.
But	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira	 were	 far	 more	 clear	 about	 the	 whole	 thing.	 They
never	said	god	was	dead	because	they	said	god	never	existed	in	the	first	place.
There	 was	 no	 question	 of	 his	 death	 --	 there	 had	 been	 no	 birth.	 But	 it	 was
Buddha's	own	insight,	hence	he	was	not	disturbed	by	it.	In	fact	nobody	has	been
so	graceful,	so	beautiful,	so	calm.	And	quiet,	so	godly,	so	divine	as	Buddha.
Nietzsche	was	 not	 prepared	 --	 he	was	 just	 a	 philosopher.	 Somehow	 the	whole
unconscious	of	humanity	erupted	through	him.	It	happens.	lIe	must	have	been	a
very	sensitive	person.
Now	 psychologists	 say	 that	 if	 one	 person	 in	 a	 family	 goes	 mad	 that	 simply
shows	 that	 he	 is	 the	most	 sensitive	 person	 in	 the	 family.	 me	 whole	 family	 is
driving	each	other	crazy	--	he	is	 the	most	sensitive,	hence	he	becomes	the	first
victim.	And	he	cannot	be	cured	unless	 the	whole	 family	and	 its	way	of	 life	 is
changed.
So	now	from	individual	 therapy,	psychology	has	moved	 to	 family	 therapy.	But
that	also	is	not	going	to	help	much,	because	the	family	is	only	a	single	unit	in	a
community,	 and	 the	whole	 community	 is	 driving	 the	 family	mad.	Maybe	 this
family	is	the	most	sensitive;	others	are	thick,	they	are	not	so	sensitive.	Unless	the
whole	community	is	changed	we	may	not	be	able	to	change	this	family.
But	 if	 one	 stretches	 this	 logic	 to	 its	 very	 end	 --	 that	 means	 unless	 the	 whole
humanity	 changes	 --	 not	 even	 a	 single	 individual	 has	 any	 chance	 of
transformation.	In	a	way	this	is	true	because	we	are	interlinked.
Nietzsche	 must	 have	 been	 the	 most	 sensitive	 person	 of	 those	 days,	 hence	 he
became	 the	 voice	 of	 the	 age,	 he	 became	 the	 revolt.	 But	 his	 statement	 is
significant.	It	ends	one	era,	it	ends	one	chapter	of	human	history.
But	the	other	chapter	has	not	yet	started.	That's	my	effort	here:	to	start	another
chapter,	to	create	people	who	are	god-loving.	And	when	I	say	god-loving	I	mean
life-loving,	because	to	me	life	is	god	and	when	you	love	life,	out	of	that	love	you
start	becoming	pious,	because	love	cannot	be	destructive.	Love	cannot	harm,	it	is
impossible	for	love	to	harm	anybody;	it	can	only	help.	It	is	a	nourishment.
The	loving	person	creates	a	nourishing	climate	around	himself.	He	carries	Spring
around	himself	wherever	he	goes.	People	start	blooming	in	his	climate.
So	 I	 would	 like	 to	 insist	 that	 Pia	means	 pious	 --	 through	 love,	 pious	 through
meditation,	but	not	out	of	fear,	not	out	of	any	conditioning	by	the	priests.
Meditation	takes	you	beyond	all	conditionings,	it	is	a	process	of	unconditioning.
And	when	you	are	completely	unconditioned,	all	the	springs	of	love	in	you	start
flowing.
That	growth	of	love	is	pious.	Out	of	that	whatsoever	happens	is	good,	is	right,	is
holy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 is	 only	 through	 meditation	 that	 nobility	 arises	 because	 it	 is	 only	 through
meditation	 that	 you	 become	 graceful,	 that	 you	 become	 sensitive,	 that	 you
become	compassionate,	that	you	become	loving.	And	these	are	the	real	religious
qualities.
One	is	not	born	noble,	 it	 is	an	achievement.	One	can	be	born	in	an	aristocratic
family,	in	a	royal	family	that	does	not	make	anybody	noble.	That	is	a	false	kind
of	nobility,	only	of	mannerism,	of	etiquette,	of	education.	It	is	a	formal	kind	of
nobility;	 deep	 down	you	 are	 the	 same	ugly	 human	being	 carrying	 all	 kinds	 of
nonsense,	violence,	destructiveness,	hatred,	anger,	greed,	fear,	lust,	ego.
Nobility	arises	only	when	ego	disappears	and	with	it	all	the	disciples	anger	and
ambition	and	possessiveness	 and	 jealousy.	They	are	 all	disciples	of	 the	ego.	 If
you	kill	the	master	all	the	disciples	are	killed	automatically;	they	can	only	exist
with	the	ego.	And	meditation	is	a	blow	on	the	ego,	it	cuts	off	the	head	of	the	ego
in	a	single	blow.	Hence	only	very	courageous	people	can	move	into	meditation.
It	is	not	for	the	cowards.
Be	 courageous!	 And	 the	 greatest	 courage	 is	 to	 drop	 the	 ego.	 It	 is	 really	 the
ultimate	courage;	because	if	you	can	manage	that,	then	miracles	start	happening
in	your	life.	Each	moment	becomes	so	exquisitely	beautiful,	such	a	joy,	such	a
celebration	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 right	now	even	 to	 imagine.	One	knows	 it	only
when	one	knows	it.
It	is	bliss	that	makes	you	the	beloved	of	the	whole	existence.	A	blissful	person	is
loved	not	 only	 by	 people	 but	 even	by	 animals,	 birds,	 trees,	 rocks.	Bliss	 is	 the
language	that	is	understood	by	the	whole	existence.	Once	you	know	what	bliss	is
you	can	commune	with	all	 that	surrounds	us,	with	the	clouds	and	the	stars	and
the	moon,	 because	 they	 don't	 understand	 any	 other	 language.	Misery	 they	 are
absolutely	 unaware	 of,	 misery	 they	 have	 not	 known.	Misery	 is	 an	 absolutely
human	phenomenon,	it	is	man's	creation,	his	great	invention.
Trees	don't	know	what	misery	is.	Yes,	sometimes	they	know	pain,	but	there	is	a
great	difference	between	pain	and	misery.	Pain	is	spontaneous.	If	you	cut	a	tree
there	is	pain.	But	misery	is	not	spontaneous.
It	is	playing	with	your	past	wounds,	it	is	going	into	the	past	history	of	your	hurts
again	and	again.	It	is	going	into	all	that	has	been	somehow	agonising	you	in	the
past.	It	is	not	only	thinking	of	the	past,	but	thinking	of	the	future	in	terms	of	the
past,	being	constantly	afraid	of	tomorrow,	that	it	may	bring	some	wound	again,
some	misery.
Misery	belongs	 to	 the	past	and	 the	 future	 --	 it	 is	non-existential.	Pain	 is	a	real
phenomenons	if	you	have	a	headache	it	is	pain.	But	you	had	a	headache	twenty
years	before,	now	brooding	over	 it	 is	misery,	or	being	afraid	 that	 it	may	come
again	some	day	is	misery.	Between	these	two	miseries	the	small	moment	of	the
present	will	 be	 crushed.	And	 both	miseries	 are	 now	 non	 --	 existential.	One	 is
memory,	another	is	imagination,	one	is	no	more,	one	is	not	yet	and	between	the
two	that	which	is,	is	missed.
Yes,	animals,	birds,	they	all	know	pain	but	they	don't	know	anything	of	misery,
pain	is	something	existential,	misery	is	psychological.	Because	they	don't	know
bliss	miserable	 people	 cannot	 communicate	 with	 existence.	 And	 these	 are	 the
people	who	go	to	the	temples	and	to	the	mosques	and	to	the	churches,	and	they
pray	 to	god	and	 they	 try	 to	commune	with	god	--	 it	 is	 impossible.	God	cannot
understand	their	language.
God	only	understands	joy.	God	means	this	whole	existence;	there	is	no	other	god
except	this	whole.	God	simply	means	the	totality	of	existence,	this	organic	unity
of	existence.
If	you	want	to	commune	with	it	--	and	the	communion	is	tremendously	beautiful
--	then	you	have	to	learn	the	language:	bliss	is	the	language.	And	once	you	start
being	 cheerful,	 singing,	 dancing,	 celebrating,	 once	 you	 know	 the	 festive
dimension	of	consciousness,	immediately	the	whole	existence	becomes	an	open
secret.	Then	there	is	no	need	to	read	the	Bible	and	the	Koran	and	the	Vedas;	then
they	all	look	superficial.
You	can	read	the	book	god	himself	has	written.	 It	 is	 in	 the	flowers,	 it	 is	 in	 the
stars,	it	is	in	this	rain...	this	sound	of	rain	on	the	roof.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	the	language	of	bliss.	And	once	you	know	it,	you
become	beloved	of	 the	whole	existence.	Existence	starts	pouring;	 its	bliss	over
you,	so	much	that	you	cannot	contain	it.
One	 cannot	 cultivate	 love	because	 a	 cultivated	 love	 is	 not	 love	 at	 all.	And	we
have	all	been	told	to	cultivate	it	that's	where	things	have	gone	wrong.	The	father
says	'Love	me	--	I	am	your	father.	You	have	to	love	me.	This	is	your	duty.'	The
mother	says	the	same.	The	child	starts	fulfilling	his	duty,	he	has	to	because	he	is
helpless.	He	depends	on	these	people	and	they	are	very	demanding	about	love.
Very	unconsciously	they	are	forcing	the	child	to	do	something	which	he	cannot
do.	If	it	happens	it	happens,	if	it	does	not	happen	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it	does	not	happen.
In	a	more	conscious	world	we	will	leave	children	to	themselves.	We	will	create
all	possible	situations	in	which	a	child	can	love	you.	You	can	play	with	the	child,
you	can	run	on	the	sea	beach	with	the	child,	you	can	collect	sea-shells	with	him,
you	can	make	sandcastles	with	him;	you	can	create	 the	situation	in	which	love
grows	naturally,	spontaneously.	But	never	say	to	a	child,	'Love	me,	you	have	to
love	me	--	this	is	your	duty,'	because	once	he	starts	thinking	of	love	as	duty	you
have	contaminated	his	mind,	you	have	corrupted	his	natural	 sources,	you	have
distracted	his	energy,	diverted	his	energy.	Then	one	day	the	wife	says,	'Love	me'
the	husband	says	'Love	me	--	I	am	your	husband'	or	'I	am	your	wife,	you	have	to
love,	this	is	your	duty.'
Even	children	start	saying	to	their	parents,	'Love	us!	You	don't	love	us	enough.'
Everybody	is	demanding	and	nobody	understands	the	simple	fact	that	if	love	is
supplied	because	of	your	demand	it	is	going	to	be	false.	That's	why	the	world	is
full	of	false	love.	It	satisfies	no	one,	but	we	go	on	repeating	the	same	pattern.
Man	 lives	 so	 mechanically	 that	 he	 goes	 on	 repeating	 the	 same	 pattern	 for
centuries,	unless	a	Buddha,	an	awakened	person	tries	 to	wake	a	few	people,	 to
shake	 a	 few	people	 and	 say	 'What	 are	 you	doing?	 It	 is	 just	 stupid.'	And	more
stupidities	 have	 been	 done	 concerning	 love	 than	 anything	 else.	 It	 has	 been
completely	killed.
My	sannyasins	have	to	know	one	thing:	drop	the	idea	of	love	as	a	duty,	drop	the
idea	that	you	have	 to	love.	It	 is	not	a	should	is	not	a	commandment,	it	 is	not	a
demand.
When	you	drop	all	kinds	of	imposed	nonsense	about	love	then	suddenly	you	will
see	something	growing	in	you	naturally.	That	will	be	love,	and	that	is	immensely
fulfilling.	But	people	are	afraid	of	it,	because	one	never	knows	whether	it	will	be
in	support	of	the	status	quo	or	not,	whether	it	will	support	the	vested	interests	or
not.	It	is	unpredictable;	one	cannot	say	anything	about	it.	Only	one	thing	can	be
said:	it	will	fulfil	you,	it	will	bring	your	life	to	a	flowering,	it	will	make	your	life
meaningful	and	significant.
And	 is	 everybody's	 life	 is	meaningful	 and	 significant	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
bother	about	the	status	quo.	If	 it	disappears,	 let	 it	disappear!	We	don't	exist	for
the	 status	 quo,	 it	 exists	 for	 us.	We	 don't	 exist	 for	 any	 vested	 interests;	 if	 they
want	to	exist	they	have	to	serve	us.	We	don't	exist	for	any	nation,	state,	church,
they	are	our	servants.	If	they	want	to	exist	they	have	to	exist	for	us.	They	are	the
means	--	we	are	the	end.
There	is	no	need	to	go	to	any	temple,	any	church,	any	mosque,	because	they	are
all	 false.	They	are	substitutes	created	by	cunning	people	 to	befool	 the-gullible.
There	is	only	one	true	temple	--	that	is	you.
You	 have	 to	 go	 withinwards:	 when	 you	 reach	 your	 innermost	 core	 you	 have
penetrated	 into	 the	 temple.	And	 the	method	 to	 find	 your	 centre	 is	meditation.
Meditation	leads	you	to	your	inner	shrine,	You	will	find	god	there,	nowhere	else.
Jesus	says	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you	he	is	absolutely	right.	You	are	the
most	 sacred	place,	you	are	 the	Kaaba.	There	 is	nothing	more	sacred	 than	your
own	being.
It	happened:	a	Sufi	mystic,	Bayazid,	was	going	on	a	pilgrimage	to	Kaaba.	Kaaba
is	the	most	sacred	temple	of	the	Mohammedans.	For	at	least	twenty	years	he	had
collected	 money	 for	 the	 journey.	 He	 was	 a	 poor	 man.	 When	 he	 had	 enough
money	he	went	on	the	journey,	but	the	next	day	he	was	back	and	all	the	money
was	gone.
The	people	were	puzzled;	 they	 said	 'What	happened?	Have	you	been	 robbed?'
He	said,	No,	I	met	a	mystic	 just	outside	 the	 town	and	he	asked	me	 'Where	are
you	going?".	I	have	never	seen	such	a	powerful	man!	The	way	he	asked,	me,	the
way	he	looked	at	me...	I	started	trembling!	I	don't	know	what	happened	--	I	had
to	touch	his	feet.	He	had	a	certain	energy-field	around	him.
He	said	"I	know	where	you	are	going.	Are	you	going	to	Kaaba!"	I	said	'Yes,	Sir,
I	am	going	to	Kaaba."
He	said,	"There	 is	no	need.	What	will	you	do	 in	Kaaba?"	I	said,	"I	have	 to	go
and	make	seven	rounds	of	the	sacred	stone".	He	said	"Forget	all	about	that.	Give
me	the	money	and	you	can	make	seven	rounds	around	me!"
'The	way	he	looked....	For	a	moment	I	was	shocked	--	what	was	he	saying?	But
his	 eyes	were	 so	 penetrating	 that	 I	 had	 to	 give	 the	money	 to	 him	 and	 I	made
seven	rounds.	He	blessed	me	and	he	said	"Your	journey	is	fulfilled.	Now	you	go
home.	And	whenever	you	want	to	go	again,	there	is	no	need	even	to	come	to	me
--	just	close	your	eyes	and	go	withinwards,	because	the	one	who	has	commanded
through	me	is	sitting	inside	you	too!"	And	I	am	convinced	of	it,'	Bayazid	said	to
the	people.	'I	have	found	my	Kaaba,	I	have	found	my	temple.'
He	never	went	 to	Kaaba	again.	 In	 fact	 soon	people	started	coming	 to	him:	 the
miracle	had	happened'
Without	 any	 formality	 something	 had	 transpired	 between	 that	 mystic	 and
Bayazid.	Bayazid	never	even	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
knew	 the	 name	 of	 the	 master.	 He	 went	 again	 to	 find	 out,	 but	 the	 man	 had
disappeared.
Sufis	 say	 he	was	 no	 one	 but	Khidr.	Khidr	 is	 a	metaphorical	 figure,	 a	 spiritual
guide	 who	 leads	 people	 to	 reality,	 an	 eternal	 master	 who	 always	 appears
whenever	somebody	is	in	need.	It	is	just	an	allegory,	but	the	story	is	beautiful.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	go	withinwards,	there	is	nowhere	else	to	god.
If	you	have	found	yourself	you	have	found	all.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006175
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
One	who	loves	is	loved	by	the	whole	existence.	Existence	only	echoes	us	from
all	directions,	 from	all	dimensions.	 If	we	sing	a	beautiful	song	the	song	comes
back	to	us	a	thousandfold	more	beautiful,	it	showers	back	on	us.	Whatsoever	we
give	 is	 given	 back.	 People	 are	 miserable	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 are
giving	misery	to	others,	they	are	giving	pain	to	others.
This	 is	 the	 whole	 philosophy	 of	 karma.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 fact	 of	 life:
whatsoever	we	sow	we	reap.	And	of	course	 if	you	sow	a	single	seed,	you	will
reap	thousands	of	seeds.	Existence	is	not	miserly,	it	gives	abundantly,	but	it	can
give	only	when	you	have	given	already	--	 it	multiplies	that	which	you	give,	so
everything	 basically	 depends	 on	 you.	 If	 you	 want	 bliss,	 shower	 bliss	 on
everyone,	on	everything.	If	you	want	love,	love.	If	you	want	anything,	wanting	is
not	 going	 to	 help	 --	 do	 it,	 materialise	 it,	 and	 soon	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:
whatsoever	 you	 have	 given	 always	 comes	 back	 to	 you,	 multiplied	 a
thousandfold,	not	less	than	that.
And	everybody	is	in	need	of	love.	It	is	impossible	to	find	a	person	who	is	not	in
need	 of	 love.	 But	we	 don't	 love,	 we	 only	want	 to	 be	 loved	 --	 and	 that	 is	 not
possible.	Everybody	wants	to	be	loved	and	nobody	loves;	hence	there	is	so	much
conflict,	 so	 much	 destructiveness,	 violence.	 The	 same	 energy	 can	 bring	 great
benediction,	but	it	only	creates	hell.
Let	this	be	the	foundation	for	your	sannyas:	whatsoever	you	want,	give	and	you
will	not	remain	empty.
You	 will	 be	 fulfilled,	 immensely	 fulfilled;	 beyond	 your	 imagination,	 beyond
your	dreams	you	will	be	fulfilled.
God	is	light.	The	experience	of	inner	light	is	the	experience	of	god;	hence	light
became	synonymous	with	god.	Light	became	another	aspect	of	the	experience	of
the	divine.
Bliss	 is	 both.	 It	 is	 divine,	 the	 most	 divine	 phenomenon	 in	 existence	 is	 bliss.
That's	why	everybody	seeks	it.	Even	the	atheist	--	one	who	does	not	believe	in
god,	 one	 who	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 any	 after-life	 --	 still	 believes	 in	 bliss.	 It	 is
impossible	to	find	a	person	who	is	not	seeking	bliss.
If	somebody	says	'I	am	not	seeking	bliss,	that	simply	means	that	no	seeking	bliss
is	his	bliss.	If	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
somebody	 says	 'I	 am	 seeking	 misery,'	 that	 simply	 means	 he	 feels	 blissful	 in
misery	--	that's	all,	nothing	else.
Misery	 is	 his	 bliss,	 he	 enjoys	 it.	 He	 is	 masochistic,	 that's	 all;	 he	 is	 ill,
pathological.	But	it	is	impossible	to	find	a	person	who	does	not	seek	bliss.	Even
the	 person	 who	 commits	 suicide	 commits	 suicide	 in	 order	 to	 find	 bliss.
Whatsoever	one	does,	the	fundamental	reason	is	always	the	same:	it	is	bliss.	The
motive	is	always	the	same.
And	bliss,	once	achieved,	cannot	be	hidden.	you	cannot	hide	 it;	 it	 shines	 forth
like	the	sunrise.	It	is	as	bright	as	the	day,	it	is	luminous.	Even	if	you	want	to	hide
it...	Many	have	tried.	There	are	traditions,	there	are	a	few	mystic	schools,	which
teach	you	to	try	to	hide	your	bliss,	because	people	are	miserable.	It	is	not	good	to
move	 blissfully	 amongst	 miserable	 people.	 They	 will	 feel	 offended,	 they	 will
take	revenge;	they	will	not	be	able	to	forgive	you.	That's	what	happened	to	Jesus,
that's	what	happened	to	Socrates,	that's	what	happened	to	Al	Hillaj	Mansoor.
About	 Al	 Hillaj	Mansoor,	 the	 Sufi	mystic,	 the	 story	 is	 very	 clear.	 his	master,
Junaid,	told	him,	'Keep	it	hidden.'	When	for	the	first	time	Al	Hillaj	experienced
the	joy	fo	knowing	truth,	he	was	so	ecstatic	he	started	dancing	and	shouting	out
of	sheer	joy.	He	shouted	'Ana'l	Haq'	--	I	am	god.	Junaid	said,	'Shut	up!	I	know,
you	know	--	there	is	no	need	to	shout.'
Because	the	master	was	saying	keep	quiet,	he	promised	to	keep	quiet,	but	again
and	again	he	would	forget	his	promise.	Again	and	again	he	would	start	dancing
and	shouting.	Finally	Junaid	said,	'You	will	get	into	trouble	and	you	will	also	get
me	into	trouble.	And	because	of	you	my	whole	work	will	be	disturbed.'
Junaid	 was	 a	 great	 master.	 He	 had	 thousand	 of	 followers	 and	 they	 were	 all
working	 secretly.	 Living	 amongst	 Mohammedans	 and	 working	 is	 really
dangerous	because	they	are	very	fanatic	people.	They	don't	know	any	generosity,
they	 don't	 know	 any	 tolerance.	 They	 don't	 argue	 --	 their	 only	 argument	 is	 the
sword:	whosoever	wins	is	right,	whosoever	is	killed	is	wrong.
Junaid	 told	 Mansoor	 again	 and	 again.	 Finally	 he	 said,	 'Go	 to	 Mecca,	 to	 the
Mohammedan	shrine	of	Kaaba	on	a	pilgrimage.'	In	those	days	it	used	to	take	at
least	three	years.	'So	the	journey	will	take	you	away	and	I	can	work	silently	with
my	people.	and	in	three	years	you	will	also	cool	down.'
But	Al	Hillaj	 simply	 stood	up,	went	 around	 Junaid	 seven	 times	 and	 said,	 'The
journey	 is	 finished	--	you	are	my	Kaaba,	you	 are	my	Mecca.	 I	don't	know	any
holy	place	other	than	you.	You	are	my	temple,	so	I	have	done	it,;	and	he	started
shouting	again!	And	what	Junaid	was	afraid	of	finally	happened:	Al	Hillaj	was
killed	 and	 Junaid's	 whole	 school	 was	 disturbed.	 Junaid	 was	 trying	 to	 keep	 it
secret,	utterly	secret,	but	nobody	had	become	enlightened	before	al	Hillaj.
My	feeling	is	that	anybody	would	have	done	the	same;	it	was	nothing	to	do	with
Al	Hillaj.	He	was	 the	 first	disciple	who	became	enlightened,	and	he	exploded.
this	would	have	happened	to	anybody.	In	fact	it	had	happened	to	Junaid	himself,
but	he	was	living	int	he	mountains;	for	seven	years	he	lived	int	he	mountains.
Of	 course,	 trees	 don't	 feel	 offended	 and	 rocks	 don't	 feel	 offended.	 He	 was
shouting	and	singing	and	dancing,	but	in	those	seven	years	he	cooled	down.	He
became	aware	of	a	great	message	--	that	he	had	to	go	and	work	in	the	world.
Even	though	he	was	trying	to	keep	it	secret,	he	could	not	keep	it	secret.	When	Al
Hillaj	was	killed	people	were	throwing	stones	at	him,	and	just	to	participate	with
people	 so	nobody	 took	any	note	of	 Junaid,	 so	nobody	 thought	 that	 Junaid	was
against	the	murder,	he	was	also	standing	in	the	crowd,	crying.	He	threw	a	flower,
a	rose	flower	at	Mansoor,	just	to	show	him	'I	love	you.	I	know	that	whatsoever
you	are	saying	is	right,	but	I	have	been	telling	you	and	you	didn't	listen	to	me:
this	was	going	to	happen.	I	had	predicted	it.
Al	Hillaj	Mansoor	was	laughing	when	others	were	throwing	stones,	hitting	him
hard	--	from	all	over	his	body	blood	was	oozing.	When	he	was	hit	by	the	rose
flower	 thrown	 by	 Junaid,	 he	 started	 crying.	 Somebody	 asked	 'Why	 are	 you
crying?'	He	said,	'The	people	who	were	throwing	stones	at	me	don't	understand,
but	 the	 person	 who	 has	 thrown	 the	 rose	 flower	 understands	 me	 --	 still	 he	 is
throwing	 the	 rose	 flower.	 His	 rose	 flower	 hits	 me	 far	 more	 deeply	 than	 their
stones.	Their	stones	are	nothing.	They	are	stupid	people	--	it	is	to	be	expected.'
Like	Junaid,	many	masters	have	tried	many	times	to	keep	bliss	submerged,	but
nobody	has	ever	succeeded.	Sooner	or	later	it	becomes	known,	because	it	is	just
like	daylight:	how	can	you	hide	the	morning?	When	the	night	is	gone,	when	the
starts	have	disappeared	and	the	sun	has	risen,	the	birds	start	singing,	the	flowers
start	opening.	It	is	not	some	small	things,	it	is	not	a	small	lamp	that	you	can	hide
behind	something.
Remember:	bliss	is	divine,	and	when	it	explodes	it	is	a	sunrise,	it	is	as	bright	as
day;	the	night	is	over.
That	 is	 the	goal	of	sannyas.	And	I	don't	want	my	sannyasins	 to	hide	 it.	 I	want
them	to	shout	and	sing	and	dance.	And	if	it	brings	death,	it	is	okay:	die	dancing,
shouting.	There	is	no	need	to	worry.	Anyway,	even	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Junaid	died	after	only	a	few	years.	My	feeling	is	that	Mansoor	died	a	far	better
death.
Junaid	 is	 remembered	 only	 because	 of	 Mansoor.	 Nobody	 would	 have
remembered	 Junaid,	 nobody	 would	 have	 even	 remembered	 his	 work.	 It	 is
through	Mansoor	that	his	work	is	remembered.	His	name	has	become	one	of	the
most	significant	names	 in	 the	history	of	mysticism	--	 it	 is	because	of	Mansoor
and	his	death.
So	 there	 is	no	need	 to	be	afraid:	 let	 it	 shine	 forth!	 I	believe	more	 in	Jesus.	He
said	to	his	disciples,	'Go	onto	the	tops	of	houses,	onto	the	roofs,	and	from	there
shout	--	because	people	are	deaf.	Unless	you	shout	they	won't	listen.'	And	if	you
are	killed	while	dancing	and	singing	blissfully,	there	can	be	nothing	better	than
that.	Live	celebrating,	die	celebrating.
Bliss	 is	not	 something	 that	 comes	 from	 the	outside,	 it	 is	 already	 the	case,	 it	 is
inside	you.	You	are	outside,	bliss	is	inside	--	that	is	the	problem	--	not	vice	versa.
People	think	they	are	inside	and	bliss	is	outside	so	it	has	to	be	found	in	money,	in
power,	in	prestige,	in	something	outside.	The	reality	is	just	he	opposite:	bliss	is
inside	and	you	are	outside;	you	are	running	hither	and	thither,	everywhere.	you
go	 everywhere	 --	 except	 in.	 People	 are	 going	 to	 the	 Everest,	 they	 will	 go	 to
Tibet,	they	will	go	in	search	of	Shambala,	they	are	ready	to	go	to	the	moon.
One	 company	 in	 Japan	 is	 selling	 tickets	 for	 the	moon	 for	 the	 first	 of	 January,
1986,	and	people	are	booking!
Just	the	other	day	I	came	across	the	news	that	they	are	planning	a	city	in	the	sky,
a	city	hanging	in	the	sky	between	the	earth	and	the	moon.	it	will	be	inside	a	big
balloon	for	then	thousand	people.	People	are	already	purchasing	apartment!	That
will	 happen	 by	 the	 end	 of	 this	 century.	 it	will	 take	 twenty	 years,	 these	 people
may	 not	 be	 there,	 but	 they	 think,	 'So	 what?	 --	 our	 children	 will	 have	 the
opportunity	--	they	will	be	the	first	ones	to	live	in	a	space	city.'
People	are	ready	to	go	anywhere,	any	foolish	idea...	and	they	become	tempted.
Just	 one	 thing	 never	 becomes	 a	 longing	 in	 them:	 to	 explore	 their	 own	 being.
They	take	themselves	for	granted	--	and	that's	where	they	are	wrong.	don't	take
yourself	for	granted.	you	are	carrying	within	you	a	dark	continent,	unexplored.
Sannyas	means	its	exploration.	And	it	 is	the	most	important	thing	in	life.	 those
who	have	gone	in	have	found	immortality,	have	found	deathlessness,	have	found
eternity,	truth,	consciousness,	bliss,	in	a	single	word	they	have	found	god.
Christianity	 has	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 trinity,	 but	 its	 trinity	 is	 very	 childish,	 it	 is	 very
primitive.	It	is	conceived	of	as	a	family,	it	is	a	projected	idea	of	a	family	--	and
that	 too	 is	 not	 complete	 because	 the	 woman	 is	missing:	 god	 the	 father,	 Jesus
Christ	 the	 son,	 and	 the	 Holy	 Ghost.	 Unless	 this	 Holy	 Ghost	 functions	 as	 a
woman...
Nobody	knows	--	ghosts	can	do	things,	even	impossible	things	they	can	do...	But
it	is	a	very	strange	family:	the	first	gay	family!
In	 the	 East	 we	 have	 a	 far	 more	 beautiful	 idea	 of	 a	 trinity:	 satyam,	 shivam,
sundaram.	Satyam	means	truth,	shivam	means	good,	sundaram	means	beautiful.
This	is	the	Eastern	concept	of	trinity,	these	are	the	three	faces	of	god:	he	is	true,
he	is	good,	he	is	beautiful.	He	can	be	explored	in	three	ways;	these	are	his	three
dimensions.
Religions	 explore	 him	 from	 the	 side	 of	 good.	That's	why	 they	 talk	 about	 god:
god	 means	 the	 good	 one,	 the	 ultimate	 good.	 the	 philosophers	 enquire	 from
another	 dimension,	 truth.	 Their	 whole	 concern	 is	 'What	 is	 the	 ultimate	 truth?'
They	enter	from	the	door	of	truth.	and	the	poets,	the	musicians,	the	dancers,	the
artists,	the	painters,	all	enter	from	the	door	of	the	beautiful.
My	approach	is	that	of	the	poet.	I	am	not	a	religious	person	in	the	ordinary	sense.
I	am	close	to	art	than	to	religion,	closer	to	aesthetics	than	to	religion,	because	I
see	 that	 existence	 provides	 you	 many	more	 opportunities	 to	 see	 the	 beautiful
than	 it	 provides	 to	 see	 truth	 or	 good.	 In	 the	 flowers,	 int	 he	 stars,	 in	 the
mountains,	 in	 the	 people,	 in	 the	 birds,	 in	 the	 animals	 --	 you	 can	 find	 beauty
everywhere.
Seek	 god	 through	 beauty	 --	 the	 beauty	 of	 everything.	 let	 that	 become	 your
enquiry,	worship	beauty,	 rejoice	 in	beauty.	And	when	you	worship	beauty	 and
rejoice	 in	 beauty,	 you	 start	 becoming	 beautiful.	And	 to	 be	 beautiful	 is	 to	 be	 a
sannyasin.	Truth	and	good	will	follow.	if	one	can	attain	one	out	of	the	three	the
other	two	automatically	come	along.
There	is	a	silence	that	can	be	imposed	from	outside.	through	practising	a	certain
body	posture,	by	eating	a	certain	kind	of	food,	by	fasting,	a	certain	silence	can	be
cultivated.	 By	 moving	 to	 the	 mountains,	 being	 alone,	 one	 can	 manage	 to	 be
silent,	but	 that	will	be	something	managed	from	the	outside,	forced.	It	will	not
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
be	very	deep,	it	will	be	just	a	facade.	That's	what	saints,	the	so-called	saints	have
been	 doing	 all	 along,	 in	 the	 monasteries,	 in	 the	 caves,	 int	 he	 jungles,	 in	 the
mountains:	 fasting,	 living	 alone	 or	 not	 talking.	 These	 are	 tricks	 to	 create	 a
pseudo	kind	of	silence,	but	deep	down	the	unconscious	goes	on	boiling.	 It	can
explode	any	day.	This	is	really	repression.
Real	silence	comes	only	out	of	meditation.	You	are	not	to	cultivate	it;	it	is	a	by-
product,	it	is	a	consequence.	You	have	to	go	into	meditation,	you	have	to	learn
the	 art	 of	meditation.	As	you	become	more	 and	more	meditative,	 you	become
aware	of	a	certain	silence	that	starts	following	you	like	a	shadow.	You	have	not
done	 anything	 about	 it	 --	 it	 is	 suddenly	 there,	 it	 is	 there	 because	 of	 your
meditation.	 And	 as	 meditation	 deepens,	 it	 will	 deepen.	 When	 meditation	 is
complete,	your	silence	is	complete.
And	 this	 is	 a	 silence	 that	 nobody	 can	 take	 away.	 Then	 you	 can	 be	 in	 the
marketplace	 and	you	will	 remain	undisturbed,	 undistracted.	Then	you	 can	 live
with	people,	you	can	be	 together	with	people;	 that	will	not	change	anything	 --
you	 will	 be	 as	 alone	 as	 ever,	 even	 int	 he	 crowd.	 You	 can	 do	 the	 ordinary
activities	 of	 life	 and	 still	 you	will	 remain	 aloof	 and	 beyond	 and	 unconcerned.
You	will	become	a	 lotus	 in	 the	 lake;	 it	 is	 in	 the	water,	yet	 the	water	 touches	 it
not.
That's	the	idea	of	a	real	sannyasin:	to	be	in	the	world	and	yet	not	to	be	of	it,	to
the	in	the	world	but	not	to	allow	the	world	to	be	in	you.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006185
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	is	a	seed,	a	seed	of	great	potential.	But	millions	of	people	die	without	ever
realising	 that	 potential,	 they	 never	 come	 to	 a	 flowering.	 It	 is	 only	 through
meditation	--	there	is	no	other	way,	there	never	has	been,	there	will	never	be	--
meditation	is	the	only	way	to	bring	your	potential	into	reality,	to	transform	it	into
actuality.	 Seeds	 can	 become	 flowers,	 and	 not	 ordinary	 flowers	 either	 --	 not
flowers	that	exist	only	for	the	moment	and	then	are	gone	but	flowers	of	eternity,
not	of	time,	flowers	which	defy	death,	flowers	which	are	undying,	which	know
no	beginning,	no	end,	which	are	beyond	time	and	beyond	space	too.
The	art	of	bringing	those	flowers	into	your	being	is	meditation.	And	meditation
is	a	simple	process,	the	same	as	the	process	of	bringing	a	seed	into	life.	The	seed
is	almost	dead,	but	If	 it	falls	into	the	soil	and	is	ready	to	die	into	the	soil,	 then
immediately	life	springs	up,	then	a	sprout	comes	up.	Soon	it	will	become	a	bush
or	a	tree	with	a	profusion	of	flowers.
The	same	is	the	art	of	meditation.	It	is	nothing	but	the	courage	to	surrender,	the
courage	to	die	as	an	ego.
Ego	is	like	a	hard	crust	that	surrounds	everybody,	the	hard	crust	that	surrounds
every	seed;	it	is	protective.	It	is	good	as	far	as	it	goes,	but	if	it	remains	forever
then	it	becomes	a	grave.	It	protects	the	seed	till	it	come	to	the	right	soil,	then	it
simply	disappears.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	be	with	a	master	means	to	be	ready	to	die.	The	ancient	scriptures	of	the	East
say	the	master	is	death	a	very	strange	statement	but	very	true.	And	the	disciple	is
one	who	is	tired	of	the	ego,	its	misery,	its	agony,	its	darkness,	and	who	has	come
to	a	conclusion	that	there	is	no	way	within	the	ego,	one	has	to	take	a	jump	out	of
it.
Initiation	is	a	death	--	the	death	of	the	ego,	but	the	death	of	the	ego	becomes	the
birth	of	your	real	being.
The	death	of	the	ego	is	the	death	of	all	that	is	dead	in	you	and	the	beginning	of
all	that	is	really	alive	in	you.
Misery	 only	 proves	 one	 thing,	 that	 the	 person	 is	 stupid,	 that	 he	 has	 got	 no
intelligence.	Bliss	proves	just	the	contrary	-	that	the	person	is	intelligent,	that	he
knows	how	to	live,	that	he	knows	how	to	enjoy,	that	he	knows	how	to	use	this
great	opportunity	of	life.
The	miserable	person	is	one	who	has	not	yet	discovered	his	intelligence.	He	can
go	on	trying	everything
--	 nothing	 is	 going	 to	 work,	 because	 misery	 is	 a	 by-product.	 The	 miserable
person	tries	not	to	be	miserable,	but	whatsoever	he	does	will	create	more	misery
because	all	those	actions	will	be	coming	out	of	his	stupidity.	He	will	get	into	the
mess	more	 and	more	 and	 he	 will	 become	more	 and	more	 desperate.	 And	 the
more	desperate	one	is,	the	more	one	tries	each	and	everything	to	come	out	of	it.
But	unless	you	radically	change	your	own	being	nothing	can	help.
The	miserable	person	can	move	from	a	hut	into	a	palace	--	nothing	will	change.
He	will	 remain	miserable,	 he	may	 even	 become	more	miserable	 in	 the	 palace
because	 a	 palace	 has	more	 space.	And	whatsoever	 he	 does	 is	 bound	 to	 create
misery.	The	miserable	person	can	have	money,	power,	prestige,	but	he	will	create
misery	out	of	it.
You	 can	 see	 very	 rich	 people	 utterly	 miserable,	 very	 powerful	 people	 almost
going	 insane,	 because	 they	 have	 not	 changed	 the	 radical,	 the	 essential,	 the
fundamental.	 They	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 change	 the	 circumference	 instead	 of
changing	 the	 centre.	 A	 sannyasin	 is	 one	 who	 becomes	 aware	 of	 this
phenomenon.
This	 is	 a	 simple	 arithmetic	 of	 life,	 that	 'If	 I	 am	 miserable,	 then	 I	 am	 wrong
somewhere	 --	deep	down	 I	am	not	behaving	 intelligently.	 I	 am	messing	 things
up.'	So	rather	than	doing	anything	on	the	outside,	it	 is	better	first	to	stop	doing
everything	 and	 move	 inwards	 to	 discover	 one's	 intelligence.	 And	 everybody
brings	 intelligence	 into	 the	 world,	 nobody	 comes	without	 intelligence.	 Life	 is
intrinsically	intelligence,	but	it	has	to	be	discovered.	You	have	to	dig	for	it.
It	is	just	like	water:	it	is	everywhere,	you	just	have	to	dig	a	well	to	find	it.	Maybe
somewhere	 it	 is	 thirty	 feet	below,	somewhere	 forty	 feet,	 somewhere	sixty	 feet,
but	it	is	always	there.	Even	in	the	desert	it	is	there;	you	may	have	to	go	a	little
deeper...	Exactly	like	that,	intelligence	is	in	every	person.	We	have	to	remove	a
few	rocks,	a	little	earth,	and	we	will	be	able	to	find	it.
This	 is	 the	 first	 step	of	 the	 sannyasins:	 to	discover	one's	 intelligence,	 and	 then
whatsoever	you	do	will	bring	bliss	to	you.	In	fact	you	will	be	surprised	to	know,
you	may	go	on	doing	the	things	that	you	were	doing	before,	but	the	same	things
that	were	bringing	you	misery	before,	will	bring	you	bliss	now.	You	are	doing
exactly	the	same	things	--	but	it	is	not	a	matter	of	what	you	do.	The	real	matter
depends	on	who	the	doer	is,	from	where	the	act	arises	--	from	the	circumference
or	 from	 the	 centre,	 from	 the	 conditioning	 of	 the	 society,	 or	 from	 the	 natural
spontaneous	tao	within	you.
Bliss	 is	a	criterion.	Whenever	your	actions	 tart	bringing	bliss	 to	you,	now	you
can	move	with	 the	 solid	 confidence	 that	 you	 are	 on	 the	 right	 track.	whenever
your	 actions	 bring	misery	 --	 beware!	Better	 to	 stop	 before	 you	 take	 any	more
steps	into	the	same	direction.	And	don't	start	running	into	the	opposite	direction
either,	 because	 directions	 are	 not	 the	 question:	 discover	 your	 intelligence.
Everything	depends	on	your	intelligence,	and	out	of	intelligence	there	is	beauty,
there	is	bliss,	there	is	benediction.
Meditation	is	the	discovery	of	the	inner	flame.	It	is	already	there;	we	have	not	to
create	 it,	 we	 have	 only	 to	 become	 connected	 with	 it.	 We	 have	 become
disconnected,	we	 have	 lost	 contact	with	 our	 own	 self	 --	 that's	why	 there	 is	 so
much	 darkness	 in	 life.	 Once	 we	 are	 bridged	 with	 our	 own	 light	 all	 darkness
disappears.
And	the	miracle	is	that	we	are	carrying	that	light	with	us	every	moment	of	our
life,	without	using	it.	And	we	are	suffering	because	we	are	not	using	it.	We	are
really	in	anguish,	we	are	creating	hell.	We	are	stumbling	everywhere	because	it
is	all	darkness.	We	want	to	do	good	but	whatsoever	we	do	turns	out	to	be	bad.
Everybody	wants	to	do	good,	everybody	at	least	intends	to	do	good,	but	nothing
seems	 to	 work.	 Parents	 do	 harm	 to	 children	 --	 and	 they	 love	 their	 children;
nobody	can	doubt	their	love.	But	their	love	is	without	any	light,	it	is	groping	in
darkness.	Wives	love	their	husbands,	husbands	love	their	wives,	but	there	is	only
conflict,	 continuous	 struggle.	Slowly	 slowly	people	 only	 learn	 to	 tolerate	 each
other;	that's	all.	That	is	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
harmony,	that	is	not	joy;	that	is	just	calculation.	There	is	nothing	else	to	dot	we
are	tired	of	fighting	so	we	will	tolerate	each	other.	But	deep	down	there	is	great
hatred	and	it	erupts	once	in	a	while,	again	and	again.
Children	want	 to	 love	their	parents	but	 they	hate	 them.	d	because	they	want	 to
love	their	parents	and	they	cannot,	they	feel	guilty.	And	they	will	fell	guilty	for
their	whole	life.
Everything	seems	to	be	unnecessarily	complicated	for	the	simple	reason	that	we
don't	seek	and	search	for	our	inner	light.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	find	your	own	light.	I	don't	give	you	any	other
discipline,	I	don't	give	you	any	other	ritual,	I	don't	give	you	any	morality,	I	don't
give	you	any	commandments.	My	work	is	very	simple	in	a	way,	but	sometimes
it's	the	simple	that	we	go	on	missing	because	it	is	so	obvious.	My	work	consists
of	 only	 one	 thing:	 to	 bridge	 you	 again	 with	 your	 innermost	 core,	 with	 your
flame.	Once	that	happens	you	are	transformed,	you	are	reborn,	you	are	no	more
the	old	self.	Then	your	whole	life	changes,	without	any	effort.	And	when	things
charge	without	any	effort	there	is	great	beauty.	There	is	no	struggle,	there	is	no
imposition,	 there	 is	 ro	 cultivation,	 there	 is	 no	 discipline.	 There	 is	 only	 an
understanding	--	and	understanding	is	liberating.	It	is	the	only	liberation.	there	is.
Meditation	is	surrender	of	the	ego,	of	the	mind,	of	all	that	you	have	been	up	to
now,	of	the	whole	past.
One	has	 to	go	 through	a	complete	 renewal,	a	death	and	a	 rebirth.	You	have	 to
become	discontinuous	with	the	past,	as	 if	you	are	born	 this	very	moment,	as	if
your	whole	part	were	just	a	fiction	that	you	have	read	somewhere	or	a	movie	that
you	have	seen,	or	a	dream.
Becoming	a	sannyasin	means	becoming	disconnected	with	the	past,	because	the
past	 is	 the	 only	 problem.	And	 rather	 than	 solving	 problems	 it	 is	 better	 to	 put
aside	 the	 whole	 past.	 That's	 where	 the	 approach	 of	 meditation	 and
psychoanalysis	differs:	psychoanalysis	goes	on	dissecting	the	whole	bullshit:	go
on	dissecting	and	dissecting.	There	 is	no	end	 to	 it	because	a	person	gathers	so
much	 bullshit	 in	 his	whole	 life	 that	 it	 takes	 years.	 Three	 years	 is	 not	 enough,
even	 seven	 years	 is	 not	 enough.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 have	 been	 in
psychoanalysis	for	ten	years,	twelve	years,	and	it	is	still	incomplete.	I	have	not
seen	a	single	person	whose	psychoanalysis	 is	complete;	 it	cannot	be	complete,
because	while	you	are	going	 through	psychoanalysis,	dissecting	your	past,	you
are	creating	a	new	past	every	day.
If	you	go	through	psychoanalysis	for	ten	years,	then	those	ten	years	will	become
your	new	past,	now	dissect	them.	It	is	an	infinite	regress.	And	in	a	life	of	seventy
years,	 if	 on	 has	 to	 go	 on	 dissecting,	 one	 gathers	 so	much	 dust	 in	 twenty-four
hours	that	if	one	wants	to	dissect	everything	and	analyse	everything	--
why	this	is	so,	what	is	beyond	it	-	one	will	get	more	and	more	into	trouble.	And
not	only	what	you	think	has	to	be	dissected,	what	you	dream	has	to	be	dissected.
It	is	an	impossible	process.	It	may	help	you	in	a	certain	way	to	become	adjusted
to	the	society,	but	the	society	itself	is	insane.	To	get	adjusted	to	an	insane	society
is	not	sanity.	It	will	help	you	to	be	at	ease	with	other	mad	people,	but	 they	are
mad	and	you	will	be	mad.	There	are	two	kinds	of	madness:	the	normal	kind,	the
average	kind,	and	the	little-bit-abnormal	kind.	The	abnormal	person	is	thought	to
be	 mentally	 ill,	 and	 the	 normally	 insane	 is	 the	 average	 person.	 The
psychoanalists'	work	is	to	help	the	abnormally	mad	to	become	normally	mad	--
that's	all.
Meditation	has	a	 totally	different	approach.	 It	 functions	 like	a	sword:	 it	simply
cuts	the	whole	thing	off.
Why	bother	about	it?	We	can	simply	slip	out	of	it	just	like	a	snake	slips	out	of	its
old	skin.	There	is	no	need	even	to	look	back.	Why	bother	about	it?
And	that's	what	sannyas	is.	Slip	out	of	the	past.	The	past	is	not	the	only	problem,
it	also	creates	other	problems;	it	creates	the	future.	It	is	out	of	the	past	that	you
this;	 about	 your	 future,	 you	 go	 on	 imagining	 your	 future	 in	 terms	 of	 the	 past.
Whatsoever	you	 loved	 in	 the	past,	 you	would	 like	 to	have	more	of	 that	 in	 the
future,	 and	whatsoever	 is	 painful	 you	would	not	 like	 to	have	 in	 the	 future.	So
your	future	is	carved	out	of	the	past.	It	is	not	going	to	be	something	really	new;	it
is	going	to	be	the	past	a	little	modified,	a	little	refined,	but	it	is	going	to	be	the
past.
And	 remember	one	 thing:	 if	you	choose	anything	 from	 the	past,	 if	you	choose
the	good	things	from	the	past,	the	bad	things	are	bound	to	come	with	them.	They
are	 together;	 you	 cannot	 leave	 them	 aside.	 So	 you	 will	 be	 disillusioned.	 You
cannot	say	 'I	will	only	choose	 the	roses	and	 leave	 the	 thorns.	Those	 thorns	are
part	 of	 the	 same	 bush,	 they	 come	with	 the	 roses.	 If	 you	want	 the	 roses	 those
thorns	will	be	there.
And	between	the	past	and	the	future	you	lose	track	of	the	present,	which	is	the
only	reality.
Meditation	means	moving	into	the	present.	Disconnecting	yourself	from	the	past
simply	 means	 disconnecting	 yourself	 from	 the	 future	 too.	 And	 then	 there	 is
nothing	left	except	the	present,	except	this	moment	nothing	is	left.	And	just	see
the	 point:	 in	 this	moment	where	 is	 the	 problem?	What	 is	 there	 to	 dissect	 and
analyse?	 There	 is	 no	 problem	 at	 all.	 And	 if	 one	 can	 enter	 into	 the	 present
moment	there	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
immediate	 freedom,	 immediate	bliss,	 immediate	 realisation	of	 truth,	of	god,	of
beauty.
Surrendering	the	past	is	the	only	way	of	entering	into	the	present.	And	to	enter
the	present	 is	 the	way	of	 the	sannyasin.	The	sannyasin	 lives	 in	 the	now,	 in	 the
here.	He	has	no	other	concern.
My	vision	of	god	is	a	god	of	bliss	and	songs.	So	If	you	really	want	to	know	what
god	 is,	 you	 have	 to	 know	what	 bliss	 is,	 you	 have	 to	 become	more	 and	more
song-full,	dance-full.	You	have	to	become	more	and	more	celebrating.
The	old	religions	have	been	teaching	people	celibacy.	I	teach	celebration!	Why
have	been	teaching	people	seriousness	I	teach	singing,	dancing.	They	have	been
teaching	people	to	have	long	faces,	my	whole	effort	here	is	to	give	you	love	and
laughter.	 If	one	can	become	 laughter,	 if	one	can	become	 love,	 then	 there	 is	no
need	of	any	other	prayer,	one	has	already	entered	into	the	divine.
I	have	never	seen	any	sad	person	enter	 into	god.	The	only	way	towards	god	 is
the	way	of	dancing.	So	learn	to	dance,	sing!	celebrate,	rejoice,	and	then	you	will
find	 god	 anywhere.	 Then	 each	 experience	 is	 divine	 and	 the	 ordinary	 starts
changing	 into	 the	 extraordinary,	 the	 mundane	 disappears	 into	 the	 sacred.	 The
whole	 of	 life	 becomes	 so	 god-full	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 some	 god
somewhere	 above,	 in	 the	 skies	wherever	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 surrounded	 by	 god,
You	are	always	walking	on	holy	ground,	Then	each	stone	has	a	sermon	in	it	and
each	rock	is	a	scripture.	One	just	needs	a	heart,	a	dancing	heart,	to	see,	to	feel,	to
be!
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006195
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	 is	not	achieved	 through	effort,	 it	 is	achieved	 through	surrender.	All
the	 effort	 that	 is	 made,	 is	 made	 to	 make	 surrender	 possible.	 Once	 surrender
becomes	possible	then	you	are	ready	to	receive	the	gift.
Effort	is	needed,	but	not	for	meditation;	effort	is	needed	only	to	prepare	you	to
receive	the	gift.	Meditation	always	comes	as	a	gift;	hence	it	is	never	food	for	the
ego,	 it	 cannot	 be	because	 it	 is	 not	 your	 achievement	 at	 all.	On	 the	 contrary,	 it
happens	only	when	the	ego	has	been	totally	surrendered.	You	cannot	say	'I	have
found	it,'	you	can	only	say,	'God	has	found	me.'	You	cannot	say,	you	cannot	brag
'This	 is	my	achievement,	my	 realisation,'	because	 it	happens	when	you	are	not,
hence	how	can	it	be	your	realisation	and	your	achievement?	It	is	god's	grace.
But	it	is	a	very	complex	phenomenon.
There	are	two	kinds	of	misunderstandings	about	meditation.	One	is	that	no	effort
is	 needed.	Then	why	make	 any	 effort?	Whenever	 it	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 it	will
happen	 --	 what	 can	 we	 do	 about	 it?	 That	 is	 a	 misunderstanding.	 You	 can	 do
something,	not	to	achieve	meditation	but	to	prepare	yourself	to	be	receptive.
The	 other	 misunderstanding	 is	 that	 because	 effort	 is	 needed	 to	 prepare,	 then
effort	is	essential,	and	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
achieve	meditation	through	your	effort.	So:	go	on	making	effort.	If	you	are	not
achieving	it,	that	means	your	effort	is	still	not	enough,	so	make	more	effort,	put
more	 intensity	 into	 it,	 put	 more	 energy	 into	 it,	 get	 more	 involved.	 Both	 are
misunderstandings.
Effort	is	needed	but	not	for	meditation.	Effort	is	needed	only	up	to	a	point.	It	has
nothing	to	do	with	meditation,	but	it	is	very	essential	too,	because	unless	you	are
ready	you	will	miss	the	gift.	The	gift	is	arriving	every	moment,	it	is	showering
on	 everybody,	 but	 people	 are	missing	 it	 because	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 space	 to
absorb	it,	they	don't	have	any	place	to	allow	it	entry	into	their	being.	It	is	all	full
of	rubbish,	all	full	of	junk.
This	 has	 to	 become	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 understandings,	 that	 effort	 is
needed,	 yet	 meditation	 is	 a	 gift.	 it	 is	 needed	 for	 surrender	 and	 surrender	 is
needed	for	meditation.	So	there	is	no	direct	connection	with	the	effort,	but	a	very
indirect	connection	is	there.
So	avoid	both	pitfalls	and	just	be	 in	 the	middle.	 It	 is	a	razor's	edge:	 if	you	fall
here,	you	fall	 into	a	lake,	if	you	fall	on	the	other	side	you	fall	into	a	well.	You
have	 to	 keep	 yourself	 like	 a	 tightrope	walker;	 avoiding	 both	 pitfalls,	 avoiding
both	 extremes,	 maintaining	 a	 balance	 between	 effort	 and	 no-effort.	 Once	 that
balance	is	there,	meditation	comes	like	a	spring	and	you	become	full	of	flowers.
Your	life	has	all	the	splendour	and	all	the	joy	that	existence	can	give	to	you	--	it
is	infinite.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 transcend	 all	 hardness.	He	 has	 to	 become	 soft,	 vulnerable,
open.	We	are	had	because	we	have	been	told	that	life	is	a	struggle.	We	are	hard
because	we	are	prepared	to	fight	for	sheer	survival.
But	that	is	not	the	way	to	find	god.	Maybe	that	is	the	way	to	find	money,	power,
prestige,	but	that	is	not	the	way	to	find	god.	We	cannot	conquer	god,	we	have	to
be	conquered	by	him,	we	have	to	allow	him	to	conquer	us.	In	fact,	to	be	defeated
by	god	is	to	be	victorious.	In	that	very	defeat	is	victory.
The	 sannyasin	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 a	 soldier.	 The	 soldier	 has	 to	 be	 hard,
aggressive,	violent,	ambitious,	and	the	sannyasin	has	to	be	soft,	receptive,	non-
ambitious	 so	 that	 god	 can	 conquer	 him.	And	god	 is	 always	 ready:	 he	 goes	 on
waiting	patiently	for	us	to	get	ready.
Bliss	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 the	 search	 for	 truth.	 If	 you	 seek	 truth	you	will	 find	 it
without	seeking	it.	The	moment	truth	is	found	bliss	happens	of	its	own	accord.	It
is	the	flavor,	the	fragrance	of	truth.
You	can	hold	a	flower	in	your	hand	but	you	cannot	hold	its	fragrance.	And	if	you
are	seeking	the	fragrance	you	will	never	find	it.	Seek	the	flower.	Once	the	flower
is	found	the	fragrance	is	all	yours.
Truth	is	the	flower	and	bliss	is	its	fragrance.	It	has	been	found	only	by	those	who
have	found	truth.
Everybody	 seeks	 bliss,	 nobody	 bothers	 about	 truth	 --	 that's	 why	 everybody	 is
miserable.	Very	 few	 people	 seek	 truth,	 and	 those	who	 have	 sought	 truth	 have
also	 found	 bliss.	 It	 comes	 like	 a	 shadow,	 the	 other	 side	 of	 truth.	 It	 happens
without	making	any	effort	to	seek	it.
In	ordinary	life	also	that	is	true:	you	cannot	seek	happiness	directly;	it	happens
through	something	else.
Somebody	may	enjoy	swimming	and	he	may	tell	you	that	it	is	ecstatic.	It	brings
such	joy,	and	you	may	go	to	swim	in	order	to	get	the	joy,	the	ecstasy.	You	will
miss	 the	whole	 thing	because	 the	whole	 time	you	will	be	waiting:	 "When	 is	 it
going	 to	happen?"	You	will	 simply	 feel	 tired,	you	will	 look	stupid,	 silly.	What
are	you	doing?	 --	 throwing	your	hands	 in	 the	water	 and	nothing	 is	happening.
This	man	always	says	that	there	is	so	much	ecstasy	in	swimming.	You	are	also
swimming	 but	 you	 have	made	 happiness	 your	 goal.	 For	 him	 swimming	 is	 his
goal;	happiness	comes	as	a	by-product.
These	are	the	three	planes	of	bliss.	The	first,	the	most	gross	is	pleasure,	and	the
highest,	the	most	subtle	is	bliss.	Between	the	two	is	happiness,	it	is	half	way:	a
little	 gross,	 a	 little	 subtle,	 a	 part	 of	 it	 pleasure	 and	 a	 part	 of	 it	 bliss.	But	 their
happening	is	the	same.
If	somebody	is	making	love	to	a	woman	to	get	pleasure	out	of	it,	he	will	not	find
it.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 find	 any	 pleasure.	 He	 will	 look	 simply	 stupid,	 going
through	all	those	empty	exercises.	Making	love	will	simply	be	like	an	exercise.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 drunkard	 who	 saw	 a	 man	 doing	 some	 exercises	 on	 the
beach	--	just	push-ups.	He	sat	by	the	side	and	looked	at	the	man:	The	man	was
breathing	 hard	 and	 perspiring.	 The	 drunkard	 started	 laughing:	 the	 man	 was	 a
little	 annoyed.	 He	 asked,	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Why	 are	 you	 laughing?"	 The
drunkard	said,	"I	am	laughing	because	the	woman	you	are	making	love	has	left!
What	are	you	doing?	--
There	is	no	woman	at	all!	You	are	looking	so	silly,	that's	why	I	am	laughing."
A	man	who	is	seeking	pleasure	will	simply	be	doing	push-ups,	nothing	else.	He
will	 simply	 feel	 tired,	 he	 will	 be	 perspiring	 and	 will	 look	 stupid	 and	 start
thinking	"What	is	all	this	about	orgasm,	etcetera?	I	have	been	befooled."
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	 if	 you	 are	 in	 love	 and	 you	 are	 not	 thinking	 of	 pleasure	 at	 all	 and	 love
happens	on	its	own	--	a	spontaneous	phenomenon	--	then	there	is	pleasure,	great
pleasure.
Millions	 of	 people	 are	 missing	 orgasm	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 are
seeking	 it.	 And	 after	 the	 Kinsey	 Report,	 and	Masters	 and	 Johnsons'	 research
work,	 millions	 of	 people	 are	 looking	 for	 orgasm.	 These	 people	 had	 never
bothered	about	it	before.	Now	these	books	were	talking	so	much	about	orgasm
that	they	started	feeling	that	they	are	missing	something	very	essential.	And	the
more	they	feel	they	are	missing,	the	more	they	look	at	it;	the	more	they	look	for
it,	the	more	they	are	going	to	miss.	Now	they	are	in	a	vicious	circle.
Somebody	 has	 to	 tell	 them,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 orgasm,	 drop	 the	whole	 idea	 of
orgasm,	and	then	there	is	a	possibility	of	its	happening."
That	is	the	lowest...	but	the	rule	exists,	the	same	rule,	for	higher	planes	too.
If	you	listen	to	music	and	you	are	a	lover	of	music	there	is	great	happiness.	But
if	 you	 have	 just	 gone	 there	 to	 be	 happy	 and	 you	 don't	 love	music,	 you	 don't
bother	about	music,	you	have	no	ear	for	music,	no	sensibility	for	music,	you	are
just	sitting	there,	waiting	for	when	happiness	comes	and	knocks	on	your	door,	it
will	never	come.
Bliss	also	happens,	but	you	cannot	seek	it	directly.	Seek	truth	and	in	finding	truth
you	will	find	bliss	also.
Bliss	and	truth	are	synonymous,	 they	are	inseparable,	 just	 like	two	sides	of	the
same	 coin.	 Everybody	 is	 interested	 in	 bliss,	 naturally	 --	 who	 wants	 to	 be
miserable?	--	but	nobody	is	ready	to	pay	the	price.
Everybody	wants	 it	 cheap,	 and	 if	 possible,	 then	 free.	Nobody	wants	 to	 travel;
one	wants	to	find	a	short-cut,	or	is	it	is	possible,	not	to	take	even	a	single	step	--
that	would	be	 the	best	 thing.	That's	why	people	go	on	boiling	 in	 their	misery;
their	whole	life	is	nothing	but	hell.
One	has	 to	pay	 for	 truth,	 for	bliss,	 and	 the	only	way	 is	 to	become	committed.
Sannyas	is	a	commitment,	a	commitment	to	the	search.	It	is	not	just	curiosity,	it
is	 going	 on	 a	 long	 pilgrimage	 --	 not	 seeking	 any	 short-cut,	 not	 asking	 that	 it
should	 be	 cheap	 or	without	 any	 cost.	 If	 it	 is	 needed,	 the	 committed	 person	 is
ready	to	sacrifice	even	his	life	for	it.	Not	that	to	sacrifice	your	life	is	needed,	but
that	readiness	must	be	there.
With	that	very	readiness	some	radical	change	starts	happening	within	your	being.
When	something	is	higher	than	life,	when	something	is	so	valuable	to	you	that
you	can	even	sacrifice	your	life	for	it,	in	that	very	moment	a	transformation	has
already	happened.	You	are	no	more	concerned	with	the	ordinary	things,	you	have
become	interested	 in	 the	extraordinary.	Your	priorities	have	changed:	money	is
no	more	valuable,	power	 is	no	more	valuable,	 fame	 is	no	more	valuable.	Only
one	thing	is	valuable	now:	how	to	know	oneself.
That's	what	 the	goal	 of	 sannyas	 is:	 how	 to	know	oneself.	By	knowing	oneself
one	comes	to	know	truth	on	one	hand	and	bliss	on	the	other	hand.
Socrates	 is	 right	when	 he	 says	 'Know	 thyself,'	 because	 in	 knowing	 that,	 all	 is
known,	 all	 that	 is	worth	 knowing	 is	 known.	 Except	 for	 that,	 all	 knowledge	 is
simply	 rubbish,	 it	 is	 of	 no	 use.	 It	 won't	 help	 you	 to	 go	 beyond	 death,	 to	 go
beyond	time.	It	won't	help	you	to	transcend	misery,	anguish,	anxiety,	darkness.
Knowing	 yourself	 you	 become	 light,	 you	 become	 luminous.	 Now	 even	 death
cannot	extinguish	your	light.
Now	you	know	something	indestructible	in	your	being,	something	immortal	has
been	 found.	And	with	 that	 finding	 all	 anguish,	 anxiety	 disappears,	 all	 fear,	 all
greed	disappears.	That	is	true	freedom.
The	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas	is	freedom,	and	the	means	to	that	ultimate	goal	is
self-knowledge.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8006205
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Divine	rejoicing	is	precisely	the	definition	of	my	sannyas.
Misery	 is	 evil,	 joy	 is	 divine.	 To	 be	miserable	 is	 the	 greatest	 sin	 in	 the	 world
because	the	miserable	person	creates	misery	for	others.	He	cannot	help	it,	he	is
bound	 to	 create	 misery.	 The	 blissful	 person	 creates	 bliss,	 spontaneously,
effortlessly.	Wherever	he	moves	a	paradise	moves	with	him,	wherever	he	is	there
is	paradise.
The	whole	art	of	 religion	 is	 the	shifting	of	consciousness	from	misery	 to	bliss.
Both	are	our	possibilities.
They	don't	come	from	the	outside.	Misery	simply	means	our	energies	are	upside-
down,	 they	 are	 not	 in	 harmony.	 Bliss	 means	 our	 energies	 are	 functioning	 in
harmony,	humming	in	harmony,	attuned	to	each	other.
Once	 our	 energies	 are	 in	 harmony	 within,	 suddenly	 you	 find	 that	 you	 are	 in
harmony	with	the	whole	too:	the	inner	harmony	brings	you	to	the	outer	harmony.
when	there	is	music	inside,	you	fall	in	tune	with	the	universe,	with	tao,	then	you
are	part	of	this	organic	unity.
In	misery	ego	exists,	in	bliss	ego	disappears.	Being	my	sannyasin	simply	means
rejoicing.
Misery	is	dark,	it	is	gloomy.	It	is	a	dark	night	with	no	moon,	with	no	stars,	not
even	a	candlelight;	it	is	utter	darkness.	That's	where	millions	of	people	are	living
and	they	have	accepted	it	as	if	this	is	the	only	way	life	is	supposed	to	be.	They
are	 born	 not	 for	 this	 life,	 they	 bring	 a	 great	 potential	 for	 light,	 but	 they	 never
make	that	potential	actual,	they	never	go	through	a	transformation.	They	remain
seeds.	They	contain	flowers,	 they	contain	great	perfume.	But	 if	you	dissect	 the
seed	you	will	not	find	the	flowers	or	the	perfume.
The	 seed	 has	 to	 find	 the	 right	 soil,	 the	 right	 gardener,	 water,	 sun,	 the	 right
climate.	When	everything	is	helping	the	seed,	creating	a	confidence	in	the	seed
so	that	it	can	allow	a	let-go,	it	can	disappear	in	the	soil,	then	the	potential	starts
becoming	actual.
Bliss	is	light.	That's	why	another	name	for	bliss	is	delight	--	it	is	delight.	But	one
has	 to	 go	 through	 a	 great	 radical	 change;	 one	has	 to	 learn	how	 to	die	 like	 the
seed	dies	into	the	soil.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	a	death,	and	then	the
resurrection	follows.
The	master	 is	only	a	gardener;	he	can	only	help	you.	All	 that	will	happen	will
happen	within	you.	It	is	yours,	it	has	always	been	yours	--	nobody	can	give	it	to
you.	And	 the	 filed,	 the	 energy	 field	 of	 the	master	 is	 the	 right	 soil.	 If	 one	 can
disappear	 into	 it,	 if	one	can	become	anonymous,	 a	nobody	 in	 it,	 then	miracles
start	 happening.	All	 darkness	 disappears	 and	 the	whole	 being	 becomes	 full	 of
light.	Then	there	is	no	death.
Once	you	have	learned	how	to	die	as	far	as	the	ego	is	concerned,	then	there	is	no
death.	Then	you	are	eternal,	then	you	are	part	of	eternity.
Only	a	man	of	peace	can	attain	to	bliss.	Peace	is	the	foundation.	Without	peace
there	is	no	possibility	for	bliss.	Peace	prepares	you	to	receive	bliss.	Bliss	cannot
happen	in	a	disturbed	state.	It	needs	a	calm	and	quiet	and	still	being;	hence	the
importance	of	meditation.
Meditation	does	not	create	bliss,	it	only	creates	a	peaceful	state,	a	tranquil	state.
But	once	that	tranquility	is	there,	bliss	starts	descending	of	its	own	accord.	When
you	are	 ready	 then	not	 even	a	 single	moment	 is	missed,	 there	 is	no	delay;	 the
universal	 law	functions	 immediately.	But	we	have	 to	show	our	preparation,	we
have	to	show	that	we	are	ready.
Existence	 is	 very	 fair,	 very	 just.	 It	 never	 gives	 bliss	 to	 anybody	who	does	not
deserve	it	and	it	never	delays	bliss	for	anybody	who	deserves	it,	not	even	by	a
split	second.
My	path	is	the	path	of	bliss.	It	is	not	to	be	confused	with	the	so-called	religions.
The	so-called	 religions	are	all	 rooted	 in	a	sad	attitude.	Their	approach	 towards
life	is	very	serious.	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
don't	 take	 it	 as	 fun,	 they	 don't	 take	 it	 as	 a	 cosmic	 joke;	 they	 are	 very	 serious
about	 it	 --	 and	 that	 seriousness	 becomes	 a	 cancer	 in	 the	 soul.	 Life	 becomes	 a
burden	because	for	centuries	these	so-called	religions	have	been	teaching	people
how	to	renounce	life,	not	how	to	live	it.	They	have	not	taught	the	art	of	loving;
their	whole	concern	is	how	to	commit	slow	suicide.	and	your	so-called	saints	are
nothing	 but	 suicidal	 people.	 to	 me	 they	 are	 all	 pathological,	 ill,	 they	 are	 not
healthy	and	whole.	They	are	lopsided;	their	vision	is	not	clear.
And	they	are	not	really	religious.
A	really	religious	person	will	say	yes	to	life	joyously,	dancingly.	His	whole	being
will	be	a	celebration.
He	will	not	act	out	of	fear,	he	will	act	out	of	love.	He	will	not	be	worried	about
hell	and	heaven,	he	will	not	be	worried	at	all.	He	will	live	moment-to-moment,
but	he	will	live	each	moment	with	utter	totality.	and	that	total	living	brings	bliss,
that	total	living	is	the	path	of	bliss.
I	don't	teach	that	you	have	to	live	some	other	kind	of	life,	some	monastic	life.	I
teach:	 live	 the	 ordinary	 life	 but	 live	 it	with	 extraordinary	 awareness	 and	 love,
with	extraordinary	totality,	intensity,	passion.	And	then	you	will	find	something
growing	in	you	each	moment.	Slowly	slowly	you	will	see	clearly	that	a	peak	is
arising	in	you.	When	that	peak	comes	to	a	culmination	you	realise	what	life	is	all
about,	the	meaning	of	it,	the	purpose	of	it.	You	can	call	it	god,	you	can	call	it	tao
--	 any	 name	 will	 do.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 a	 nameless	 experience,	 but	 tremendously
ecstatic.
Love	is	the	only	experience	in	life	which	defies	death,	which	transcends	death,
which	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	immortality;	it	opens	a	door	into	eternity.
Love	 is	 the	 basic	 religious	 experience.	 It	 is	 the	 most	 sacred	 phenomenon	 on
earth.	All	true	spirituality	has	arisen	out	of	the	experience	of	love.	Of	course	it
only	opens	the	window,	and	that	too,	only	for	a	moment,	but	once	you	have	seen
the	vast	sky,	the	splendor	of	that	moment,	then	you	can	never	remain	confined	in
small,	mundane	concerns.	You	will	 start	 finding	more	and	more	ways	 to	 jump
out	of	all	confinement.	You	will	start	finding	the	door.
Without	love	one	never	becomes	aware	of	the	beyond.	And	unless	one	is	aware
of	 the	 beyond	why	 should	 one	 seek	 and	 search	 for	 it?	 The	 question,	 the	 very
question	does	not	arise.	One	simply	lives	in	a	prison	cell	believing	that	this	is	all
there	 is	 to	 life,	 there	 is	 no	 more	 to	 it,	 because	 one	 has	 no	 consciousness	 of
anything	beyond	the	four	walls	of	the	prison.
Love	is	the	key,	the	magic	that	uplifts	you	and	gives	you	an	opportunity	to	see
the	 sky	 full	 of	 stars,	 the	 flowers,	 the	 trees,	 the	wind,	 the	 sun,	 the	moon.	And
suddenly	a	great	longing	arises	in	you	to	transcend	those	limits,	to	go	beyond	the
four	walls	of	the	prison.
It	is	this	longing	that	has	brought	you	here;	it	is	this	longing	that	has	made	you
take	the	jump	into	sannyas.
Religion	is	nothing	but	the	science	of	love.	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	Christianity,
Hinduism,	 Buddhism,	 Mohammedanism.	 Its	 whole	 concern	 is	 with	 love,	 and
only	 with	 love.	 And	 love	 cannot	 be	 Christian	 or	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan	 or
Christian,	neither	can	you.
Trees	are	trees;	the	sun	is	not	Christian,	the	moon	is	not	Hindu.	Existence	knows
nothing	of	all	this	nonsense.	It	is	only	the	stupidity	of	man	that	goes	on	dividing;
and	all	divisions	create	conflict,	 fight,	 continuous	chaos.	Man	has	 lived	 in	 this
chaos	for	centuries,	but	because	the	chaos	has	beautiful	names	--
Christianity,	 Hinduism,	Mohammedanism	 --	 because	 of	 these	 beautiful	 names
one	is	deceived,	one	is	utterly	deceived.	Once	we	take	those	labels	away	you	can
see	the	reality;	it	is	naked	violence,	hatred,	masquerading	as	love.
Love	cannot	divide,	 love	unites.	Love	 is	 the	only	way	of	becoming	one	 --	not
only	with	humanity	but	with	all	life	as	such	and	ultimately	with	all	existence	as
such.	And	when	you	start	feeling	one	with	the	whole,	how	can	misery	exist,	how
can	anxiety	or	worry	exist?
All	these	things	become	possible	because	we	feel	ourselves	as	separate	from	the
whole.	It	 is	 the	separation	from	the	whole	that	creates	hell,	 it	 is	union	with	the
whole	that	creates	paradise.	And	love	is	the	bridge!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006215
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Richa	means	poetry	born	out	of	the	heart	of	a	Buddha	--	not	ordinary	poetry,	but
poetry	 that	 flows	 through	 total	 awarenesss.	 The	 ordinary	 poet	 is	 as	 asleep	 as
everybody	else.	His	poetry	is	just	a	mumbling	in	deep	sleep.	Maybe	he	mumbles
in	a	better	way	than	others,	his	mumbling	has	a	certain	rhythm,	a	certain	music
to	it,	but	it	is	still	the	mumbling	of	a	fast-asleep	person.	He	is	dreaming;	hence
the	poets	are	called	dreamers.
Richa	means	poetry	born	out	of	 a	man	who	has	become	awakened,	who	 is	no
more	 a	 dreamer;	 he	 can	 see,	 he	 is	 a	 seer.	 And	 because	 he	 can	 see,	 truth	 is
available	to	him,	so	whatsoever	he	says	is	poetry,	the	way	he	lives	is	poetry.	It	is
not	only	that	he	has	to	compose	poetry,	then	it	will	be	poetry;	even	his	silence	is
poetic.	 He	 walks,	 talks,	 eats,	 sleeps,	 but	 all	 these	 actions	 have	 a	 poetry
surrounding	them.	They	have	a	deep	harmony.	Each	of	his	acts	is	beautiful,	it	is
divine.
There	 are	 many	 poets	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 the	 true	 poets	 are	 rare.	 Out	 of	 one
hundred	only	one	is	a	real	poet.	and	out	of	a	real	poet,	richa	is	born.	Hence	the
poetry	 collected	 in	 the	 Vedas,	 in	 the	 Upanishadas,	 is	 called	 richa;	 the	 Koran
consists	 of	 richas,	 the	 Bible	 consists	 of	 richas.	 It	 is	 the	 highest	 form	 of	 the
experience	of	beauty	and	its	expression.
Bliss	is	our	treasure	but	we	are	completely	oblivious	of	it.	We	have	forgotten	all
about	it,	that	we	are	carrying	the	greatest	treasure	within	our	being,	and	we	are
begging	for	small	things.	We	are	born	kings	and	have	become	beggars.	This	is	a
very	strange	situation.	We	have	completely	forgotten	who	we	are.
The	whole	purpose	of	sannyas	is	to	make	you	aware	of	your	own	treasure,	And
you	have	not	to	go	to	seek	is	anywhere	else,	because	it	is	within	you	at	the	very
core	 of	 your	 being,	 Even	 if	 you	 want	 to	 lose	 it	 you	 cannot	 lose	 it,	 It	 is
intrinsically	part	of	your	being,	it	is	your	very	being;	hence	inseparable,	nobody
can	steal	it.	If	you	want	to	give	it	to	anybody	you	cannot	do	that	either.	It	is	born
with	 you,	 it	 dies	 with	 you,	 you	 bring	 it	 and	 you	 take	 it	 away	 with	 you.	 But
between	birth	and	death	you	live	like	a	beggar.
One	can	live	like	an	emperor,	one	should	live	like	an	emperor.	But	only	Buddhas
can	live	like	emperors	Even	Alexander	the	Great	remains	a	beggar	for	his	whole
lifes	 always	 desiring	 more	 and	 more.	 That	 is	 the	 style	 of	 begging.	 Desire	 is
begging.	To	live	desirelessly,	to	live	in	the	moment,	to	enjoy	the	moment	to	the
full	is	to	live	like	an	emperor.
One	may	have	everything	of	the	world,	one	may	not	have	anything	of	the	world	-
-	 it	 is	 really	 irrelevant,	 it	 does	 not	 matter.	 What	 matters	 is	 self-knowledge.
Meditation	is	the	key	to	self-knowledge.
Put	your	total	energy	into	self-enquiry,	because	that	is	the	greatest	adventure	one
can	go	on.	And	it	is	only	through	it	that	one	comes	to	fulfilment,	contentment.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	only	victory	worth	calling	victory	 is	 the	attainment	of	bliss.	Everything	 is
only	a	toy	to	play	with,	to	remain	occupied	with	--	except	bliss.	Money,	power,
prestige	--	these	are	toys	for	grown-up	children,	who	are	basically	childish,	who
have	not	really	grown.	Of	course,	chronologically	they	have	become	grown-ups,
but	 not	 psychologically;	 psychologically	 they	 are	 immature.	 They	 are	 still
concerned,	too	concerned	with	futile	things,	with	unnecessary	things,	while	the
most	 necessary	 is	 being	 left	 undone.	 Time	 is	 so	 short,	 and	 tomorrow	 is	 not
certain;	all	we	can	be	certain	about	is	this	moment.	Even	the	next	moment	may
come	or	may	not	come.
There	is	a	famous	story	in	the	life	of	a	mystic	Eknath.	A	man	used	to	come	to	see
Eknath,	 always	 enquiring	 about	 great	 metaphysical	 things.	 One	 day	 he	 came
very	 early	 in	 the	morning.	 Eknath	 asked	 'Today	 you	 have	 come	 so	 early	 --	 is
there	something	urgent?'	The	man	said	'Yes.	I	always	wanted	to	ask	one	thing	but
I	 cannot	 ask	 it	 in	 front	 of	 others,	 so	 before	 others	 come	 I	 have	 come.	 My
question	is	a	little	silly,	but	whatsoever	it	is,	it	has	been	tormenting	me	for	years.
Since	I	have	seen	you	this	question	has	persisted	in	me	and	I	will	not	get	rid	of	it
unless	I	ask	it,	Permit	me	to	ask.'
Eknath	said	'You	can	ask,	you	could	have	asked	any	time!	All	questions	are	silly,
so	it	doesn't	matter.
Ask	 right	 now.'	 The	 man	 said	 'You	 look	 so	 blissful	 that	 even	 emperors	 feel
jealous	 of	 you,	 but	 deep	 inside	 me	 a	 doubt	 persists:	 maybe	 you	 are	 just
pretending.	Maybe	inside	you	are	the	same	as	we	all	are;	you	are	simply	acting.
Who	knows?	--	maybe	the	same	desires,	the	same	lust,	the	same	greed,	the	same
anger	that	haunts	us	may	be	haunting	you	too	and	you	have	repressed	it.	I	cannot
figure	it	out,	I	know	it	is	not	right	to	ask	such	a	question,	but	what	can	I	do?	This
goes	on	and	on	inside	me.'
Eknath	 said	 'I	 will	 answer	 the	 question,	 but	 not	 right	 now.	 Right	 now	 I	 have
something	more	 important	 to	 say	 to	 you	 and	 then	you	 can	 repeat	 the	 question
and	I	will	answer	it.	Just	let	me	see	your	hand.'
The	sun	was	rising	and	Eknath	said	'I	just	saw	your	hand...	I	may	forget	if	I	start
answering	your	question,	and	this	seems	to	be	far	more	urgent,	so	let	me	say	it
first:	your	time	is	finished,	only	seven	days	more.	The	line	of	your	age	has	come
to	its	very	end.	Today	is	Sunday;	next	Sunday	as	the	sun	sets	you	will	die.	That's
all	the	time	that	is	left	for	you.	Now	you	can	ask	what	you	wanted	to	ask.	Please
remind	me	again,	then	I	can	answer	you.'
The	 man	 stood	 up,	 he	 started	 trembling.	 He	 said,	 'I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 any
question	at	all.	Right	now	I	want	to	go	home.'	Eknath	said	'But	those	questions
have	been	tormenting	you	for	years.'	The	man	said
'Forget	all	about	that	--	who	bothers	about	such	things	when	death	is	so	close?'
When	 he	 had	 come	 just	 a	 few	 moments	 before,	 he	 was	 young,	 with	 great
strength;	now	he	was	almost	old.	Within	moments	 it	happened.	When	he	went
down	the	steps	of	the	temple	he	was	trembling;	he	had	to	take	the	support	of	the
wall	 to	 get	 down	 the	 steps,	 He	 reached	 home,	 he	 told	 the	 family.	 Everybody
started	crying	and	weeping,	he	himself	was	crying	and	weeping.
Those	seven	days	were	hell.	He	stopped	eating	--	what	was	the	point	of	eating
any	more?	He	 stopped	 talking,	he	 simply	 lay	down	on	 the	bed.	And	when	 the
last	day	came	and	the	sun	was	just	about	to	set,	he	was	asking	only	one	question
again	and	again	'How	much	more	time	is	left	for	me?'
Eknath	came.	The	whole	family	started	weeping	and	crying	and	asking	Eknath
to	save	him,	to	do	somethings	'You	can	do	miracles	--	you	are	such	a	great	saint.'
Eknath	said	'Forget	all	about	this.	Don't	waste	time,	there	is	not	much	time	left	--
let	 me	 talk	 to	 him!'	 He	 went	 in,	 he	 said	 to	 the	 man	 'I	 have	 to	 ask	 you	 one
question:	in	these	seven	days	has	greed,	lust,	anger	ever	bothered	you?'	The	man
said	 'What	 are	 you	 asking	 a	 dying	man	when	 death	 is	 so	 close?	Where	 is	 the
space	for	greed,	anger,	and	lust	to	arise?'	Eknath	said	 'Then	don't	be	worried	--
you	are	not	going	to	die.	I	have	just	answered	your	question!	Get	up,	forget	all
about	it!	--	you	will	be	living	a	long	life.	But	I	know	that	whether	you	live	seven
days	 or	 seven	 years	 or	 seventy	 years	 or	 seven	 hundred	 years,	 it	 makes	 no
difference:	death	is	going	to	come.	Hence	do	that	which	is	really	essential.	Since
I	have	become	aware	of	death,	all	these	stupid	ideas	have	disappeared	from	my
being.	I	have	not	repressed	them	--	it	is	awareness	of	death	that	has	transformed
me.
'Get	up	from	your	bed,	you	are	not	going	to	die.	It	was	just	a	strategy	to	answer
you,	otherwise	you	would	not	have	understood.'
The	man	was	 transformed;	 these	 seven	 days	were	 really	 a	master	 device.	 The
man	touched	Eknath's	feet	and	told	his	family	'Now	I	have	to	become	a	disciple
of	Eknath,	I	cannot	go	on	letting	you	think	that	I	am	dying.	In	fact	I	am	dead:	the
man	who	used	to	be	has	died	within	these	seven	days.	I	am	a	totally	new	man,
because	 now	 my	 enquiry	 is	 different,	 my	 interest	 is	 different;	 now	 I	 move
indwards.'
Life	is	short,	very	momentary,	but	people	are	so	foolish	that	they	go	on	wasting
it	 on	 unnecessary	 things.	The	 only	 important	 thing	 in	 life	 is	 the	 attainment	 of
bliss,	and	that's	the	purpose	of	sannyas.	It	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
only	one	goal,	only	one	target,	and	all	your	energies	have	to	be	poured	towards
it.
Become	victorious	over	your	own	inner	being	--	that	is	true	victory.	And	those
who	have	known	their	own	inner	being	have	conquered	all,	even	death.
These	are	two	polarities	in	life:	meditation	and	love.	This	is	the	ultimate	polarity.
The	whole	of	life	consists	of	polarities:	the	positive	and	the	negative,	birth	and
death,	man	 and	woman,	 day	 and	 night,	 summer	 and	winter.	The	whole	 of	 life
consists	 of	 polar	 opposites.	 But	 those	 polar	 opposites	 are	 not	 only	 polar
opposites,	they	are	also	complementaries.	They	are	helping	each	other,	they	are
supporting	each	other.
They	 are	 like	 the	 bricks	 of	 an	 arch.	 In	 an	 arch	 the	 bricks	 have	 to	 be	 arranged
against	each	other.	They	appear	to	be	against	each	other,	but	 it	 is	 through	their
polar	 opposition	 that	 the	 arch	 is	 built,	 remains.	 The	 strength	 of	 the	 arch	 is
dependent	on	the	polarity	of	the	bricks	arranged	opposite	each	other.
This	is	 the	ultimate	polarity:	meditation	means	the	art	of	being	alone,	and	love
means	the	art	of	being	together.	The	whole	person	is	one	who	knows	both	and
who	is	capable	of	moving	from	one	to	the	other	as	easily	as	possible.	It	 is	 just
like	breathing	 in	and	breathing	out	 --	 there	 is	no	difficulty.	They	are	opposite:
when	you	breathe	in	there	is	one	process,	and	when	you	breathe	out	the	process
is	just	the	opposite.	But	breathing	in	and	breathing	out	make	one	full	breath.
In	 meditation	 you	 breathe	 in,	 in	 love	 you	 breathe	 out.	 And	 with	 love	 and
meditation	together	your	breath	is	complete,	entire,	is	whole.
For	centuries	religions	have	tried	to	attain	one	pole	to	the	exclusion	of	the	other.
There	are	 religions	of	meditation.	For	example,	 Jainism,	Buddhism	 --	 they	are
meditative	religions,	they	are	rooted	in	meditation.
And	there	are	Bhakti	religions,	religions	of	devotion:	Sufism,	Hassidism	--	they
are	rooted	in	 love.	A	religion	rooted	in	 love	needs	God	as	 the	other	 to	 love,	 to
pray	to,	Without	a	god	the	religion	of	love	cannot	exist	it	is	inconceivable	--	you
need	an	object	of	love.	But	a	religion	of	meditation	can	exist	without	the	concept
of	 God;	 the	 hypothesis	 can	 be	 discarded.	 Hence	 Buddhism	 and	 Jainism	 don't
believe	in	any	god.
There	is	no	need	of	the	other.	You	just	have	to	know	how	to	be	alone,	how	to	be
silent,	how	to	be	still,	how	to	be	utterly	calm	and	quiet	within	yourself.	The	other
has	to	be	completely	dropped,	forgotten.	Hence	these	are	godless	religions.
When	 for	 the	 first	 time	Western	 theologians	 came	 across	 Buddhist	 and	 Jaina
literature	 they	 were	 very	 puzzled:	 how	 to	 call	 these	 godless	 philosophies
religions?	They	could	be	called	philosophies,	but	how	to	call	them	religions?	It
was	inconceivable	to	them	because	the	Judaic	and	Christian	tradition	thinks	that
to	be	religious	God	is	the	most	essential	hypothesis.	The	religious	person	is	one
who	 is	 God-fearing,	 and	 these	 people	 say	 there	 is	 no	 God,	 hence	 there	 is	 no
question	of	fearing	God.
In	the	West	for	thousands	of	years	it	has	been	thought	that	the	person	who	does
not	 believe	 in	 God	 is	 an	 atheist,	 he	 is	 not	 a	 religious	 person.	 But	 Buddha	 is
atheistic	and	religious.	It	was	very	strange	for	Westerners	because	they	were	not
at	all	aware	that	there	are	religions	that	are	rooted	in	meditation.
And	the	same	is	true	about	the	followers	of	Buddha	and	Mahavira.	They	laugh	at
the	 stupidity	 of	 other	 religions	 that	 believe	 in	God,	 because	 the	whole	 idea	 is
absurd.	It	is	just	fantasy,	imagination,	nothing	else;	it	is	a	projection.	But	to	me,
both	are	true	together.
My	understanding	 is	not	 rooted	 in	one	pole;	my	understanding	 is	 fluid.	 I	have
tasted	 truth	 from	both	 sides:	 I	 have	 loved	 totally	 and	 I	 have	meditated	 totally.
And	this	is	my	experience,	that	a	person	is	whole	only	when	he	has	known	both.
Otherwise	he	remains	half,	something	remains	missing	in	him.
Buddha	 is	 half	 --	 so	 is	 Jesus.	 Jesus	 knows	what	 love	 is,	 Buddha	 knows	what
meditation	 is,	but	 if	 they	meet,	 it	will	be	 impossible	 for	 them	 to	communicate
with	each	other.	They	will	not	understand	each	other's	language.	Jesus	will	talk
about	the	kingdom	of	God	and	Buddha	will	start	laughing:	"What	nonsense	are
you	talking?	The	kingdom	of	God?"	Buddha	will	say	just	"Cessation	of	the	self,
disappearance	 of	 the	 self."	 And	 Jesus	 will	 say,	 "Disappearance	 of	 the	 self?
Cessation	 of	 the	 self?	 That	 is	 committing	 suicide,	 the	 ultimate	 suicide.	What
kind	of	religion	is	this?	Talk	about	the	supreme	self!"
They	will	not	understand	each	other's	words.	If	they	ever	meet	they	will	need	a
man	 like	 me	 to	 interpret;	 otherwise	 there	 can	 be	 no	 communication	 between
them.	And	 I	will	have	 to	 interpret	 in	 such	a	way	 that	 I	will	be	untrue	 to	both!
Jesus	will	say	"kingdom	of	God"	and	I	will	translate	it	as	nirvana	--	then	Buddha
will	understand.	Buddha	will	say	"nirvana"	and	to	Jesus	I	will	say	"Kingdom	of
God"	--	then	he	will	understand.
Humanity	needs	a	total	vision	now.	We	have	lived	with	half	visions	for	too	long.
It	was	a	necessity	of	the	past,	but	now	man	has	come	of	age.	My	sannyasins	have
to	 prove	 that	 they	 can	meditate	 and	 pray	 together,	 that	 they	 can	meditate	 and
love	together,	that	they	can	be	silent	as	possible	and	they	can	be	as	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dancing	 and	 celebrating	 as	 possible.	 Their	 silence	 has	 to	 become	 their
celebration,	and	their	celebration	has	to	become	their	silence.	I	am	giving	them
the	hardest	 task	ever	given	 to	any	disciples,	because	 this	 is	 the	meeting	of	 the
opposites.
And	in	this	meeting	all	other	opposites	will	melt	and	become	one:	East	and	West,
man	and	woman,	matter	and	consciousness,	 this	world	and	 that	world,	 life	and
death.	All	opposites	will	meet	and	merge	through	this	one	meeting,	because	this
is	the	ultimate	polarity;	it	contains	all	the	polarities.
This	meeting	will	create	my	man	--	Zorba	the	Buddha.	That's	my	name	for	the
new	man.	 And	 each	 of	my	 sannyasins	 has	 to	make	 all	 the	 efforts	 possible	 to
become	such	a	liquidity,	a	flow,	so	that	both	poles	belong	to	you.
Then	you	will	have	the	taste	of	wholeness.	And	to	know	wholeness	is	the	only
way	to	know	what	is	holy.	There	is	no	other	way.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006225
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	is	a	child	of	light;	it	is	a	by-product.	One	cannot	find	it	directly.	Those	who
try	 to	 find	 it	 directly	 will	 create	 more	 misery	 for	 themselves	 because	 it	 is
impossible	to	find	it	directly.	It	is	as	if	one	is	trying	to	find	the	fragrance	of	rose
flowers	directly.	it	is	a	by-product:	you	grow	roses	and	the	fragrance	comes	on
its	own.	When	the	roses	bloom	there	is	fragrance	in	the	air.
Everybody	 seeks	bliss	but	people	 rarely	 find	 it	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they
start	seeking	it	directly.
And	 the	 more	 you	 seek	 bliss	 directly,	 the	 more	 miserable	 you	 will	 become,
because	except	for	frustration,	and	failure,	nothing	can	be	achieved.
The	people	who	want	 to	be	blissful	 have	 to	 seek	 light,	 they	have	 to	 find	 their
inner	flame;	they	have	to	find	their	inner	awareness.	Light	represents	awareness,
darkness	 represents	 unawareness.	 Light	 means	 consciousness,	 darkness	means
unconsciousness	--	and	we	are	all	 living	in	unconsciousness.	We	have	to	move
towards	the	dawn,	towards	light,	towards	awareness.
One	has	to	completely	forget	about	bliss.	There	is	no	need	to	bother	about	it.	If
you	can	transform	your	unconsciousness	into	consciousness,	then	slowly	slowly
you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 a	 great	 bliss	 is	 arising	 in	 you	 for	 not	 reason	 at	 all.
From	where	is	it	coming?	You	will	not	be	able	to	find	even	its	source.	It	is	just
through	the	flowering	of	the	light	inside	you,	the	fragrance	is	released.
People	 who	 are	 seeking	 bliss	 directly	 start	 seeking	 money,	 power,	 prestige,
because	they	think	you	can	purchase	everything	if	you	have	money;	if	you	have
enough	money	 you	 can	 purchase	 bliss	 --	 it	 seems	 logical.	But	 bliss	 cannot	 be
purchased.
Once	a	great	king	came	to	Mahavira.	Mahavira	is	one	of	those	few	people	who
have	attained	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ultimate	light.	The	king	was	a	great	conqueror,	he	had	achieved	everything,	but
again	 and	 again	 people	 told	 him	 'You	may	 have	 achieved	 everything	 but	 you
have	not	achieved	bliss	yet.	One	thing	more	remains	to	be	conquered.'
And	 that	 had	 always	 been	 a	 wound	 in	 him	 --	 that	 one	 thing	 remained	 to	 be
conquered.	Where	to	find	it?
From	whom	 to	 find	 it?	He	knew	only	one	way,	 and	 that	was	 to	 conquer	 it,	 to
fight	for	it.
Somebody	suggested,	 'Why	don't	you	go	 to	Mahavira?	He	is	 just	very	close	 to
your	 capitol.'	He	went	 there	 and	 he	 said	 to	Mahavira,	 'I	 have	 heard	 you	 have
attained	 bliss.'	Mahavira	 said,	 'You	 have	 heard	 rightly.'	 The	 king	 said,	 'Then	 I
have	come	to	ask	you	to	give	it	to	me.	I	am	ready	to	pay	any	price	you	ask	for	it.'
Mahavira	laughed.	He	said,	'You	don't	understand	at	all.	You	understand	how	to
conquer	a	a	great	kingdom,	how	to	accumulate	money,	how	to	have	many	things,
how	 to	possess	 --	you	don't	know	anything	about	bliss.	You	are	asking	 such	a
childish	question.'
The	king	said,	'Don't	be	worried	about	the	price.	whatsoever	you	ask	I	am	ready
to	pay	for	it.	Don't	hesitate	at	all.'
Now	 this	 is	 how	 the	 worldly	 one	 always	 thinks:	 he	 can	 purchase	 everything.
Mahavira	played	a	joke	on	him.	He	said,	'Do	one	thing.	I	am	not	willing	to	sell
it,	I	have	no	desire	to	sell	it,	but	there	is	a	man	in	your	capitol	itself,	a	very	poor
man.	He	has	also	attained	it	and	he	is	so	poor	that	he	may	be	ready,	he	may	be
willing	to	sell	it.	Go	and	ask	that	men.'
Mahavira	gave	him	 the	address.	That	man	was	a	 follower	of	Mahavira,	a	very
poor	man,	but	he	had	also	attained.
The	king	said,	 'Then	 it	 is	very	easy.	The	address	 that	you	have	given	 is	 in	 the
poorest	part	of	the	town.	I	will	purchase	it,	but	if	the	man	is	not	willing	to	sell	it,
then	he	will	be	in	trouble.'
He	went	to	the	poor	man	and	he	asked	him.	The	poor	man	said,	'Mahavira	must
be	joking,	because	it	is	not	something	that	can	be	sold	or	purchased.	I	can	give
you	my	life;	if	you	want	ME	I	am	ready.	You	can	make	me	a	prisoner,	you	can
kill	me	--	whatsoever	you	want	to	do	with	me,	I	am	ready.	I	am	just	your	subject.
I	am	a	poor	man	--	you	can	do	whatsoever	you	want.
'It	 is	 not	 that	 I	 am	 unwilling	 to	 give	 you	 bliss,	 but	 you	 don't	 understand	 the
mathematics	of	bliss:	 it	 is	a	by-product.	You	have	to	find	your	inner	light	first.
My	 inner	 light	 will	 not	 be	 of	 any	 use	 to	 you.	 My	 consciousness	 is	 my
consciousness.	 It	 is	 unsharable,	 untransferrable.	You	will	 have	 to	go	deep	 into
meditation	--	there	is	no	other	way.	You	will	have	to	go	inwards.	You	know	only
how	 to	go	outwards.	You	are	 an	 extrovert,	 par	 excellence,	you	are	 an	 extreme
extrovert	 --	 and	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 finding	 the	 light	 is	 introversion.	 I	 have
found	 it,	Mahavira	has	 found	 it,	you	can	 find	 it	because	 I	can	see	 --	 it	 is	 there
inside	you,	but	just	a	seed,	just	a	potential.
'But	 forget	 about	 bliss.	 Go	 again	 to	Mahavira	 and	 ask	 how	 to	 meditate.	 You
asked	a	wrong	question.
Ask	how	to	find	the	inner	light.	Don't	talk	in	terms	of	purchasing.'
Once	you	know	how	to	find	the	inner	light,	bliss	comes.	It	comes	so	silently	that
you	will	not	even	hear	its	footsteps.	It	fill	you,	and	it	fills	you	forever.	It	comes
and	never	goes.	 In	 fact	 it	 does	not	 come,	 it	 only	 appears	 to	be	 a	 coming.	 It	 is
your	own	innermost	flowering	and	its	fragrance.
Meditation	and	Karuna	are	tremendously	significant	words,	and	both	have	to	be
understood.
Meditation	 is	 not	 concentration.	 It	 is	 written	 in	 the	 books	 that	 it	 is,	 because
books	 are	 written	 by	 people	 who	 know	 nothing	 of	 meditation.	 Ninety-nine
percent	of	books	on	meditation	are	written	by	non-meditators.
They	may	be	scholars,	they	may	have	read	all	the	literature	about	meditation,	but
they	 have	 not	 tasted	 its	 joy!	 They	 have	 not	 gone	 into	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 their	 own
experience;	hence	they	go	on	repeating	each	other.
It	is	so	easy	to	write	a	book:	just	read	ten	books	on	meditation	and	the	eleventh
book	is	born.
Whatsoever	you	write,	you	have	read	in	those	ten	books,	and	they	were	written
in	the	same	way.
I	have	come	across	many	people	who	have	written	beautiful	books	on	meditation
and	 they	 have	 not	 tasted	 even	 a	 single	 drop	 of	meditativeness.	They	 have	 not
experienced	 a	 single	moment	 of	 that	 joy,	 of	 that	 bliss,	 of	 that	 ecstasy,	 of	 that
dance,	of	that	celebration.	They	are	absolutely	unaware	of	what	they	are	writing,
they	are	simply	repeating	like	parrots.
All	 these	books	will	 tell	you	 that	meditation	means	concentration.	 If	any	book
tells	 you	 that	meditation	means	 concentration,	 it	 simply	means	 that	 the	person
knows	 nothing	 of	meditation	 at	 all,	 because	meditation	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of
concentration.
Concentration	is	a	process	of	 the	mind.	It	 is	focussing	the	mind	on	one	object;
meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 unfocussing.	 In	 concentration	 there	 is	 one	 object;	 in
meditation	there	is	no	object	at	all.	It	is	objectless;	it	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
a	mirror	reflecting	nothing	--	just	a	mirror,	not	a	reflecting	even	a	single	object.
When	two	meditators	face	each	other	they	are	like	two	mirrors.	And	when	two
mirrors	 are	 in	 front	 of	 each	 other,	 they	 go	 on	 reflecting	 each	 other	 --	 nothing
else.	There	is	only	emptiness	reflected	again	and	again.
Once	a	great	meditator,	Sheikh	Farid	--	he	was	a	Sufi	mystic	--	met	another	great
mystic,	 Kabir.	 They	 both	 sat	 for	 two	 days	 together.	 Not	 a	 single	 world	 was
uttered	by	either	 --	neither	Kabir	nor	Farid	 said	anything.	Their	disciples	were
very	much	puzzled:	 'What	has	happened?'	They	were	expecting	that	something
would	 be	 said	 that	 would	 be	 of	 immense	 value.	 But	 those	 two	 people	 were
absolutely	silent.
They	looked	into	each	other's	eyes,	they	smiled,	they	nodded,	they	laughed,	they
hugged	each	other	and	then	they	departed	--	not	even	a	goodbye.
When	they	were	left	along	with	their	disciples	their	disciples	said,	'Master,	this	is
too	much!	For	 two	days	we	waited	 and	waited	 and	waited,	 and	we	have	been
waiting	for	this	opportunity	for	years,	 thinking	that	at	the	meeting	of	two	great
enlightened	persons	something	would	be	bound	to	transpire.	We	were	thrilled,	so
excited,	but	you	both	remained	utterly	silent.'
Farid	 said,	 'When	 two	 mirrors	 face	 each	 other,	 nothing	 is	 reflected	 or	 only
nothing	is	reflected,	again	and	again.	He	is	silent,	I	am	silent;	he	knows,	I	know;
I	am	not,	he	is	not.	We	have	both	disappeared	into	the	ultimate.	what	is	there	to
say?	Who	is	there	to	say	it?'
And	the	same	was	said	by	Kabir.	When	his	disciples	asked	him,	'Lord...'	he	said,
'If	 either	of	 us	had	 spoken,	 that	would	have	proved	 that	 he	knew	nothing.	We
looked	 into	 each	 others'	 eyes	 and	we	 recognised	 that	 the	 other	 had	 become	 a
mirror,	he	recognised	that	I	had	become	a	mirror.	That's	why	we	nodded:	without
saying	yes,	we	recognised,	 that	 it	happened.	It	 is	very	rare,	so	we	rejoiced,	we
laughed.	 and	we	 laughed	 at	 you	 also	 because	 you	were	 so	 excited,	 sitting	 and
waiting	for	something	to	be	said.	the	meeting	was	beautiful,'	Kabir	said,	'It	was
tremendously	beautiful:	the	meeting	of	two	hearts,	two	souls,	in	deep	silence.'
Meditation	 means	 becoming	 a	 mirror	 without	 any	 thoughts,	 any	 clouds.
Concentration	needs	effort,	meditation	needs	relaxation.	Concentration	tires	you,
meditation	rejuvenates.	concentration	is	a	forced	thing,	unnatural,	against	tao.
Meditation	is	simply	flowing	with	the	river,	going	with	the	wind,	just	like	a	dead
leaf	moving	with	 the	wind,	wherever	 it	 goes.	The	 dead	 leaf	 has	 no	will	 of	 its
own.	If	the	wind	is	going	south	it	goes	south;	if	the	wind	suddenly	turns	towards
the	north	it	starts	moving	towards	the	north.	It	does	not	say	'What	does	it	mean?
We	were	going	to	the	south	and	now	you	have	turned	towards	the	north	--	this	is
contradictory.	 The	whole	 effort	 is	wasted.'	 It	 says	 nothing;	 there	 is	 nothing	 to
say.	It	has	simply	become	surrendered.
Meditation	 is	 surrender,	 concentration	 is	 struggle.	 Concentration	 is	 a	 fight	 to
force	 the	mind	 into	 a	 certain	pattern,	 to	 channelise	 the	mind	 towards	 a	 certain
object,	not	to	allow	it	freedom,	to	chain	it,	to	make	it	tethered	and	to	force	it	to
remain	stagnant	on	that	point,	not	to	move.	Meditation	is	a	flowing	phenomenon.
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 effort,	 not	 question	 of	 forcing,	 no	 question	 of
fighting,	no	question	of	any	goal,	achievement,	ambition.	It	is	a	total	let-go,	it	is
the	 most	 beautiful	 experience.	 There	 is	 nothing	 which	 is	 more	 beautiful	 than
meditation;	hence	out	of	such	relaxation,	compassion	arises.
Compassion	is	the	flowering	of	a	relaxed	consciousness.	One	starts	feeling	great
compassion	 for	 all	 that	 is.	 One	 starts	 feeling	 compassion	 because	 people	 are
unnecessarily	miserable.	 They	 need	 not	 be	miserable;	 that	 is	 not	 their	 destiny.
They	are	creating	their	misery,	they	are	making	a	great	effort	to	create	their	hells,
and	then	they	are	caught	in	their	own	nets.	They	go	on	crying	and	weeping	and
they	want	to	get	out	of	the	misery	but	still	they	go	on	making	the	same	prisons
again	and	again.	They	don't	want	to	remain	imprisoned,	but	they	have	become	so
unconscious,	so	mechanical,	that	they	only	know	how	to	make	prisons.	They	go
on	saying	"We	want	to	be	free,	we	want	to	be	blissful,"	but	whatsoever	they	do
brings	more	misery,	On	one	hand	they	make	some	effort	to	get	out	of	the	prison,
on	the	other	hand	they	destroy	it.	People	are	in	a	dilemma.
The	man	of	meditation	 feels	 tremendous	compassion	 for	all	beings	 --	not	only
man:	 animals,	 birds,	 trees,	 rocks	 --	 for	 all	 that	 is,	 because	 they	 are	 all
imprisoned.	Every	 being	 is	 an	 imprisoned	 splendour	 --	 it	 can	 be	 released,	But
nobody	can	force	anybody	out	of	his	imprisonment,	If	he	has	decided	to	remain
a	 prisoner	 nobody	 can	 do	 anything	 about.	 Hence	 the	man	 of	meditation	 feels
even	more	compassion.,	He	can	see	clearly	 the	whole	ridiculousness	of	 it.	The
absurdity	of	 the	human	mind,	 of	 the	human	endeavour,	 is	 so	 clear	 to	him	 that
there	is	no	question	about	his	compassion,	It	is	not	something	cultivated.	It	is	not
that	he	forces	himself	to	feel	compassion	for	others,	he	simply	feels	compassion.
Buddha	made	 it	 a	 point	 --	 and	 it	 was	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	 history	 of	 thought;
before	him	nobody	had	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
made	 it	clear	 in	 that	way,	nobody	had	emphasised	 it	 --	 that	 true	compassion	 is
not	 a	 cultivated	 phenomenon,	 True	 compassion	 comes	 naturally	 out	 of
meditation.	Hence	he	 says,	 'Compassion	 is	 the	 criterion	of	whether	meditation
has	succeeded	or	not,	whether	you	have	really	become	relaxed	or	not.'
If	your	life	becomes	compassionate,	that	is	the	proof,	a	very	concrete	proof	that
you	 have	 gone	 through	 an	 inner	 transformation,	 all	 tensions	 have	 disappeared
and	 there	 is	 now	 absolute	 calm,	 absolute	 silence,	 absolute	 peace,	 you	 have
arrived	home.	Compassion	becomes	the	symbol,	the	criterion,	the	manifestation
of	what	has	happened	at	the	innermost	core	of	your	being.
Meditation	happens	inside,	compassion	is	its	outer	expression,	its	manifestation.
Nobody	 can	 see	 anybody	 else's	 meditativeness,	 but	 everybody	 can	 see	 the
compassion,	 the	 love,	 that	 surrounds	 such	 a	 person.	 He	 becomes	 love,	 he
becomes	compassion.
Go	deeply	into	meditation	so	compassion	can	be	achieved.	That	is	the	ultimate
truth	of	life.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
24	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006245
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	 Mind	 means	 being	 in	 thinking,	 desiring,
dreaming;	 no-mind	 means	 no	 thinking,	 no	 desiring,	 no	 dreaming,	 absolute
inward	silence,	when	nothing	stirs	inside,	as	if	everything	has	totally	stopped.	It
is	a	full-stop,	the	mind	is	no	more	functioning.	It	 is	a	tremendous	silence,	very
pregnant.	It	is	not	dead,	it	is	very	alive,	very	vibrant,	full	of	great	possibilities.	In
fact	mind	is	absolutely	impotent;	it	only	thinks.	And	thoughts	are	just	hot	air	and
nothing	else.
An	old	man	was	 telling	 his	 physician	 'I	 am	 feeling	 very	weak.'	The	 physician
checked	him	and	told	him
'You	will	have	to	cut	your	sex	life	to	almost	half.'	The	old	man	said,	'Which	half
do	I	have	to	cut?	--	talking	about	it	or	thinking	about	it?'
That's	what	mind	goes	on	doing.	Talking	means	thinking	loudly;	thinking	means
talking	 silently	 inside,	whispering	 to	yourself.	 It	 is	 the	 same:	whether	you	 talk
aloud	or	 you	 talk	without	moving	your	 lips	 the	process	 is	 the	 same.	Thoughts
cannot	lead	you	to	reality.	Thoughts	are	just	thoughts.
You	can	think	about	great	things:	god,	love,	truth,	but	to	think	about	god	has	no
meaning.	 To	 know	 god	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon.	 The	 person	 who
knows	god	never	thinks	about	god	--	there	is	no	need	to	think.
Thinking	is	like	a	blind	man	pondering	over,	contemplating	light	--	what	light	is,
how	it	looks,	what	exactly	it	consists	of,	why	people	are	so	interested	in	light.	He
is	 trying	 to	 define	 light	 --	 which	 is	 impossible	 for	 him.	 A	 blind	 man	 cannot
define	light	--	it	is	an	experience.	So	is	god,	so	is	love,	so	is	truth.
Mind	keeps	you	clouded.	The	whole	sky	of	your	inner	universe	remains	clouded;
you	can't	see	clearly.	It	keeps	you	in	the	dark,	it	keeps	your	eyes	closed.	You	are
not	blind,	nobody	is	born	blind;	as	far	as	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
consciousness	 is	 concerned	 nobody	 is	 born	 blind.	 Even	 the	 physically	 blind
person	is	not	blind	inwardly.	He	can	become	enlightened.	He	may	not	be	able	to
know	 the	 outer	 light	 but	 he	 can	 know	 the	 inner	 light.	 That	 inner	 light	 is
everybody's	birthright,	it	is	intrinsic	to	our	being.	But	for	it	one	has	to	go	beyond
mind.
Going	beyond	mind	is	just	like	taking	your	aeroplane	above	the	clouds,	moving
upwards.	When	you	are	travelling	in	an	aeroplane	sometimes	you	are	below	the
clouds,	 sometimes	you	are	 in	 the	clouds,	 sometimes	you	are	above	 the	clouds.
And	the	beauty	of	being	above	he	clouds	is	tremendous.	The	whole	sky	is	open
for	 you,	 the	 whole	 infinity	 is	 open	 to	 you.	 Nothing	 debars	 your	 vision,	 the
insight	is	absolutely	clear.	You	can	see	into	the	unbounded.
Meditation	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 process:	 taking	 yourself	 above	 mind,
transcending	 mind,	 surpassing	 mind.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 known	 something
beyond	 the	 mind,	 mind	 looks	 just	 child's	 play,	 of	 no	 utility	 at	 all.	 It	 looks
ridiculous,	 and	 all	 its	 efforts	 and	 all	 its	 endeavours	 that	 you	 have	made	 your
whole	 life,	 look	stupid,	 silly,	because	now	you	can	see.	And	 it	was	 impossible
for	 the	 mind	 to	 conceive	 that	 which	 you	 are	 seeing,	 it	 is	 incomprehensible
through	the	mind.
The	way	 to	 transcend	 the	mind	 is	watchfulness:	you	have	 simply	 to	watch	 the
mind.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 process	 but	 with	 immense	 possibilities.	 One	 cannot
even	imagine	how	such	a	simple	process	can	take	you	beyond	the	mind.	But	all
ultimate	laws	are	very	simple.
Man	had	never	thought	 that	one	day	he	would	be	able	to	fly.	Of	course	people
had	 imagined	 it	 for	centuries;	all	 the	scriptures	of	 the	world	are	 full	of	stories.
But	 they	 are	 all	 stories,	 fiction,	 an	 old	 type	 of	 science	 fiction;	 nobody	 really
believed	them.
When	for	the	first	time	the	Wright	brothers	started	working	to	make	a	machine
that	would	fly,	everybody	 laughed.	People	 thought	 they	were	mad,	 their	whole
family	 thought	 they	were	mad.	They	were	so	condemned	 that	 they	could	work
only	in	the	night	and	that	too,	in	the	basement	of	their	house	so	nobody	would
disturb	them.	Otherwise	everybody	was	ready	to	condemn	them.
The	first	flying	machine	that	they	made	was	made	out	of	old	cycle	parts,	because
their	 father	owned	a	bicycle	 shop.	He	used	 to	purchase	old	bicycles	and	make
them	workable	and	then	sell	them	again.	So	there	was	a	huge	pile	of	old	parts	in
the	basement	of	the	house.	The	first	aeroplane	was	made	of	old	bicycles.
When	they	had	made	it	they	didn't	declare	it,	because	nobody	would	believe	it.
In	fact	they	themselves	were	very	afraid	to	believe,	it	was	impossible	for	them	to
believe	that	it	was	going	to	fly.	They	went	alone	outside	the	town.	The	first	time
they	were	the	only	persons	there:	one	brother	watched	and	the	other	brother	took
the	machine	up.	For	only	sixty	seconds,	 for	only	one	minute,	was	 it	 in	 the	air.
But	 that	was	enough:	 the	principle	had	been	 found.	And	 then	 the	whole	world
said,	 'There	 is	 nothing	 in	 it	 --	 anybody	 could	 have	 done	 it.'	 But	 for	 centuries
nobody	had	done	 it.	That's	how	people	are:	once	you	do	a	 thing	 they	will	 say,
'This	is	so	simple.'
Meditation	also	is	a	very	simple	process.	It	is	just	a	silent	watching	of	the	mind:
thoughts	moving,	desires	moving,	dreams	coming	in,	going	out,	and	you	remain
centred,	looking	at	it	without	doing	a	thing.
That's	 the	 most	 important	 point	 to	 remember.	 If	 you	 start	 doing	 something,
immediately	you	have	forgotten	to	watch,	you	have	fallen	into	the	mind.	You	are
no	more	 sitting	on	 the	bank	of	 the	 river,	 you	have	 jumped	 into	 the	 river.	That
temptation	is	the	only	barrier,	and	it	is	a	great	temptation.
Some	thoughts	are	so	beautiful,	some	dreams	are	so	beautiful,	that	one	forgets	to
watch;	 one	 becomes	 identified,	 one	 starts	 following	 those	 thoughts,	 one	 starts
getting	into	imagination,	into	fantasising.
All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 not	 to	 be	 tempted	 by	 anything	 passing	 by;	 just	 remain
untempted.	Slowly	slowly	the	knack	is	learned,	and	when	you	are	untemptedly
watching,	the	transcendence	happens	of	its	own	accord.
The	 moment	 you	 are	 a	 watcher	 you	 have	 already	 transcended,	 because	 the
watcher	 cannot	 be	 the	 watched,	 the	 observer	 cannot	 be	 the	 observed.	 Those
thoughts	are	 there;	you	are	here,	a	witness.	You	are	no	more	part	of	 it;	 the	no-
mind	has	started	growing	in	you.	This	is	 the	way	a	man	becomes	a	Christ	or	a
Buddha	or	a	Zarathustra	or	a	Lao	Tzu.
The	word	'Marie'	is	very	beautiful.	It	has	three	meanings	which	define	the	whole
process	of	meditation.
The	first	meaning	is	bitterness.	Meditation	starts	in	a	very	bitter	state.	The	taste
is	bitter.	In	the	beginning	it	 is	bitter,	because	temptation	is	sweet	and	you	have
always	been	a	victim	of	temptation;	it	 is	an	old	habit.	It	 is	really	bitter	 to	keep
yourself	aloof,	cool,	untempted,	not	to	get	into	the	merry-go-round	of	the	mind,
not	 to	start	playing	with	 the	beautiful	 toys	 --	and	 they	are	very	colourful,	very
psychedelic,	really	alluring,	intoxicating,	infatuating.
For	 example,	 a	 sexual	 desire	 passes	 in	 the	 mind.	 Suddenly	 you	 think	 of	 a
beautiful	man	or	a	woman	--
and	 no	 man,	 no	 woman,	 is	 as	 beautiful	 as	 the	 colourful	 image	 of	 a	 man	 or
woman	can	be	inside	the	mind.	It	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	so	attractive.	One	is	unconsciously	pulled	into	it;	one	gets	into	the	whirlpool
of	 it,	 forgets	all	about	meditation.	One	says	 to	oneself,	 'I	can	meditate	 later	on
but	let	us	go	a	little	more	into	this	thought.	This	Sophia	Loren	may	come	again,
may	 not	 come	 again,	 this	 Mohammed	 may	 visit,	 may	 not	 visit	 again	 --	 who
knows?	Meditation	 you	 can	 do	 any	 time,	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you,	 but	 don't	 miss	 this
opportunity.'	One	starts	postponing	meditation.
And	the	strange	thing	is	when	you	start	meditating,	very	beautiful	thoughts	will
come,	great	desires	will	arise	because	mind	will	try	in	every	way	to	manipulate
you;	mind	is	a	master	of	you	and	you	are	a	slave,	and	through	meditation	You
will	 become	 the	 master	 and	 the	 mind	 will	 be	 the	 slave.	 And	 the	 mind	 has
remained	a	master	for	so	long,	it	does	not	want	to	become	a	slave.	11ho	wants	to
lose	one's	mastery	so	easily?
So	it	will	give	all	kinds	of	temptations.	There	is	no	other	devil	except	your	own
mind;	hence	the	beginning	is	very	bitter.	The	first	meaning	of	Marie	is	bitterness.
If	you	can	pass	through	it...
The	second	meaning	of	Marie	is	rebellion.	If	one	can	pass	through	bitterness,	if
you	can	start	centering	and	settling	into	yourself,	and	the	mind	no	longer	has	any
power	 over	 you,	 a	 great	 radical	 change	 happens	 in	 your	 consciousness;	 a
rebellion	happens.	You	are	no	more	the	same	person,	you	are	reborn.
This	 rebirth	 is	 true	 rebellion.	 All	 other	 rebellions	 are	 just	 so-called.	 They	 are
only	 reforms,	 not	 rebellions,	 because	 they	 only	 change	 the	 outer	 form,	 they
never	change	the	inner	spirit.
All	 the	 revolutions	have	 failed	 in	 that	 sense.	No	 revolution	has	yet	 succeeded.
French	 or	 russian	 or	 Chinese	 --	 no	 revolution	 has	 succeeded.	 Only	 a	 few
rebellious	people	have	succeeded,	but	they	have	succeeded	through	meditation.
The	fight	is	not	outside,	the	fight	is	inside,	with	your	own	mind.	the	mind	is	the
real	csar,	and	you	have	to	rebel	against	the	mind.	Once	this	rebellion	is	possible
you	 are	 for	 the	 first	 time	 beginning	 to	 live	 life	 with	 a	 new	 light,	 with	 new
perceptiveness,	 with	 a	 new	 clarity,	 with	 new	 transparency.	 Your	 whole	 inner
world	is	new,	and	because	the	inner	is	new	the	outer	is	bound	to	change	for	you.
It	 will	 not	 change	 for	 anybody	 else,	 but	 for	 you	 the	 whole	 world	 will	 be
different.
And	the	third	meaning	of	Marie	is	fragrance.	If	this	rebirth	happens	you	flower;
your	ultimate	potential	becomes	actual.	You	are	no	more	a	seed,	you	become	a
flower.	You	have	become	a	grown-up,	you	have	matured,	you	have	come	home.
And	great	fragrance	is	released.	That	fragrance	is	a	celebration:	the	celebration
of	coming	home,	the	celebration	of	the	ultimate	achievement.
Buddha	calls	it	nirvana,	Jesus	calls	it	kingdom	of	god,	Mahavira	calls	it	moksha,
ultimate	 freedom.	Now	you	know	what	 the	meaning	of	 life	 is,	 now	you	know
what	 the	 beauty	 of	 life	 is,	 now	 you	 know	what	 the	music	 of	 life	 is,	 now	 you
know	what	the	poetry	of	life	is.	Each	moment	becomes	a	dance,	a	song.	And	it
goes	on	growing	--	it	is	a	process	that	begins	but	never	ends.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
25	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006255
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	is	a	state	of	awareness,	watchfulness,	witnessing.	Ordinarily	we	live
just	 like	 a	 robot:	 we	 go	 through	 all	 the	 gestures	 of	 living,	 but	 they	 are	 only
gestures;	 there	 is	 no	 consciousness	 behind	 it.	 We	 are	 functioning	 like	 a
mechanism.	 And	 that's	 what	 the	 society	 wants	 us	 to	 do.	 The	 society	 needs
machines,	not	men.
Machines	are	good	in	a	way;	they	are	very	obedient.	Nobody	has	ever	heard	of
any	machine	 being	 rebellious,	 of	 any	machine	 saying	 no.	 They	 are	 always	 at
your	 disposals	 push	 the	 button	 and	 they	 start	 functioning,	 and	 whenever	 you
want.	 They	 don't	 even	 need	 a	 coffee	 break;	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 they	 can	 go	 on
working	for	you.
Hence	slowly	slowly	society	bas	tried	to	reduce	man	to	a	machine.	It	has	almost
succeeded.	Fortunately	it	has	only	almost	succeeded.	With	a	few	persons	it	has
failed	--	and	those	few	are	the	salt	of	the	earth.
Moise	is	a	form	of	Moses.	Moses	is	one	of	those	few	people	who	can	be	called
the	salt	of	the	earth.
Existence	is	beautiful	because	there	have	been	people	like	Moses.	They	function
consciously;	they	create	great	rebellions.	The	whole	evolution	has	depended	on
these	few	people.
Meditation	means	undoing	what	the	society	has	done	to	you.	It	has	reduced	you
to	 a	machine;	 you	have	 to	de-automatise	yourself,	 you	have	 to	become	a	man
again.	You	have	to	come	out	of	this	state	of	unconsciousness,	of	mechanicalness.
You	have	to	come	out	of	this	sleep.	It	is	possible	only	through	meditation.	There
is	 no	 other	 way,	 there	 has	 never	 been,	 there	 will	 never	 be.	 The	 only	 way	 to
reduce	a	man	to	a	machine	is	take	away	his	consciousness	force	him	to	function
unconsciously.	And	just	the	opposite	is	the	way	of	meditation:	give	him	back	his
consciousness.
That's	my	work	here:	to	help	you	to	become	conscious	again	so	you	can	be	rid	of
all	 structures	 that	 have	 been	 imposed	 upon	 you,	 which	 are	 keeping	 you	 in
slavery,	 in	 a	mental	 slavery.	The	 slavery	 is	 so	 subtle	 that	 one	 is	 not	 ordinarily
even	aware	of	it,	that	it	exists.	People	take	it	for	granted	that	they	are	Christians,
Hindus,	Mohammedans,	Indians,	Japanese,	French.	They	never	think,	even	for	a
single	moment,	that	each	child	is	born	without	any	religion,	without	any	nation,
without	any	race;	he	is	simply	born	as	a	conscious	being.	But	we	take	away	his
consciousness,	and	instead	of	it	we	give	him	poor	substitutes.	We	take	away	his
real	 identity	 and	give	him	 false	 ideas;	 'You	are	 this,	you	are	 that,'	 and	 then	he
goes	on	living	according	to	those	ideas.	His	whole	life	becomes	a	falsification.
One	has	to	wake	up	from	this	sleep.
The	 meaning	 of	 Moise	 is	 very	 beautiful.	 It	 has	 two	 meanings.	 Those	 two
meaning	are	like	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
The	first	meaning	is	servant	of	god.	It	simply	means	one	who	is	surrendered	to
tao,	 to	 existence,	 to	 nature.	 God	 is	 just	 a	 metaphor	 for	 the	 ultimate	 law	 of
existence.
And	the	second	meaning	is	one	who	is	saved	by	god.	The	first	has	 to	precede,
then	the	second	succeeds	of	its	own	accords	if	you	surrender	to	the	ultimate	law
of	existence	you	are	saved;	to	surrender	is	to	be	saved.	Sannyas	is	nothing	but	a
discipline	of	surrendering,	and	the	outcome	is	deliverance.
You	 have	 to	 disappear	 as	 an	 ego	 and	 then	 you	 are	 suddenly	 born	 as	 the	 very
ocean.	 You	 have	 to	 disappear	 as	 a	 person,	 as	 a	 separate	 entity,	 and	 then	 you
appear	as	the	whole.	And	to	be	the	whole	is	to	be	holy.
The	 discipline	 that	 is	 imposed	 from	 the	 outside	 is	 always	 ugly	 because	 it	 is
destructive,	 it	 is	 paralysing,	 It	 cripples	 you.	 Rather	 than	 cutting	 the	 cloth
according	to	you	and	then	making	a	dress	out	of	it,	it	does	just	the	opposite:	the
dress	is	already	there,	made	by	somebody	maybe	thousands	of	years	before,	and
you	have	 to	 fit	 into	 it.	 If	 you	don't	 fit	 into	 it	 then	You	have	 to	be	 cut,	 not	 the
dress.	Then	something	is	wrong	with	you,	not	with	the	dress.
That	 is	 the	 moralistic	 attitude,	 the	 puritan	 attitude,	 that	 the	 moral	 rules	 are
always	right.	If	something	is	wrong	it	is	always	you,	so	you	have	to	fit	with	the
moral	rules.	If	you	don't	fit	it	creates	guilt;	if	you	try	to	fit,	it	creates	discomfort.
If	you	are	stupid	you	try	to	fit,	but	then	your	whole	life	becomes	a	misery.	If	you
are	clever,	cunning,	then	you	become	a	hypocrite.	You	pretend	'Yes,	everything
is	okay.	I	am	fitting	in	perfectly	--	the	dress	is	beautiful,	it	is	lovely!'
But	then	you	have	to	live	a	double	life:	one	life	in	your	drawing	room,	the	other
life,	which	is	your	real	life,	from	the	backdoor.	And	then	there	is	a	split;	then	you
are	constantly	in	a	kind	of	inner	struggle,	an	inner	tension,	and	you	can	never	be
at	ease.	You	are	pulled	apart:	if	you	try	to	be	real	you	start	feeling	you	are	being
oral;	if	you	try	to	be	moral	you	start	feeling	you	are	being	unnatural.	And	both
prove	to	be	tense	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
states.
My	approach	is	totally	different;	it	is	not	moralistic	at	all.	And	I	make	a	clear-cut
distinction	between	morality	 and	 religion.	Morality	 is	 discipline	 imposed	 from
the	 outside,	 religion	 is	 an	 inner	 discipline.	 It	 arises	 out	 of	 your	 own
consciousness.	Morality	depends	on	creating	a	conscience,	and	very	conscience
is	bound	to	create	problem	for	you	because	it	is	against	you	somewhere.	It	may
look	 right	 basically,	 but	 nature	 knows	 no	 logic.	 You	 may	 have	 to	 agree
intellectually,	but	existence	is	far	bigger	than	the	intellect.	You	cannot	manage	to
force	 existence	 into	 intellectual	 patterns.	 Moreover,	 the	 patterns	 were	 created
long	ago.
Manu,	 the	 Indian	 law-maker,	 the	Hindu	 founder,	 prescribed	 certain	 rules.	Five
thousand	 years	 have	 passed	 and	 the	Hindu	 still	 has	 to	 follow	 them.	Now,	 the
whole	world	has	changed,	man	bas	changed;	nothing	is	the	same.	If	Manu	comes
back	he	will	not	even	be	able	to	recognise	anything.	But	his	rules	are	still	there.
If	the	Hindu	follows	those	rules,	in	one	sense	he	feels	good	that	he	is	following
the	 right	 path.	 But	 then	 there	 is	 repression,	 and	 then	 the	 whole	 situation	 is
against	him	and	he	looks	silly	and	stupid	--	to	himself,	to	others	too.	He	does	not
look	contemporary.	He	becomes	a	mess.
Morality	is	for	man	--	man	is	not	for	morality.	And	morality	has	to	change	with
the	times.	Peoples'	needs	change,	requirements	change;	you	cannot	continue	with
old	 rules.	 Ten	 commandments	 were	 given	 three	 thousand	 years	 ago;	 now
everything	 is	 different	 --	 they	 are	 absolutely	 irrelevant.	You	 have	 to	 find	 new
ways	to	live,	new	ways	to	be.	The	only	possibility	is	that	we	drop	the	whole	idea
of	conscience.	Instead	of	conscience	we	should	depend	on	consciousness.
Conscience	is	always	created	by	others.	It	is	a	manipulation,	it	is	a	subtle	slavery.
Consciousness	is	created	by	you.	It	is	your	own	effort	to	stand	on	your	own	two
feet,	to	look	at	life	and	to	gather	enough	courage	to	live	according	to	your	light.
Of	 course	 when	 you	 live	 according	 to	 your	 light	 you	 may	 commit	 many
mistakes,	but	 there	 is	nothing	wrong	 in	committing	mistakes	because	 that's	 the
only	way	 to	 learn.	 The	more	mistakes	 one	 commits,	 the	more	 one	 learns.	 He
only	thing	to	be	remembered	is:	don't	commit	the	same	mistake	again	and	again,
because	 that	 is	 stupid'	 Commit	 new	 mistakes,	 find	 out	 ways	 to	 commit	 new
mistakes.
As	you	grow,	as	you	learn,	as	you	become	conscious,	as	you	become	more	and
more	alert,	a	certain	inner	discipline	arises	without	any	imposition,	because	you
can	see	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	And	when	you	see	it,	there	is	no	split;
then	 you	 are	 not	 of	 a	 double	 mind,	 then	 it	 does	 not	 create	 a	 kind	 of
schizophrenia.	Otherwise	 the	whole	humanity	has	 lived	a	schizophrenic	 life	up
to	now,	because	of	the	moralistic	past.
We	 have	 to	 free	 religion	 from	morality.	 Once	 religion	 is	 freed	 from	morality,
then	religion	gives	you	a	totally	new	kind	of	morality,	but	it	will	not	be	of	Manu
and	 it	 will	 not	 be	 of	Moses	 and	 it	 will	 not	 be	 of	 Jesus,	 and	 it	 will	 not	 be	 of
Buddha,	it	will	not	be	mine	--	it	will	be	yours.	And	when	it	is	yours	there	is	a	joy
in	living	it,	 there	 is	great	growth	through	it.	You	don't	 feel	crippled,	paralysed,
hampered,	obstructed,	manipulated;	you	become	more	and	more	natural,	simple,
spontaneous.	You	become	more	and	more	attuned	to	the	universe.
That's	the	way	of	sannyas:	it	is	non-moralistic	but	absolutely	religious.	I	teach	an
amoral	religion:	not	immoral,	not	moral,	but	amoral	--	a	religion	that	transcends
morality.	Then	it	brings	freedom	to	you,	and	freedom	is	the	ultimate	value.	There
is	nothing	higher	than	that.	Freedom	is	the	highest	truth.	It	is	another	name	for
god.
Bliss	is	not	something	philosophical,	something	intellectual.	It	is	existential,	it	is
an	experience	--	like	love,	like	light,	like	life.
You	cannot	teach	a	blind	man	what	light	is.	You	can	tell	him	about	the	physics	of
light,	you	can	 tell	him	about	 the	mathematics	of	 light,	you	can	 tell	him	all	 the
theories	about	 light,	but	 even	all	 those	 theories,	physics	and	mathematics,	will
not	 give	him	a	 single	glimpse	of	 light.	He	will	 not	 know	even	 a	 single	 ray	of
light:	he	 is	blind.	In	fact	he	does	not	even	know	darkness	--	what	 to	say	about
light?
People	 ordinarily	 think	 that	 blind	 people	 live	 in	 darkness.	 That	 is	 absolutely
wrong.	That	is	just	our	idea,	because	we	close	our	eyes	and	there	is	darkness,	so
we	think	blind	people	must	be	living	in	darkness.	The	blind	person	cannot	see	at
all,	how	can	he	see	darkness?	To	see	darkness	eyes	are	needed	as	much	as	eyes
are	needed	to	see	light.	You	cannot	even	explain	darkness	to	a	blind	man,	what
to	say	about	light?
Impossible!
The	only	possible	 tray	 is	 to	help	him	so	 that	his	eyes	are	cured,	so	 that	he	can
also	see.	Then	he	may	not	know	the	physics	--	who	knows	the	physics	of	light.	I
don't	 know,	 but	 I	 know	 what	 light	 is.	 Who	 knows	 the	 mathematics	 of	 light?
Millions	of	people	use	light	without	knowing	anything	about	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	said	that	once	it	happened	that	Thomas	Alva	Edison,	who	was	the	inventor
of	the	electric	bulb,	went	to	a	village,	a	hill	station,	for	a	holiday.	The	hill	station
had	a	small	school	and	the	school	was	celebrating	its	hundredth	anniversary,	so
they	had	many	functions;	many	celebrations	were	going	on.
He	had	nothing	 to	 do	 so	he	went	 to	 see	what	was	going	on	 there.	The	 school
children	 had	 arranged	 a	 small	 exhibition	 and	 they	 had	 made	 a	 few	 electrical
things.	A	boy	was	showing	him:	'Push	this	button	and	the	light	comes	on,	push
this	 button	 and	 the	 fan	 starts	moving,'	 and	 the	 villagers	were	 very	 enchanted,
amused.	It	was	so	new;	they	had	never	seen	electricity.
Edison	 also	 showed	much	 interest,	 and	 nobody	 knew	 that	 he	was	 Edison,	 the
inventor.	 Humorously	 he	 asked	 the	 young	 boy,	 'What	 is	 electricity?'	 The	 boy
said,	'What	is	electricity?	Wait.	I	don't	know	--	I	will	call	my	teacher,	my	science
teacher.'	 So	 the	 science	 teacher	 was	 called	 and	 Edison	 asked,	 'What	 is
electricity?'	 The	 science	 teacher	 was	 almost	 at	 a	 loss	 for	 an	 answer.	 He	 said,
'Wait.	I	am	not	very	educated,	just	a	B.Sc.,	but	our	principal	holds	a	doctorate	in
science;	I	will	call	him.'
The	principal	came	and	Edison	asked,	'What	is	electricity?'	The	principal	looked
very	puzzled	and	said,
'You	have	asked	such	a	great	question.'
Seeing	the	difficulty,	Edison	laughed	and	said,	'Don't	be	worried	--	I	am	Thomas
Alva	Edison.	I	myself	don't	know	what	electricity	is.	Not	that	we	know	is	how	to
use	it.	So	don't	get	worried	about	it.	I	am	the	inventor	of	all	these	things	that	you
are	 showing	 here.	 I	 was	 just	 joking.	 I	 myself	 don't	 know	 what	 electricity	 is
exactly	--	it	is	indefinable.	But	we	are	using	it,	are	using	light,	we	are	using	air,
we	are	using	water.
People	were	 drinking	water	 even	 before	 they	 came	 to	 know	 that	water	means
H2O.	It	was	not	needed.
Without	 knowing	 what	 water	 consists	 of,	 people	 have	 been	 drinking	 and
surviving	perfectly	well...
The	blind	man	needs	eyes	and	then	he	will	know	light.	He	does	not	need	theories
about	it.	Exactly	is	the	case	with	bliss:	you	don't	need	theories	about	it.	I	am	not
a	 theoretician	 and	 I	 don't	 encourage	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 philosophical.	 I
discourage	 them	as	much	as	I	can.	 I	destroy	all	 their	philosophical	curiosity	 in
order	 to	 emphasise	 the	 existential,	 because	 once	 you	 start	 moving	 into	 the
philosophic	direction,	 there	 is	no	end	 to	 it;	you	will	never	come	 to	know	what
bliss	 is.	 You	 will	 go	 on	 thinking	 and	 thinking	 and	 thinking;	 and	 one	 thought
leads	to	another	thought,	ad	infinitum.
Bliss	 is	 an	 experience.	 I	 can	 teach	you	how	 to	 experience	 it,	 I	 cannot	 tell	 you
what	 it	 is.	 If	 you	 become	 silent,	 still,	 calm	 and	 quiet	 and	 collected,	 you	 will
experience	it.	Bliss	is	the	experience	of	a	silent	state	of	mind,	because	in	a	silent
state	 of	mind,	mind	disappears.	 It	 is	 no	more	mind;	 it	 becomes	no-mind.	And
with	the	disappearance	of	the	mind	all	desires	disappear,	all	tensions	disappear,
all	anxieties	disappear.	And	these	are	the	barriers	which	do	not	allow	the	flow	of
bliss	in	you,	otherwise	bliss	is	your	nature.	If	all	the	rocks	are	beloved,	suddenly
it	with	great	force	--	your	bliss	starts	flowing	like	a	stream.
A	sannyasin	has	to	remember	it	continuously	because	mind	always	distracts	you
towards	philosophy.
And	it	is	very	easy	to	talk	about,	to	thing	about,	to	read	about;	the	real	problem
is	to	experience.	That	is	arduous,	because	for	that	you	will	have	to	go	through,
an	 inner	 transformation,	 from	 mind	 to	 no-mind,	 from	 thought	 to	 no-thought,
from	desire	to	no-desire.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
26	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006265
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	real	victory	comes	only	through	meditation.	All	else	that	looks	like	victory	-
-	money,	power,	prestige	 --	 is	only	a	deception,	 a	mirage.	Even	Alexander	 the
Great	remains	a	beggar	and	dies	a	beggar,	because	the	outer	riches	cannot	make
you	 inwardly	 rich	 and	 the	 outer	 victories	 cannot	 fill	 your	 inner	 emptiness.	He
also	became	aware	of	 the	 fact,	but	 then	 it	was	 too	 late.	 Just	before	he	died	he
realised	it,	that	his	whole	life	had	been	a	sheer	wastage.	In	trying	to	conquer	the
world	he	had	completely	forgotten	himself.
And	now	death	was	knocking	on	 the	door,	 no	 time	was	 left,	He	was	going	 as
empty-handed	as	he	came	into	the	world.
He	confessed	it	--	that	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	things	about	him,	otherwise
rarely	do	people	like	Alexander	ever	confess	their	failure.	His	last	wish	was	that
when	he	was	taken	to	the	cemetery	his	hands	should	be	left	hanging	outside	the
coffin.	His	ministers	and	generals	were	puzzled.	They	said,	'What	do	you	mean?
It	 is	 not	 done?'	 He	 said,	 'Whether	 it	 is	 done	 or	 not,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point.
Thousands	of	people	will	see	mo	being	carried	to	the	cemetery	and	I	want	them
to	know	that	I	am	going	empty-handed.	Let	my	hands	hang	out	of	the	coffin	so
everybody	recognises	the	stupidity	that	I	have	committed.'
Meditation	means	an	inward	journey.	It	is	moving	from	the	circumference	to	the
centre.	The	moment	you	reach	your	centre	you	are	victorious.	When	you	reach
the	innermost	core	you	are	victorious,	and	now	you	know	that	there	is	no	birth,
no	death,	you	are	immortal.	Only	the	circumference	goes	on	changing,	with	each
birth	it	is	a	different	circumference,	but	it	is	the	same	centre.	As	far	as	the	centre
is	 concerned	nothing	 ever	 changes,	 it	 is	 unchanging.	 It	 goes	 not	 belong	 to	 the
world	of	time,	it	transcends	time,	it	is	part	of	eternity.
Meditation	makes	you	a	really	loving	one.	Without	meditation	one	only	pretends
to	love.	It	is	pseudo,	it	is	a	mask;	it	is	not	your	real	face.	Behind	the	mask	other
things	are	hiding;	 sometimes	even	hatred	 is	hiding	behind	your	 love.	And	 it	 is
almost	 always	 an	 effort	 to	 exploit	 the	 other	 as	 a	 means	 --	 and	 love	 cannot
exploit,	love	cannot	use	the	other	as	a	means.	Love	respects	the	other	as	an	end
unto	himself	or	herself.
Love	cannot	possess,	love	respects	the	freedom	of	the	other.	Possession	is	one	of
the	most	ugly	things.	It	cannot	exist	with	love.	To	possess	someone	means	you
have	reduced	the	other	to	a	thing.	Only	things	can	be	possessed,	not	persons,	not
beings.	 You	 can	 share	 but	 you	 cannot	 possess.	 But	 that	 love	 is	 possible	 only
when	 you	 have	 become	 rooted	 in	 your	 own	 being,	 when	 you	 have	 become
grounded,	 when	 you	 are	 so	 grounded	 in	 yourself	 that	 you	 can	 enjoy	 your
aloneness.	Then	there	is	no	need	to	possess	the	other.
The	need	to	possess	the	other	arises	out	of	your	incapacity	to	enjoy	yourself	in
your	 aloneness.	You	are	 afraid:	 if	 you	don't	 possess	 the	other	you	may	be	 left
lonely,	the	other	way	move	away.	So	you	create	all	kinds	of	barriers	and	chains	-
-	 legal	and	social.	You	create	a	kind	of	 slavery	 for	 the	other	and	naturally,	 the
other	is	doing	the	same	to	you.	Hence	lovers	become	gaolers	for	each	other;	they
start	destroying	each	other.
They	 don't	 help	 growth.	 They	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 other's	 growth,	 because	 who
knows?	 --	 if	 the	 other	 starts	 growing,	 he	may	 love	 you,	 he	may	 not	 love	 you
because	he	will	be	a	totally	different	person,	He	has	to	be	stopped,	wherever	he
is,	 so	 that	 he	goes	on	 loving	you.	With	 any	 change	 in	 his	 life	 you	 feel	 afraid,
shaken,	And	you	immediately	start	destroying	all	possibilities	for	growth.
That's	why	peoples'	psychological	age	is	very	retarded	near	about	thirteen.	They
may	 be	 seventy	 years	 chronologically	 but	 only	 thirteen	 years	 psychologically,
And	 then	 there	 is	 trouble	 because	 the	 gap	 between	 their	 psychology	 and	 their
physiology	 is	 so	 vast,	 so	 unbridgeable,	 that	 they	 become	 two	 persons:
psychologically	they	live	very	childishly,	physiologically	they	are	grown-ups,	so
there	is	a	split	in	them.
Almost	 the	whole	of	humanity	 lives	 in	 this	kind	of	 split	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	we	don't	know	how	to	first	get	rooted	in	our	being.
Love	is	a	flowering	of	meditation.	Meditation	is	the	art	of	being	alone,	and	love
is	 the	 art	 of	 being	 alone	 together.	 But	 your	 aloneness	 remains	 intact	 and	 you
keep	the	others'	aloneness	unhindered,	untouched.	It	is	so	sacred,	it	is	so	divine,
it	cannot	be	destroyed...	 if	you	love	the	person.	But	this	kind	of	love	can	grow
only	out	of	meditation.	Hence	to	me,	meditation	is	the	foundation;	and	then	only
you	can	make	the	temple	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
love.
People	are	making	sandcastles	--	but	they	call	it	love	--	because	they	are	missing
something	very	fundamental:	the	foundation	is	not	there.
Start	with	meditation,	and	as	you	go	deeper	 into	meditation	you	will	 find	 love
arising	in	you,	a	 totally	new	quality	of	 love,	a	new	flavour	of	 love,	a	 love	that
you	have	never	known	before,	a	love	that	is	synonymous	with	god.
There	is	a	vast	difference	between	satisfaction	and	contentment.	The	dictionaries
will	not	 say	 there	 is	any	difference	 --	 if	you	 look	up	contentment	 the	meaning
'satisfaction'	will	be	given,	and	 if	you	 look	for	 the	meaning	of	satisfaction	you
will	find	'contentment'.	They	are	not	synonymous	at	all...	but	dictionaries	are	not
made	by	buddhas.
Satisfaction	is	a	negative	state,	contentment	is	a	positive	state.	Satisfaction	is	like
the	famous	Aesop's	fable,	the	fable	about	the	sour	grapes.
The	fox	wanted	to	reach	the	grapes	but	they	were	too	far	away.	The	fox	jumped,
tried	hard	and	fell	on	 the	ground	many	 times,	but	 they	were	beyond	his	 reach.
Utterly	frustrated	he	went	away,	but	before	he	went	away	he	looked	all	around	to
see	that	nobody	was	watching.
Hidden	behind	a	bush	a	small	rabbit	was	watching.
He	said,	"Uncle,	what	happened?"	And	the	fox	changed	his	face;	 there	was	no
more	any	frustration,	no	sign	of	failure.
He	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "Those	 grapes	 are	 sour.	 Let	 them	 become	 ripe.	We	will
have	to	wait	a	little."
That	is	satisfaction.	You	can	deceive	others,	you	can	also	deceive	yourself.	It	is	a
strategy	to	survive	as	an	ego,	otherwise	there	are	so	many	problems	in	life.	You
don't	have	enough	money,	you	don't	have	enough	power,	you	don't	have	enough
fame.	The	ego	feels	wounded	and	hurt,	and	slowly	slowly	you	have	to	create	a
certain	 kind	 of	 satisfaction,	 you	 have	 to	 create	 many	 rationalizations:	 "Who
cares?"
Nirupa	 is	sitting	 there	 --	she	 is	my	medium.	Before	she	became	a	medium	she
used	to	think,	"I	don't	want	to	be	a	medium	--	who	cares?"	That	was	satisfaction:
trying	to	satisfy	herself	--	"I	am	not	 interested	in	 it."	But	now	she	knows	what
that	 was;	 now	 she	 understands	 that	 that	 was	 not	 contentment,	 that	 was
satisfaction.	That	is	a	strategy	to	hide	your	wounds.	It	is	a	negative	state.
Contentment	is	a	positive	phenomenon.	It	is	not	that	you	are	trying	to	rationalize
some	failure,	it	is	simply	that	you	are	enjoying	a	certain	blissful	moment	inside.
It	 can	 happen	 only	 through	 meditation,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 know	 only
satisfaction.	 It	 is	 through	 meditation	 that	 you	 start	 experiencing	 bliss,	 peace,
silence,	 joy,	 and	 then	 there	 is	 tremendous	 contentment;	 you	 are	 so	overfull,	 in
fact	so	full	that	you	would	like	to	share.	You	are	overflowing.
Satisfaction	 is	 a	 poor	 man's	 effort	 to	 keep	 his	 face	 smiling,	 somehow.
Contentment	 is	 the	 joy	 of	 inner	 richness.	 It	 is	 the	 aura	 that	 surrounds	 a
meditative	 person.	 It	 is	 the	 fragrance	 that	 naturally	 comes	 to	 those	 who	 go
beyond	mind.	Satisfaction	is	of	the	mind,	contentment	is	of	no-mind.	And	that's
what	meditation	is	all	about:	a	shift	of	your	consciousness	from	thought	 to	no-
thought,	from	constant	chattering	to	an	inner	silence.
And	 unless	 one	 knows	 contentment	 one	 is	 not	 really	 alive.	 One	 is	 somehow
dragging,	 somehow	 keeping	 oneself	 together.	 But	 the	moment	 you	 experience
contentment	you	need	not	keep	yourself	from	falling	apart.
You	become	integrated,	you	become	crystallized.
You	are	not	only	a	union,	you	become	a	unity;	you	are	one.
And	that	oneness	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Knowledge	 can	 be	 acquired	 in	 two	ways.	 Either	 you	 acquire	 knowledge	 from
others...	Then	it	is	superficial.	You	become	knowledgeable	but	you	don't	become
wise.	You	become	more	 informed,	more	 learned,	but	you	 remain	 the	 same	old
person	with	no	inner	change,	with	no	radical	transformation.	All	your	knowledge
becomes	just	an	addition	to	whatsoever	you	were.	It	does	not	affect	you,	it	leaves
you	intact.
The	other	way	to	find	knowledge	is	to	go	deep	into	your	own	being,	to	dig	deep.
That's	what	meditation	is:	a	method	of	digging	deep	within	yourself	so	that	you
can	find	the	real	source	of	your	life.	From	there	arises	a	totally	different	kind	of
knowledge	--	 that	 is	wisdom.	It	 is	not	 just	an	addition	 to	whatsoever	you	were
before,	it	is	a	transformation.	You	are	no	more	the	same	person,	you	become	new
through	it.	You	are	reborn;	it	is	a	rebirth.
And	unless	one	 is	 reborn	one	cannot	understand	 the	mystery	of	existence.	One
can	know	much	about	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
god,	but	to	know	about	god	is	not	to	know	god.	One	can	know	much	about	love,
but	to	know	about	love	is	not	to	know	love.	To	know	about	love	is	fallacious.	We
need	 not	 to	 know	 about	 god,	 but	 to	know	 god,	 to	 know	 love,	 to	 know	 life,	 to
know	light,	to	know	who	we	are.	It	is	not	a	question	of	about;	the	word	'about'
means	around.
The	so-called	knowledge	goes	around	and	around,	never	touching	the	centre;	it
goes	in	circles.
Meditation	 leads	you	directly	 to	 the	centre	of	 the	very	 source	of	your	being	 --
and	it	is	also	the	source	of	the	whole	existence.	Having	a	taste	of	it	changes	you
completely,	changes	your	perspective.	Everything	else	remains	the	same	but	you
are	no	more	 the	 same.	And	because	you	are	no	more	 the	 same,	nothing	 is	 the
same	any	more.	Now	you	have	new	eyes	to	see,	new	ears	to	hear;	a	new	heart	to
love,	new	hands	to	touch	and	reel.	Now	you	have	a	new	being,	a	new	heart-beat.
And	with	this	newness,	life	becomes	a	dance,	a	song,	a	celebration.
Sannyas	is	a	celebration	of	life.	It	is	not	renunciation,	it	is	rejoicing.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
27	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006275
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	needs	tremendous	perseverance.	It	is	not	like	a	seasonal	flower,	it	is
more	 like	 a	 cedar	 of	Lebanon;	 it	 needs	 time	 to	 grow	 roots.	That	 is	 one	of	 the
reasons	why	the	contemporary	man	is	missing	the	inner	treasure:	he	is	always	in
a	 hurry.	 Never	 before	 was	 man	 in	 such	 a	 hurry.	 Speed	 was	 never	 such	 an
addiction.	 People	 were	 moving	 slowly,	 living	 slowly;	 there	 was	 a	 kind	 of
unhurriedness	in	their	life.	As	technology	has	progressed,	it	has	given	more	and
more	speed	to	man,	and	everything	is	moving	faster	and	faster.	We	are	becoming
more	and	more	intoxicated	with	speed;	it	is	a	drug.	It	does	not	allow	us	to	grow
anything	 that	 takes	 time,	patience,	perseverance.	 It	does	not	 allow	us	anything
that	needs	the	art	of	waiting...
Hence	we	are	running	outwards.	It	is	possible	with	scientific	technology	to	rush
towards	 the	 moon,	 towards	 the	 stars	 one	 day;	 but	 to	 go	 in	 no	 scientific
technology	can	be	of	any	help.	There	nature	has	to	take	its	own	course.	And	one
has	 to	 learn	not	 to	be	 so	 concerned	with	 the	 result,	with	 the	goal.	One	 should
start	enjoying	the	journey	itself.	One	should	start	enjoying	the	trees	by	the	side
of	the	road,	the	birds	singing,	the	sun	rising,	he	clouds	floating	in	the	sky.	One
should	 move	 slowly,	 at	 one's	 natural	 pace.	 And	 one	 should	 not	 even	 be	 in
competition	 with	 others	 because	 everybody	 has	 their	 own	 natural	 pace	 and
everybody	has	a	unique	individuality.
So	one	should	listen	to	one's	own	heart.	And	it	is	not	difficult	to	judges	if	you	are
in	a	hurry	you	are	tense.	That	tension	is	enough	to	indicate,	it	is	an	indicator	that
you	are	doing	something	against	your	nature,	you	are	straining	too	much.	Slow
down.	Move	in	a	relaxed	way,	as	if	there	is	the	whole	infinity	available.	In	fact	it
is	so,	the	whole	infinity	is	available.	We	are	not	born	with	our	birth	and	we	don't
die	with	our	death	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
either.	We	are	eternal.
One	can	go	into	deep	meditation	only	with	this	understanding.	One	should	forget
completely	whether	anything	is	happening	or	not.	One	should	start	enjoying	just
sitting	silently,	for	no	reason	at	all,	with	no	motive	at	all	--	just	for	the	sheer	joy
of	 sitting	silently,	 just	breathing,	being,	 listening	 to	 the	birds	or	watching	your
breath.	 Slowly	 slowly	 a	 new	 fragrance	 starts	 arising	 in	 your	 being.	 That
fragrance	 is	meditation,	 that	 poise,	 that	 calmness,	 that	 stillness.	 It	 comes	 from
the	 beyond	 as	 a	 gift.	 And	 whenever	 someone	 is	 ready	 it	 always	 happens,
inevitably.
Nature	 is	 never	 unfair	 to	 anybody.	 Whosoever	 deserves	 and	 whatsoever	 he
deserves,	 he	 gets	 it.	 If	 people	 are	 miserable	 they	 deserve	 it,	 that's	 what	 they
deserve.	Nobody	is	at	fault,	nobody	else;	nobody	else	is	responsible.	They	have
earned	 it.	They	may	have	 forgotten	how	 they	have	 earned	 it,	 they	may	not	 be
conscious	how	they	have	got	into	the	mess,	but	that's	what	they	have	been	doing.
It	is	the	outcome	of	their	own	work.
If	 somebody	 is	 blissful	 that	 simply	means	he	deserves	 it.	Nature	 always	gives
that	for	which	you	have	become	worthy,	for	which	you	are	ready	and	prepared
and	receptive	to.
Perseverance,	constant	effort	with	no	hurry	--	that	is	one	of	the	fundamentals	of
meditation.	The	word
'con'	comes	from	constantia,	constancy;	it	is	a	beautiful	word.	It	can	become	the
very	 foundation	 of	 your	 inner	 growth.	 Just	 be	 relaxed,	 at	 ease	with	 life,	 with
yourself,	with	others,	and	drop	this	whole	nonsense	of	rushing.
There	 is	a	Korean	Zen	story...	An	old	monk	gets	out	of	a	boat	with	his	young
disciple.	They	are	carrying	many	ancient	scriptures	with	them.	The	village	they
want	 to	 reach	 is	 on	 a	 hilltop	 and	 the	 sun	 is	 almost	 setting	 so	 they	 ask	 the
ferryman,	 'Will	we	be	able	 to	 reach	 it	before	 the	 sun	sets?	 --	because	we	have
heard	that	as	the	sun	sets	the	doors	of	the	village	will	be	closed.	It	is	surrounded
by	a	wall	and	we	will	not	be	able	to	enter	then.	We	will	have	to	wait	till	morning,
and	it	is	dangerous	to	wait	outside	the	gates;	it	is	wild	territory,	wild	animals	are
there.	Will	we	be	able	to	reach	there?
The	ferryman	said,	 'If	you	go	slowly	you	may	manage.	 If	you	go	fast	 I	cannot
say	that	you	will	be	able	to	manage	it.'
They	thought	the	ferryman	was	just	mad:	What	was	he	saying?	'If	you	go	slowly
you	may	manage	to	reach,	but	if	you	go	fast	I	cannot	guarantee	it.	I	cannot	say
even	that	--	that	you	will	be	able	to	manage	it.
The	greater	possibility	is	that	you	will	not	be	able	to	reach	before	sunset.'	There
was	no	point	in	waiting	time	with	such	a	madman.	They	rushed!	And	what	the
ferryman	 said	 did	 happen.	 The	 old	 man	 was	 really	 very	 old	 and	 they	 were
carrying	a	big	load	of	scriptures;	the	track	was	hilly	and	he	slipped	on	a	rock,	fell
into	a	ditch	and	had	many	fractures.	All	the	scriptures	were	spread	all	over	the
place.	The	 young	man	was	 collecting	 the	 scriptures,	 and	 the	 old	man	was	 not
even	in	a	state	to	walk.
Meanwhile	 the	ferryman	came.	He	had	been	putting	his	boat	 in	 the	right	place
for	 the	night.	He	had	chained	his	boat	and	 then	he	had	come	along	slowly.	He
looked	at	the	scene	and	he	said	'I	told	you	--	you	didn't	listen.	Now	I	will	have	to
carry	you.	But	I	am	also	old.	Now	even	if	we	go	slowly	it	is	not	possible	to	reach
the	gates	before	sunset.	But	you	didn't	listen.	You	thought	I	was	a	madman!	You
think	you	are	meditators	--	you	are	fools!	I	am	a	meditator.	For	my	whole	life	I
have	been	meditating,	carrying	people	in	the	boat	from	this	side	to	that,	from	that
side	to	this.	What	am	I	doing?	--	just	meditating,	silently,	rowing	the	boat.	I	have
nothing	else	to	do	so	I	go	on	watching	my	breath.
'One	thing	I	have	learned	that	if	you	go	slowly	you	always	reach.	I	had	thought
that	you	being	Buddhist	monks	would	understand	it.	I	am	not	a	monk,	but	I	think
you	have	never	meditated	in	your	life;	you	are	just	formal	monks.'
Now	they	understood;	now	they	could	see	the	man	clearly.	Now	for	the	first	time
they	looked	at	his	eyes,	his	face,	his	aura,	his	presence,	his	beauty.	They	bowed
down	and	touched	his	feet	and	they	said.	'You	are	a	master!'
Go	slowly.	Those	who	go	slowly	always	reach.	It	looks	like	a	paradox,	but	life	is
paradoxical.	 Those	 who	 hurry	 never	 reach.	 As	 far	 as	 the	 inner	 journey	 is
concerned	this	is	the	law,	this	is	tao.
Meditation	is	a	gift	from	god.	It	does	not	mean	that	you	have	not	to	do	anything
at	all.	You	have	to	do	much	to	become	receptive,	to	become	available	to	god,	to
become	capable,	worthy.	But	that's	all	 that	man	can	do	--	the	real	thing	always
comes	as	a	gift.	Hence	there	have	been	two	kinds	of	misunderstanding	and	they
are	both	very	ancient.
One	 misunderstanding	 is	 that	 because	 meditation	 is	 a	 gift	 you	 need	 not	 do
anything	at	all.	Whenever	it	is	going	to	happen,	it	is	going	to	happens	you	cannot
do	anything,	so	why	bother?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	is	a	fallacy,	that	logic	is	fallacious.	Meditation	will	never	happen.
The	other	misunderstanding	is	that	because	you	have	to	do	much	preparation,	it
is	 not	 a	 gift,	 it	 is	 the	 outcome	 of	 your	work.	 So	 if	 you	 are	 not	 getting	 it	 that
means:	 go	 on	 straining	 more	 and	 more.	 That's	 another	 extreme.	 So	 people
become	almost	mads	they	strive	too	much	to	reach	a	meditative	state.	And	their
very	striving	at	a	certain	point	becomes	the	barrier.
My	understanding	is	that	your	effort	is	needed	up	to	a	certain	point	and	then	the
effort	has	to	be	dropped.	You	have	to	make	the	effort	and	you	have	to	drop	the
effort	 --	both	are	essential.	And	you	have	 to	be	alert	enough	to	know	where	 to
stop.
Whenever	your	effort	 starts	creating	 tension	and	anxiety	 in	you,	 relax,	drop	 it.
You	 have	 done	 enough;	 now	 wait.	 But	 don't	 start	 waiting	 from	 the	 very
beginning.	 First	 prepare	 the	 soil,	 remove	 the	 rocks,	 the	 weeds,	 then	 sow	 the
seeds	 of	 the	 flowers,	 then	 water	 the	 ground,	 and	 then	 wait!	 But	 if	 you	 start
waiting	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 without	 removing	 the	 weeds	 and	 without
removing	 the	 rocks	and	without	 sowing	 the	seeds,	nothing	 is	going	 to	happen.
And	 if	 you	 go	 on	 digging	 every	 day	 and	 looking	 at	 the	 seeds	 to	 see	whether
something	is	happening	or	not,	then	too	nothing	will	happen.
You	 have	 to	 work	 and	 then	 you	 have	 to	 wait.	 And	 there	 has	 to	 be	 a	 balance
between	work	and	waiting,	a	very	subtle	balance.	It	is	not	impossible	to	judge	it.
Every	indication	is	being	given	by	your	inner	being.
It	is	just	as	when	you	have	a	headache	you	know,	although	you	cannot	explain	to
anybody	else	how	you	know	it.	How	can	you	prove	that	you	have	a	headache?
But	you	know	it.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	little	awareness.	Yes,	sometimes	it	may
happen	that	you	have	a	headache	but	you	are	so	engaged	in	something	that	you
lose	all	awareness	of	the	headache.
For	 example,	 your	 house	 catches	 fire...	 You	may	 forget	 the	 headache	 because
your	consciousness	becomes	wholly	directed	towards	the	fire.	Now	you	are	not
in	 a	 state	 to	bother	 about	 a	 small	 thing	 like	 a	headache.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 a	 curtain	 is
pulled	over	it	and	the	headache	disappears	for	the	moment.	But	it	is	there.
In	George	Bernard	Shaw's	life	there	is	an	anecdote.	He	phoned	his	old	doctor	--
the	doctor	was	as	old	as	Bernard	Shaw,	Bernard	Shaw	was	ninety	and	the	doctor
was	also	ninety	--	he	was	his	private	physician.
Bernard	Shaw	said	'I	am	feeling	as	if	it	is	a	heart	attack.	Come	immediately!	It
seems	I	am	sinking	and	dying.'
In	the	middle	of	the	night	the	old	doctor	came,	almost	running.	He	had	to	go	up
the	staircase;	and	he	was	very	old	so	he	was	breathing	hard	and	panting.	When
he	reached	the	room,	before	asking	George	Bernard	Shaw	anything,	he	fell	into	a
chair	just	to	have	a	little	rest.	Bernard	Shaw	became	very	much	afraid.	He	was
lying	on	his	bed;	he	stood	up,	brought	water	for	the	doctor	and	a	fan	and	started
fanning	him	--	he	was	perspiring.	The	doctor	had	one	of	his	hands	on	his	heart.
Bernard	Shaw	was	afraid:	'It	seems	that	he	has	a	heart	attack.	He	is	an	old	man
and	he	had	to	come	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	his	sleep	was	disturbed	and	he	had
to	come	up	a	long	flight	of	stairs.'	He	forgot	all	about	his	own	heart	attack	and
the	 sinking	 heart	 and	 everything.	 After	 fifteen	 minutes,	 when	 the	 doctor	 was
okay,	the	doctor	asked	for	the	fee	and	started	leaving!
Bernard	 Shaw	 said,	 'This	 is	 something!	 I	 have	 been	 serving	 you	 for	 fifteen
minutes	continuously,	bringing	water	and	ice	and	this	and	that,	and	fanning	you.
You	ask	me	for	the	fee	--	and	you	have	not	done	a	single	thing.'
The	doctor	said,	'But	I	have	been	doing	something	--	where	is	your	heart	attack?
I	made	you	get	up	of	the	bed,	you	were	running	here	and	there,	bringing	things
and	fanning	me	--	you	are	perfectly	okay!	That	was	 just	my	medicine	for	you.
Give	me	the	fee!'	He	took	the	fee.	And	Bernard	Shaw	recalls	in	his	memoirs
'That	was	something.	He	really	played	a	great	 joke	on	me!	I	used	 to	 think	 that
only	I	had	a	sense	of	humour,	but	he	had	much	more.'
If	 you	have	 a	headache	 and	 the	house	 is	 suddenly	on	 fire,	 your	 consciousness
will	move	towards	the	fire.
But	otherwise	every	indication	of	your	headache	is	given.
And	 exactly	 the	 same	 happens	when	 you	 are	meditating.	 First	work,	 put	 your
whole	energy	into	it,	with	intensity,	totality,	passion,	and	then	the	indication	will
come	 that	now	is	 the	 time	 to	 relax	and	wait	 --	you	have	sown	 the	seeds.	They
will	sprout	 in	 their	own	times	now	let	 the	spring	come.	And	the	spring	always
comes.
Meditation	is	a	gift,	but	the	gift	is	available	only	to	those	who	are	ready	for	it.
Meditation	 brings	 perfection.	 In	 fact	 the	 only	way	 perfection	 comes	 to	 one	 is
through	meditation.
Without	meditation	 something	 always	 remains	missing.	We	may	 have	wealth,
power,	prestige	and	all	 that	 the	world	can	offer,	but	deep	down	there	is	always
some	emptiness,	some	meaninglessness.	One	goes	on	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
feeling	that	life	must	be	something	more	than	this	--	and	life	certainly	is	more.
That	gap	inside,	that	yawning	gap	inside	can	be	filled	only	through	meditation;
nothing	else	can	fill	it.
People	try	to	fill	 it	with	every	kind	of	 thing	but	 it	cannot	be	filled	by	anything
from	the	outside.	It	is	basically	inner,	hence	nothing	from	the	outside	can	fill	it.
Something	has	to	grow	inside,	only	then	can	it	be	fulfilled.	And	when	that	inner
gap	 is	 full,	 overflowing,	 one	 experiences	 perfection	 for	 the	 first	 time.	And	 by
perfection	 I	 mean	 one	 starts	 feeling	 nothing	 is	 missing,	 one	 starts	 feeling
meaning,	significance.	For	the	first	time	life	becomes	not	just	an	accident	but	a
significant	event	of	immense	value.
Blessed	 are	 those	who	have	known	meditation.	Only	 those	 few	people	 are	 the
blessed	people;	others	are	simply	groping	in	darkness.	Meditation	gives	you	an
inner	light,	and	then	wherever	you	are	there	is	light	and	whatsoever	you	do,	you
do	 in	 full	 light	 and	 clarity.	 Hence	 there	 is	 never	 any	 guilt,	 no	 repentance,	 no
looking	back.	Whatsoever	one	does,	one	 feels	 that's	 the	only	 thing	 that	can	be
done.	It	is	always	right.
And	when	each	of	your	actions	has	such	totality	it	does	not	 leave	any	trace	on
you.	 It	 is	 only	 incomplete	 action	 that	 goes	 on	 leaving	 a	 trace	 upon	 your
consciousness.	it	is	the	incomplete	action	that	goes	on	hankering	around	you	for
completion.	it	is	the	incomplete	past	that	we	are	burdened	with.
The	meditative	man	lives	each	moment	so	totally,	so	fully,	that	once	he	has	lived
it,	it	is	finished;	he	is	out	of	it.	And	he	is	always	fresh	because	he	carries	no	past.
He	has	no	karma,	no	bondage	with	 the	past;	he	 is	absolutely	free.	and	because
each	action	comes	out	of	his	freedom	and	freshness,	it	has	a	tremendous	beauty
and	grace;	it	has	perfection	in	it.
Meditation	 is	 only	 a	 means	 --	 the	 end	 is	 awakening.	 The	 end	 is	 to	 become
absolutely	 aware.	 Ordinarily	 we	 live	 out	 of	 unconsciousness;	 we	 live	 like	 a
robot,	we	 function	more	 like	 a	machine	 than	 like	 a	man.	And	 that's	 the	whole
problem:	how	 to	 release	 the	man	 from	 the	machine.	That's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all
about:	how	to	free	the	man	from	the	machine.
The	 machine	 is	 heavy	 and	 it	 surrounds	 you	 from	 everywhere.	 You	 are
imprisoned	in	it.	Man	is	an	imprisoned	splendour	and	the	misery	is	nothing	but
the	realisation	of	what	he	can	be	and	what	he	is:	'I	can	be	as	blissful	as	Buddha,
Christ,	Krishna	--	full	of	songs	and	celebration	--	but	I	am	just	full	of	misery.	It	is
for	the	simple	reason	that	we	have	not	even	tried,	we	have	not	made	any	effort	to
transform	our	potential	into	the	actual.	We	go	on	living	at	the	minimum.	We	can
live	at	the	maximum,	we	can	reach	the	ultimate	heights	of	consciousness;	hence
the	great	anguish,	because	somewhere	deep	down	we	feel	what	we	can	be;	what
is	possible.
Nothing	is	impossible	as	far	as	inner	growth	is	concerned.	napoleon's	statement
that	 nothing	 is	 impossible	 may	 not	 be	 true	 about	 the	 outside	 world,	 but	 it	 is
absolutely	true	about	the	inner:	nothing	is	impossible	in	the	inner	world.	We	just
have	to	start	moving	in	the	right	direction	by	the	right	means.
meditation	 is	 the	beginning	of	 the	 right	 step,	 in	 the	 right	direction.	Meditation
simply	means	 an	 effort	 to	watch	 your	mind,	 how	 the	mind	 functions,	with	 no
interference,	 neither	 for	 nor	 against,	 no	 condemnation,	 no	 appreciation,	 with
absolute	 neutrality,	 pure	 watchfulness,	 just	 like	 a	mirror.	 The	mirror	 does	 not
bother	whether	you	are	beautiful	or	ugly;	whosoever	you	are,	the	mirror	simply
reflects.
When	your	consciousness	starts	reflecting	your	mind	with	all	its	ugliness	and	all
its	beauties,	with	all	 its	pleasures	and	with	all	 its	pains;	with	no	choice...	when
your	 mind	 is	 reflected	 in	 your	 consciousness	 in	 a	 choiceless	 way,	 you	 have
started	meditation.
Choiceless	awareness	is	meditation.	And	then	you	have	to	go	on	doing	the	same,
slowly	 slowly	 deepening	 the	 process.	 And	 one	 day,	 the	 ultimate	 flowering
happens:	the	inner	lotus	opens	up.	That's	the	state	of	the	awakened	one,	the	state
of	a	Buddha,	Christ,	Lao	Tzu.
Unless	we	achieve	it	there	is	no	possibility	of	rest.	something	inside	will	go	on
goading	us.	And	it	is	good	that	something	inside	goes	on	goading	us.	If	it	stops
goading	us	we	will	remain	unfulfilled,	immature,	ungrown-up.
There	 is	an	 inner	guide	who	goes	on	goading,	who	says	 'This	 is	not	enough	--
something	has	to	be	done.'
That	 goading	 has	 brought	 you	 here.	Now	don't	miss	 this	 opportunity	 of	 being
here.	It	is	a	great	opportunity	for	growing,	a	rare	challenge.	If	one	accepts	it	one
can	become	a	beautiful	peak	of	joy,	of	bliss,	of	celebration.	But	everything	has	to
begin	in	meditation.	And	if	you	begin	in	meditation	whatsoever	is	needed	will	go
on	happening	to	you	naturally,	without	any	effort.
Meditation	creates	almost	a	magnetic	force	in	you.	It	attracts	whatsoever	is	right
and	whatsoever	is	needed.	It	attracts	the	right	nourishment,	the	right	people,	the
right	guidance.
One	 of	 the	 ancient	 Egyptian	 scriptures	 says:	 When	 the	 disciple	 is	 ready	 the
master	 appears.	 It	 simply	means	 if	 you	 are	meditating	 the	master	 is	bound	 to
appear;	if	you	are	meditating	then	all	that	is	needed	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
be	provided	for.	Nature	takes	care	of	it.
We	 are	 not	 orphans,	 we	 are	 part	 of	 this	 universe.	 And	 the	 universe	 is	 not
indifferent	to	us,	it	takes	every	care,	we	just	have	to	move	in	the	right	direction
and	 immediately	 the	whole	existence	starts	 supporting	us.	 It	hinders	you	when
you	 start	 going	 wrong.	 That	 too	 is	 because	 it	 loves	 you.	 But	 when	 you	 start
going	right	it	supports	you,	it	removes	all	hindrances.
Remember,	god	is	a	friend	of	all	seekers.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
28	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006285
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Just	as	in	spring	miracles	start	happening	in	nature,	bliss	brings	a	spring	to	your
inner	world	 and	miracles	 start	 happening.	 Bliss	 is	 the	 springtime	 of	 the	 inner
world.	 Without	 bliss	 nothing	 flowers,	 here	 is	 no	 fulfilment,	 no	 fragrance,	 no
meaning.	Life	remains	a	drag.	One	can	go	on	existing	somehow,	but	it	is	not	true
living	 because	 there	 is	 no	 celebration	 in	 the	 heart.	 There	 is	 no	 dance	 in	 your
being;	one	remains	hollow	and	empty.
And	because	of	this	emptiness	we	go	on	doing	a	thousand	and	one	things	to	fill
it,	 to	 forget	 it,	 to	 cover	 it	 somehow,	but	nothing	ever	 succeeds.	Maybe	 for	 the
time-being	you	can	cover	 it;	soon,	you	will	have	 to	encounter	 it	again.	For	 the
time	being	you	can	forget	it;	you	can	become	so	occupied	in	outward	activities.
But	 for	 how	 long	 can	 one	 remain	 occupied?	 One	 needs	 rest,	 one	 needs
relaxation.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 are	 at	 rest,	 suddenly	 the	 inner	 emptiness	 is
there.
That's	why	people	go	on	moving	from	one	occupation	to	another.	Even	on	their
holidays	 they	 cannot	 rest;	 in	 fact	 they	work	more	 on	 their	 holidays	 than	 ever.
They	are	afraid,	afraid	of	something	inner	--	that	they	may	have	to	face	it.	They
don't	want	to	face	it.
From	 immemorial	 times	man	has	 remained	 interested	 in	 all	 kinds	 of	 alcoholic
beverages	 for	 the	 simple	 reason:	 to	 forget.	 He	 wants	 to	 forget	 the	 inner
emptiness.	But	for	how	long	can	you	remain	intoxicated?
Sooner	 or	 later	 you	 have	 to	 come	 out	 of	 it,	 and	 the	 inner	 emptiness	 is	 there,
hurting.	It	is	like	a	wound	that	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	It	heals	only
when	 you	 have	 been	 able	 to	 attain	 a	 state	 of	 bliss.	 Then	 suddenly	 all	wounds
disappear,	 and	 instead	 of	 wounds	 there	 are	 flowers.	 Each	 wound	 becomes	 a
flower,	a	lotus	flower.
But	there	are	very	few	people	who	try	to	seek	bliss,	because	the	journey	seems	to
be	 that	 of	 absolute	 aloneness.	And	 it	 is:	 nobody	 can	 accompany	you.	And	we
have	 become	 addicted	 to	 the	 crowd,	 we	 always	 want	 company;	 we	 are	 very
much	scared	of	aloneness.	That	is	one	of	the	reasons	why	only	very	daring	souls
go	 into	 the	 search	 for	 bliss,	 because	 the	 first	 step	 is:	 you	 have	 to	 be	 alone,
because	you	will	be	going	inwards.	Outside	you	can	have	company	but	inside	no
company	is	possible.	The	deeper	you	go	in,	the	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
alone	you	will	be.
The	whole	art	of	meditation	is	a	training	in	being	alone,	without	any	fear;	in	fact,
tremendously	curious	to	explore	one's	aloneness.	When	one	becomes	allured	by
this	adventure	of	being	alone,	then	bliss	is	not	far	away.	The	more	alone	you	are,
the	more	bliss	starts	happening.	When	you	are	absolutely	capable	of	being	alone
your	whole	consciousness	becomes	full	of	bliss	--	and	that	is	the	springtime	for
the	soul.	After	that	you	can	be	in	the	crowd,	in	the	marketplace,	you	can	have	as
many	 relationships	 as	 you	want,	 friendships,	 all	 kinds	 of	 friendships,	 but	 you
will	 never	 lose	 your	 rootedness	 in	 your	 aloneness;	 hence	 nothing	 will	 be	 a
distraction.
Once	 the	 taste	 of	 aloneness	 and	 bliss	 has	 penetrated	 into	 every	 pore	 of	 your
being	it	remains	with	you	wherever	you	are.	Then	your	whole	life	becomes	full
of	aloneness	and	full	of	bliss.	Bliss	and	aloneness	are	 two	aspects	of	 the	same
coin.
Bliss	is	the	goal	of	life;	meditation	is	the	means,	the	way	to	it.	Bliss	is	the	end;
meditation	 is	 the	 bridge,	 the	 boat	 that	 takes	 you	 to	 the	 farther	 shore.	Without
meditation	nobody	has	ever	known	what	bliss	is.
It	 is	not	pleasure.	Pleasure	 is	physiological,	chemical;	 it	has	no	depth	and	 it	 is
very	momentary.	For	example,	a	sexual	orgasm	is	pleasure.	For	a	moment	you
feel	on	the	top	of	the	world,	but	only	for	the	moment.	And	in	the	wake	of	that
moment	 deep	 sadness	 and	 depression	 sets	 in;	 hence	 after	 love	 people
immediately	fall	asleep.	That's	a	way	to	avoid	the	sadness	that	is	bound	to	come
in.
Watch	animals	making	love;	after	they	have	made	love	you	will	see	sadness	even
on	 their	 faces.	They	don't	 seem	to	be	ecstatic.	 If	you	observe	closely,	you	will
see	that	they	are	disillusioned;	they	are	feeling	as	if	they	have	been	cheated.	And
it	is	in	fact,	a	trick	of	nature.	Nature	is	cheating	you.	It	has	its	purposes;	nature
wants	 to	 reproduce	 the	species	and	nature	has	devised	clever	means.	The	most
clever	is	the	pleasure	that	you	attain	for	a	moment.	It	is	for	that	pleasure	that	you
are	ready	to	reproduce.	If	there	were	no	pleasure	at	all,	the	whole	sexual	activity
will	 look	so	silly.	 It	would	 look	 like	gymnastics	or	doing	yoga...	 it	would	 look
foolish.
It	is	because	of	that	pleasure,	that	one	is	ready	to	go	on	doing	any	kind	of	stupid
things.	But	it	is	just	a	chemical	phenomenon,	hormonal,	physiological;	it	can't	be
deep	because	physiology	is	not	deep.
Bliss	is	not	even	happiness.	What	we	call	happiness	is	psychological.	Whenever
you	find	a	certain	moment	of	elation	your	ego	is	fulfilled,	you	feel	happy.	You
have	become	 the	president	 of	 a	 country,	 you	 feel	 happy,	 but	 only	 for	 the	 time
being,	because	your	ego	is	fulfilled.	You	have	defeated	all	other	competitors,	you
have	 arrived;	 whereas	 others	 have	 failed,	 you	 have	 succeeded...	 or	 you	 have
much	money,	power,	prestige,	fame.	But	soon	one	becomes	tired	of	it	all.
Only	 the	 successful	 people	 know	 how	 tiring	 success	 is.	 Only	 the	 rich	 people
know	how	utterly	disappointed	they	are,	but	they	cannot	even	say	so,	because	to
say	so	seems	to	be	even	more	foolish,	people	will	laugh.	They	have	wasted	their
whole	life	in	accumulating	wealth	and	now	they	say	that	it	is	stupid.
Mahavira	 and	 Buddha	 who	 renounced	 their	 kingdoms,	 must	 have	 been	 really
courageous	people.	It	needs	courage	to	renounce.	It	needs	courage	to	recognize
the	fact,	"This	was	all	stupid	and	we	have	been	living	a	stupid	life	up	to	now."
The	ego	does	not	want	to	do	that;	the	ego	wants	to	go	on	keeping	the	illusion.	So
on	the	surface	you	go	on	smiling,	but	deep	down	there	are	tears	and	nothing	else,
deep	down	there	is	anguish.	Whenever	ego	is	fulfilled,	you	feel	happy.
Bliss	 is	 not	 happiness	 but	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 not	 pleasure
because	 it	 is	 not	 physiological.	 It	 is	 not	 happiness	 because	 there	 is	 no	 ego
fulfillment.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is	 dissolution	 of	 the	 ego,	 it	 is	 dissolving	 your
separate	 entity	 into	 the	 whole.	 That's	 what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about,	 merging,
melting	 into	 the	 whole,	 totally	 forgetting	 that	 you	 are	 separate,	 remembering
your	unity	with	the	whole.
That's	why	Gurdjieff	used	to	call	his	meditation	process	"self-remembering";	it	is
really	a	remembering.
Buddha	used	to	call	his	meditation,	"right	remembering".
We	 are	 one	 with	 the	 whole;	 even	 though	 we	 think	 we	 are	 separate.	 We	 are
inseparable.	 Just	 by	 thinking	we	 are	 separate,	we	 cannot	 become	 separate.	All
that	is	needed	is	a	remembrance;	all	that	is	needed	is	dropping	this	false	notion
that	we	are	separate.	And	 in	 those	 rare	moments	when	you	can	put	aside	your
ego,	 your	 personality,	 your	 body-mind	 complex,	 and	 you	 are	 just	 a	watcher,	 a
witness,	a	consciousness,	you	know	the	first	taste	of	meditation.	And	with	that,
immediately	great	bliss	comes,	it	rushes	towards	you	from	all	directions,	from	all
dimensions.	All	your	inner	emptiness	is	immediately	filled.	It	becomes	a	lake	of
bliss.	 That	 is	 the	 end,	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas.	And	 the	method	 and	 the	means	 is
meditation.	There	is	no	other	method,	there	is	no	other	way.
Hence	one	has	to	learn	to	imbibe	the	spirit	of	meditation.	However	long	it	takes,
whatsoever	cost	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
has	to	pay	for	it,	one	has	to	be	ready.	Once	you	are	ready	to	have	it	at	any	cost,
then	 it	 is	not	difficult.	That	very	 readiness	makes	you	worthy	of	 it,	 and	 things
become	very	simple.
The	 search	 for	bliss	 is	 as	 scientific	 as	 any	objective	 science.	The	difference	 is
only	of	direction.	The	science	watches	the	objective	world	and	enquires	into	the
reality	that	surrounds	us.	Religion	moves	into	the	watcher,	into	the	subject,	into
subjectivity	 itself.	 Science	 is	 concerned	with	 the	 object;	 religion	 is	 concerned
with	subjectivity	itself	--	but	the	approach,	the	method,	the	attitude,	is	exactly	the
same.
Religion	is	not	superstition,	it	is	not	belief.	It	is	not	at	all	a	dogma	in	which	you
can	 believe;	 it	 is	 something	 to	 be	 experienced.	 Just	 as	 science	works	 through
experimentation,	 religion	 works	 through	 experimentation.	 The	 experiment	 of
religion	 is,	 of	 course,	 far	 deeper	 than	 that	 of	 science,	 far	 more	 individual,
personal.	Science	and	its	enquiry	is	collective,	objective;	others	can	watch.	But
when	you	are	moving	into	meditation,	nobody	can	watch;	except	for	you	nobody
else	will	be	there	to	be	a	witness	of	it.
Of	 course,	 others	will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 something	 is	 happening	 to	 you,	 but
what	exactly	it	is	they	will	never	be	able	to	decipher.	something	mysterious	will
start	 surrounding	you,	 and	 those	who	 are	 very	perceptive	will	 be	 able	 to	 have
some	 glimpse	 that	 you	 are	 no	more	 the	 same	 old	 person.	 Something	 new	 has
entered	your	 life.	You	have	changed	 --	but	 to	what	exactly	 there	 is	not	way	 to
judge	from	the	outside	or	to	measure	from	the	outside.	Only	you	know	it.
It	is	like	love:	if	you	love,	you	know.	Prayer	is	even	deeper,	far	deeper	than	love.
Meditation	is	the	deepest;	there	is	no	more	depth	than	meditation.	But	one	thing
which	modern	man	has	completely	forgotten	has	to	be	remembered,	that	religion
is	also	a	science.
All	 the	 so-called	modern	 thinkers	go	on	saying,	writing,	proving,	arguing,	 that
religion	 is	 superstitious,	 it	 is	 dogmatic,	 that	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 blind	 belief.	 All
these	 assertions	 are	 basically	 wrong.	 They	 are	 true	 as	 far	 as	 the	 so-called
organised	 religions	are	concerned	 --	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,
Judaism
--	but	they	are	not	true	about	Buddha	or	jesus	or	Krishna	or	Mohammed,	they	are
not	true	about	the	really	religious	people.	They	are	true	about	people	who	have
been	 conditioned	 as	Christians	 and	Hindus,	who	 have	 never	 explored	 on	 their
own	what	exactly	it	is,	who	have	simply	believed	as	a	formality.
They	go	to	the	church	every	sunday,	just	as	a	social	formality.	It	is	another	kind
of	 club.	 Rotary	 clubs	 are	 there	 and	 Lions'	 clubs	 are	 there,	 and	 the	 church	 --
Catholic,	Protestant,	 this	 and	 that...	These	 are	 just	 clubs,	 good	meeting	places.
and	 they	 give	 you	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 social	 status.	 People	 think	 that	 you	 are
religious,	that	you	are	a	good	person.	and	people	thinking	that	you	are	religious
and	 a	 good	 person	 helps	 you	 in	 your	 business,	 in	 your	 social	 life,	 in	 your
relationships.	 It	 functions	 like	a	 lubricating	agent.	So	cunning	people	go	 to	 the
churches,	 to	 the	 temples,	 to	 the	mosques.	 They	 use	 religion,	 but	 they	 are	 not
religious.
To	 be	 religious	 one	 needs	 a	 really	 daring	 spirit,	 a	 tremendous	 longing	 for	 the
unknown,	 such	 a	 deep	 desire	 and	 thirst	 for	 truth	 that	 even	 if	 life	 has	 to	 be
sacrificed,	one	is	ready	for	it.	those	few	people	are	religious	--	and	they	are	not
superstitious	at	all.
Buddha	says	again	and	again	to	his	disciples,	'Don't	believe	in	what	I	am	saying,
don't	believe	 that	 this	 is	written	 in	 the	scriptures,	don't	believe	 that	all	 the	past
Buddhas	 have	 said	 it;	 believe	 only	 when	 you	 have	 known	 it,	 otherwise	 don't
believe,	because	to	believe	without	knowing	will	keep	you	blind	forever.	and	a
blind	person	cannot	see	truth,	cannot	see	god.
Religion	 is	 a	 very	 precise	 science	 of	 creating	 clarity,	 perceptiveness,
transparency,	within	your	being,	so	that	you	can	see	things	as	they	are.	and	the
moment	you	see	things	as	they	are	you	know	god	is.	You	simply	know	god	is	--
just	 as	 you	 know	 when	 the	 sun	 rises	 that	 light	 is.	 No	 other	 proof	 is	 needed.
Proofs	 are	 needed	 only	 for	 believers;	 for	 those	 who	 have	 experienced,
experience	is	self-evident.	it	needs	no	proof	at	all.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
29	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8006295
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	moment	we	use	the	word	 'god'	we	create	a	fictitious	person,	who	does	not
exist.	Godliness	 is	a	 truth,	god	is	a	fiction,	Godliness	 is	a	quality,	not	a	person
but	a	presence.	You	cannot	see	godliness	but	you	can	feel	it,	you	can	experience
it,	you	can	have	a	taste	of	it.	It	is	like	fragrance,	not	like	a	flower.	The	flower	is
visible,	the	fragrance	is	invisible.	You	can	possess	the	flower;	you	cannot	catch
hold	of	the	fragrance.
All	that	you	need	to	experience	fragrance	is	a	deep	sensitivity.	Godliness	is	the
fragrance	that	surrounds	the	whole	existence.	The	moment	we	say	god,	suddenly
it	seems	god	has	an	address.	He	must	be	somewhere:	above	in	the	sky,	in	heaven
--	 but	 somewhere.	 It	 is	 not	 accidental	 that	 the	moment	 people	 pray	 they	 start
looking	towards	the	sky,	It	is	an	old	habit,	an	old	idea,	a	conditioning	that	god	is
there	above	the	clouds.
Immediately	 the	 idea	 of	 god	 as	 a	 person	 is	 limited,	 defined.	And	 then	 people
start	thinking	about	his	personality:	how	he	looks,	what	his	preferences	are,	what
he	 likes,	 what	 he	 dislikes,	 how	 we	 can	 pray	 to	 him,	 what	 language	 he
understands.	Hindus	 think	 he	 understands	 only	Sanskrit,	 hence	 they	 call	 it	 the
divine	language.	Jews	think	he	understands	only	Hebrew.	Mohammedans	think
he	 understands	 only	 Arabic,	 otherwise	 why	 should	 he	 have	 given	 his	 most
precious	 treasure	 to	 the	 world	 in	 the	 Arabic	 language?	 Why	 had	 he	 chosen
Mohammed	to	be	his	prophet?
These	 are	 natural,	 logical	 consequences	 of	 thinking	 of	 god	 as	 a	 person.	 One
starts	thinking	of	him	as	a	white	man	or	as	a	black	man;	and	of	course	there	are
women	liberationists	who	think	he	 is	not	a	he	at	all	but	a	she,	There	 is	a	great
controversy:	why	 should	 go	 be	 called	 a	 he?	 It	 smells	 of	male-chauvinism.	He
should	be	called	she.
Negroes	will	think	of	him	as	a	Negro,	Hindus	will	think	of	him	as	a	Hindu	and
the	 Chinese	will	 create	 his	 figure	 in	 a	 Chinese	way.	 The	 Chinese	 god	 cannot
have	a	very	thick	beard	and	thick	moustache	--
impossible:	just	a	few	hairs,	that	will	do.	And	all	the	countries	have	the	idea	of
god	 as	 an	 old	 man	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 for	 millions	 of	 years	 we	 have
thought	that	old	people	are	wise.	God	has	to	be	old	to	be	wise.	All	this	nonsense
comes	with	one	idea:	that	god	is	a	person.	Once	that	idea	is	dropped,	this	whole
rubbish	disappears.
Godliness	is	my	emphasis;	and	my	message	to	my	sannyasins	is:	never	think	of
god	as	a	person	but	only	as	a	presence.	And	the	presence	can	he	neither	Hindu
nor	Christian	nor	Mohammedan.	The	presence	will	not	have	any	address	and	the
presence	 cannot	 be	masculine	 or	 feminine.	 The	 presence	 surrounds	 the	whole
existence	like	an	aura;	the	whole	existence	is	full	of	it.	Each	grass	leaf,	each	star,
each	 person	 --	 knowingly	 or	 unknowingly...	 Those	 who	 know	 become	 the
Buddhas.	Those	who	don't	know	also	have	the	same	quality	in	their	being,	it	is
just	that	they	are	unaware	of	their	treasure.	It	is	within	and	without.
Godliness	 cannot	 be	 estimated,	 cannot	 be	 measured;	 it	 is	 immeasurable.	 The
English	word	'matter'
literally	means	that	which	can	be	measured.	God	is	not	matter	but	consciousness,
He	cannot	be	measured,	There	 is	 no	way	 to	weigh	him,	no	possibility	of	 ever
drawing	a	map	of	godliness.	 It	 is	a	mystery	and	it	 is	always	going	to	remain	a
mystery.	You	cannot	possess	its	you	can	disappear	into	it.	You	can	become	part
of	it	but	you	cannot	be	the	owner.	And	man's	mind	always	likes	things	which	it
can	measure,	define,	possess,	because	then	the	mind	becomes	the	owner.
God	or	godliness	is	the	only	experience	where	you	have	to	drop	the	very	idea	of
ownership,	 of	 possessiveness.	 You	 have	 to	 disappear,	 you	 have	 to	 melt	 and
merge	into	the	ocean.
Whatsoever	 we	 say	 about	 god	 remains	 inadequate.	 Nothing	 can	 ever	 be
adequate.	Words	are	too	small	and	he	is	vast;	it	is	impossible	to	confine	him	in	a
small	word.	That	would	be	like	holding	the	whole	sky	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	fist.
You	cannot	purchase	god,	 it	 is	not	a	commodity.	And	priests	have	been	selling
god,	they	have	made	it	a	commodity,	You	can	purchase	everything:	a	ticket	for
heaven,	a	special	place	in	paradise	--	you	just	have	to	pay	the	right	amount.
There	 is	 a	 small	 Mohammedan	 community	 in	 this	 country;	 the	 chief	 of	 the
community	lives	in	Surat.
When	I	visited	Surat,	a	few	of	his	followers	came	to	me.	They	were	angry	young
men,	and	they	said	'So	much	nonsense	is	going	on	here	in	the	name	of	religion
that	you	have	to	say	something	about	it.'	I	said
'What	is	the	matter?'	They	said	'In	our	small	sect	you	have	to	pay	a	certain	price
and	then	the	arch-priest	writes	a	letter	to	god,	recommending	that	you	should	be
given	such	and	such	a	place,	And	when	the	person	dies	the	letter	is	put	into	his
pocket	and	he	is	buried	in	the	ground.	People	collect	money	for	their	whole	life
just	to	have	some	special	place	in	paradise.'
But	 people	 are	 gullible.	 Now	 such	 nonsense	 continues,	 even	 in	 the	 twentieth
century.	And	it	is	not	only	with	one	small	sect,	it	is	with	all	religions.
God	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 can	 purchase	 or	 sell.	 It	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the
marketplace	 at	 all,	 it	 belongs	 to	your	 inner	world.	And	you	have	 it	 already	 so
there	is	no	need	to	purchase	it	--	it	is	already	the	case.
Although	it	is	beyond	words,	although	we	cannot	say	anything	about	god,	still,
when	 you	 experience	 something	 of	 godliness	 great	 praise	 arises	 in	 your	 heart,
great	gratitude	--	that	is	the	essence	of	prayer.
Knowing	 perfectly	 well	 nothing	 can	 be	 said,	 still	 one	 has	 to	 express	 one's
gratitude,	one	has	 to	express	 it	 in	 some	way	or	other.	You	can	dance,	you	can
sing,	or	you	can	be	silent.	That	may	be	your	way	of	saying	it:	just	silent,	in	awe
and	wonder.
But	 whenever	 the	 experience	 happens	 it	 is	 such	 a	 gift,	 it	 is	 beyond	 our
comprehension.	We	cannot	believe	it	when	it	happens	for	the	first	time.	It	is	so
incredible:	we	cannot	feel	that	we	are	worthy	of	it,	 that	we	have	earned	it,	 that
we	deserve	it	at	all.	One	bows	down	and	one	mumbles	something	or	other.	All
our	prayers	are	 just	mumbling:	significant	as	far	as	our	heart	 is	concerned,	but
inadequate	as	far	as	godliness	is	concerned.
Meditation	 is	a	 state	of	awareness,	watchfulness,	 consciousness,	Ordinarily	we
are	 living	 as	 if	we	 are	 sleepwalkers,	 somanabulists.	 Just	 the	very	minimum	of
awareness	exists,	enough	for	 the	day-to-day	work,	but	not	enough	to	know	the
truth	of	existence.	It	is	the	bare	minimum.	We	are	like	an	iceberg:	just	one-tenth
of	it	shows	above	the	water,	nine-tenths	below	the	water,	Exactly	the	same	is	our
situation,	it	is	exactly	the	same	proportion:	only	one-tenth	of	our	consciousness
is	available,	nine-tenths	is	just	underground;	it	has	yet	to	be	discovered.	It	is	our
own	inner	territory	which	has	remained	unexplored.
We	have	explored	the	whole	earth;	we	have	gone	to	the	very	ends	of	the	earth,
we	have	reached	the	North	Pole	and	the	South	Pole.	Now	we	have	reached	the
moon.	Soon	we	will	be	reaching	some	other	planets	and	then	the	stars	--	plans
are	 already	 on	 the	 way,	 scientists	 are	 already	 working	 on	 it.	 And	 the	 darkest
continent,	 which	 remains	 unexplored	 and	 which	 is	 the	most	 precious,	 is	 still
within	our	being.
Compared	 to	 it	 everything	 else	 is	 futile,	 utterly	 meaningless.	 If	 we	 are	 not
capable	of	knowing	ourselves,	whatsoever	we	know	is	not	going	to	help	us.	But
if	we	know	ourselves,	 even	 if	we	don't	 know	anything	 else,	 that	 self-knowing
will	 be	 enough	 to	give	us	 a	beautiful	 life,	 a	blissful	 life,	 a	peaceful	 life,	 a	 life
with	significance,	meaning,	poetry,	celebration.
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	of	 slowly	 slowly	making	your	whole	being	conscious,	 so
not	just	 the	tip	of	the	iceberg	is	available	to	you,	but	the	whole	being	becomes
available	to	you,	There	remains	no	dark	corner	in	you.	It	is	the	greatest	work	and
the	greatest	adventure	in	life.
Only	the	courageous	one	can	go	inside,	because	he	will	be	travelling	all	alone	--
without	any	maps,	without	any	guide,	with	every	possibility	of	getting	lo	st,	not
exactly	knowing	where	he	is	and	where	he	is	going	and	whether	he	will	be	able
to	 reach	 his	 own	 centre	 ever	 or	 not.	 Nothing	 is	 guaranteed,	 nothing	 can	 be
predicted.	The	inward	pilgrim	is	always	in	for	a	surprise.	At	each	step	there	is	a
surprise.	He	has	never	thought	of	the	things	which	become	available	to	him,	and
many	times	he	goes	astray,	many	times	he	moves	away	from	himself.
There	are	many	pitfalls	in	the	inner	world	too.	It	is	not	so	easy;	it	is	not	straight,
it	 is	very	zigzag.	 It	passes	 through	a	 jungle	where	 there	 is	 every	possibility	of
losing	your	way.	And	many	times	you	will	lose	it,	many	times	you	will	think	you
have	arrived	and	you	will	find	sooner	or	later	that	that	was	an	illusion.
Many	 times	 beautiful	 experiences	 will	 happen	 and	 will	 deceive	 you,	 the
experiences	are	so	beautiful	that	one	tends	to	believe	in	them.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	inner	world	is	full	of	many	beauties,	and	there	is	no	way	to	know	whether
you	have	come	to	the	very	end	yet	or	not,	whether	there	is	yet	something	to	be
discovered.	And	the	distractions	are	great,	attractions	are	great.
For	example,	as	you	start	moving	inwards	many	psychic	forces	become	available
to	you.	You	can	perform	many	things	which	will	look	like	miracles	to	others	and
will	be	very	ego-fulfilling,	One	tends	to	forget	all	about	 the	 inner	 journey;	one
starts	 using	 those	miracles	 to	prove	oneself	 special,	 somebody,	 not	 ordinary	 --
extraordinary.	For	example,	you	can	read	other	peoples'	thoughts,	and	once	you
start	doing	that	you	will	forget	about	the	inner	journey.
Once,	a	man	who	had	been	living	in	the	Himalayas	for	thirty	years,	was	brought
to	me.	He	 thought	 he	 had	 become	very	 efficient	 at	meditating;	 he	was	 simply
concentrating.	But	he	became	capable	of	many	things.
One	of	them	was	he	could	read	anybody's	ideas.	You	would	enter	his	room	and
he	would	ask:	'So,	your	name	is	Hardy?	You	come	from	such-and-such	a	place?
Your	 father's	 name	 is	 this?	 You	 are	 educated	 or	 not	 educated,	 married	 or	 not
married,	you	have	so	many	children	or	you	don't?'	And	if	something	was	going
on	 in	your	head	he	would	 immediately	 start	 answering	 it	before	you	had	even
articulated	your	questions.	You	would	just	write	them	down	on	paper	and	keep
the	paper	 in	your	pocket	and	he	would	 read	 it	 from	 the	outside,	He	would	not
open	the	envelope,	it	would	be	a	closed	envelope.	but	he	would	read	the	content
exactly.
Of	course	he	became	very	famous;	he	was	thought	to	be	a	great	siddha,	one	who
has	arrived.	Somebody	brought	him	to	me	and	he	said	'I	would	like	to	read	your
thoughts,'	I	said	'Okay.	You	are	welcome.'	I	said,
'Read	 my	 thoughts	 if	 you	 can.'	 So	 he	 sat	 there	 and	 I	 sat	 there...	 After	 a	 few
minutes	he	said	'But	you	don't	think	at	all.'	He	said	'This	is	the	first	time	in	my
life	--	I	am	trying	hard	out	I	cannot	catch	hold	of	anything.
How	do	you	manage	it?'	he	asked	me.
I	 said	 'This	 is	 meditation.	What	 you	 have	 been	 thinking	 is	 meditation	 is	 not.
Reading	other	peoples,	 thoughts	 is	of	no	use	--	 their	 thoughts	are	stupid	 in	 the
first	place.	They	want	to	get	rid	of	them	and	you	are	wasting	your	life	in	reading
their	thoughts!	Why	are	you	wasting	your	life?	--	you	should	get	rid	of	your	own
thoughts!	What	 did	 you	 do	 for	 thirty	 years	 in	 the	Himalayas?'	He	 said,	 'I	was
trying	to	meditate.'
I	 said,	 'Forget	 all	 about	 it,	Meditation	means	 a	 state	 of	 no-thought.	A	man	 of
meditation	would	not	 bother	 to	 read	 anybody's	 thought.	Why	 should	he?	Why
should	he	go	into	such	bullshit,	for	what?	He	is	finished	with	all	that	nonsense.'	I
said,	'Start	meditating	now.	All	that	you	have	done	is	concentration,	and	through
concentration	this	is	possible.	Telepathy	is	possible,	clairvoyance	is	possible	and
many	other	 things	which	look	like	miracles	and	on	which	the	ego	immediately
jumps,	becomes	possible.	These	are	the	pitfalls	for	the	inner	pilgrim.	One	has	to
be	 very	 aware	 and	 very	 courageous	 to	 avoid	 them	 because	 the	 temptation	 is
there.
People	start	seeing	lights	 inside	and	they	become	very	thrilled,	as	 if	something
great	is	happening.	Even	if	you	see	light	inside	it	 is	nothing	much.	You	are	not
that	light,	you	are	the	seer,	and	the	seer	has	to	be	seen
--	nothing	else	is	going	to	help.	And	meditation	is	the	art	of	seeing	the	seer,	not
the	light.	Light	is	an	object;	whether	you	see	the	outside	light	or	the	inside	light,
it	 makes	 no	 difference,	 Then	 there	 are	 people	 who	 start	 smelling	 beautiful
perfume	inside	and	they	think	this	is	spiritual.	It	is	nothing!	And	there	are	people
who	will	start	hearing	music	inside	--	that	too	is	nothing.
These	are	all-subtle	games	of	the	mind	which	can	trap	you,	hence	great	courage
is	needed	to	remain	untempted.
Momentary	courage	won't	do.	Everybody,	once	in	a	while,	is	courageous,	but	the
question	 is	 of	 enduring	 courage,	 It	 should	 become	 something	 constant,	 you
should	never	fall	below	it,	otherwise	whatsoever	you	gain	will	be	lost	in	a	single
moment.	Great	patience,	great	endurance...
When	 courage	 is	 enduring	 the	 ultimate	 outcome	 is	 that	 you	 become	 brave.	 a
person	is	brave	when	he	is	unashakable,	when	there	is	no	wavering	at	all,	when
all	wavering	has	ceased	--	so	much	so	that	he	is	not	even	aware	of	his	bravery,
because	 to	 remain	 aware	 means	 the	 opposite	 will	 be	 there.	 The	 courageous
person	 remains	 aware	 of	 his	 cowardliness.	 Without	 cowardliness	 he	 will	 not
know	his	courage;	 it	 is	 in	contrast	with	cowardliness	 that	he	 feels	courageous.
The	 enduring	 person	 remains	 aware	 that	 there	 are	 still	 possibilities	 of
cowardliness	 and	 he	 has	 to	 be	watchful,	 alert,	 on	 guard,	 otherwise	 he	 can	 fall
into	the	trap	and	lose.	But	the	brave	person	is	one	whose	courage	has	become	his
nature,	 very	 nature.	He	 need	 not	 be	 on	 guard,	 he	 is	 simply	 brave.	Others	will
know	about	his	bravery,	he	himself	will	not	know	about	it	at	all.	It	has	entered
into	his	bones,	blood,	into	his	very	marrow.	that	is	the	highest	state	of	courage.
All	 these	 three	 qualities	 are	 needed	 for	 the	 inner	 pilgrimage.	 These	 are	 the
essential	ingredients	which	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
make	one	ready	to	go	in.	Because	people	are	missing	in	these	qualities	they	go
on	moving	towards	small	things,	toys:	money,	power,	prestige.	their	life	remains
childish	--	they	never	mature,	they	never	grow.
The	Imprisoned	Splendor
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
30	June	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8006305
ShortTitle:	IMPRIS30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	greatest	courage	in	life	is	needed	when	you	go	inwards,	for	many	reasons...
The	first	is:	it	is	a	flight	from	the	alone	to	the	alone,	it	is	going	deeper	into	your
aloneness.	And	man	is	caught	up	in	such	a	way	that	he	becomes	accustomed	to
company,	 to	 people,	 to	 family.	 He	 forgets	 absolutely	 the	 joy	 of	 being	 alone;
hence	there	is	a	fear	of	being	left	alone.	That's	why	nations	exist:	it	is	because	of
fear,	 not	 because	 of	 any	 love.	 That's	 why	 religions	 exist	 --	 not	 because	 of	 a
longing	for	god.	How	many	people	really	long	for	god?	Not	so	many	Christians,
not	so	many	Hindus,	not	so	many	Mohammedans.	The	whole	world	is	religious
in	 that	way.	But	 people	 are	 afraid	 of	 being	 left	 alone;	 they	 have	 to	 be	 part	 of
some	crowd	--	a	political	crowd,	a	social	crowd,	a	 religious	crowd;	any	crowd
will	 do,	 but	 they	 are	 dependent	 on	 the	 crowd.	 They	 feel	 good	when	 they	 are
surrounded	 by	 people;	 they	 start	 feeling	 shaky,	 scared	when	 they	 find	 there	 is
nobody	and	they	are	alone.	That	is	the	fear	that	grips	you	when	you	are	lost	in	a
jungle	 or	 in	 a	 desert	where,	 as	 far	 as	 you	 can	 see,	 there	 is	 nobody.	That	 utter
aloneness	 creates	 great	 fear	 because	we	 are	 conditioned	 by	 the	 crowd,	 for	 the
crowd,	 as	 part	 of	 the	 crowd.	 We	 are	 not	 brought	 up	 as	 individuals.	 We	 are
brought	up	as	small	units	of	a	great	mechanism	called	the	society,	the	nation,	the
church.
People	 are	 not	 satisfied	with	 these	 crowds	 --	 they	 create	 their	 small	 crowds	 --
because	when	 the	 crowd	 is	 very	 big	 you	 start	 losing	 yourself	 in	 the	 crowd.	 It
becomes	 impossible	 for	 you	 to	 recognise	 people,	 to	 see	 who	 is	 who;	 hence
people	create	small	crowds	of	their	own:	the	Rotary	Club,	the	Lion's	Club.	These
are	just	small	crowds	where	everybody	knows	everybody	else,	where	everybody
is	acquainted	with	everybody	else.
The	greatest	fear	arises	when	you	move	inwards...	because	it	is	possible	to	find	a
man	in	the	desert,	it	is	possible	to	find	somebody	in	the	jungle	when	you	are	lost.
I	have	heard	a	story:
Once	a	hunter	got	lost	in	the	jungle.	He	tried	for	three	days	continuously,	but	he
could	not	find	any	way	to	get	out.	He	got	deeper	and	deeper	in	the	thicker	parts
of	the	jungle.	He	became	desperate:	he	could	not	sleep,	there	was	nothing	to	eat.
After	 three	 days	 he	 thought	 'This	 is	 death.	Now	 I	 cannot	 survive.'	He	 shouted
and	did	everything	and	on	the	third	day	evening,	he	suddenly	saw	a	man	coming.
They	both	 rejoiced,	 both	 ran	 towards	 each	 other	 and	 hugged	 each	 other.	They
were	absolutely	unacquainted,	but	what	a	joy	to	see	another	man!	But	soon	they
found	that	that	joy	was	wrong,	they	were	disillusioned:	both	were	lost.	Each	was
thinking	 'Now	 I	 have	 found	 a	 person	 who	will	 help	me	 to	 get	 out,'	 and	 both
rejoiced	for	a	moment,	but	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	moment	they	explained	to	each	other	why	they	were	rejoicing	so	much,	both
were	shocked.
They	were	still	 lost	 in	 the	same	way,	but	 they	were	not	 in	so	much	despair.	At
least	they	could	share	their	misery,	they	could	communicate,	relate,	talk	to	each
other,	converse,	do	something	--	 together.	They	were	still	 lost	 in	 the	same	way
but	somehow	it	felt	different.
That's	how	marriage	came	 into	existence.	Two	lost	people	 for	a	moment	enjoy
the	honeymoon,	thinking
'I	 have	 found	 the	person	whom	 I	was	 seeking,'	 and	each	 is	 thinking	 the	 same;
soon	 they	will	 be	 disillusioned.	 But	 still,	 even	 though	 they	will	 be	miserable,
they	will	be	miserable	together.	It	is	better,	people	think,	to	be	miserable	together
than	 to	 be	 miserable	 alone;	 in	 fact	 in	 togetherness	 misery	 is	 multiplied.	 But
people	love	togetherness	because	we	are	brought	up	in	that	way.	From	the	very
first	 moment	 of	 birth	 the	 child	 depends	 on	 the	 mother,	 on	 the	 father,	 on	 the
family.	 Then	 his	 circle	 becomes	 bigger,	 but	 he	 always	 remains	 part	 of	 some
group,	some	collectivity.
Meditation	 is	 the	 only	 phenomenon	 where	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 meeting
anybody,	where	you	have	to	go	alone,	totally	alone.	Hence	only	very	courageous
people	 can	 enter	 into	 the	world	 of	meditation.	That's	why	 so	 few	people	 have
ever	entered,	Why	so	few	people	have	ever	become	enlightened.
Secondly:	when	you	move	inwards	you	move	without	any	maps.	Even	if	you	go
to	 the	moon	 you	 have	 a	 certain	map,	 a	 certain	 route.	 There	 have	 been	 people
before	you,	 their	footprints	are	 there,	 there	are	milestones	everywhere.	Even	in
the	 sea	 you	 are	 not	 totally	 lost,	 in	 the	 sky	 you	 are	 not	 totally	 lost:	 you	 can
communicate	with	people,	you	can	give	messages	--	even	from	the	moon!	You
can	remain	in	some	kind	of	relationship;	it	may	be	just	through	radio	waves,	but
you	can	remain	connected.	You	can	still	hear	the	voices	of	people,	you	can	still
see	that	others	are	there;	you	are	connected.
But	 when	 you	move	 inwards,	 the	 people	who	 have	 gone	 in	 cannot	 leave	 any
footprints	for	anybody.	It	is	impossible,	because	everybody's	inner	territory	is	so
different	 that	 Buddha's	 footprints	 won't	 help	 you	 and	 if	 you	 follow	 Buddha's
footprints	literally,	you	will	never	find	yourself.
Jesus'	map	won't	help	you;	you	cannot	 follow	 it	 literally.	 It	 can	help	 in	a	very
indirect	way;	it	can	make	you	aware	of	certain	things	inside,	but	in	a	very	vague
sense.	It	can	give	you	the	confidence	that	'Yes,	there	is	a	world	inside,	no	doubt
about	 it,	 because	 so	many	people	 cannot	 be	 lying.	Buddha,	 Jesus,	Zarathustra,
Lao	Tzu,	Mahavira,	Krishna,	Mohammed,	 such	 beautiful	 people	 cannot	 all	 be
lying.	They	cannot	be	in	a	conspiracy	--	for	what?	They	never	existed	together	--
they	lived	in	different	ages,	in	different	countries	--
yet	they	all	speak	almost	the	same	language...	But	you	cannot	follow	it	exactly
because	 Buddha's	 inner	 territory	 is	 different.	 Each	 individual	 is	 unique,	 so
unique	 that	 you	 have	 to	 discover	 yourself	 all	 alone;	 hence	 great	 courage	 is
needed.
This	 is	 the	 greatest	 adventure	 in	 life,	 and	 one	 who	 goes	 on	 this	 adventure	 is
blessed.
These	are	 the	 two	paths	 that	have	been	followed	up	 to	now	by	all	 the	seekers.
Either	people	have	arrived	through	love	--	Meera,	Chaitanya,	Farid,	Bahauddin,
Jesus,	Mohammed...	All	these	people	have	arrived	through	the	path	of	love.	And
the	other	path	is	of	meditation	--	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu,	Lieh
Tzu.	These	people	have	followed	the	path	of	meditation.	Both	arrive	at	the	same
goal;	but	up	to	now	nobody	has	tried	to	create	a	higher	synthesis	of	the	two.
My	effort	here	is	to	create	that	higher	synthesis.	Because	of	these	two	different
paths,	 humanity	 has	 become	 divided.	 And	 it	 is	 possible	 that	 one	 can	 be	 both
together,	there	is	no	intrinsic	impossibility	in	it.
They	are	complementaries,	not	opposites,	but	they	have	always	been	thought	to
be	 opposites.	 In	 fact	 opposites	 are	 always	 complementaries.	 For	 example,
negative	 and	 positive	 poles	 look	 opposite	 but	 together	 they	 both	 create
electricity.	 Man	 and	 woman,	 yin	 and	 yang,	 Shiva	 and	 Shakti,	 matter	 and
consciousness	--
these	are	all	polarities.	On	the	surface	they	are	opposite,	opposed	to	each	other,
but	deep	down	they	are	connected,	joined	together.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	discover	that	inner	connection;	then	a	man	can
be	both	a	lover	and	a	meditator;	and	that	will	be	the	highest	kind	of	man	because
he	will	 have	 the	qualities	of	 Jesus	 and	Buddha	 together.	Of	 course,	he	will	 be
more	misunderstood	 in	 the	world	 than	anybody	else.	 Jesus,	who	was	 in	a	way
consistent,	was	misunderstood.	So	what	to	say	about	a	man	like	me	who	is	trying
to	live	both	these	polarities	together	--	not	only	trying	to	live	them	himself,	but
helping	many	 to	 live	 in	 the	same	way?	 I	am	bound	 to	be	misunderstood,	 I	am
going	to	be	the	most	misunderstood	man	on	the	earth	ever,	for	the	simple	reason
that	each	of	my	statements	will	be	contradictory	to	other	statements	--	my	own
statements!	I	am	bound	to	be	inconsistent	for	the	simple	reason	that	when	I	talk
about	love	I	am	bound	to	say	something	which	will	look	as	if	it	is	going	against
meditation	 ,	 and	 vice	 versa;	 when	 I	 talk	 about	 meditation	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to
interpret	it	as	going	against	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	 understand	me	 one	will	 need	 a	 very	 sympathetic	 heart	 --	 not	 an	 analytical
mind.	My	approach	will	remain	incomprehensible	to	the	analytical	mind.	In	that
way	 Jesus	 will	 look	 clear-cut,	 Buddha	 will	 look	 very	 clear-cut,	 and	 far	 more
clear-cut	that	Jesus,	because	Jesus	follows	the	path	of	love	and	love	can	never	be
very	clear.	Love	is	a	kind	of	mad	affair	with	god.	But	Buddha	is	very	clear,	very
logical,	very	consistent,	comprehensible	to	any	analytical	mind.
But	 I	 am	 really	 going	 to	 be	 a	 dilemma.	 And	 that's	 what	 is	 creating	 so	 much
controversy	all	over	the	world	--	and	it	is	going	to	grow	every	day.	I	would	like
to	involve	the	whole	world	in	a	controversy	over	what	I	am	doing,	because	that
controversy	will	bring	the	most	intelligent	and	sympathetic	people	to	me.
Only	 the	 stupid	will	 be	 debarred,	 and	who	 cares	 about	 them.	 I	want	 only	 the
most	 intelligent	people;	not	 intellectual	but	 intelligent.	The	intellectual	will	not
be	 able	 to	 understand;	 only	 the	 intelligent	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the
complementariness	of	the	opposites.
And	I	would	like	my	sannyasins	to	be	more	liquid	than	the	followers	of	Jesus	or
Buddha	 --	 they	 are	more	 rigid.	My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	more	 like	water,	 so
they	can	take	any	form.	If	you	fill	a	pot	with	water,	it	takes	the	form	of	the	pot;	if
you	 pour	 the	 water	 in	 a	 bucket,	 it	 takes	 the	 form	 of	 the	 bucket.	 It	 has	 no
resistance,	it	does	not	fight	with	any	form.	It	is	always	in	a	state	of	let-go.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	in	a	state	of	let-go,	so	when	they	are	alone	they	will	be
meditators,	 enjoying	 their	 aloneness,	 their	 solitariness,	 and	 when	 they	 are
together	 they	will	 be	 lovers	 and	 great	 lovers	 and	 enjoying	 togetherness.	 They
will	not	renounce	the	world;	there	is	no	reason	to	renounce	the	world	--	they	can
fit	 anywhere,	 they	 can	 adjust	 anywhere.	 Their	 adjustability	 will	 be	 almost
infinite.	And	 that	 is	what	 is	 needed	 in	 the	world:	 not	 rigid	 people,	 not	 fanatic
people,	but	liquid	people.
Become	both	love	and	meditation.	Allow	that	synthesis	to	happen	in	you.
The	 old	 religions	 are	 religions	 of	 renunciation.	 They	 teach	 people	 anti-life
attitudes,	 they	 are	 life-negative.	 they	 encourage	 people	 to	 renounce	 life,	 to
escape	to	the	monasteries,	to	the	mountains,	to	the	deserts.
My	 religion	 is	 a	 religion	 of	 celebration,	 festivity.	 I	 teach	 not	 renunciation,	 but
deep	rejoicing.	Rejoice	in	life	because	life	is	synonymous	with	god.	There	is	no
other	god	than	life.	I	am	life-affirmative.	I	am	a	total	yes-sayer	to	life	and	to	all
that	 it	 implies,	 from	 the	 very	 ordinary	 things	 to	 the	 very	 extraordinary.	 The
whole	spectrum	has	to	be	accepted	with	gratitude	--	loved,	lived,	gone	through,
transcended,	but	not	renounced.
Yes,	There	comes	a	moment	of	transcendence,	but	that	comes	through	living	it,
experiencing	 it,	going	 through	 it.	That	 transcendence	comes	of	 its	own	accord,
not	through	any	effort.	when	you	force	something	you	become	ugly.	that's	why
your	old	so-called	saints	are	ugly.	they	don't	have	the	grace,	the	beauty,	the	joy,
the	splendour	of	 the	divine.	 they	are	 like	parrots:	 repeating,	 reciting	scriptures,
torturing	 themselves.	 In	 the	 name	 of	 religion	 they	 are	 really	 practising
masochists,	and	teaching	others	also	to	torture	themselves.
The	whole	of	 religion	up	 to	now	has	 remained	pathological,	 sado-masochistic:
torture	 yourself	 and	 teach	 others	 to	 torture	 themselves.	 The	 more	 you	 torture
yourself,	the	greater	a	saint	you	are,	the	more	holy	you	are;	the	less	you	torture
yourself	 of	 course,	 the	 smaller	 a	 saint	 you	 are.	 You	will	 also	 have	 a	 place	 in
heaven	 but	 just	 near	 the	 gate,	 not	 very	 close	 to	 the	 palace	 of	 god	 --	 that	 is
impossible.	Around	him	will	be	real	torturers.
He	must	be	getting	tired	of	these	people,	unless	he	himself	is	a	sadist	and	enjoys
all	 this	 torture:	people	 fasting,	 lying	down	on	a	bed	of	nails,	 hitting	 their	own
body	with	spears,	wounding	themselves,	creating	as	many	wounds	as	possible	in
the	body	and	never	allowing	those	wounds	to	heal.	Just	think	of	a	go	surrounded
by	these	people	--	this	god	must	be	a	sadist!
They	 say	 the	 best	 marriage	 is	 between	 a	 sadist	 and	 a	 masochist	 because	 the
sadist	wants	 to	 torture	and	 the	masochist	wants	 to	be	 tortured.	That	 is	 the	best
kind	of	marriage,	because	both	can	enjoy	themselves.
But	sometimes	even	that	may	not	work.
One	masochist	read	about	this,	that	the	best	kind	of	marriage	is	that	of	a	sadist
with	 a	masochist.	 and	 she	was	 a	masochist,	 she	wanted	 to	 be	 tortured,	 so	 she
searched	for	a	sadist	and	she	found	one.	The	sadist	was	also	happy	because	no
woman	was	ready	to	marry	him	but	this	woman	rejoiced	in	finding	him	because
he	would	be	torturing	her	--	that	was	his	joy	--	and	to	be	tortured	was	her	joy...
So	on	the	first	night	of	the	honeymoon	the	woman	threw	off	her	clothes.	Naked,
she	lay	down	on	the	floor	and	the	man	brought	 in	 the	bag	he	used	to	carry	for
such	 loving	 situations.	 In	 the	 bag	 he	 used	 to	 have	 all	 kinds	 of	 instruments	 of
torture	--	nails	and	screwdrivers	and	all	kinds	of	things!	He	started	bringing	them
out	and	the	woman	rejoiced;	she	was	almost	going	into	orgasm,	just	seeing	the
things	he	was	taking	out!
And	then	he	just	sat	there.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	woman	said,	'What	are	you	doing?	Start!'	But	he	just	sat	there.	The	woman
said,	'What	are	you	doing?'	He	said,	'I	rejoice	in	torturing	people.	Now,	I	will	not
do	anything	 --	 this	 is	my	 joy.	Now	you	will	 feel	 tortured,	 now	you	will	 know
what	torture	is.'	And	he	started	putting	the	things	back.
So	sometimes	even	that	may	not	work!
God	is	not	a	sadist	and	the	mahatmas	need	not	be	masochists.	They	are	ill	and
pathological	 people.	 My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 whole;	 they	 have	 to	 live	 as
totally,	as	intensely,	as	passionately	as	possible.	They	have	to	rejoice	in	life.
Bliss	is	our	goal,	bliss	is	our	ultimate	truth,	and	we	are	going	to	find	it	dancing,
celebrating.	 We	 will	 celebrate	 life,	 we	 will	 celebrate	 even	 death	 --	 we	 will
celebrate	everything!
Celebration	 is	 the	 keyword	 if	 somebody	 want	 to	 understand	 me	 and	 my
philosophy,	my	religion,	my	way	of	life.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
