
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Talks	on	the	Baul	Mystics
Talks	given	from	21/06/76	am	to	30/06/76	am
English	Discourse	series
10	Chapters
Year	published:	1976
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Submission	is	the	secret	of	knowledge
21	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606210
ShortTitle:
BELOV101
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
97
mins
ONLY	A	CONNOISSEUR	OF	THE	FLAVOURS	OF	LOVE	CAN
COMPREHEND	THE	LANGUAGE	OF	A	LOVER'S	HEART,
OTHERS	HAVE	NO	CLUE.
THE	TASTE	OF	LIME	RESTS	IN	THE	CORE	OF	THE	FRUIT,
AND	EVEN	EXPERTS	KNOW	OF	NO	EASY	WAY	TO	REACH	IT.
HONEY	IS	HIDDEN	WITHIN	THE	LOTUS	BLOOM	--	BUT	THE
BEE	KNOWS	IT.
DUNG-BEETLES	NESTLE	IN	DUNG,	DISCOUNTING	HONEY.
SUBMISSION	IS	THE	SECRET	OF	KNOWLEDGE.
I'M	TREMENDOUSLY	HAPPY	TO	INTRODUCE	YOU	TO	THE	WORLD	OF
THE
BAULS.	I	hope	you	will	be	nourished	by	it,	enriched	by	it.	It	 is	a	very	bizarre
world,	 eccentric,	 in-sane.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 so.	 It	 is	 unfortunate	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be	 so,
because	 the	world	 of	 the	 so-called	 sane	 people	 is	 so	 insane	 that	 if	 you	 really
want	to	be	sane	in	it	you	will	have	to	be	insane.	You	will	have	to	choose	a	path
of	your	own.	It	is	going	to	be	diametrically	opposite	to	the	ordinary	path	of	the
world.
The	Bauls	are	called	Bauls	because	they	are	mad	people.	The	word	'Baul'	comes
from	 the	 Sanskrit	 root	 VATUL.	 It	 means:	 mad,	 affected	 by	 wind.	 The	 Baul
belongs	to	no	religion.
He	 is	 neither	 Hindu	 nor	 Mohammedan	 nor	 Christian	 nor	 Buddhist.	 He	 is	 a
simple	human	being.	His	 rebellion	 is	 total.	He	does	not	belong	 to	anybody;	he
only	belongs	to	himself.
He	lives	in	a	no	man's	land:	no	country	is	his,	no	religion	is	his,	no	scripture	is
his.	 His	 rebellion	 goes	 even	 deeper	 than	 the	 rebellion	 of	 the	 Zen	 Masters	 --
because	 at	 least	 formally,	 they	 belong	 to	 Buddhism;	 at	 least	 formally,	 they
worship	 Buddha.	 Formally	 they	 have	 scriptures	 --	 scriptures	 denouncing
scriptures,	of	course	--	but	still	they	have.
At	least	they	have	a	few	scriptures	to	burn.
Bauls	have	nothing	--	no	scripture,	not	even	 to	burn;	no	church,	no	 temple,	no
mosque	--
nothing	whatsoever.	A	Baul	 is	a	man	always	on	 the	road.	He	has	no	house,	no
abode.
God	 is	 his	 only	 abode,	 and	 the	whole	 sky	 is	 his	 shelter.	He	possesses	 nothing
except	 a	 poor	 man's	 quilt,	 a	 small,	 hand-made	 one-stringed	 instrument	 called
AEKTARA,	 and	 a	 small	 drum,	 a	 kettle-drum.	That's	 all	 that	 he	 possesses.	He
possesses	only	a	musical	instrument	and	a	drum.	He	plays	with	one	hand	on	the
instrument	and	he	goes	on	beating	the	drum	with	the	other.	The	drum	hangs	by
the	side	of	his	body,	and	he	dances.	That	is	all	of	his	religion.
Dance	 is	 his	 religion;	 singing	 is	 his	 worship.	 He	 does	 not	 even	 use	 the	word
'God'.	 The	 Baul	 word	 for	 God	 is	 ADHAR	MANUSH,	 the	 essential	 man.	 He
worships	 man.	 He	 says,	 inside	 you	 and	 me,	 inside	 everybody,	 there	 is	 an
essential	being.	That	essential	being	is	all.	To	find	that	ADHAR	MANUSH,	that
essential	man,	is	the	whole	search.
So	 there	 is	no	God	somewhere	outside	you,	and	 there	 is	no	need	 to	create	any
temple	 because	 you	 are	His	 temple	 already.	The	whole	 search	 is	withinwards.
And	on	the	waves	of	song	and	on	the	waves	of	dancing,	he	moves	withinwards.
He	goes	on	moving	like	a	beggar,	singing	songs.	He	has	nothing	to	preach;	his
whole	 preaching	 is	 his	 poetry.	And	 his	 poetry	 is	 also	 not	 ordinary	 poetry,	 not
mere	poetry.	He's	not	consciously	a	poet;	he	sings	because	his	heart	 is	singing.
Poetry	 follows	him	 like	a	 shadow,	hence	 it	 is	 tremendously	beautiful.	He's	not
calculating	it,	he's	not	making	it.	He	lives	his	poetry.
That's	 his	 passion	 and	 his	 very	 life.	His	 dance	 is	 almost	 insane.	He	 has	 never
been	trained	to	dance,	he	does	not	know	anything	about	the	art	of	dancing.	He
dances	 like	 a	 madman,	 like	 a	 whirlwind.	 And	 he	 lives	 very	 spontaneously,
because	 the	 Baul	 says,	 "If	 you	 want	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 ADHAR	MANUSH,	 the
essential	 man,	 then	 the	 way,	 the	 way	 goes	 through	 SAHAJA	MANUSH,	 the
spontaneous	man."
To	 reach	 to	 the	 essential	 man,	 you	 have	 to	 go	 through	 the	 spontaneous	 man.
Spontaneity	 is	 the	only	way	 to	 reach	 to	 the	essence...so	he	cries	when	he	feels
like	crying.	You	can	find	him	standing	in	a	village	street	crying,	for	nothing.	If
you	ask,	"Why	are	you	crying?"	he	will	laugh.	He	will	say,	"There	is	no	why.	I
felt	like,	I	felt	like	crying,	so	I	cried."	If	he	feels	like	laughing,	he	laughs;	if	he
feels	 like	 singing,	 he	 sings	 --	 but	 everything	 has	 to	 come	 out	 of	 deep	 feeling.
He's	not	mind	oriented,	not	in	any	way	controlled	and	disciplined.	He	knows	no
rituals.	He's	absolutely	against	rituals	because	he	says,	"A	ritualized	person	is	a
dead	 person."	 He	 cannot	 be	 spontaneous.	 And	 a	 person	 who	 follows	 rituals,
formalities	too	much,	creates	so	many	habits	around	him	that	there	is	no	need	to
be	 alert.	 Alertness	 is	 lost;	 habits	 are	 formed.	 Then	 the	 man	 of	 rituals	 lives
through	habits.	If	he	goes	to	the	temple	he	bows	down,	not	in	any	way	conscious
and	alert	of	what	he	is	doing,	but	just	because	he	has	been	taught	to	do	so,	he	has
learned	to	do	so.	It	has	become	a	conditioning.
So	 they	don't	 follow	any	ritual,	 they	don't	have	any	 technique,	 they	don't	have
any	habit.
So	 you	 cannot	 find	 two	 Bauls	 that	 are	 similar;	 they	 are	 individuals.	 Their
rebellion	leads	them	to	become	authentic	individuals.
This	has	to	be	understood:	the	more	you	become	a	part	of	society,	 the	less	and
less	you	are	an	individual,	the	less	and	less	you	are	spontaneous	--	because	the
very	membership	in	the	society	will	not	allow	you	to	be	spontaneous.	You	will
have	to	follow	the	rules	of	the	game.	If	you	enter	a	society,	you	accept	to	follow
those	 rules	 that	 the	 society	 is	 playing,	 or	 has	 decided	 to	 play.	 That's	 what
membership	means:	you	enter	 into	a	certain	organization;	you	have	 to	play	 the
game.	Bauls	have	no	organization,	so	each	Baul	is	individual.
And	that's	what	religion	really	is:	it	is	an	individual	approach	towards	truth.	One
has	to	go	alone,	one	has	to	go	in	his	own	way;	one	has	to	find	one's	own	way.
You	cannot	 follow	another,	you	cannot	move	on	a	 readymade	 track.	The	more
you	search	your	own	way,	the	closer	you	will	be	to	God,	or	to	truth,	or	to	reality.
In	fact,	the	way	is	created	by	walking.	You	create	it	as	you	walk.	It	is	not	ready
there	for	you,	waiting	to	be	walked	on.
You	walk	and	you	create	it.
It	is	as	if	you	are	lost	in	a	forest.	What	do	you	do?	You	have	no	map	and	there	is
no	way	leading	anywhere	--	trees	and	trees	and	trees	all	around,	and	you	are	lost.
What	do	you	do?	You	start	walking,	searching,	seeking.	By	your	very	walk,	by
your	very	search,	a	path	is	created.
Life	is	wild,	and	it	is	good	that	it	is	wild.	It	is	good	that	it	has	no	map,	that	it	is
not	charted,	that	it	 is	still	unknown.	And	its	unknowability	is	such	that	there	is
no	way	to	make	it	known.	Otherwise,	all	charm	will	be	 lost,	all	beauty	will	be
lost.	Then	life	will	not	surprise	you;	and	if	surprise	is	lost,	all	is	lost.	Then	there
will	be	no	wonder,	no	wondering.	Then	your	eyes	will	go	dead	and	your	heart
will	 stop	 beating;	 the	 passion	will	 disappear.	 Love	will	 not	 be	 possible.	 Awe,
wonder,	surprise:	these	are	the	ingredients	of	the	charisma,	of	the	mystery	of	life.
So	 it	 is	good	 that	 there	are	no	scriptures;	 it	 is	good	 that	 there	are	no	ritualized
religions;	it	is	good	that	you	are	not	on	a	super-highway.
The	Baul	 is	a	 rebellious	person,	and	 I	 say	 'rebellious'	with	great	consideration.
He	is	not	a	revolutionary.	A	revolutionary	is	still	thinking	in	terms	of	the	society.
How	to	change	the	society:	that	is	the	revolutionary's	continuous	brooding.	But
he	 remains	 society-focused,	 society-oriented:	 "How	 to	 change	 the	 world?"	 A
rebellious	person	does	not	bother	 about	 the	world	because	he	understands	 that
the	 world	 cannot	 be	 changed	 by	 him,	 and	who	 is	 he	 to	 change	 the	 world?	 --
"What's	my	authority	 to	change	 the	world?	And	 if	 the	world	decides	 to	be	 the
way	it	is,	who	am	I	to	interfere	with	it?"	He	leaves	the	world	to	itself.
He	does	not	 interfere,	 he	does	not	meddle	with	 it.	He	 starts	 changing	himself.
His	revolution	is	inward;	his	revolution	is	absolutely	inner.
A	 rebellious	 person	 is	 a	 drop-out.	 He	 simply	 drops	 out	 of	 that	 society	 which
doesn't	suit	him.	He	does	not	wait	for	it	to	be	transformed	so	that	he	can	fit	with
it.	That	desire	is	foolish,	stupid.	Then	you	will	be	lost.	And	that	day,	that	utopia
will	never	happen	--	when	the	society	has	changed	so	much	that	you	can	fit	with
it,	and	the	society	can	fit	with	you.
It	has	never	happened.	Revolutionaries	have	 lived	down	 through	 the	centuries,
and	died.
The	 world	 has	 remained	 the	 same,	 more	 or	 less,	 but	 the	 lives	 of	 those
revolutionaries	were	wasted	in	changing	it.
Just	think	of	Marx,	Lenin,	Trotsky,	coming	back	and	looking	at	the	world	--	they
will	start	crying.	This	is	the	world	for	which	they	wasted	their	whole	lives?	This
is	 the	world	 for	which	 they	hoped	 and	 staked	 their	whole	 lives,	 gambled	with
their	lives?	They	could	not	live	their	lives	because	they	were	trying	to	change	the
world.	 They	 were	 trying	 to	 change	 the	 world	 because	 they	 thought	 that	 only
when	 the	world	 had	 changed	 according	 to	 their	wishes	would	 they	 be	 able	 to
live.	Otherwise,	how	could	they	live?	How	can	you	live	happily	in	an	unhappy
world?	--	that	is	the	revolutionary's	question.	Very	significant:
"How	can	you	be	happy	in	an	unhappy	world?"	--	so	he	tries	to	make	the	world
happy.
The	rebellious	person	says,	"Leave	the	world	to	itself.	Nobody	has	ever	changed
it."	He	is	more	practical	and	down	to	earth:	"I	can	live	my	own	way.	I	can	create
my	 own	world	within	me."	He	 is	 a	 drop-out.	 Bauls	 are	 drop-outs.	 They	 don't
belong	 to	 any	 religion,	 to	 any	 society,	 to	 any	 nation.	 They	 are	 beggars,
wanderers,	 vagabonds,	 hippies,	 gypsies,	 moving	 from	 one	 village	 to	 another,
singing	their	song,	dancing	their	dance,	living	their	lives	in	their	own	way,	doing
their	thing.
A	 rebellious	person	 is	one	who	 says,	 "I'm	not	going	 to	wait,	 I'm	going	 to	 live
right	now."
The	revolutionary	hopes	for	the	future.	He	says,	"I	am	going	to	wait.	I	will	wait
for	 the	 right	moment."	The	 rebellious	person	says,	 "The	 right	moment	 is	here-
now,	 and	 I'm	 not	 going	 to	 wait	 for	 anybody,	 I'm	 going	 to	 live	 right	 now."	 A
rebellious	person	lives	in	the	present.
And	one	thing	more	to	be	understood:	a	rebellious	person	is	not	against	anybody.
He	may	 appear	 against	 because	he	 is	 trying	 to	 live	his	 own	 life,	 but	 he	 is	 not
really	 against	 anybody.	 He	 may	 not	 go	 to	 the	 mosque	 but	 he	 is	 not	 against
Mohammedans.	He	may	not	go	 to	 the	 temple	but	he	 is	not	against	Hindus.	He
simply	says,	"I	am	not	concerned;	it	is	irrelevant."	He	simply	says,	"Please	leave
me	alone.	You	do	your	thing	and	let	me	do	my	thing.	Don't	interfere	with	me	and
I	will	not	interfere	with	you."
The	vision	of	the	rebellious	mind	is	very	realistic.	Life	is	short.	Nobody	knows
whether	tomorrow	will	come	or	not.	The	future	is	not	certain,	and	this	is	the	only
moment	 one	 can	 live.	Why	waste	 it	 in	 fighting	with	 others?	Why	waste	 it	 in
trying	to	convince	others?
Enjoy	it,	delight	in	it.	A	Baul	is	a	hedonist;	he	is	epicurean.	He	starts	living:	he
loves,	he	lives,	he	delights.
When	a	Baul	dies,	he	is	not	afraid	of	death	--	he	is	ready.	He	has	lived	his	life.
He	is	ripe.
The	fruit	is	ripe	and	ready	to	fall	to	the	ground,	with	no	hesitation.
You	will	be	afraid.	You	are	already	afraid	of	death	because	you	have	not	been
able	to	live.	You	have	not	lived	yet	and	death	has	come	or	is	coming.	You	have
not	yet	had	time	to	live	and	death	has	knocked	at	the	door.	How	can	you	accept
death?	How	can	you	welcome?
A	Baul	is	ready	to	die	any	moment	because	he	has	not	wasted	a	single	moment
of	life.	He	has	lived	it	as	deeply	as	it	was	possible	to	live.	He	has	no	complaint,
he	has	no	grudge	against	life,	and	he	has	nothing	to	wait	for.	So	if	death	comes,
he	 is	 ready	 to	 live	 death	 also.	 He	 embraces	 death.	 He	 says,	 "Come	 in."	 He
becomes	a	host	to	death	also.
If	you	live	rightly,	you	will	be	ready	to	die	peacefully,	blissfully.	If	you	are	not
living	rightly,	if	you	are	postponing,	if	you	are	simply	putting	aside	your	life	and
doing	 other	 things	 rather	 than	 enjoying	 life,	 doing	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things
rather	 than	 delighting	 in	 life,	 then	 of	 course,	 naturally,	 you	 will	 be	 afraid	 of
death.	And	when	death	comes,	you	will	be	a	coward	in	front	of	death.
A	Baul	dies	dancing,	a	Baul	dies	singing,	a	Baul	dies	playing	his	AEKTARA	and
his	DUGGI.	He	knows	how	to	live	and	how	to	die.	And	he	is	not	worried	about
God;	 he's	 only	 worried	 about	 the	 ADHAR	MANUSH,	 the	 essential	 man	 that
resides	in	him.	His	whole	search	is	to	find	this	essential	man	that	he	is.'Who	am
I?'	is	his	essential	search.
And	he's	 very	 respectful	 about	 other	 human	beings	 because	 they	 all	 belong	 to
that	essential	nature.	All	other	forms	are	of	that	formless	essential	nature;	all	the
waves	belong	to	the	ocean.	He's	very	respectful,	tremendously	respectful.	A	Baul
never	condemns	anything.
To	me,	 that	 is	 the	 very	 criterion	 of	 a	 religious	man:	 he	 has	 no	 condemnatory
attitude.	 He	 accepts	 everything,	 his	 world	 includes	 everything.	 It	 does	 not
exclude	 anything.	 Sex	 is	 accepted,	 SAMADHI	 also.	 His	 world	 is	 very	 rich
because	 nothing	 is	 excluded	 from	 it.	 He	 says,	 "Everything	 comes	 from	 that
essential	core	of	your	being,	so	why	deny	it?	And	if	you	deny	it,	how	will	you	be
able	to	reach	to	the	source?"	Wherever	you	deny	something,	you	cling	there,	you
stop	there.	Then	the	journey	cannot	move	to	the	very	core.
Life,	as	it	is,	is	totally	accepted.	That	does	not	mean	that	a	Baul	is	a	man	of	mere
indulgence,	 no.	He	knows	 the	 alchemy	of	 how	 to	 transform	 the	 baser	 into	 the
higher.	He	knows	how	to	transform	iron	into	gold.	He	knows	how	to	transform
sex	into	SAMADHI;	he	knows	the	secret.	And	what	is	the	secret	of	transforming
life	 into	 eternal	 life,	 time	 into	 eternity?	 The	 secret	 is	 love.	 Between	 sex	 and
SAMADHI,	the	bridge	is	love.	Love	is	participated	in	by	both:	on	the	one	hand
sex,	on	 the	other	hand	SAMADHI.	 It	 is	 the	bridge.	One	bank	 is	sex,	 the	other
bank	 is	SAMADHI.	Love	 includes	both,	comprehends	both.	Through	 love,	 the
Bauls	say,	one	reaches	to	the	eternal	home.
So	 that	 is	 the	 only	 provision	 for	 the	 path:	 love.	Love	 is	 their	worship,	 love	 is
their	prayer,	love	is	their	meditation.	The	path	of	the	Baul	is	the	path	of	love.	He
loves	tremendously.
There	are	 two	traditions	 in	India:	one	 is	 the	 tradition	of	 the	Vedas,	 the	other	 is
the	tradition	of	the	Tantras.	Vedas	are	more	formal,	more	of	the	nature	of	rituals.
Vedas	 are	 more	 social,	 organizational.	 Tantras	 are	 more	 individual	 --	 less
concerned	 with	 rituals,	 forms,	 habits,	 more	 concerned	 with	 the	 essential;	 less
concerned	with	the	forms,	more	concerned	with	the	soul.
Vedas	 are	 not	 all-inclusive.	 Much	 is	 excluded;	 it	 is	 more	 puritan,	 more
moralistic.	 Tantras	 are	 non-puritan,	 allinclusive,	 more	 human,	 more	 earthly.
Tantras	say	that	everything	has	to	be	used	and	nothing	is	to	be	denied.
Bauls	 belong	 more	 to	 the	 Tantras	 than	 to	 the	 Vedas.	 There	 is	 only	 one
improvement	on	Tantras;	that	is	the	only	difference.	Tantra	is	all-inclusive,	more
feminine	 than	male.	 The	 Vedas	 are	more	male-oriented,	 the	 Tantras	 are	more
feminine.	 Of	 course,	 woman	 is	 more	 inclusive	 than	 man.	Man	 is	 included	 in
woman,	 but	 woman	 is	 not	 included	 in	 man.	 Man	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 sort	 of
specialization.	Woman	seems	to	be	more	general,	more	fluid,	more	round.	Tantra
is	the	way	of	the	feminine,	just	like	Tao.
But	the	Bauls	have	improved	upon	Tantra	also.	Tantra	is	too	technical.	The	very
word
'Tantra'	 means	 technique.	 It	 is	 a	 little	 harsh,	 more	 scientific.	 Bauls	 are	 more
poetic;	Bauls	are	more	soft	--	singers	and	dancers.
Tantra	uses	sex	 to	 rise	higher	 than	 it,	but	 it	uses	 it.	Sex	becomes	 instrumental.
Bauls	say	that	is	not	very	respectful:	"How	can	you	USE	some	energy?	How	can
you	use	some	energy	as	a	means?"	They	don't	use	sex	as	a	means;	they	delight	in
it,	they	enjoy	it.	They	make	a	worship	out	of	it,	but	without	any	technique.	It	is
not	technological.	They	love	it,	and	through	love	the	transformation	happens	on
its	own	accord.
In	Tantra,	you	are	to	remain	unattached.	Even	while	using	sex	as	a	means	to	go
towards	SAMADHI,	you	have	 to	 remain	unattached	 to	 sex,	 absolutely	neutral,
absolutely	like	an	observer,	a	witness,	just	like	a	scientist	working	in	his	lab.	In
fact,	Tantras	say	that	Tantra	techniques	cannot	be	used	with	the	woman	you	love,
because	love	will	be	a	disturbance.
You	will	be	too	attached.	You	will	not	be	able	to	remain	detached	and	outside	it.
So	Tantrics	will	find	women	with	whom	they	are	not	in	love	at	all	so	the	attitude
can	remain	absolutely	of	the	observer.
That's	where	Bauls	differ.	They	say	it	is	too	cruel;	this	passionless	attitude	is	too
cruel.
There	is	no	need	to	be	so	hard	and	so	harsh.	Through	love,	the	transformation	is
possible.
That's	why	I	call	their	attitude	more	poetic,	more	human,	and	more	worthy.	The
Bauls	say	you	can	live	attached	in	the	world	and	yet	be	unattached;	you	can	love
a	woman	and	yet	be	a	witness;	you	can	be	in	the	marketplace	and	yet	be	beyond
it.	You	can	live	in	the	world	and	be	not	of	it.
This	vision	is	my	vision	also.	That	is	the	meaning	of	my	SANNYAS:	be	in	the
world	but	don't	be	of	it.	And,	nothing	is	of	worth	if	it	is	not	done	through	love.
That's	where	Tantra	 lacks	 something;	 it	 lacks	humanity.	 If	 you	 love	 a	woman,
Tantra	is	not	possible.	If	you	love	a	man,	Tantra	is	not	possible.	You	should	be
completely	aloof.
Then	 sex	 becomes	 very	 scientific.	 It	 becomes	 a	 technique,	 something	 to	 be
manipulated,	something	to	be	done	--	not	something	to	be	in,	not	something	that
absorbs	you,	not	something	oceanic,	orgasmic,	but	something	that	you	are	doing.
The	very	idea	of	doing	something	to	a	man	or	to	a	woman	because	you	want	to
achieve	 SAMADHI,	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 using	 the	 other	 as	 an	 instrument,	 as	 a
means,	is	ugly	and	immoral.
That's	 where	 Bauls	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 fragrance.	 They	 say,	 "There	 is	 no
need	to	be	so	hard.	There	is	no	need	to	be	so	means-oriented.	Love	will	do."	And
we	will	try	to	understand	what	they	mean	by	love.
The	first	poem....
These	 poems	 belong	 to	 different	Bauls,	 but	 I'm	 not	 going	 to	 use	 their	 names.
That	is	irrelevant.	They	all	belong	to	the	same	vision.	Different	poems,	but	they
remain,	 deep	 down,	 as	 the	 same	 poem;	 different	 words,	 different	 forms,	 but
running	 through	 them	 is	 the	 same	 current.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 in	 a	 garland,	 many
flowers	are	held	together,	but	only	one	thread	runs	inside	and	holds	them	all.	We
will	 insist	 on	 that	 thread.	We	will	 not	 be	 bothered	 about	who	 has	written	 this
poem.	In	fact,	many	of	the	poems	are	anonymous.
Nobody	 has	 ever	 known	 who	 wrote	 them,	 because	 in	 fact,	 they	 were	 never
written.
Bauls	are	 illiterate;	maybe	 that's	why	 they	have	such	purity.	They	are	not	very
cultured	people,	 educated	 in	 the	ways	of	 the	world.	Maybe	 that's	why	 there	 is
such	innocence.
They	are	children	of	the	earth:	uneducated,	poor,	humble,	but	very	sincere.	So,	I
will	not	be	telling	you	who	has	sung	this	song,	or	the	other	songs	that	will	follow
in	the	coming	twenty	days.	That	is	irrelevant.	They	come	out	of	the	same	vision.
They	 have	 a	 certain	 melody,	 so	 individual	 that	 it	 is	 called	 BAULSUR,	 the
melody	 of	 the	Baul;	 so	 special,	 the	 taste	 is	 so	 special	 and	 the	 fragrance	 is	 so
individual	that	whenever	you	hear	a	song	from	the	Bauls,	you	will	immediately
recognize	 it.	 It	 has	 its	 own	 individuality,	 its	 own	 style:	 wild,	 illiterate,
uncultured,	but	very	individualistic.	Just	as	the	ocean	tastes	the	same	--
from	anywhere	you	taste	it,	and	it	is	salty	--	in	these	songs,	immediately	you	will
feel	 that	 they	come	from	one	vision,	one	attitude,	one	passion,	one	experience.
And	 they	were	never	written.	Bauls	have	been	singing	 them	down	 through	 the
centuries.	 Each	Baul	 has	 dropped	 something,	 added	 something,	made	 his	 own
songs	or	used	the	old	songs	that	he	had	heard	from	his	Masters,	but	the	vision	is
so	clear	that	you	can	never	miss	when	you	hear	a	Baul	song.
The	first	song:
ONLY	A	CONNOISSEUR	OF	THE	FLAVORS	OF	LOVE	CAN
COMPREHEND	THE	LANGUAGE	OF	A	LOVER'S	HEART,
OTHERS	HAVE	NO	CLUE..
THE	TASTE	OF	LIME	RESTS	IN	THE	CORE	OF	THE	FRUIT
AND	EVEN	EXPERTS	KNOW	OF	NO	EASY	WAY	TO	REACH	IT.
HONEY	IS	HIDDEN	WITHIN	THE	LOTUS	BLOOM	BUT	THE	BEE
KNOWS	IT.
DUNG	BEETLES	NESTLE	IN	DUNG	DISCOUNTING	HONEY.
SUBMISSION	IS	THE	SECRET	OF	KNOWLEDGE.
The	first	thing	is:	that	love	can	be	known	only	by	loving.	It	is	not	something	that
can	 be	made	 comprehensible	 by	 intellectual	 discussion	 about	 it.	 Love	 is	 not	 a
theory.	If	you	try	to	make	a	theory	out	of	it,	it	remains	incomprehensible.	That	is
the	 first	Baul	 standpoint:	 there	 are	 things	which	 you	 can	 know	only	 by	 doing
them,	by	being	them.
If	you	don't	know	swimming	you	don't	know	what	it	is,	and	there	is	no	way	to
know	about	it.	You	may	go	and	hear	a	thousand	and	one	swimmers	talking	about
it,	 but	 still	 you	will	 never	 know	 it,	what	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 incomprehensible	 in	 every
other	way;	you	will	have	 to	 learn	swimming.	You	will	have	 to	go	down	to	 the
river;	 you	will	 have	 to	 take	 the	 risk,	 the	 danger	 of	 being	 drowned.	 If	 you	 are
very,	 very	 clever,	 you	 may	 say,	 "I	 will	 not	 step	 into	 the	 river	 unless	 I	 know
swimming	 first"	 --	 it	 is	 logical	 --	 "How	 can	 I	 step	 into	 the	 river	when	 I	 don't
know	swimming?	So,	first	I	must	know	swimming;	only	then	can	I	step	into	the
river."	But	then	you	will	never	be	able	to	know	swimming,	because	even	to	learn
swimming,	you	will	have	to	step	into	the	river.
Swimming	is	known	only	by	swimming;	love	is	known	only	by	loving;	prayer	is
known	only	by	praying.	There	 is	no	other	way.	There	are	 things	which	can	be
known	 without	 moving	 into	 them	 --	 those	 are	 the	 futile	 things,	 those	 are
intellectual	 things:	 philosophies,	 dogmas,	 creeds.	But	 all	 that	 is	 real	 has	 to	 be
lived,	and	all	that	is	existential	has	to	be	penetrated,	and	the	risk	has	to	be	taken.
One	has	to	be	courageous,	one	has	to	be	daring.
And	 it	 is	 a	 great	 daring,	 because	 when	 you	 love	 somebody	 you	 start	 losing
yourself.	To	love	somebody	is	to	]ose	the	ego;	to	love	somebody	is	to	be	lost;	to
love	somebody	is	to	give	power	to	somebody	over	you;	to	love	somebody	is	to
be	possessed.	To	love	somebody	means	surrendering...
...	SUBMISSION	IS	THE	SECRET	OF	KNOWLEDGE...
...	 because	 to	 the	Baul,	 love	 is	 the	 only	 knowledge	 there	 is.	You	 can	 read	 the
Vedas:	there	is	no	need	to	submit,	there	is	no	need	to	surrender.	You	can	read	the
Bible;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 surrender.	 You	 can	 become	 very	 proficient,	 very
skilled,	 very	 learned,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 surrender.	 If	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
surrender,	it	is	not	knowledge	for	the	Baul.
The	Baul	criterion	is	this:	that	when	something	demands	surrender,	only	then	is
there	a	possibility	of	real	knowledge,	otherwise	not.
If	you	come	to	me	and	I	just	impart	knowledge	to	you....
Many	 people	 come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 say,	 "Is	 there	 any	 difficulty	 if	 we	 don't
become	 SANNYASINS,	 if	 we	 are	 not	 surrendered	 to	 you?	And	 still,	 we	 love
what	 you	 say.	Still	we	want	 to	 listen	 to	 it.	 Is	 there	 any	problem?	Can't	we	do
that?"
I	say,	"You	can	do	that;	the	problem	is	not	there.	But	then	you	will	collect	only
the	superficial.	You	will	collect	the	words.	Then	you	will	collect	only	the	fallen
dregs	from	the	table.	You	will	not	really	be	a	guest	to	me.	You	will	miss	all	that
is	essential;	only	the	non-essential	wi!l	be	your	fate.	You	have	to	decide."
Once	you	are	surrendered,	a	totally	different	world	opens	between	me	and	you.
The	heart-to-heart	communication	starts.	Then	you	can	listen	to	my	words,	but
you	listen	in	such	a	different	way,	with	such	deep	sympathy	and	love,	with	such
gratitude	 and	 receptivity,	 that	 those	 words	 are	 no	 longer	 words;	 they	 start
becoming	alive.	You	have	made	 them	alive	with	your	 receptivity.	You	become
pregnant	with	what	I	am	saying	to	you,	with	what	I	am	communicating	to	you.
Then,	there	happens	a	transfer;	then	words	are	just	excuses.	Hanging	around	the
word,	 I	 send	 you	 something	which	 cannot	 be	managed	 in	 the	word.	 Then	 not
only	is	the	word	reaching	you,	but	the	climate	that	it	carries	through	my	heart.
If	you	are	in	love	with	me,	then	there	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	understanding
between	me	and	you.	If	you	are	not	in	love	with	me,	then	we	are	far	apart.	Then
you	are	on	some	other	planet,	thousands	and	thousands	of	miles	away	from	me.	I
may	shout:	you	may	hear	a	 few	words,	but	nothing	special	 is	going	 to	happen
that	way.	You	may	become	more	knowledgeable,	but	 that	 is	not	 the	point.	You
should	have	more	being,	not	more	knowledge.	If	you	are	really	becoming	richer
here,	 in	 close	 contact	 with	 me,	 then	 your	 being	 is	 growing.	 Then	 you	 are
becoming	more	and	more	crystallized,	more	and	more	authentic,	more	and	more
alive,	more	and	more	divine.	That	is	not	possible	without	love.
And	what	is	surrender?	Surrender	means	surrendering	the	ego,	surrender	means
surrendering	all	 that	you	know.	Surrender	means	surrendering	your	knowledge,
your	mind,	 your	 intellect.	 Surrender	 is	 a	 suicide,	 a	 suicide	 of	 the	 past.	 If	 you
carry	your	past	within	you	 in	a	secret	way,	 then	your	gesture	of	SANNYAS	is
impotent.	You	can	take	SANNYAS	and	still	go	on	carrying	your	past,	hiding	and
guarding	it	like	a	treasure.	Then	just	on	the	surface	you	will	be	a	SANNYASIN,
but	 not	 surrendered	 to	 me.	 And	 then	 if	 you	 are	 not	 fulfilled,	 nobody	 else	 is
responsible	but	you.
The	 first	Baul	 standpoint	 is	 that	 existential	 things	 can	 be	 known	only	 through
existential	ways.	Love	can	be	known	only	by	loving.
Somebody	asked	Jesus,	"How	to	pray?"	and	he	said,	"Pray."	But	he	said,	"That's
what	I	am	asking.	I	don't	know	how	to	pray."	So	Jesus	said,	"I	will	pray.	You	sit
by	my	side	and	you	also	try."
How	to	teach	prayer?	It	can	be	caught	but	it	cannot	be	taught.	If	you	are	open	to
me,	you	can	catch	many	things.	If	you	are	not	open	to	me,	nothing	can	be	taught.
A	prayer	is	like	an	infection.	Love	is	also	like	an	infection:	it	can	be	caught	but
not	taught.	You	can	catch	it.	It	is	flowing	all	around	you,	but	if	you	remain	like
an	island,	closed,	then	there	is	no	way	to	teach	it	to	you.
The	Bauls	say,
GOD	IS	DESERTING	YOUR	TEMPLE	AS	YOU	AMUSE	YOURSELF	BY
BLOWING	CONCH	SHELLS	AND	RINGING	BELLS.	THE	ROAD	TO	YOU
IS
BLOCKED	 BY	 TEMPLES	 AND	 MOSQUES.	 I	 HEAR	 YOU	 CALL,	 MY
LORD,	 BUT	 I	 CANNOT	 ADVANCE.	 MASTERS	 AND	 TEACHERS	 BAR
THE	WAY.
God	 is	 all	 around	you,	but	you	are	 so	 full	 of	 scriptures,	 knowledge,	 so	 full	 of
your	own	ego	that	there	is	no	space	left	inside	you	where	God	can	penetrate	and
enter	into	you.	It	has	become	impossible.	It	is	becoming	impossible	only	because
of	you.
Jesus	is	right	when	he	says,	"Pray,	if	you	want	to	know	what	prayer	is";	and	the
man	 is	 also	 right.	He	 says,	 "How	 to	 pray?	That	 is	my	problem.	You	have	 not
answered	it."	And	Jesus	says,	"The	only	way	is,	I	will	pray.	I	will	kneel	down	in
prayer.	You	just	sit	by	my	side,	open,	vulnerable;	you	may	catch	it."
That's	what	I'm	trying	to	do	here.	Just	be	open	to	me;	you	may	catch	it.	There	is
every	possibility	once	you	are	not	barring	your	own	path,	once	you	start	getting
out	of	your	own	way.	There	 is	no	problem	--	because	 the	essential	man	 that	 is
speaking	 to	you	 is	also	hearing	 through	you.	Then	 the	essential	 can	meet	with
the	essential.	The	ADHAR
MANUSH	 can	 meet	 with	 the	 ADHAR	 MANUSH.	 Just	 put	 your	 ego	 aside,
because	that	is	the	non-essential.	Face	me	with	your	essence,	encounter	me	with
your	essence.	Then	suddenly	you	will	see	a	new	fire	arising	in	you.	A	new	love
is	born.
Yes,	submission	is	the	secret	of	knowledge,	surrender	is	the	secret	of	knowledge.
It	is	not	an	intellectual	effort,	but	a	total	submersion,	a	merging	of	the	self.	That's
why	Bauls	talk	more	about	love	and	less	about	knowledge,	because	love	is	 the
only	 thing	 in	 the	 world	 which	 cannot	 be	 attained	 in	 any	 other	 way	 than	 by
loving.
Now,	it	is	possible	some	day	that	even	swimming	can	be	taught	to	you	without
taking	you	to	the	river.	They	have	invented	ways	to	teach	driving	without	ever
taking	you	to	the	road.	You	simply	sit	in	a	car	in	a	room:	nothing	moves,	because
there	is	nowhere,	no	place	to	move.	You	simply	sit	in	the	car	behind	the	wheel,
and	 a	 film	 is	 shown	 on	 the	walls.	 The	 road	moves,	 so	 you	 feel	 as	 if	 you	 are
moving	on	the	road.	On	both	sides,	the	street	is	moving.	A	movie	is	shown	fast;
it	goes	on	moving	fast.	There	are	turns	and	things,	and	you	have	to	do	the	right
things	at	the	wheel.	The	teacher	can	show	you	whether	you	are	doing	wrong	or
right,	 and	you	are	 simply	 sitting	 in	 the	car.	The	car	 is	not	moving,	 the	 road	 is
moving	in	the	movie,	just	on	the	sides.	You	can	learn	it.	It	seems	to	be	safer.	I
think	someday	or	other	you	can	just	lie	down	on	your	mattress,	and	a	movie	of	a
river	will	be	all	around,	and	you	can	start.	It	is	possible.	At	least	a	rudimentary
knowledge	may	become	possible.
But	love?	--	there	seems	to	be	no	way.	Many	people	are	trying	movies	to	learn
about	 love.	 Many	 people	 go	 on	 trying	 pornographic	 literature	 to	 know	 about
love.	Many	people	 go	on	 reading	novels	 and	poetry	 and	others'	 love	 letters	 in
order	 to	 know	 about	 love.	Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 danger	 that	 you	may	 come	 to	 know
many	things	about	love,	but	to	know	about	love	is	not	to	know	love.	In	fact,	the
more	you	know	about	love,	the	less	will	be	the	possibility	to	know	love.	You	will
be	lost	in	your	knowledge.	You	will	start	thinking	that	you	know.
Have	you	observed	the	fact	that	movie	actors	who	are	in	the	business	of	love	are
almost	 always	 failures	 in	 their	 own	 love	 lives?	 They	 never	 succeed.	 Even	 a
Marilyn	Monroe	commits	suicide.	She	was	at	 the	 top;	even	President	Kennedy
was	in	love	with	her.	The	whole	world	was	in	love	with	her.	But	somehow,	her
whole	life	was	empty.	She	committed	suicide	at	the	very	peak	of	her	career,	of
her	fame;	such	a	beautiful	woman.
What	happened?	Why	are	actors	and	actresses	always	failures	in	their	real	love
lives?
They	have	learned	so	much	about	love	that	they	cannot	be	real	about	love.	They
go	on	 acting	 the	 same	 roles,	 they	 go	 on	 playing	 the	 same	games.	As	 they	 are
playing	on	the	stage,	they	go	on	playing	in	life.	On	the	stage	it	is	okay	because
nothing	 is	 involved.	But	 in	 real	 life,	 it	 is	 empty.	So	 they	go	on	making	empty
gestures.
Remember,	you	can	know	much	about	love,	but	that	cannot	help	to	know	love.
Love	can	be	known	only	by	loving.	It	means	you	have	to	move	into	love	without
knowing	anything	about	it.	That's	why	it	needs	courage.	You	have	to	move	in	the
dark,	with	no	map,	nobody	to	guide,	not	even	a	torch.	You	have	to	move	in	the
dark	not	knowing	where	you	are	moving,	not	knowing	whether	you	are	on	 the
right	track	or	not,	not	knowing	whether	you	will	find	the	path	or	you	will	fall	in
a	ditch	and	be	lost	forever.
This	is	the	courage.
Bauls	are	very	courageous	people.	They	say:
ONLY	A	CONNOISSEUR	OF	THE	FLAVORS	OF	LOVE..
Love	has	many	flavors...	Love	has	many	dimensions,	many	nuances.	Love	is	not
one	single	thing.	It	is	very	rich,	tremendously	rich.	It	has	many	aspects	to	it;	it	is
multi-faceted.	 It	 is	 like	 a	diamond:	 it	 has	many	 facets	 and	 every	 facet	 gives	 it
richness.
Only	 a	 connoisseur	 --	 one	who	 has	 loved	 in	many	ways,	 one	who	 has	 loved,
lived	courageously,	dangerously,	one	who	knows	all	the	flavors	of	love.
Have	 you	watched?	 --	 '	 love'	 does	 not	 express	 all.	 It	 is	 a	 single	word.	All	 the
ancient	 languages	had	many	words	 for	 love,	 because	 there	 are	 so	many	 loves.
The	English	language	is	poor	in	that	way,	hmm?.	--	because	you	love	a	car	also,
and	you	love	your	woman	and	you	love	your	house	and	you	love	your	country
and	you	love	your	child	and	you	love	your	mother.	Only	one	word!	You	love	a
particular	brand	of	cigarettes.	It	is	very	poor,	because	love	has	so	many	facets.
When	you	love	a	child,	you	love	differently.	It	is	not	the	same	love	as	when	you
love	a	woman.	It	has	no	passion.	It	has	compassion,	but	it	has	no	passion.	When
you	 love	 your	 mother,	 it	 is	 totally	 different:	 it	 has	 reverence,	 it	 has	 deep
gratitude.	 But	 when	 you	 love	 a	 woman	 it	 is	 totally	 different:	 it	 has	 great
intensity,	almost	maddening	--	but	it	 is	not	the	way	you	love	your	mother.	You
love	your	friend:	that	is	totally	different.	It	is	affection,	but	not	in	the	same	way.
If	 you	watch,	 you	will	 find	many	 nuances	 of	 love.	The	 single	word	 'love'	 has
many	words	hidden	in	it.	And	one	has	to	know	all	about	love	by	moving	in	all
the	 dimensions.	 If	 you	 have	 not	 known	 any	 facet	 of	 love,	 your	 understanding
about	love	will	lack	that	much.
One	has	 to	know	all	 the	aspects	 and	all	 the	 subtle	differences.	That's	what	 the
Bauls	mean	when	they	say,
ONLY	A	CONNOISSEUR	OF	THE	FLAVORS	OF	LOVE	CAN
COMPREHEND	THE	LANGUAGE	OF	A	LOVER'S	HEART,
OTHERS	HAVE	NO	CLUE.
Yes,	it	is	a	language.	A	single	word	will	not	do;	it	is	a	complete	language.	And
once	you	know,	you	will	be	simply	surprised.	You	can	 touch	somebody's	hand
like	 a	 friend,	 and	 then	 the	 touch	 has	 a	 different	 flavor.	 And	 you	 can	 touch
somebody's	hand	like	a	lover,	then	the	touch	has	again	a	different	flavor.
A	connoisseur,	with	closed	eyes,	can	just	feel	your	hand	and	see...and	understand
the	language.
Have	you	not	watched	it	sometimes:	when	somebody	looks	at	you	with	a	deep
lust	 in	 his	 eyes,	 you	 can	 immediately	 feel?	When	 somebody	 looks	with	 deep
love,	you	can	see	the	difference.	When	somebody	looks	with	affection,	you	can
feel	 the	difference.	But	 these	 are	 very	 rudimentary	 things	because	 compassion
also	has	many	layers.
When	 a	Buddha	 is	 there,	 his	 compassion	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 quality.	When
you	 have	 compassion	 it	 is	more	 like	 sympathy,	 less	 like	 compassion.	When	 a
Buddha	has	compassion,	it	has	nothing	of	sympathy	in	it.	It	is	pure.
When	Buddha	has	 love	showering	on	you,	 it	has	nothing	that	you	have	known
about	love	up	to	now.	Only	a	Buddha	can	know	that.	It	has	no	passion	in	it;	it	is
very	cool.	It	is	not	hot	--	not	that	it	has	no	warmth;	it	has	warmth,	but	still	it	is
very	cool.	It	will	cool	you	down	if	you	come	close	to	a	Buddha.	It	will	help	you
to	become	less	excited,	more	collected.	It	will	not	create	a	turmoil	within	you.	It
will	 subside	all	 turmoil;	 it	will	be	a	soothing	force.	 It	will	 surround	you	 like	a
subtle	 climate	 and	 soothe	 you.	 It	will	 be	 like	 a	 lullaby.	You	will	 start	 feeling,
falling	 asleep,	 as	 if	 just	 close	 to	 your	mother's	 heart.	 It	 has	 something	 of	 the
mother,	 something	 of	 the	 father,	 something	 of	 the	 beloved,	 something	 of	 the
child.	It	has	every	subtle	nuance	in	it.	It	has	all	the	dimensions	of	love	in	a	great
harmony.	When	you	come	around	Buddha,	it	is	an	orchestra	of	all	the	flavors	of
love.
Sometimes	he	looks	like	a	child;	you	can	play	with	him.	His	smile	or	his	being
simply	 gives	 you	 a	 feeling	 that	 he	 is	 just	 a	 child	 --	 you	 can	 mother	 him.
Sometimes	 he	 is	 like	 a	mother	 and	 you	 are	 like	 a	 small	 child.	 Sometimes	 he
looks	 like	 a	 beloved	 --	 you	 can	 love	 him,	 only	 him,	 and	 nobody	 else.	 But
sometimes	he	is	just	like	a	friend.	He	is	all.
These	 changes	 happen	 because	 of	 you:	 your	 outlook	 changes,	 your	 vision
changes.	Your	eyes	are	not	yet	clear	and	fixed.	You	cannot	see	his	totality.	You
circum-locate	 him.	 At	 one	 time	 you	 see	 one	 aspect,	 at	 another	 time	 you	 see
another	aspect	--	because	you	cannot	comprehend	the	whole.
ONLY	A	CONNOISSEUR	OF	THE	FLAVORS	OF	LOVE	CAN
COMPREHEND	THE	LANGUAGE	OF	A	LOVER'S	HEART,
OTHERS	HAVE	NO	CLUE.
Not	even	a	clue	is	possible	for	others.	You	will	have	to	move	into	the	world	of
love;	and	don't	ask	how.	You	will	have	to	move	into	the	dark;	And	don't	ask	for	a
map	 --	 because	 that	 very	 asking	 is	 against	 love.	 That's	 why	 trust	 is	 needed,
SHRADDHA.	If	you	trust	a	person,	you	say,	"Okay.	If	you	send	me	in	the	dark,	I
will	go.	If	you	send	me	into	death,	I	will	go."
On	the	path	of	love,	trust	is	the	most	essential	thing.	On	the	path	of	meditation,
you	 can	move	without	 trust.	On	 the	path	of	meditation	you	 can	move	without
surrender,	but	on	the	path	of	love,	without	surrender,	without	trust,	there	is	no	go
because	it	is	the	very	first	door.	Love	demands	so	much.	It	demands	almost	the
impossible,	and	on	the	first	step.
Love	 is	easy	but	very	demanding.	That's	why	even	 though	 the	path	 is	 so	easy,
very	 few	 people	 travel	 it.	 The	 path	 of	 meditation	 is	 very	 difficult	 but	 not	 so
demanding.	That's	why	the	path	 is	difficult	and	arduous,	yet	still,	many	people
travel	it.
When	 you	 hear	 about	 love	 it	 seems	 very	 simple	 and	 easy;	 but	 look	 at	 the
demands.	On	 the	 path	 of	meditation,	 that	which	will	 be	 demanded	 on	 the	 last
step,	is	demanded	on	the	first	step	on	the	path	of	love.
The	meditator	will	be	asked	to	surrender	his	ego	only	at	 the	last	step:	when	he
moves	 from	 SAVIKALPA	SAMADHI	 to	NIRVIKALPA	SAMADHI,	when	 he
moves	from	the	mind	to	no	mind;	only	at	the	last	step.	First	he	goes	on	purifying
his	mind,	he	goes	on	purifying	his	 ego.	He	goes	on	making	 it	more	 and	more
subtle,	more	and	more	subtle,	refined,	cultured.	Then	just	a	trace	remains.	On	the
last	step,	he	has	to	drop	that	trace.
Love	demands	the	impossible.	It	says:	on	the	first	step	you	have	to	drop	the	ego.
There	is	no	need	to	refine	it	and	there	is	no	need	to	work	on	it.	Because	one	has
to	drop	it,	so	why	bother	carrying	it?	Drop	it	here,	now.
Trust	 arises	on	 the	path	of	meditation	at	 the	 last	 stage.	Trust	 arises	only	when
you	 are	 arriving	home.	When	 the	 arrival	 is	 so	 close	 and	when	you	 are	 almost
approaching,	and	you	can	see	 the	door	and	you	can	see	 the	house	and	you	can
see	that	you	have	reached,	then	trust	arises	--	you	say,	"Yes."
But	on	the	path	of	love,	trust	is	asked	on	the	first	step.	The	first	step	of	love	is
the	same	as	the	last	step	of	meditation.	The	path	is	very	easy	if	you	are	daring,	if
you	are	almost	a	dare-devil.	If	you	are	almost	mad	and	ready	to	risk	all	without
any	condition,	the	path	is	very	easy	--	because	it	completes	on	the	first	step.	The
first	step	becomes	the	last	step.
Here	you	surrender,	and	not	even	a	split	second	is	lost	and	you	have	arrived.
...THE	LANGUAGE	OF	A	LOVER'S	HEART,
OTHERS	HAVE	NO	CLUE.
People	 who	 are	 very	 learned	 in	 the	 ways	 of	 meditation,	 in	 the	 ways	 of
intellectual	 comprehension,	 contemplation,	 concentration,	 have	 no	 clue	 about
love.	They	simply	don't	know	that	language.
THE	TASTE	OF	TIME	RESTS	IN	THE	CORE	OF	THE	FRUIT,	AND	EVEN
EXPERTS	KNOW	OF	NO	EASY	WAY	TO	REACH	IT.
And	 this	 love	 the	 Bauls	 talk	 about,	 or	 rather,	 sing	 about,	 dance	 about,	 is	 just
hidden	 inside	you	at	 the	very	core	of	your	being.	 It	 is	already	 there.	You	have
just	 to	 find	 a	 way	 to	 reach	 to	 your	 own	 innermost	 core	 --	 the	 ADHAR
MANUSH,	 the	essential	man.	 It	 is	not	something	 that	has	 to	be	achieved,	 it	 is
already	there.	It	is	not	something	that	has	to	be	earned,	it	is	a	gift	of	God.
The	moment	you	were	created,	that	very	same	moment	that	treasure	was	handed
over	 to	 you	 --	 because	 who	 has	 ever	 known	 somebody	 to	 live	 without	 love?
Have	you	known	anybody	to	live	without	breathing?	Love	is	the	very	breath	of
the	soul.
Bauls	 say,	 "As	 the	 body	 cannot	 exist	 without	 breathing,	 the	 soul	 cannot	 exist
without	love."	So	you	may	know	it,	you	may	not	know	it,	but	continuously	love
is	happening	inside.	It	 is	 throbbing	there;	 it	 is	your	very	beat.	You	just	have	to
find	a	way	to	reach	there,	because	you	have	gone	out	in	search	of	other	treasures
that	don't	belong	to	you,	in	search	of	other	treasures	that	can	NEVER	belong	to
you.
That's	why	a	Baul	lives	like	a	beggar.	That	is	simply	symbolic.	He	says,	"I	am
not	searching	for	any	other	treasure.	I	am	enough	unto	myself.	My	treasure	is	too
much.	 I	 am	 a	 king	 already.	 I	 don't	 need	 any	 other	 kingdom;	 my	 kingdom	 is
already	here."	He	lives	like	a	beggar,	but	if	you	come	across	a	Baul	you	will	see
that	 he	 lives	 like	 a	 king.	 Even	 kings	 are	 not	 so	 kingly.	 Even-kings	 are	 not	 so
blissful	as	a	Baul	is.	His	whole	life	consists	of	bliss.	He	knows	no	other	taste:	he
knows	 no	 anxiety,	 he	 knows	 no	worry.	He	 lives	 in	 some	 unknown	 dimension
with	tremendous	grace.	Having	nothing,	he	has	everything.
Possessing	nothing,	he	possesses	the	whole	world.
The	Bauls	sing,
THE	MIRROR	 OF	 THE	 SKY	 REFLECTS	MY	 SOUL.	 OH	 BAUL	 OF	 THE
ROAD,	OH
BAUL,	MY	HEART!	THE	MIRROR	OF	THE	SKY	REFLECTS	MY	SOUL.
OH,	MY	SENSELESS	HEART,	YOU	HAVE	FAILED	TO	CULTIVATE	THE
HUMAN
LAND.	CULTIVATED,	IT	COULD	HAVE	YIELDED	A	HARVEST	OF	GOLD.
WHEN	 THE	 LIFE,	 THE	 MIND	 AND	 THE	 EYES	 ARE	 IN	 AGREEMENT,
THE
TARGET	 IS	 WITHIN	 YOUR	 REACH.	 YOU	 CAN	 SEE	 THE	 FORMLESS
ONE	WITH
BARE	EYES.
"When	the	life,	the	mind	and	the	eyes	are	in	agreement",	hmm?	--	that	is	the	way
to	find	the	inside.	When	you	are	in	agreement,	when	there	is	no	conflict	inside
you,	that	is	the	way.	That	is	why	Bauls	insist	on	being	without	conflict,	on	being
natural,	spontaneous.
Don't	 create	 any	 division	within	 yourself,	 otherwise	 you	will	 never	 be	 able	 to
reach	--
because	 a	 tremendous	 quality	 of	 agreement	 is	 needed.	 When	 you	 fall	 into
harmony,	 the	 door	 is	 open.	 "When	 the	 life,	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 eyes	 are	 in
agreement,	 the	 target	 is	within	 your	 reach.	You	 can	 see	 the	 formless	 one	with
bare	eyes."
"Forget	not,"	 they	say,	"that	your	body	contains	the	whole	of	existence."	"I	am
fulfilled,"
they	sing,	"being	a	blow	of	your	own	breath	on	your	flute.	What	more	can	I	wish
for	me	than	to	be	blown	away	with	such	melody?"
A	Baul	is	fulfilled	the	moment	he	comes	to	a	deep	agreement	within	himself.	His
singing	 and	 his	 dancing	 is	 nothing	 but	 an	 effort	 to	 fall	 into	 agreement	 with
himself.	 Have	 you	 watched	 somebody	 dancing?	 What	 happens?	 Have	 you
observed	yourself	sometimes	dancing?	What	happens?	Dance	seems	to	be	one	of
the	most	penetrating	things,	in	which	one	falls	into	a	harmony.	Your	body,	your
mind,	your	soul	all	fall	 into	a	harmony	in	dancing.	Dancing	is	one	of	 the	most
spiritual	 things	 there	 is.	 If	 you	 really	 dance,	 you	 cannot	 think.	 If	 you	 really
dance,	the	body	is	used	so	deeply	that	the	whole	energy	becomes	fluid.	A	dancer
loses	shape,	fixity.	A	dancer	becomes	a	movement,	a	process.	A	dancer	is	not	an
entity:	 he's	movement,	 he's	 energy.	He	melts.	Great	 dancers,	 by	 and	 by,	melt.
And	a	dancer	cannot	retain	his	ego	because	if	he	retains	the	ego,	that	will	be	a
jarring	note	in	his	dance.	A	real	dancer	loses	his	ego	in	it.	He	forgets	that	he	is.
The	dancer	is	lost;	only	the	dance	remains.	Then	the	door	opens	because	you	are
one	unity.
Now	the	soul	is	not	separate,	the	mind	is	not	separate,	the	body	is	not	separate.
All	 have	 fallen	 in	 one	 line.	 All	 have	 become	 one,	 melting	 into	 each	 other,
merging	into	each	other.
It	is	said	about	Nijinsky,	one	of	the	greatest	dancers	in	the	world,	that	there	were
moments	when	he	would	take	jumps,	and	he	would	come	back	so	slowly	that	it
was	almost	impossible.	He	would	fall	back	featherlike,	as	if	gravitation	had	lost
its	power	over	him.	Scientists	were	worried:	"This	should	not	happen,	it	cannot
happen"	--	but	it	was	happening.	No	other	dancer	has	been	capable	in	that	way.
And	 of	 course,	 Nijinsky	 went	 mad;	 he	 became	 a	 Baul.	 His	 is	 one	 of	 the
madnesses	which	has	not	yet	been	understood.	And	because	he	was	in	the	West,
it	was	impossible	to	comprehend	what	had	happened	to	him.	He	was	confined	to
a	psychiatric	hospital,	forced,	given	electric	shocks,	insulin	shots.	Had	he	been	in
the	 East	 he	 would	 have	 become	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 Bauls.	 His	 madness	 was
nothing	to	be	treated,	it	was	something	to	be	revered.
But	how	did	he	become	mad?	He	became	mad	 through	his	 dancing.	When	he
was	asked	what	happens	to	him,	he	said,	"It	happens	only	when	I	am	lost,	so	I
cannot	say	anything	about	it.	If	I	am,	then	it	never	happens.	I	have	tried	it.	If	I
am	 there,	deliberately	 trying	 it,	 consciously	 trying,	 it	never	happens.	But	 there
are	moments	when	I	am	lost.	Then	simply,	I	don't	know	who	jumps	--	and	then	it
happens.	 I	 am	also	 surprised.	 I	 have	no	explanation	 for	 it,	 but	 it	 happens	only
when	I	am	lost."
That	 is	what	Bauls	say:	when	you	dance	and	you	become	a	whirlwind	and,	by
and	by,	you	are	completely	 lost	 in	your	dancing,	 it	happens.	Something	breaks
down	inside	you.
The	 barriers	 are	 lost.	 You	 become	 one	 unity.	A	 great	 orgasm	 spreads	 all	 over
your	being.
You	 are	 in	 tune	 with	 existence	 in	 those	 moments.	 These	 moments	 are	 the
SATORIS	 of	 Zen,	 but	 Bauls	 have	 a	 better	 way	 to	 attain	 them.	 Zen	 has	 to	 be
worked	on	for	twelve,	fifteen,	twenty,	thirty	years.	It	is	a	very	slow	process.	It	is
the	path	of	meditation.
Bauls	can	attain	 to	 it	more	easily.	 Just	 the	day	you	decide	 that,	 "I	am	ready	 to
drop	my	ego,"	you	become	available	to	God	and	God	becomes	available	to	you.
The	 essential	man	 suddenly	 arises	 over	 the	 non-essential;	 there	 is	 a	mutation.
And	this	is	the	moment	when	you	are	full	of	love,	when	you	are	love,	when	your
energy	 is	 love.	 This	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 you	 can	 bless	 the	 whole	 existence.
When	there	is	no	conflict	within	you,	there	cannot	be	any	conflict	between	you
and	 the	 existence.	 That	 is	 the	 secret:	 drop	 all	 conflict	 within	 you,	 and	 your
conflict	with	 the	existence	 is	 also	dropped	 simultaneously.	Become	one	within
you	and	you	have	become	one	with	the	existence.
THE	TASTE	OF	TIME	RESTS	IN	THE	CORE	OF	THE	FRUIT,
AND	EVEN	EXPERTS	KNOW	OF	NO	EASY	WAY	TO	REACH	IT.
In	fact,	there	is	no	easy	way	to	reach	it,	because	it	is	hard	to	drop	the	ego.	And
that	is	the	only	way.
HONEY	 IS	 HIDDEN	 WITHIN	 THE	 LOTUS	 BLOOM	 --	 BUT	 THE	 BEE
KNOWS	IT.
DUNG-BEETLES	NESTLE	IN	DUNG,	DISCOUNTING	HONEY.
Bauls	 say	 that	 intellectuals	 are	 dung-beetles.	 The	 PUNDITS,	 the	 scholars,	 are
dung-beetles.	They	will	never	find	the	way	to	the	lotus...only	the	bee.
Become	a	bee;	become	a	lover.	Because	the	bee	LOVES	honey,	it	finds	the	way.
Why	cannot	the	dung-beetle	find	the	way?	It	finds	a	certain	way;	it	finds	the	way
to	the	dung.
Because	love	is	the	way.
Bauls	say,	"Whatsoever	you	love	you	become,	and	whatsoever	is	your	love	you
will	find."	So	be	alert	about	your	love:	don't	love	a	car,	don't	love	a	house,	don't
love	 a	 bank	 balance	 --	 because	 you	will	 become	 like	 that.	You	will	 become	 a
dung-beetle.	Don't	love	dung.
If	you	are	to	love,	then	love	something	of	the	divine,	something...something	that
transcends	 things,	 something	 that	 transcends	 forms,	 something	 for	 which	 you
will	 have	 to	 raise	 your	 eyes	 to	 the	 sky.	 Love	 a	 GOURISHANKAR;	 love	 the
Himalayan	 peaks.	 If	 you	 love	 something	 like	 dung,	 you	will	 move	 into	 dung
because	we	always	find	the	way.
Wherever	our	love	moves,	we	move	behind	it.	The	bee	loves	the	lotus;	it	finds	it.
The	very	love	is	the	path.	Howsoever	the	lotus	is	hiding,	the	bee	will	find	it.
There	is	a	story	about	Solomon:
A	 woman	 came;	 the	 woman	 was	 the	 queen	 of	 Ethiopia.	 She	 wanted	 to	 love
Solomon,	 she	wanted	 to	 become	 his	 beloved.	 She	was	 very	 beautiful,	 but	 she
wanted	to	love	the	wisest	man	in	the	world.	So	she	tried	a	few	tests	on	Solomon,
about	 whether	 he	 was	 really	 as	 wise	 as	 he	 was	 said	 to	 be.	 She	 did	 many
experiments;	one	of	the	experiments	was	this:	she	brought	one	false	flower	made
of	paper,	but	made	so	beautifully	that	 it	was	almost	 impossible	to	detect	 that	 it
was	 false.	 She	 went	 into	 the	 court	 of	 Solomon,	 she	 stood	 far	 away	 from
Solomon,	and	she	said,	"I	have	a	flower	in	my	hand.	Can	you	say	from	that	far
away	whether	it	is	real	or	unreal?"
Solomon	said,	"Light	is	not	enough,	and	I'm	an	old	man,	and	I	cannot	see	rightly.
Please	 open	 the	 windows."	 The	 windows	 were	 opened.	 He	 waited	 for	 two
minutes	and	said,
"No,	it	is	false."
Then	the	woman	brought	another	flower	from	her	bag	and	she	said,	"What	about
this?"	It	was	exactly	like	the	first,	but	it	was	real.	Solomon	pretended	to	look	at	it
and	then	he	said,	"Yes,	this	is	a	real	flower."
The	 woman	 was	 astounded.	 The	 whole	 court	 was	 astounded:	 "What	 has
happened?"	 They	 asked	 him,	 "How	 could	 you	 find	 it?"	 He	 said,	 "Easy	 --	 I
opened	the	windows	for	the	bees	to	come	in.	They	decided.	For	the	first	flower,
no	bee	came	in;	for	the	second	they	immediately	rushed	in."
When	you	love	something,	you	have	a	supra-sense	about	where	it	is.	Your	love
monitors	you,	it	leads	you,	it	becomes	your	guide.
A	bee	can	smell	 from	miles	 far	away	where	 the	 flowers	are.	Much	experiment
and	research	has	been	done	with	bees	about	how	they	find	their	way.	Miles	away
the	 flowers	 have	 bloomed,	 and	 bees	will	 come	 rushing.	Almost	 a	 supra-sense
exists	in	them;	that	supra-sense	is-nothing	but	love.
You	will	 find	your	way	 to	 the	object	you	 love,	so	be	very	cautious	about	your
object	 of	 love	 because	 that	 is	 going	 to	 decide	 your	 destiny.	Your	 love	 is	 your
destiny.	 Love	 something	 superb;	 love	 something	 of	 the	 supra-existence;	 love
something	of	the	divine,	and	you	will	find	your	way.
Bauls	 say,	 "When	 there	 is	no	 fear,	 just	 the	 love	 is	enough;	 it	will	monitor	you
and	it	will	guide	you."
HONEY	IS	HIDDEN	WITHIN	THE	LOTUS	BLOOM	--	BUT	THE
BEE	KNOWS	IT.
DUNG-BEETLES	NESTLE	IN	DUNG,	DISCOUNTING	HONEY.
SUBMISSION	IS	THE	SECRET	OF	KNOWLEDGE.
Surrender	is	the	secret	of	knowledge,	because	surrender	is	the	secret	of	love-and
love	is	the	only	knowledge	of	worth.
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	I	am	just	a	midwife
22	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606220
ShortTitle:
BELOV102
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
104
mins
The	first	question.
Question	1
I	 ALWAYS	 YEARN	 TO	 BE	 HERE,	 BUT	WHY,	 ON	 SEEING	 YOU,	 AM	 I
FILLED
WITH	AWE?
THAT'S	HOW	 IT	SHOULD	BE.	One	 should	 feel	 blessed,	 because	 awe	 is	 the
only	quality	that	can	make	man,	religious.	That	is	the	only	door.	Through	awe,
you	start	feeling	the	divine	around	you.	Eyes	filled	with	awe	cannot	deny	God;	it
is	impossible.
And	people	who	have	 forgotten	how	 to	be	 filled	with	awe	cannot	accept	God.
God	is	not	the	question.	If	you	are	still	capable	of	being	in	a	tremendous	state	of
wonder,	 so	 tremendous,	 so	 penetrating	 that	 thinking	 stops,	 everything	 stops	 --
suddenly	time	is	not	there,	space	is	not	there,	and	you	cannot	figure	it	out,	what
it	is	--	some	sublime	presence	is	felt	in	those	moments.
But	man	has	become	afraid	of	awe.	That's	why	in	language,	in	the	ancient	days,
'awful'
was	a	 religious	word,	very	sacred.	Now,	when	you	are	 feeling	 terrible	you	say
you	are	feeling	awful.	Even	the	word	has	changed	its	meaning.	People	used	to	be
awful	when	they	were	deep	in	prayer,	when	they	were	in	close	contact	with	the
divine.	When	the	divine	was	revealed	to	them,	then	they	used	to	be	awful.	Now
when	they	are	feeling	terrible,	horrible,	very	bad,	they	say,	"I	am	feeling	awful."
The	word	has	completely	been	destroyed.	It	used	to	be	at	the	peak;	now	it	is	at
the	bottom.	It	used	to	be	 the	most	positive	feeling;	now	it	 is	 the	most	negative
feeling.	How	has	it	happened?	There	are	some	reasons	for	it.
Whenever	people	used	 to	 feel	awe,	 they	also	used	 to	 feel	 fear.	That	 is	natural,
because	 through	 awe	 you	 come	 in	 contact	 with	 the	 unknown,	 unfamiliar,	 the
strange,	 the	 mysterious.	 You	 cannot	 control	 it,	 you	 cannot	 manipulate,	 you
cannot	possess	it.
Suddenly,	something	bigger	than	you,	something	vaster	than	you	surrounds	you,
and	you	are	at	a	loss.	Fear	arises;	you	start	feeling	afraid.
All	the	old	religions	describe	God	as	both	'the	mysterium'	and	'the	tremendum'	--
mysterium	because	He	 is	 the	mystery,	a	mystery	 that	can	never	be	solved,	and
tremendum	 because	 one	 feels	 terrible	 before	 Him.	 These	 two	 feelings	 arise
together,	but	you	should	pay	attention	 to	 the	 first	 feeling	more.	Otherwise,	 the
doors	of	 the	 temple	will	be	closed	 for	you.	Emphasize	 the	positivity	of	 it,	 and
learn	how	 to	be	 in	 the	presence	of	 the	unknown,	how	 to	be	 in	 the	presence	of
something	that	you	cannot	manipulate,	how	to	be	in	the	presence	of	something
where	you	have	to	surrender,	where	surrender	is	the	only	thing	that	you	can	do,
that	can	be	done	--	that's	all	that's	possible.
You	should	feel	blessed;	but	you	must	be	feeling	afraid,	hence	the	question.	You
must	be	paying	more	attention	to	the	negative	part,	to	the	shadow	part.	If	you	do
that,	by	and	by,	you	will	become	closed.	Then	you	will	not	feel	awe,	and	if	you
cannot	feel	awe	you	cannot	feel	God.
They	 say	 philosophy	 arises	 out	 of	 wonder.	 It	 is	 right,	 absolutely	 right.
Philosophy	arises	out	of	wonder;	and	religion?	--	religion	arises	out	of	awe.	And
what	is	the	difference	between	wonder	and	awe?
When	 you	 are	 full	 of	 wonder,	 you	 try	 to	 find	 a	 clue;	 how	 to	 dissolve	 that
wonder?	 You	 try	 to	 think	 about	 it,	 figure	 out	 what	 it	 is.	 Wonder	 creates	 a
question-mark	in	you,	and	you	start	struggling	with	it	--	so	philosophy	is	a	fight
with	 wonder.	 It	 arises	 out	 of	 wonder,	 then	 it	 tries	 to	 dissolve	 the	 wonder,	 to
dissolve	 the	 inexpressible,	 the	 unexplainable,	 to	 find	 an	 explanation	 so	 the
wonder	 can	 be	 dropped.	 Wonder	 is	 felt	 like	 a	 dis-ease,	 a	 tension.	 So	 the
philosopher	 is	 continuously	 trying	ways	 and	means	 to	 be	 again	 at	 ease.	He	 is
trying	to	find	some	answer	so	the	questions	can	be	dropped,	so	the	mystery	is	no
more	a	mystery.	Philosophy	is	against	wonder.
Religion	arises	out	of	awe.	Awe	is	also	wonder	with	one	different	quality:	that	is,
it	does	not	create	a	question	mark	in	you.	Rather,.it	creates	deep	love,	it	creates
deep	 gratitude,	 it	 creates	 humbleness.	 It	 creates	 such	 a	 state	 in	 your
consciousness	that	you	would	like	to	bow	down	before	it.	It	is	not	a	question	to
be	solved,	but	a	deep	mystery	to	be	respected.
You	would	 like	 to	 kneel	 down	 and	 pray.	You	would	 not	 like	 to	 think	 about	 it
because	it	 is	so	vast;	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 think	about	 it.	You	would	like	to	pray;
you	would	like	to	fall	into	it	in	deep	love.
Wonder	 becomes	 awe	 when	 it	 does	 not	 create	 a	 question-mark	 in	 you;	 awe
becomes	 wonder	 if	 it	 creates	 a	 question-mark	 in	 you.	 That's	 the	 difference
between	philosophy	and	religion,	and	then	the	paths	go	diametrically	opposite.	A
philosopher	 goes	 on	 thinking	 and	 thinking,	 and	 a	 religious	 person	 goes	 on
dropping	thinking.
God	enters	into	you	through	awe.
"I	always	yearn	to	be	here,	but	why,	on	seeing	you,	am	I	filled	with	awe?"
That's	how	it	should	be.	If	you	are	not	filled	with	awe,	then	your	coming	to	me	is
pointless.	 If	 you	 don't	 feel	 like	 praying,	 if	 you	 don't	 feel	 like	 bowing	 down,
surrendering,	 then	 you	 have	 not	 come	 to	 me.	 Physically	 you	 may	 be	 here;
spiritually	we	exist	far	apart.
It	happens	many	 times:	every	day	 I	watch	many	people	who	yet	have	a	 living
heart	 in	 them	start	 feeling	awe,	but	 they	start	 repressing	 it.	 It	 feels	as	 if	 it	 is	a
kind	of	weakness	and	you	are	not	to	show	it.	If	they	want	to	cry,	they	stop	their
tears.	They	have	come	with	many	questions	to	ask	and	suddenly	those	questions
are	not	 there	--	because	in	an	awful	mood,	questioning	stops.	They	forget	 their
questions.	And	they	are	very	worried	about	where	their	questions	have	gone,	and
they	 start	 searching	hectically	 inside	 to	 find	 something	 to	 cling	 to	 so	 that	 awe
does	not	become	too	overpowering.	Sometimes	 they	ask	foolish	questions,	 just
to	ask,	 so	 that	nobody	becomes	aware	 that	 they	have	 lost	 their	grounding,	 that
they	have	fallen	into	something	deep,	that	they	have	not	been	strong	enough	to
resist	--	but	then	they	miss.	Then	they	come	to	me,	and	yet,	they	come	not.
Coming	to	me,	be	ready.	It	is	not	a	question	of	asking	questions.	In	fact,	there	is
no	need.
Just	being	with	me,	just	being	close	with	me...fall	in	line	with	me,	breathe	with
me,	 let	 your	 heart	 beat	with	me	 a	 little	while	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 through	my
eyes,	so	that	you	can	taste	a	little	of	that	with	which	I	am	completely	overtaken
and	possessed.
But	 fear	 will	 arise	 --	 because	 whenever	 there	 is	 something	 bigger	 than	 your
mind,	the	mind	says,	"Don't	move;	there	can	be	danger.	You	may	not	be	able	to
come	 back."	 And	 the	 mind	 says,	 "It	 is	 almost	 mad,	 retain	 your	 intelligence,
retain	your	thinking	capacity,	retain	your	logic."	What	are	you	going	to	do?	And
you	all	have	been	trained	for	logic,	and	nobody	has	been	in	any	way	trained	for
love.	That	 feeling	of	awe	 is	 simply	 trying	 to	assert	 something	 from	your	heart
that	 has	 been	 repressed	 by	 the	 society,	 by	 the	 forces	 that	 are	 trying	 to	 control
you,	by	the	mind.
Mind	is	nothing	but	society	inside	you:	the	priest,	the	politicians,	the	power-mad
people	-
-	they	have	become	your	mind.	They	are	trying	to	manipulate	you	from	within.
When	awe	arises,	you	are	falling	into	an	infinite	ocean,	not	knowing	what	will
happen	next.	In	that	moment	you	would	like	to	escape,	you	would	like	to	close
your	 eyes,	 you	 would	 like	 to	 somehow	 control	 yourself	 --	 because	 you	 have
always	 been	 told	 that	 control	 is	 a	 great	 value.	 So	 you	 go	 on	 controlling
everywhere,	where	it	is	not	needed	at	all,	where	it	is	a	hindrance	to	life.	Where	it
is	 almost	 a	 suicide,	 there	 too	you	go	on	controlling.	You	cannot	 trust,	because
trust	 means	 losing	 your	 controlling	 to	 somebody	 else's	 hands.	 You	 cannot
surrender,	 you	 cannot	 love,	 you	 cannot	 pray.	Even	people	making	 love	 cannot
surrender;	 they	 go	 on	 controlling	 deep	 down.	Hence,	 the	 real	 peak	 is	missed.
They	 learn	 techniques	 of	 how	 to	 make	 love.	 They	 can	 become	 very	 efficient
lovemakers,	but	love	is	missed	--	because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
Love	 happens	 only	when	you	 are	 not	 there.	Love	 happens	 only	when	you	 are
surrendered	 to	 existence.	Then	 there	 is	 a	great	orgasmic	experience.	Then	you
reach	 to	 the	very	peak	of	 your	being,	 and	you	 look	 at	 existence	 from	 the	 top-
most	 peak	 of	 the	 Himalayas;	 you	 look	 from	 the	 GOURISHANKAR.	 Then	 a
totally	different	vision	arises,	and	that	vision	transforms	your	life.
So	when	you	 come	 to	me,	 be	 ready	 to	 lose	 control,	 be	 ready	 to	 lose	 yourself.
That	 is	 the	whole	 purpose	 of	 coming;	 otherwise,	 don't	 come.	Even	 if	 you	 ask
something,	don't	ask	out	of	your	knowledge.	Your	asking	should	also	be	out	of
your	 love.	Your	 asking	 should	 also	be	how	 to	go	deeper	 in	 the	mystery	 --	 not
how	to	demystify	it,	not	how	to	explain	it,	but	how	to	move	deeper	and	deeper
into	the	eternally	unexplained	--	because	that's	what	God	is.
So	have	a	little	taste	of	God	with	me.	Allow	me	to	be	a	door.
It	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	face	God	directly,	the	Whole,	because	it	will	be	too
much,	 too	 dazzling.	 You	 cannot	 look	 at	 the	 sun	 directly;	 it	 will	 destroy	 your
eyes.	That's	the	meaning	of	a	Master:	he	gives	you	God	in	quantities	that	you	can
bear.	He	 gives	 you	God	 in	 homeopathic	 doses,	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 increasing	 the
dosage,	 by	 and	 by.	 The	more	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 absorbing,	 the	more	 he
gives	 to	you.	One	day,	when	you	are	 ready	 to	 face	 the	 sun	directly,	he	 simply
disappears.	He	is	no	longer	between	you	and	God.
It	is	just	as	you	start	learning	swimming:	first	you	learn	in	shallow	water,	just	on
the	bank.	It's	natural,	it	is	intelligible,	it	is	practical.	Then	as	you	are	becoming
more	and	more	capable,	you	start	moving	towards	the	deeper	parts	of	the	river.
One	day	you	are	ready	to	go	into	the	ocean.
When	you	come	to	me,	allow	me	to	be	there	rather	than	insisting	for	your	own
presence.
You	dissolve;	let	me	be	there.	You	open	your	doors	and	windows	and	allow	me
to	 pass	 through	 you.	Much	will	 happen	 that	way.	Nothing	 is	 going	 to	 happen
through	 your	 questions	 because	 they	 are	 nothing	 of	 worth	 --	 irritations	 in	 the
mind.	 But	 I	 always	 see	 that	 whenever	 people	 feel	 full	 of	 awe,	 they	 start
defending	themselves.	Then	they	undo	the	whole	purpose.	Don't	defend.	If	you
defend,	then	how	am	I	going	to	help	you?	--
there	 is	no	way.	 I	 cannot	help	you	against	you;	 I	 can	help	you	only	with	your
deep	cooperation.	If	you	participate,	only	then	can	the	journey	start.
But	many	times	I	have	felt	it	--	many	people	would	like	to	go	on	the	journey,	but
when	it	starts,	they	start	clinging	to	the	place	where	they	are	standing.	They	don't
want	to	lose	their	ground;	but	then,	how	can	the	journey	start?	You	have	to	go	on
losing	that	which	you	have	to	attain	that	which	you	don't	have.
Jesus	 has	 said,	 "Those	 who	want	 to	 follow	me,	 they	 should	 deny	 everything,
including	 themselves.	 They	 should	 deny	 themselves"...and	 he	 is	 right,	 but	 it
takes	a	long	time.
Between	a	Master	and	a	disciple,	that	which	can	happen	right	this	moment	takes
much	time	because	the	disciple	goes	on	defending	in	many	ways,	rationalizing	in
many	ways.
The	Bauls	say,
Look...
Look	for	Him	in	the	temple	of	your	limbs;
He	is	there	as	the	Lord	of	the	world	--
speaking,	singing	in	enchanting	tunes.
He	is	an	expert	at	hide-and-seek;
no	one	can	see	Him.
Do	not	try	to	catch	Him,	O	my	heart!
He	can	never	be	caught	--
you	can	only	hope	for	Him
in	whole	faith.
When	you	are	deep	in	awe	--	and	if	you	are	courageous	enough	to	remain	in	it	--
soon	 your	 consciousness	 will	 have	 a	 tremendous	 shift,	 a	 one-hundred-eighty
degree	turn.	If	you	can	remain	in	awe	for	a	few	moments	without	disrupting	it,
without	corrupting	it	with	your	thoughts,	your	defences,	your	rationalizations;	if
you	can	remain	purely	in	it	--
not	doing	anything	about	 it,	 just	being	 in	 it	 --	 there	will	be	a	 turn	That's	what
Christians	 call	 conversion.	 It	 doesn't	mean	 that	 a	Hindu	 becomes	 a	 Christian;
that	 is	 foolish.	 It	 doesn't	mean	 that	 a	 Christian	 becomes	 a	Hindu.'Conversion'
means:	a	great	 turning	 in	your	consciousness.	 If	you	can	remain	with	me	for	a
few	 moments,	 just	 in	 pure	 awe	 --	 not	 corrupting	 it	 in	 any	 way,	 not	 doing
anything	whatsoever;	just	being	in	it,	allowing	it	to	be
--	 there	 will	 be	 a	 shift,	 a	 one-hundred-eighty	 degree	 turn,	 a	 conversion.
Suddenly,	I	will	disappear	and	you	will	be	face	to	face	with	your	own	being.	The
God	is	hiding	within	you.
Look...
Iook	for	Him	in	the	temple	of	your	limbs;
He	is	there	as	the	Lord	of	the	world	--
speaking,	singing	in	enchanting	tunes.
He	is	an	expert	at	hide-and-seek;
no	one	can	see	Him..
...	because	the	very	effort	to	see	Him	separates	you	from	Him.	The	very	effort	to
see	Him	makes	Him	an	object,	and	He	is	not	an	object;	He	is	your	subjectivity.
He	cannot	be	reduced	to	being	a	thing	--	He	is	not.	He	is	not	the	sought,	He	is
the	seeker.	He	 is	your	consciousness,	your	purity	of	consciousness.	He	 is	your
inner	sky.	You	cannot	see	Him	because	He	is	hiding	within	you.
There	is	a	beautiful	parable:
When	God	created	the	world,	He	used	to	 live	here	on	this	earth,	but	 there	was
great	 trouble	 for	Him.	He	was	not	 even	 able	 to	 sleep,	 because	 complaints	 and
complaints.	And	the	whole	day	He	was	trying	to	solve	people's	problems,	and	in
the	 night	 also	 they	 were	 knocking	 on	 His	 door.	 And	 there	 were	 so	 many
suggestions	to	improve	upon	the	world	that	He	started	becoming	almost	insane.
It	looked	as	if	nothing	was	going	right	--	millions	of	advisers	--	and	He	was	fed
up.	If	He	listened	to	one	man's	advice,	there	were	a	thousand	and	one	against	it.
It	 was	 very	 difficult	 to	 do	 anything.	 He	 asked	 His	 counsellors,	 His	 advisers,
"What	to	do?"	He	said,	"I	would	like	to	hide	somewhere."
Somebody	 suggested,	 "Why	 don't	 you	 go	 to	 GOURISHANKAR,	 Everest.
Nobody	will	ever	be	able	to	come	there;	you	can	make	your	abode	there."
He	said,	"You	don't	know	the	future.	Just	within	few	minutes	--	for	God	it	is	only
few	minutes,	our	centuries	are	seconds	for	Him	--	just	within	a	few	minutes,	this
man	Hilary	will	reach,	and	then	the	same	trouble	will	start."
And	somebody	said,	"Why	not	the	moon?"
He	said,	"That	too	is	only	a	question	of	few	minutes.	Soon,	man	will	be	walking
on	the	moon.	It	will	not	solve	anything.	It	will	at	the	most	postpone	a	little."
Then	one	old	counsellor	came	close	to	Him	and	told	Him	something	in	His	ear.
And	He	was	 very	 happy,	 and	He	 said,	 "Right!	 This	 appears	 to	 be	 the	 perfect
solution."
The	old	man	suggested,	"You	hide	in	man	himself.	There	he	will	never	find	you.
And	even	if	he	finds,	a	man	who	is	so	wise	to	find	you	within	himself	will	not
create	 any	 trouble	 for	 you.	 Hilarys	 can	 create	 trouble,	 but	 Buddhas	 cannot	 --
because	by	the	time	they	find	you	inside	themselves	they	will	be	almost	like	you.
They	will	not	have	any	complaints,	they	will	not	have	any	question.	They	will	be
as	silent	as	you	are,	they	will	be	as	deep	as	you	are.	By	the	time	they	reach	you
inside	 themselves,	 they	 will	 have	 been	 transformed.	 The	 very	 journey	 will
become	a	mutation."
God	 is	 hiding	within	 you,	 but	 you	 cannot	 see	God	 there	 directly	 because	 you
don't	know	how	to	go	there.
One	method,	one	way,	 is	of	meditation:	 start	dropping	your	 thoughts.	One	day
when	there	is	no	thinking,	no	ripple,	and	you	are	a	no-mind,	you	will	reach	there;
the	conversion	will	happen.	Another	way	is	of	prayer.
The	SANNYASIN	who	has	asked	is	Rama	Bharti.	Her	path	is	going	to	be	that	of
prayer	and	 love.	That's	why	she	 feels	 so	much	awe.	When	 she	comes	close	 to
me,	 I	 have	 seen	 her	 almost	 tremble,	 as	 if	 some	 unknown	 breeze	 is	 passing
through	 her.	 I	 have	 seen	 her	 throbbing	with	 an	 unknown	 rhythm.	 Love	 is	 her
path.	She	has	to	use	this	quality	of	awe;	it	is	rare.	Very	few	people	have	it;	it	is
disappearing	from	the	world.
People	 have	 become	much	 too	 intellectual,	 much	 too	 hung-up	 in	 their	 heads.
They	have	forgotten	the	language	of	the	heart.	Awe	is	the	script,	the	very	script
of	that	language.
Feel	 it,	 allow	 it	 to	 possess	 you,	 be	 possessed	 by	 it.	 It	 will	 lead	 you	 to	 the
innermost	 temple	 of	 your	 own	 being.	 There	will	 be	 a	 conversion,	 and	 in	 that
moment	 your	 consciousness	 will	 have	 a	 great	 shift.	 Suddenly,	 it	 will	 not	 be
looking	at	me,	it	will	start	looking	at	itself.	That	is	the	only	way	to	know	God.
The	second	question:
Question	2
WHEN	 YOU	 WERE	 A	 ZEN	 MASTER	 TELLING	 US	 TO	 CHOOSE	 OUR
PATH	AND
STICK	TO	IT,	I	FELT	SURE	THAT	MY	PATH	WAS	OF	THE	HEAD,	THAT	I
WOULD	NEVER	BE	ABLE	TO	SURRENDER	TO	ANYONE.	NOW,	AFTER
ONE
LECTURE	 ON	 THE	 BAUL	 MYSTICS,	 I	 FEEL	 LIKE	 A	 LOVESICK
SCHOOLGIRL.
HOW	TO	CHOOSE	A	 PATH	WHEN	YOU	HAVE	NONE?	HOW	TO	BE	A
LIGHT
UNTO	MYSELF	WHEN	YOUR	LIGHT	DAZZLES	ME	EVERY	MORNING?
I	can	understand	your	difficulty,	but	it	 is	being	created	knowingly.	I	will	 throw
you	from	one	path	to	another	many	times,	because	that	is	the	only	way	for	you	to
find	 out	 which	 is	 your	 path.	 Sometimes	 I	 will	 push	 you,	 pull	 you	 towards
meditation;	 sometimes	 I	will	 force	you	 towardslove,	prayer.	You	will	 need	 the
taste	 of	 both;	 only	 then	 can	 you	 be	 decisive	 about	 it,	 otherwise	 not.	 Just	 by
listening	to	me	you	cannot	decide,	because	while	you	are	listening	to	me	you	are
too	much	impressed	by	me.
So	this	is	part	of	the	device:	that	one	day	I	am	speaking	on	meditation,	another
day	I	am	speaking	on	love.	I	would	like	you	to	taste	both	because	that	taste	will
be	 decisive.	 Only	 that	 will	 decide	 which	 your	 path	 is	 where	 you	 feel	 really
flowing,	where	you	feel	 really	spontaneous	Where	 things	happen	on	 their	own
accord	and	you	need	not	force	them,	that	is	your	path	--	but	how	to	know	it?
When	you	listen	to	me	when	I	am	talking	about	love	you	will	be	impressed	by	it,
but	that	is	not	going	to	decide	it.	Just	being	impressed	is	not	going	to	help.	It	is	a
sort	of	hypnosis.
When	I	am	chanting	and	singing	about	 love	you	will	be	hypnotized	by	 it.	You
will	start	thinking,	"Yes,	this	my	path."	But	this	is	just	a	wave	created	by	me.	It
may	be	your	wave,	it	may	not	be	your	wave;	and	you	cannot	know	it.	And	your
whole	 life	has	been	conditioned	so	much	by	others	 that	you	have	become	very
impressionable.	You	immediately	take	the	imprint	from	the	outside.	If	you	listen
to	me	on	meditation,	you	will	be	impressed	by	that.	That'	why	ordinarily	Masters
have	 not	 done	 that	 which	 I	 am	 doing	 here.	 They	 only	 insist	 on	 one	 path
continuously,	for	their	whole	lives.	But	then	many	people	follow	that	path	only	--
because	 their	 Master	 has	 impressed	 them	 so	 much	 about	 it	 continuously	 and
consistently	 that	 they	 follow.	 That	 may	 not	 be	 their	 path.	 Hence,	 my
ABSOLUTELY	new	effort.
I	will	be	talking	on	all	sorts	of	paths	and	all	sorts	of	methods	In	the	beginning	it
will	be	very	confusing,	but	that	is	meant	to	be	so.	I	would	like	to	confuse	you	so
much	that	you	forget	all	about	being	impressed	by	anybody.	My	whole	effort	is
to	throw	you	to	yourself.
How	long	can	you	go	on	doing	this?	--	one	day	you	are	thinking	of	meditation,
an	then	I	talk	about	love;	you	start	thinking	about	love.	Again	I	will	talk	about
meditation,	 and	 again	 the	 problem	 will	 arise.	 How	 long	 are	 you	 going	 to	 be
impressed	by	me?	One	day	or	other	you	will	say,	"Now	I	have	 to	decide.	This
man	will	drive	me	crazy!"
J.	 Krishnamurti	 says,	 "Don't	 be	 impressed	 by	 anybody,"	 but	 he	 is	 a	 very
consistent	man,	VERY	consistent.	And	his	consistency	becomes	a	deep	imprint
on	his	followers.	He	goes	on	saying,'Don't	be	impressed	by	anybody,"	but	he	has
been	 saying	 that	 for	 forty	 years	 so	 consistently	 that	 people	 have	 even	 become
impressed	 about	 it.	 They	 say,	 "Because	Krishnamurti	 says,'Don't	 be	 impressed
by	 anybody,'	we	 are	 not	 going	 to	 be	 impressed	 by	 anybody"	 --	 but	 this	 is	 the
impression.
What	 I	 am	 doing	 is	 exactly	what	Krishnamurti	 is	 saying.	 I	 am	 doing	 it;	 he	 is
simply	saying	it.
I	will	not	allow	you	to	be	impressed.	Even	if	you	want,	 there	 is	no	way.	I	will
change	continuously:	I	will	plant	a	few	seeds	today,	tomorrow	I	will	take	them
back.	I	will	plant	something	today,	tomorrow	it	will	be	gone.	How	long	are	you
going	to	wait	for	me?	One	day	you	will	say,	"Wait!	Now	let	me	decide.	Enough
is	enough!"	But	by	that	time	you	will	have	been	shifted	and	shunted	from	this	to
that	 so	much	 that	you	will	have	had	glimpses	of	both.	You	must	have	 tasted	a
little	of	love,	prayer,	a	little	of	meditation,	a	little	of	yoga;	a	little	of	Meera	and
Chaitanya,	and	a	 little	of	Buddha	and	Mahavir.	You	will	have	 tasted	both,	and
then	decision	will	arise	in	you.	And	that	will	not	be	because	of	me,	that	will	be
because	of	you.	And	when	something	is	because	of	you	it	is	real,	it	is	authentic;
it	transforms,	it	transfigures,	it	transports	you	into	another	world.	If	it	is	just	an
impression,	because	I	have	been	consistently	telling	you	about	something	again
and	again	and	again,	then	it	becomes	just	a	suggestion	deeply	implanted	within
your	mind.	You	may	think	that	you	have	decided,	but	it	is	not	your	decision.
Krishnamurti	 has	 never	 asserted	 a	 single	 contradiction.	 He	 simply	 goes	 on
repeating	 the	 same	 thing.	 His	 note	 is	 simple,	 clear;	 there	 is	 nothing	 confused
about	 him.	 Either	 you	 agree	 with	 him	 or	 you	 don't	 agree	 with	 him	 --	 that	 is
another	thing	--	but	there	is	nothing	to	be	confused	about.	Nobody	can	say	that
he	is	confusing.	You	can	say	he	is	right	or	you	can	say	he	is	wrong,	but	not	that
he	is	confusing.
You	 cannot	 say	 about	me	whether	 I	 am	 right	 or	 whether	 I	 am	wrong.	 At	 the
most,	you	can	say	that	I	am	confusing.	But	that	is	my	whole	device:	to	confuse
you	so	much.	How	long	can	you	allow	me	to	shift	from	this	to	that,	from	that	to
this?	One	day	you	are	going	to	shout,	"Keep	your	hands	away!	Now	I	want	 to
decide";	 and	 that	 decision	will	 come	out	 of	 you.	And	 that	will	 come	not	 only
because	of	 intellectual	 conviction,	 it	will	 come	because	of	 real	 experiences	on
both	the	paths.	When	you	have	tasted	all,	you	can	decide	easily.	And	then	you
can	remain	with	that	decision	for	your	whole	life.
If	 you	 are	 impressed	 by	 me	 and	 then	 you	 decide,	 you	 can	 be	 impressed	 by
somebody	 else	 tomorrow,	 and	 then	 you	 will	 decide	 that.	 And	 if	 you	 are
impressionable	 for	 me,	 you	 are	 impressionable	 for	 anybody	 else.	 That's	 how
people	go	from	one	Master	to	another.
Here	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere	because	I	am	all	the	Masters	together.	You
can	just	remain	here	and	the	Master	changes;	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	I
consistently	 contradict	 myself,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 You	 need	 not	 go
anywhere;	you	can	just	remain	where	you	are.
People	go	on	changing	Masters	because	one	day	something	impresses	you	and
you	 are	 over-enthusiastic	 about	 it,	 and	 then	 there	 is	 a	 honeymoon	 --	 but
honeymoons	end.
Anything	that	begins	has	to	end.	After	a	few	days	the	enthusiasm	is	gone.	Now
the	 thing	 seems	 to	 be	 familiar.	The	 enthusiasm	was	because	of	 the	unfamiliar,
because	it	was	new.
Try	to	understand	this	mechanism.
You	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 a	 woman	 because	 she	 is	 so	 new:	 the	 physiology,	 the
proportions	of	her	body,	 the	face,	 the	eyes,	 the	eyebrows,	 the	color	of	her	hair,
the	way	she	walks,	the	way	she	turns,	the	way	she	says	hello,	the	way	she	looks.
Everything	 is	new,	 the	whole	 territory	unknown.	You	would	 like	 to	 investigate
this	territory;	it	 is	inviting,	it	 is	very	inviting.	You	are	caught,	hypnotized.	And
when	you	start	approaching,	she	starts	to	run	away;	that	is	part	of	the	game.	The
more	she	runs,	the	more	enchanting	she	becomes.	If	she	simply	says,	"Yes,	I	am
ready,"	half	of	the	enthusiasm	will	be	dead	that	very	moment.
In	fact,	you	will	start	 thinking	how	to	run	away.	So,	she	gives	you	a	chance	to
chase	her.
People	 are	 never	 as	 happy	 as	 while	 the	 courting	 continues	 --	 very	 happy	 --
because	it	 is	a	chase.	Man	is	basically	a	hunter,	so	when	the	woman	is	chased,
running	away,	 trying	 to	hide	here	and	 there,	avoiding,	 saying	no,	 the	man	gets
more	 and	 more	 hot.	 The	 challenge	 becomes	 intense;	 the	 woman	 has	 to	 be
conquered.	Now	he	is	ready	to	die	for	her,	or	do	whatsoever	is	needed,	but	the
woman	has	to	be	conquered.	He	has	to	prove	that	he	is	no	ordinary	man.
But	once	 they	are	married,	 then	everything...because	 the	whole	 interest	was	 in
the	chase,	 the	whole	 interest	was	 in	 the	unfamiliar,	 the	whole	 interest	was	 that
the	woman	was	apparently	unconquerable.	But	now	she	is	conquered;	now	how
can	 that	 old	 interest	 remain?	At	 the	most	one	 can	pretend,	 but	 the	old	 interest
cannot	 remain.	Things	start	becoming	cold.	They	start	getting	bored	with	each
other	 because	 now	 there	 are	 other	women	who	 are	 again	 new	 territories:	 they
attract,	they	invoke,	they	call	forth.
The	same	happens	with	 thoughts:	you	are	enchanted	with	one	sort	of	 thinking,
but	by	the	time	you	become	acquainted	with	it	the	honeymoon	is	over,	the	love	is
over.	Now	you	would	like	to	be	interested	in	something	else,	something	new	that
again	gives	you	a	thrill,	a	kick.	This	way	one	goes	from	one	woman	to	another,
from	one	man	to	another,	from	one	thinking	to	another	thinking,	from	one	path
to	another	path,	from	one	Master	to	another	Master.	This	sort	of	searching	will
never	allow	you	time	enough	to	create	trust.
In	 one	 aboriginal	 community	 of	 India	 in	 the	 very	 primitive	 parts	 of	 Madhya
Pradesh,	 in	Bastar,	 there	 lives	a	 tribe	--	aboriginals,	very	old	people,	primitive,
almost	three	or	four	thousand	years	old.	They	are	not	contemporaries	at	all	but
something	can	be	learned	from	them.	One	thing	has	happened	in	that	community
that	has	never	happened	before	anywhere	else,	and	that	is:	once	a	man	marries	a
woman	there	is	never	any	divorce.
Divorce	is	allowed,	but	never	has	divorce	happened.	And	once	a	man	marries	a
woman,	he	 remains	 truly	with	her,	and	 the	woman	remains	 truly	with	him.	He
never	becomes	again	 interested	 in	any	other	woman	 in	any	other	way,	and	 the
woman	never	becomes	interested	in	any	other	man.	How	have	they	managed	this
miracle?	They	have	managed	very	psychologically.
The	structure	of	their	society	is	such	that	every	boy	and	every	girl	is	allowed	to
meet	and	mix	with	every	other	boy	and	girl.	So	every	boy	comes	to	know	each
girl	of	the	community,	and	each	girl	comes	to	know	each	boy	of	the	community.
In	 fact,	 by	 the	 time	boys	 and	girls	 are	getting	 interested	 in	 the	other	 sex,	 they
don't	stay	in	their	homes	in	the	night.	They	have	a	small	temple-like	thing	just	in
the	middle	of	the	village;	they	call	it	GHOTUL	--	a	youth	house.
Once	 a	 boy	becomes	 interested	 in	 girls	 he	 has	 to	 go	 to	 stay	 in	 the	GHOTUL;
once	 a	girl	 starts	 becoming	 interested	 in	 the	boys,	 she	has	 to	go	 to	 live	 in	 the
GHOTUL.	In	the	GHOTUL	they	live,	all	the	boys	of	the	village	and	all	the	girls
of	the	village,	and	they	make	love	to	each	other.	Only	one	thing	is	insisted	upon:
the	superintendent	of	the	ghotul	insists	that	no	boy	and	girl	should	remain	with
each	 other	 more	 than	 three	 days.	 They	 should	 change,	 so	 that	 before	 their
marriage	time	comes	they	have	known	everybody;	then	they	can	decide.
When	you	know	all	the	women	of	your	community	and	decide,	that	decision	is
totally	different	 than	 the	decision	 that	 is	 taken	 in	 civilized	 societies.	You	don't
know	other	women;	a	better	woman,	a	better	man	is	always	possible.	Then	what
will	you	do?	A	more	interesting	personality	can	always	be	there;	then	there	will
be	disruption,	 there	will	be	distraction,	 there	will	be	problems.	These	are	small
village	communities:	not	many	people	--	two	hundred,	three	hundred	people,	at
the	most,	in	one	community.	Every	boy	is	allowed	to	know	each	girl.	When	he
has	known	all	 the	girls	and	all	 the	girls	have	known	all	 the	boys,	and	then	one
girl	and	one	boy	decide	to	get	married,	before	marriage	happens	they	are	given
one	 more	 year	 to	 be	 together,	 to	 finally	 decide	 --	 because	 to	 decide	 before
knowing	each	other	well	 is	dangerous.	The	decision	may	be	only	because	 they
want	to	know	each	other	well.	But	once	they	have	known	each	other	well,	then
what	will	happen	to	their	decision?	So	they	have	to	know	each	other	well	for	one
year,	 two	years;	whatsoever	 time	 they	 need,	 they	 can	 be	 together.	There	 is	 no
interference	on	them	by	the	society.
But	once	they	decide	to	get	married,	of	course	that	decision	is	very,	very	solid,
absolute,	 unconditional	 --	 because	 all	 conquering	 is	 gone,	 hunting	 is	 gone,
chasing	is	gone.	The	honeymoon	is	before	marriage	in	that	community,	and	that
seems	 to	 be	 more	 logical,	 psychological,	 more	 true	 to	 the	 human	 mind.	 The
honeymoon	is	before	the	marriage.
Marriage	has	 to	happen	only	when	the	honeymoon	is	over.	When	two	persons,
knowing	 each	 other	 well,	 decide	 to	 be	 together,	 now	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
conquering.	It	is	not	a	question	of	novelty.	It	is	not	that	they	decide	for	marriage
because	 they	want	 to	 know	each	 other;	 they	 decide	 for	marriage	 because	 they
know	each	other.	This	is	totally	different.
But	 that	GHOTUL	and	 the	system	of	 those	communities	 is	disappearing.	They
are	being	civilized	by	us,	forced,	because	this	seems	to	be	immoral.	At	least	for
Christians,	 Hindus,	 Jains,	 it	 seems	 immoral.	 Their	 community	 is	 being
destroyed;	their	GHOTUL	is	thought	to	be	like	a	house	of	prostitution.	So	they
are	 being	 taught	 against	 their	 experience:	 they	 are	 being	 taught	 to	 destroy
GHOTULS	and	to	stop	this	'immoral'	situation.
But	man	seems	to	be	absolutely	foolish.	They	are	not	immoral	people;	they	are
very	moral	 people,	 very	 natural	 people.	 But	 Christians	 are	 there	 working	 and
trying	to	convert	them	into	Christians.	They	have	converted	many	of	those	poor
people	into	Christians.
Now	GHOTULS	are	disappearing,	 and	 there,	one	of	 the	most	 solid	 systems	 is
being	destroyed.	In	fact,	we	should	learn	something	from	them.
My	whole	device	is	to	give	you	all	the	chances	possible	for	spiritual	growth	so
that	you	can	have	a	 feel	 for	 the	 right	path.	And	 that	 feel	has	 to	 come	 through
you.	It	has	not	to	come	through	me,	it	has	not	to	come	through	my,	influence.
There	are	two	ways	not	to	influence	you:	one	way	is	not	to	speak,	to	disappear
somewhere	so	nobody	can	come	close.	Many	people	have	done	that	too,	but	that
doesn't	 seem	 to	 work.	 It	 has	 no	 compassion	 in	 it.	 The	 other	 way	 is	 to
communicate	 to	 you,	 to	 say	 to	 you	what	 I	 have	 attained,	what	 I	 have	 known,
what	I	have	tasted.	That	has	been	done,	but	then	people	become	impressed.	They
become	so	impressed	that	they	are	almost	dragged	out	of	their	natures	That	too	is
dangerous.	Maybe	 a	hundred	persons	 are	 influenced	 --	 then	 ten,	 fifteen,	 at	 the
most	twenty,	will	reach	to	the	goal.	Eighty	will	be	going	against	their	nature.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 make	 you	 available	 to	 all	 possibilities	 and	 to	 make	 all
possibilities	 available	 to	you	 so	you	can	move,	you	can	change,	you	can	have
your	own	time,	at	your	own	pace.	And	then	one	day	a	feeling	will	arise,	and	tha.
feeling	will	be	totally	yours.	It	will	have	nothing	to	do	with	me.	Then	you	have
come	 to	 a	 point	where	marriage	happens:	 then	you	 are	married	 to	 a	 particular
path.
I	will	continue	talking	about	other	paths,	but	from	that	moment	you	will	listen	to
me,	you	will	love	me,	you	will	be	grateful	to	me,	but	if	I	am	saying	something
which	goes	against	your	path	you	will	not	choose	it,	you	will	not	be	impressed
by	it.	If	something	fits	on	your	path	you	wil	choose,	but	the	decision	will	be	your
chosen	path.	Now	anything	that	fits	with	it	you	will	take	in;	anything	tha	doesn't
fit	you	will	not	take	in.	And	you	will	not	say,	"That	is	wrong";	you	know	that	on
some	other	path	it	fits,	so	I	may	be	right	for	somebody	else.
But	 once	 you	 have	 chosen	 your	 path,	 whatsoever	 I	 say,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to
choose.	You	will	become	a	chooser	you	will	have	an	inner	criterion	--	what	fits,
what	does	no	fit.
I	am	here	for	many	sorts	of	people.	I	am	not	one	dimensional;	I	am	here	for	all
sorts	 of	 people,	 and	 I	 am	 speaking	 to	 all	 of	 them.	By	and	by,	 listening	 to	me,
being	 attentive	 to	 me,	 you	 will	 go	 on	 deciding	 by	 your	 feeling.	 Then	 I	 will
continue	to	speak;	you	will	 love	to	listen,	you	will	 love	to	understand,	but	you
will	 not	 be	 distracted.	Once	 you	 are	married	 you	will	 not	 be	 distracted.	 Then
there	is	no	divorce.
"When	you	were	a	Zen	Master	telling	us	to	choose	our	path	and	stick	to	it,	I	felt
that	my	path	was	of	the	head,	that	I	would	never	be	able	to	surrender	to	anyone.
Now,	after	one	lecture	on	the	Baul	mystics,	I	feel	like	a	lovesick	schoolgirl.	How
to	choose	a	path	when	you	have	none?	How	to	be	a	light	unto	myself	when	your
light	dazzles	me	every	moming?"
One	day	you	will	be	saturated	with	 it.	One	day,	one	morning	you	will	arise	 in
your	own	being,	alert	to	your	needs,	alert	to	your	direction.	Once	that	direction	is
understood,	recognized,	then	there	will	be	no	problem.	But	one	has	to	wait	for	it;
it	takes	time.	And	before	it	happens	I	will	have	to	shift	you,	turn	you,	shunt	you
from	here	and	there.
Sorry,	but	I	have	to	do	it.
The	Bauls	say,
Blind	one,
how	can	you	stumble
on	a	straight	spontaneous	path?
Be	spontaneous	in	your	own	self
and	find	the	way
that	is	born	in	you.
That's	what	 I	 am	 trying	 to	 do	 here	 --	 I	 am	 a	midwife.	 I'm	not	 going	 to	 create
something	for	you;	it	is	already	being	created	in	your	womb.	It	is	already	being
created	in	your	innermost	shrine.	At	the	most,	I	can	help	it	to	be	born	smoothly.
At	the	most,	if	something	goes	wrong	I	can	help	you	to	remove	the	obstacle.	But
the	child	has	been	getting	ready	in	you;	I	am	just	a	midwife....
Once	 you	 have	 found	 your	 child,	 your	 direction,	 then	 the	 path	 is	 very
spontaneous.
Blind	one,
how	can	you	stumble
on	a	straight	spontaneous	path?
Be	spontaneous
in	your	own	self,
and	find	the	way
that	is	born	in	you
Words	of	wisdom	describing	God
can	reveal	us	riches
in	a	darkened	room.
Seeking	in	darkness
is	confusing.
Break	the	barriers
and	look	at	the	sky;
the	formless
is	held	as	a	beautiful	form
in	the	arms	of	the	moon.
I	go	on	describing	about	the	wealth,	treasures,	but	your	eyes	are	full	of	darkness.
My	 description	 impresses	 you;	 greed	 arises	 in	 you.	 You	 would	 also	 like	 to
become	a	possessor	of	great	treasures	--	but	your	eyes	are	full	of	darkness.	Even
if	 the	 treasure	 is	 right	 in	 front	 of	 you	 and	 I	 am	 describing	 it	 to	 you,	 you	 are
impressed	by	my	description	but	you	are	not	aware	of	the	treasure	Iying	just	in
front	of	you.	My	description	is	not	going	to	help.
Words	of	wisdom	describing	God
can	reveal	us	riches
in	a	darkened	room.
Seeking	in	darkness
is	confusing.
Break	the	barriers
and	look	at	the	sky;
the	formless	is	held	as	a	beautiful	form
in	the	arms	of	the	moon.
So	don't	be	too	impressed	by	my	words,	and	don't	start	feeling	very	sure	while
listening	to	me.	But	I	know	it	is	natural,	it	 is	human.	Many	times	you	will	feel
sure:	"This	 is	my	path";	but	next	day	 it	will	change.	So	become	a	 little	unsure
about	your	sureness.	Hesitate	a	little.	When	I	was	talking	on	Zen	you	felt	sure:
"This	is	my	path."	Now	I	am	talking	about	Bauls	--	remember,	tomorrow	I	may
be	talking	about	something	else,	so	this	time	at	least	don't	feel	so	sure.	Listen	to
me,	but	don't	give	surety	to	what	is	heard.	Wait,	there	is	no	hurry.	Be	patient,	go
on	listening	and	trying,	but	don't	feel	sure	because	your	surety	is	dangerous.	Feel
sure	only	when	your	child	is	born,	when	you	have	a	sense	of	direction.
And	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the	 difference,	 because	 it	 is	 so	 tremendously
different.	It	will	not	be	because	of	me.	You	will	be	able	to	see	now	that	it	is	not
that	you	are	impressed	by	me;	there	is	nothing	like	impression.	Suddenly	a	great
upsurge,	a	great	energy	has	happened	in	you,	and	it	is	absolutely	certain.	But	you
will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 it	 is	 not	 because	 of	 any	 influence	 from	 my	 side.
Sometimes	it	may	even	happen	contrary	to	what	I	am	saying.	Sometimes	--	it	is
possible	if	you	have	been	shifted	too	many	times	from	one	path	to	another	--	I
am	talking	about	love,	and	listening	to	me	about	love	a	great	certainty	will	arise
in	 you	 that,	 "This	 is	 not	my	 path;	my	 path	 is	meditation,"	 or	 vice	 versa.	 It	 is
difficult	 to	 say	 how	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	make	 sure	 that	 this	 is	 not	 the	 surety
coming	by	influence,	but	your	own.	But	I	know	that	you	will	be	able	to	do	it.
It	is	exactly	like	when	you	have	a	headache:	you	know.	You	don't	ask	anybody,
"Please	 tell	me	when	 I	 have	 a	headache.	How	am	 I	going	 to	know	 that	 it	 is	 a
headache,	that	I	am	really	having	it?"	No,	you	will	know.	When	the	real	certainty
arises,	it	is	so	clear,	so	crystal-clear	--	like	a	pillar	of	light;	and	just	by	its	arising
you	are	washed	clean.
Just	 by	 its	 arising	 you	 feel	 a	 new	being,	 altogether	 new,	 a	 new	birth.	 It	 is	 not
intellectual,	it	is	not	in	the	head.	You	will	feel	it	all	over	your	body,	all	over	your
body,	all	over	your	mind,	all	over	your	heart.	Your	totality	will	feel	it.	When	that
certainty	arises,	then	it	is	faith,	then	it	is	trust.	By	being	influenced,	whatsoever
you	get	is	nothing	but	a	belief.	A	belief	is	a	very	impotent	thing;.it	never	changes
anybody.
The	third	question:
Question	3
WHAT	 IS	 THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	 THE	 FOLLOWING:	 THINKING
AND
UNDERSTANDING,	 REACTION	 AND	 RESPONSE,	 BELIEF	 AND	 FAITH,
SYMPATHY	 AND	 COMPASSION,	 COMMUNICATION	 AND
COMMUNION?
Thinking	 is	 the	 absence	 of	 understanding.	 You	 think	 because	 you	 don't
understand.	When	 understanding	 arises,	 thinking	 disappears.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 blind
man	groping	his	way;	when	eyes	are	there	you	don't	grope	for	the	way,	you	see
it.	Understanding	is	like	eyes;	you	see	it,	you	don't	grope.	Thinking	is	groping.
Not	knowing	what	is	what,	you	go	on	thinking,	guessing.	Thinking	cannot	give
you	 the	 right	 answer	 because	 thinking	 can	 only	 repeat	 that	 which	 is	 known.
Thinking	has	no	vision	for	the	unknown.
Have	you	ever	tried	thinking	about	the	unknown?	How	will	you	think?	You	can
think	only	that	which	you	know;	it	is	repetitive.	You	can	go	on	thinking	it	again
and	again,	you	can	make	new	combinations	of	old	thoughts,	but	nothing	really	is
new.
Understanding	is	fresh,	new.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	past.	Understanding	is
here,	now.	It	is	an	insight	into	reality.
With	thinking	there	are	questions	and	questions	and	no	answers.	Even	sometimes
when	you	feel	that	you	have	found	an	answer,	it	is	just	because	one	has	to	decide
some	way	or	other.	It	is	not	really	the	answer,	but	you	have	to	decide	for	action
so	some	answer	has	to	be	clung	to.	And	if	you	look	deeply	into	your	answer,	you
will	 see	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 questions	 arising	 out	 of	 it.	Understanding	 has	 no
questions	but	only	answers,	because	it	has	eyes.
Thinking	is	borrowed.	All	your	thoughts	are	given	by	others	to	you.	Watch	--	can
you	find	a	single	thought	that	is	yours,	authentically	yours,	that	you	have	given
birth	 to?	They	 are	 all	 borrowed.	The	 sources	may	 be	 known	or	 unknown,	 but
they	 are	 all	 borrowed.	 The	 mind	 functions	 like	 a	 computer,	 but	 before	 the
computer	can	give	you	any	answer	you	have	 to	feed	 it.	You	have	 to	supply	all
the	information;	then	it	will	give	you	the	answer.
That's	what	mind	has	been	doing.
Mind	is	a	biocomputer.	You	go	on	collecting	data,	knowledge,	information,	and
then	when	 a	 certain	 question	 arises	 your	mind	 supplies	 the	 answer	 out	 of	 that
collection.	It	is	not	a	real	response;	it	is	just	out	of	the	dead	past.
What	 is	 understanding?	 --	 understanding	 is	 pure	 intelligence.	 That	 pure
intelligence	 is	 originally	 yours;	 you	 are	 born	 with	 it.	 Nobody	 can	 give	 you
intelligence.	 Knowledge	 can	 be	 given	 to	 you,	 not	 intelligence.	 Intelligence	 is
your	own	sharpened	being.	Through	deep	meditation	one	sharpens	one's	being;
through	 meditation	 one	 drops	 borrowed	 thoughts,	 reclaims	 one's	 own	 being,
reclaims	one's	originality,	redaims	one's	childhood,	innocence,	freshness.	Out	of
that	 freshness,	 when	 you	 act,	 you	 act	 out	 of	 understanding.	 And	 then	 the
response	 is	 total,	 here-now;	 and	 the	 response	 is	 because	 of	 the	 challenge,	 not
because	of	the	past.
For	 example:	 somebody	 asks	 you	 a	 question	 --	 what	 do	 you	 do?	 You
immediately	 go	 inside	 the	mind	 and	 find	 out	 the	 answer.	You	 immediately	 go
into	the	basement	of	the	rnind	where	you	have	collected	all	knowledge,	and	find
the	answer	there.	Then	it	is	thinking.	Somebody	asks	a	question	and	you	become
silent;	you	look	into	the	question	with	penetrating	eyes;	not	into	the	memory,	but
into	the	question.	You	face	the	question,	you	encounter	the	question.	If	you	don't
know	you	say	you	don't	know.
For	example:	 somebody	asks	whether	God	exists	or	not.	You	 immediately	say,
"Yes,	God	 exists."	From	where	 is	 this	 answer	 coming?	 --	 from	your	memory?
Christian	memory,	Hindu	memory,	Muslim	memory?	Then	it	 is	almost	useless,
futile.	If	you	have	a	communist	memory	you	will	say,	"No,	there	is	no	God."	If
you	 have	 a	Catholic	memory	 you	will	 say,	 "Yes,	 there	 is	God."	 If	 you	 have	 a
Buddhist	memory	you	will	say,	"There	is	no	God."	But	these	answers	are	coming
from	the	memory.	If	you	are	a	man	of	understanding	you	will	simply	listen	to	the
question,	you	will	go	deep	into	the	question,	you	will	simply	watch.	If	you	don't
know,	 you	will	 say,	 "I	 don't	 know."	 If	 you	 know,	 only	 then	will	 you	 say	 you
know.	And	when	I	say	'if	you	know',	I	mean,	if	you	have	realized.
A	man	of	understanding	is	true.	Even	if	he	says,	"I	don't	know,"	his	ignorance	is
more	valuable	 than	 the	knowledge	of	 the	mind,	because	at	 least	his	 ignorance,
his	 acceptance	 of	 the	 ignorance	 is	 closer	 to	 truth.	 At	 least	 he	 is	 not	 trying	 to
pretend,	he	is	not	a	hypocrite.
Watch,	and	you	will	see	that	all	your	answers	come	from	your	memory.	Then	try
to	 find	 out	 a	 way	 where	 memory	 does	 not	 function	 and	 pure	 consciousness
functions.	That	is	what	understanding	is.
I	have	heard....
A	 doctor	 stepped	 into	 the	 patient's	 room.	 Five	minutes	 later	 he	 came	 out	 and
asked	for	a	corkscrew,	then	he	went	back	to	his	patient.	In	another	five	minutes
he	was	out	again	and	demanded	a	chisel	and	hammer.
The	distraught	husband	couldn't	 stand	 it	any	 longer.	He	pleaded,	"For	heaven's
sake,	doctor,	what	is	wrong	with	my	wife?"
"I	don't	know	yet,"	the	doctor	replied.	"I	can't	get	my	bag	opened."
Even	sometimes	when	you	say,	"I	don't	know,"	it	is	not	necessary	that	it	may	be
coming	out	of	understanding.	It	may	be	simply	that	you	can't	open	your	bag.	It
may	 be	 that	 you	 cannot	 open	 your	 memories,	 or	 you	 are	 not	 able	 to	 find
something	 in	 the	 memory;	 you	 need	 time.	 You	 say,	 "I	 don't	 know";	 you	 say
"Give	me	 time,	 let	me	 think	 about	 it."	What	will	 you	 do	 by	 thinking?	 If	 you
know,	you	know;	if	you	don't	know,	you	don't	know.
What	 are	 you	 going	 to	 think	 about?	But	 you	 say,	 "Give	me	 time,	 I	will	 think
about	it."
What	are	you	saying?	You	are	saying,	"Give	me	a	little,	time;	I	will	have	to	go
into	the	basement	of	my	mind	and	search.	And	there	is	such	rubbish	accumulated
through	the	years	that	it	is	difficult	to	find,	but	I	will	try."
Meditate,	and	become	free	from	this	basement.	It	is	not	that	the	basement	is	not
useful;	 it	 can	 be	 used.	 But	 it	 should	 not	 become	 a	 substitute	 for	 your
understanding.
A	man	of	understanding	 looks	 into	 things	directly.	His	 insight	 is	direct,	but	he
can	use	all	his	accumulation	to	help	the	insight	to	reach	you.	He	can	use	all	his
accumulation	 to	make	 everything	 that	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 convey	 to	you	 clear.	But
that	which	he	is	trying	to	convey	is	his	own.	Words	may	be	borrowed,	language
may	be	borrowed	--	has	 to	be	borrowed	--	concepts	may	be	borrowed,	but	not
what	he	is	trying	to	convey	to	you.	The	container	will	come	from	the	memory,
but	the	contents	will	be	his	insight.
And	of	course,	a	man	who	has	no	understanding	is	continuously	a	victim	of	so
many	 thoughts,	 because	 he	 has	 no	 one	 insight	 to	 give	 him	 a	 center.	He	 has	 a
crowd	of	thoughts,	unrelated	to	each	other,	even	diametrically	opposite	to	each
other,	contradicting	each	other,	with	deep	antagonism	towards	each	other.	He	has
a	crowd	--	not	even	a	group,	not	even	a	society,	but	a	mob	of	thoughts	buzzing
inside	 the	mind.	So	 if	 you	go	on	with	your	 thinking	 too	 far,	 one	day	you	will
become	mad.	Too	much	thought	can	create	insanity.
In	primitive	societies	madness	is	rare.	The	more	civilized	a	society	is,	the	more
people	go	insane.	Even	in	civilized	societies,	more	people	go	insane	who	work
with	their	intellects.
This	 is	unfortunate	but	 this	 is	a	 fact:	 that	more	psychoanalysts	go	mad	 than	 in
any	other	profession.	Why?	--	too	much	thinking.	It	is	very	difficult	to	manage
so	many	contradictory	 thoughts	 together.	 In	managing	 them,	your	whole	being
becomes	unmanaged,	becomes	a	chaos.
Understanding	is	single,	understanding	is	central.	It	is	simple;	thoughts	are	very
complex.
A	 henpecked	 husband	 visited	 a	 psychiatrist	 and	 said	 he	 had	 a	 recurring
nightmare.
"Every	night,"	he	said.	"I	dream	I	am	shipwreck	with	twelve	beautiful	women."
"What	is	so	terrible	about	that?"	asked	the	psychiatrist
"Have	you	ever	tried	cooing	for	twelve	women?"
That	was	his	problem:	how	 to	 'coo'	 twelve	women	Even	 to	coo	one	woman	 is
difficult.
Thinking	is	like	cooing	for	thousands	and	thousands	of	women	around	you.	One
naturally	 goes	 mad.	 Understanding	 is	 very	 simple:	 you	 are	 married	 to	 one
insight,	 but	 that	 insight	 works	 like	 a	 light,	 a	 torch.	Wherever	 you	 focus	 your
torch,	mysteries	are	revealed.
Wherever	you	focus	your	torch,	darkness	disappears.
Try	to	find	your	hidden	understanding,	and	the	way	is	to	drop	thinking.	And	to
drop	thinking	two	are	the	possibilities:	either	meditation	or	love.
The	second:	'reaction	and	response'.
Reaction	 is	 from	 the	 thoughts	 and	 response	 is	 understanding.	 Reaction	 comes
from	 the	past;	 response	 is	always	 in	 the	present.	But	ordinarily	we	 react	 --	we
have	everything	already	ready	inside.
Somebody	 is	 doing	 something	 and	 we	 react	 as	 if	 button	 has	 been	 pushed.
Somebody	 insults	you	--	you	be	come	angry.	That	has	happened	before.	 It	has
been	 happening	 the	 same	 all	 the	 while.	 It	 has	 become	 almost	 like	 a	 button:
somebody	pushes	it,	you	become	angry.	There	is	not	a	single	moment	of	waiting,
not	a	single	moment	where	you	look	at	the	situation	--	because	the	situation	may
be	different.	The	person	who	is	insulting	you	may	be	right.	He	may	have	simply
revealed	a	truth	to	you;	that's	why	you	feel	insulted.
Or,	he	may	be	absolutely	wrong,	or	he	may	be	nasty	person	--	but	you	have	to
look	into	the	person.	If	he	is	right,	you	have	to	thank	him	because	he	has	shown
some	thing	to	you
--	 he	 has	 shown	 compassion	 towards	 you.	He	has	 been	 friendly	 by	bringing	 a
truth	 to	 your	 heart.	Maybe	 it	 hurts,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 his	 fault.	 Or,	 he	 is	 simply
stupid	ignorant:	not	knowing	anything	about	you	he	has	blurted	something	out.
Then	there	is	no	need	to	be	angry;	he	is	simply	wrong.	Nobody	is	worried	about
something	 which	 is	 absolutely	 wrong.	 Unless	 it	 has	 some	 truth	 in	 it,	 you	 are
never	 irritated	 by	 it.	 You	 can	 laugh	 at	 it,	 at	 the	 whole	 absurdity	 of	 it.	 It	 is
ridiculous.
Or,	the	person	is	nasty	and	that	is	his	way.	He	is	being	insulting	to	everybody.	So
he	is	not	doing	anything	to	you	in	particular;	he	is	simply	being	himself	--	that's
all.	So	in	fact,	nothing	is	needed	to	be	done.	That	man	is	that	type.
Somebody	insulted	Buddha.	His	disciple	Ananda	asked	him,	"I	was	getting	very
angry	and	you	kept	quiet.	You	should	have	at	least	allowed	me;	I	would	have	put
him	right."
Buddha	 said,	 "You	 surprise	 me.	 First	 he	 surprised	 me,	 now	 you	 surprise	 me.
Whatsoever	he	was	saying	is	simply	irrelevant.	It	is	unconnected	with	us,	so	why
get	into	it?	But	you	surprise	me	more:	you	have	become	very	annoyed,	you	look
angry.	This	is	foolish.	To	punish	oneself	for	somebody	else's	error	is	foolish.	You
are	 punishing	 yourself.	 Cool	 down.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 angry	 --	 because
anger	 is	 fire.	Why	are	you	burning	your	own	 soul?	 If	 he	has	 committed	 some
mistake,	why	do	you	punish	yourself?	It	is	stupid"...but	we	react.
I	have	heard....
One	man	was	saying	to	one	of	his	friends,	"To	please	my	wife,	I	have	given	up
smoking,	drinking,	and	playing	cards."
"That	must	make	her	very	happy,"	said	his	friend.
"No,	 it	 has	 not.	 Now,	 every	 time	 she	 begins	 to	 talk	 to	me,	 she	 can't	 think	 of
anything	to	say."
People	 live	 mechanical,-robot-like	 lives.	 If	 your	 wife	 has	 been	 continuously
nagging	you	to	stop	smoking,	and	you	think	that	she	will	be	happy	if	you	stop,
you	are	wrong.	 If	you	 smoke	 she	 is	unhappy,	 if	you	 stop	 smoking	 she	will	 be
unhappy,	because	then	she	will	not	find	any	excuse	to	nag	you.
One	woman	has	 said	 to	me	 that	 she	 doesn't	want	 her	 husband	 to	 be	 perfect.	 I
asked,
"Why?"	She	said,	"Because	I	 love	nagging."	If	 the	husband	is	perfect	what	are
you	going	to	do?	You	will	be	simply	at	a	loss.
Watch	yourself,	watch	others,	 and	 see	how	 they	 are	 behaving	 in	 a	mechanical
way:	unconscious,	like	somnambulists,	sleepwalkers.
Reaction	is	of	the	mind;	response	is	of	the	no-mind.
Belief	and	faith?	--	again	the	same:	belief	is	of	the	mind,	of	the	thinking;	faith	is
of	no-mind,	of	awareness,	understanding.
It	happened	in	a	hillside	village:	the	hunter	said	to	his	guide,	"This	seems	to	be	a
very	dangerous	cliff.	It	is	a	wonder	they	don't	put	up	a	warning	sign."
"They	had	one	up	for	two	years,"	the	native	guide	admitted,	"but	no	one	fell	over
so	they	took	it	down."
Belief	 is	blind	--	you	believe	because	you	have	been	taught	 to	believe	--	but	 it
never	goes	very	deep	because	it	has	no	understanding	of	the	situation.	It	is	just	a
superfluous	tag,	just	something	added	to	you.	It	has	not	grown	from	you,	it	has
not	been	a	growth.	It	is	just	borrowed,	so	it	never	penetrates	your	being.	A	few
days	you	carry	it,	and	then	seeing	that	it	is	useless,	nothing	is	happening,	you	put
it	aside.	There	are	Christians	who	are	not	Christians;	 there	are	Hindus	who	are
not	Hindus.	They	are	Hindus	only	because	of	those	beliefs	that	they	have	never
used,	those	beliefs	that	have	never	been	given	any	respect	by	them.	They	think
they	 are	 Christians,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans,	 but	 how	 can	 you	 be	 a
Mohammedan	if	you	have	not	lived	your	belief?
But	 belief	 cannot	 be	 lived.	 If	 one	 starts	 becoming	 more	 alert,	 watching	 life,
responding,	 then	 by	 and	 by	 a	 faith	 arises.	 Faith	 is	 yours;	 belief	 is	 somebody
else's.	Drop	 beliefs	 so	 that	 faith	 can	 arise.	And	 don't	 be	 satisfied	with	 beliefs,
otherwise	faith	will	never	arise.
Sympathy	and	compassion....
The	same;	the	questioner	has	asked	the	same	thing	again	and	again.
Sympathy	 is	 of	 the	 mind:	 you	 feel	 somebody	 is	 in	 trouble,	 somebody	 is	 in
misery;	you	think	somebody	is	in	misery	and	you	have	to	help.	You	have	been
taught	to	help,	to	be	of	service,	to	be	dutiful,	to	be	a	good	human	being,	to	be	a
good	citizen,	to	be	this	and	that.
You	have	been	 taught;	you	 feel	 sympathy.	Compassion	has	nothing	 to	do	with
your	 teachings.	 Compassion	 arises	 as	 an	 empathy,	 not	 as	 a	 sympathy.
Compassion	arises	when	you	can	see	the	other	person	as	he	is,	and	when	you	can
see	 him	 so	 totally	 that	 you	 start	 feeling	 him.	 You	 start	 feeling	 in	 the	 same
situation.
It	happened:	A	few	people	were	beating	a	fisherman.	Ramakrishna	was	moving
from	one	bank	to	another	of	the	Ganges,	near	Dakshineshwar.	On	the	other	shore
a	few	people	were	beating	a	man.	Ramakrishna	was	in	the	middle	of	the	stream.
He	started	crying	and	weeping,	and	he	started	shouting,	"Stop,	don't	beat	me!"
People	who	were	sitting	around	him,	his	disciples,	could	not	believe	what	was
happening:	"Who	is	beating	you?	Who	can	beat	him?"	They	said,	"What	are	you
saying,	PARAMAHANSADEVA?	Have	you	gone	mad?"	He	said,	"Look!	They
are	beating	me	there	on	 the	other	side."	Then	they	 looked;	a	few	persons	were
beating	 a	 man,	 and	 Ramakrishna	 said,	 "Look	 at	 my	 back."	 He	 uncovered	 his
back	--	 there	were	marks,	blood	was	coming	out.	 It	was	 impossible	 to	believe.
They	 went,	 they	 rushed	 to	 the	 other	 shore,	 caught	 hold	 of	 the	 man	 who	 was
beaten.	They	uncovered	his	back:	exactly	the	same	marks.
This	is	empathy	--	putting	oneself	into	somebody	else's	place	so	totally	that	what
is	happening	to	him	starts	happening	to	you.	Then	compassion	arises.	But	these
states	are	all	of	no-mind.
Communication	and	communion....
Communication	 is	of	 the	mind:	verbal,	 intellectual,	 conceptual.	Communion	 is
of	no-mind,	of	deep	silence;	a	 transfer	of	energy,	non-verbal;	a	 jump	from	one
heart	to	another	-
-	immediate,	without	any	medium.
The	basic,	most	essential	thing	to	remember	is	--	because	it	divides	your	life,	it
divides	 the	whole	world	 into	 two	worlds	 --	 that	 if	 you	 are	 looking	 through	 a
screen	 of	 thoughts,	 then	 you	 live	 in	 one	 world:	 the	 world	 of	 belief,	 thinking,
sympathy.	If	you	are	 looking	with	clean	eyes,	unclouded	eyes,	your	perception
has	 a	 clarity:	 pure,	 just	 seeing	 into	 things	 as	 they	 are,	 not	 projecting	 anything
upon	 them.	Then	you	have	understanding,	 then	you	have	meditation.	Then	 the
whole	world	changes.	And	the	problem	is	that	mind	can	deceive	you.	It	creates
sympathy.	 It	 creates	 pseudo	 coins:	 for	 compassion	 it	 creates	 sympathy.
Sympathy	is	a	pseudo	coin.	For	communion,	it	has	only	communication,	which
is	a	pseudo	coin.	For	faith,	it	has	belief,	which	is	a	pseudo	coin.
Remember	it	--	mind	tries	to	substitute.	You	are	lacking	something?	--	mind	tries
to	 substitute	 it.	Be	 very	 alert,	 because	whatsoever	mind	 can	 do	 is	 going	 to	 be
false.	Mind	is	the	great	falsifier,	the	greatest	deceiver	there	is.	It	helps,	it	tries	to
console	you,	it	gives	you	something.
For	 example:	 if	 in	 the	 day	 you	 have	 fasted,	 in	 the	 night	 you	 dream	 of	 foods,
resting	 in	 great	 hotels,	 or	 being	 invited	 to	 the	 palaces	 of	 the	 kings	 and	 eating
beautiful	food.	Why?	-
-	 the	whole	 day	 you	 have	 been	 hungry,	 now	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 sleep	 because	 of
hunger;	the	mind	creates	a	substitute,	a	dream.	Have	you	not	watched?
In	the	night	your	bladder	is	full	and	you	would	like	to	go	to	the	bathroom,	but
sleep	will	be	disturbed	--	the	mind	immediately	creates	a	dream	that	you	are	in
the	 bathroom.	 Then	 you	 can	 go	 on	 sleeping.	 It	 gives	 you	 a	 substitute.	 The
substitute	is	conciliatory;	it	is	not	real	--	but	for	the	time	being	it	helps.
So	beware	of	mind's	consolations.	Seek	reality,	because	only	reality	can	fulfill.
Consolations	will	 only	 post-pone;	 they	 can	 never	 be	 fulfilling.	You	 can	 eat	 as
much	food	as	you	like	in	the	night	in	your	dream,	you	can	enjoy	the	fragrance	of
it,	the	taste	of	it,	the	color	of	it,	everything,	but	it	is	not	going	to	be	nourishing.
The	one	thing	that	is	not	going	to	happen:	it	cannot	nourish.	Belief	can	give	you
the	whole	fragrance	of	faith,	the	taste,	the	color.	You	can	enjoy	it	but	it	will	not
nourish	you.	Only	faith	can	nourish.
Always	remember:	that	which	nourishes	you	is	real,	and	that	which	simply	gives
you	 a	 consolation	 is	 very	 dangerous.	Because	 of	 this	 consolation	 you	will	 not
seek	the	real	food.	If	you	start	living	in	dreams	and	you	don't	eat	real	food,	then
by	and	by,	you	will	dissipate,	disappear,	become	dry,	and	you	will	be	dead.
So	take	immediate	action:	whenever	mind	is	trying	to	give	you	a	substitute,	don't
listen	to	it.	It	is	a	great	salesman,	a	great	seducer.	It	convinces	you,	and	it	says,
"Those	 things	 are	 very	 cheap.	 Faith	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 because	 you	will
have	to	risk	your	life;	belief	is	very	easy,	very	cheap.	You	can	get	it	for	nothing."
In	fact,	so	many	people	are	ready	--	if	you	accept	their	belief	they	are	ready	to
give	you	something	more	with	it:	become	a	Christian,	become	a	Hindu,	become
a	Mohammedan.	 People	 are	 ready	 to	 give	 you	 a	 great	 welcome	 and	 respect,
respectability.	Everything	is	available;	just	accept	their	belief.
Belief	is	not	only	cheap,	it	can	even	bring	many	more	things	with	it.
Faith	is	dangerous,	never	cheap.	You	will	have	to	put	your	whole	life	at	stake.	It
needs	courage,	but	only	a	courageous	person	can	be	religious.
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	What	is	there,	is	there
23	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606230
ShortTitle:
BELOV103
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
90
mins
NOTHING	HAS	HAPPENED
AND	NOTHING	WILL	HAPPEN.
WHAT	IS	THERE,	IS	THERE.
I	BECAME	A	KING
IN	MY	DREAM
AND	MY	SUBJECTS
OCCUPIED	THE	ENTIRE	EARTH.
I	SAT	ON	THE	THRONE	RULING	LIKE	A	LION,
LIVING	A	HAPPY	LIFE.
THE	WORLD	OBEYED	ME.
AS	I	TURNED	IN	MY	BED
ALL	WAS	CLEAR:
I	WAS	NOT	A	LION
BUT	A	LION'S	UNCLE,
A	JACKASS,
THE	VILLAGE	IDIOT....
NOTHING	HAS	HAPPENED
AND	NOTHING	WILL	HAPPEN.
WHAT	IS	THERE,	IS	THERE.
THIS	IS	ONE	OF	THE	MOST	SIGNIFICANT	ASSERTIONS	EVER	MADE.	It
is	so:	the	reality	remains	in	its	suchness.	Nothing	changes,	nothing	can	change.
But	we	see	many	changes	happening	all	around.	For	us,	everything	is	changing.
Life	is	a	flux.
Then	 something	 is	 wrong	with	 us.	 Then	 the	 change	 appears	 not	 because	 it	 is
there,	 but	 because	we	 cannot	 see	 the	 eternal.	Our	 inability	 to	 see	 the	 real,	 the
eternal,	 creates	 a	 flux-like	 phenomenon	 all	 around	 us.	 It	 is	 our	 flickering
consciousness.
Have	 you	watched	 sometimes	 in	 a	 dark	 room?	 --	 a	 small	 candle	 burns,	 and	 it
goes	on	flickering.	Because	of	its	flickering	the	whole	room	seems	to	be	moving,
waving,	 changing.	 If	 the	 flame	 is	 constant,	 the	 room	 stops	 changing	 --	 it
becomes	constant.	Our	consciousness	creates	the	mirage,	the	illusion,	the	dream-
like	world	that	surrounds	us.
This	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 very	 deeply,	 because	 this	 is	 the	 very	 base	 of	 all
essential	religions.
It	is	true	as	far	as	ordinary	understanding	goes:	everything	seems	to	be	changing,
nothing	 seems	 to	 be	 permanent.	 Nothing	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 same	 even	 for	 two
moments,	two	consecutive	moments.	Nothing	seems	to	be	the	same,	everything
goes	 on	 like	 a	 river.	 To	 think	 of	 anything	 permanent	 is	 almost	 impossible.	 To
think	 of	 anything	 that	 has	 remained	 the	 same	 forever	 and	 ever	 is
incomprehensible	to	the	mind.	The	mind	knows	only	the	world	of	change.	The
mind	knows	only	the	dream,	the	illusion.	A	life	lived	through	the	mind	is	a	life
of	 dreams.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 concept	 of	 MAYA.	 It	 does	 not	 say
anything	about	the	reality,	remember:	it	does	not	say	that	the	reality	is	not	real,	it
does	not	say	that	the	existence	is	dream.	It	simply	says	that	the	way	you	look	at
it	 is	 so	unconscious,	 the	way	you	 look	at	 it	 is	 so	wavering,	unstable,	 that	your
inner	wavering	gives	you	a	world	of	flux,	dreams.	Attain	to	inner	integrity,	attain
to	 inner	 crystallization,	 and	 suddenly	 all	 flux-like	phenomena	disappear	 --	 and
suddenly	you	are	face	to	face	with	the	real,	the	substantial,	the	permanent;	call	it
God.	The	world	and	God	are	not	two	things	but	the	same	reality	looked	at	in	two
ways.	One	is	through	the	mind,	the	other	is	through	no-mind	--	because	if	mind
is	there,	there	is	going	to	remain,	more	or	less,	the	flickering.
The	mind	cannot	be	constant.	Have	you	watched?	Even	 for	 a	 few	seconds	 the
mind	cannot	be	constant.	 Just	 look	at	your	watch	someday,	and	 just	 remember
that	 you	 are	 looking	 at	 the	 watch,	 and	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 retain	 this
remembrance	 that	 you	 are	 looking	 at	 the	watch	 even	 for	 a	 few	 seconds.	Your
mind	will	 slip	 somewhere	 else:	 some	memory,	 some	 imagination,	 some	work
that	is	incomplete,	some	worry,	some	plan;	you	must	go	somewhere.	Again	you
will	realize	and	you	will	see	that	for	a	few	seconds	you	have	not	been	here.	Try
again;	again	the	mind	will	go	away.
Mind	cannot	be	stable,	so	all	efforts	to	make	mind	stable	are	impossible.	That	is
not	 in	 the	nature	of	 the	mind.	The	only	way	 to	be	 stable	 is	 to	 drop	 the	whole
mind	as	such.	To	look	into	reality	without	any	thinking,	to	look	so	directly	that
the	medium	of	 the	mind	 is	 not	 there;	 look	 immediately,	 then	 suddenly	God	 is
revealed.	Then	in	all	the	forms	the	formless	is	revealed.	Then	you	see	that	which
the	Bauls	say:	Nothing	has	happened,	and	nothing	will	happen.	What	is	there,	is
there;	and	what	is	not	there,	is	not	there.	But	the	mind	goes	on	seeing	that	which
is	not	there,	and	because	of	that	which	is	not	there,	we	cannot	see	that	which	is
there.	Because	of	the	false,	because	of	the	projected,	because	of	the	dreamed,	we
cannot	see	the	real,	we	cannot	see	the	true.	When	the	false	is	dropped,	reality	is
revealed.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 way	 to	 seek	 reality.	 One	 has	 to	 drop	 the	 very
mechanism	that	creates	falseness.
Mind	 is	a	projector.	You	sit	 in	a	movie	house	and	you	see	a	 thousand	and	one
things	passing	on	the	screen,	and	the	screen	is	empty;	nothing	is	really	passing
except	shadows.
You	go	on	looking	at	the	screen	and	there	is	every	possibility	that	you	may	not
even	 think	 of	 the	 projector	 behind	 you	which	 is	 projecting	 all	 those	 shadows,
pictures.	You	can	start	fighting	with	those	shadows	but	that	is	not	the	way	to	stop
them.	The	way	is	to	look	back,	to	turn	a	one	hundred-eighty-degree	turn	and	go
and	 stop	 the	 projector.	 Once	 the	 projector	 is	 stopped,	 the	 screen	 is	 empty.
Suddenly	there	is	nothing,	or,	only	the	whiteness	of	the	screen	is	left.	Only	the
eternal	is	there	and	the	changing	has	disappeared.
But	one	has	to	stop	the	projector.
There	 are	many	 people	 who	 become	 interested	 in	meditation,	 but	 in	 a	 wrong
way.	They	start	fighting	with	the	mind,	they	start	struggling	and	wrestling	with
the	mind.	Then	they	are	not	ever	going	to	be	victorious.	Then	they	are	fighting	a
losing	battle.	It	is	not	possible	because	they	have	forgotten	the	projector.	Where
is	 the	 projector?.	 --	 one	 has	 to	 find	 the	 projector	 hidden	 behind	 your	 back.
Hidden	 deep	 in	 the	 unconscious	 is	 the	 projector,	 hidden	 in	 the	 unconscious:
becoming,	desiring.	It	is	what	Buddhists	call	TRISHNA.	The	constant	desire	to
be	 somebody,	 to	be	 someone,	 to	be	 somewhere	else,	 is	 the	 cause	of	 the	mind;
then	the	mind	continues.
How	 to	 stop	 the	 projector?	 BE	HERENOW.	Don't	 try	 in	 any	way	 to	 become
somebody	else;	accept	that	which	you	are.	Drop	all	ideas	of	improvement.	Drop
all	 ideas	 of	 bettering	 yourself.	Drop	 all	 ideas	 of	 achieving	 something;	 there	 is
nothing	to	be	achieved.
Empty-handed	we	 come,	 empty-handed	we	 go,	 and	 in	 the	meanwhile,	 empty-
handed	we	remain.	And	if	you	think	your	hands	are	full	then	you	are	befooling
yourself.	Then	you	are	taking	dreams	as	real.	Your	hands	may	be	full	of	dreams.
You	 must	 have	 heard	 about	 the	 Japanese	 discipline	 of	 KARATE.	 The	 word
'karate'	 is	 very	meaningful.	 It	 comes	 from	 a	 root	which	means	 empty	 hand.	 It
says:	a	man	can	become	a	great	warrior	if	he	understands	totally	the	meaning	of
being	empty.	If	somebody	understands	that,	"Empty-handed	I	have	come,	empty-
handed	 I	will	 go,	 and	 empty-handed	 I	 am	here,"	 then	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 lose.
Who	can	conquer	a	person	who	has	nothing	 to	 lose?	Who	can	defeat	a	person
who	has	nothing	to	lose?	Who	can	frighten	a	person	who	has	nothing	to	lose?	By
understanding	 this	 emptiness	 he	 becomes	 a	 great	 warrior.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
defeat	him,	it	is	impossible	to	rob	him;	it	is	impossible	to	kill	him	--	because	he
is	 already	 empty.	He	 holds	 nothing	 in	 his	 hands.	By	 not	 holding	 anything,	 he
goes	beyond	life	and	death.
That	 is	 the	meaning	when	 Jesus	 says	 again	 and	 again,	 "Lose	 yourself."	Those
who	are	not	going	to	lose	themselves,	they	will	lose;	and	those	who	are	ready	to
lose,	they	will	gain.
The	losers	will	become	winners,	and	the	winners	will	become	losers.	Those	who
are	 empty	will	 be	 fulfilled,	 and	 those	who	are	 trying	 to	 fulfill	 themselves	will
remain	empty.
This	is	the	paradox.
Understand	 the	very	motivation	of	all	 ideas,	 thoughts,	desires.	 It	 is	 a	 seed-like
thing.
Watch	 inside	 --	 why	 can't	 you	 be	 herenow?	 Why	 is	 it	 always	 that	 you	 are
thinking	of	somewhere	else?	Why	can't	you	be	happy	as	you	are?	Why	are	you
thinking	that	tomorrow	you	will	be	happy?	How	can	you	be	happy	tomorrow	if
you	are	not	happy	 today?.	 --	because	 tomorrow	 is	going	 to	be	born	out	of	 the
moment.	 Out	 of	 this	 moment	 the	 next	 moment	 is	 going	 to	 be	 born.	 Today	 is
going	to	become	the	parent	of	tomorrow.
If	you	are	unhappy	 today,	you	will	be	more	unhappy	 tomorrow.	You	will	have
learned,	by	that	time,	many	more	tricks	to	be	unhappy.	You	are	practicing	it,	and
you	hope	tomorrow	to	be	happy?	Then	you	are	in	a	hopeless	rut.	You	desire	for
tomorrow?	--	 then	you	are	continuously	missing	all	 that	 is	here,	and	that	 is	 the
only	reality	there	is.	If	you	can	even	for	a	single	moment	put	aside	desiring,	then
the	projector	stops,	and	the	dreaming	stops,	and	you	are	able	to	face	reality.
Nothing	 has	 happened.	 The	 reality	 is	 as	 it	 has	 always	 been	 from	 the	 very
beginning.
Nothing	 has	 happened	 and	 nothing	will	 happen,	 so	 all	 your	 desiring	 is	 futile,
because	you	are	 trying	 for	 something	 to	happen.	Your	whole	effort	 is	 to	make
something	 happen:	 riches,	 wealth,	 power,	 prestige.	 Your	 whole	 effort	 is	 for
something	to	happen,	but,	NOTHING	HAS	HAPPENED
AND	NOTHING	WILL	HAPPEN.
WHAT	IS	THERE,	IS	THERE.
This	is	a	tremendously	significant	sutra.	All	the	scriptures	can	be	condensed	in
such	 a	 sutra.	 If	 you	 can	 understand	 only	 these	 three	 lines,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
understand	 anything	 else.	 Look	 at	 your	 life	 from	 your	 childhood	 up	 to	 now.
What	has	happened?
Many	 things	appear	 to	happen,	but	what	has	 really	happened?	You	 remain	 the
same,	 the	 consciousness	 remains	 the	 same,	 and	 all	 that	 happens	 is	 just
superficial,	 like	 a	dream.	 If	 it	 has	not	 happened	up	 to	now,	how	 is	 it	 going	 to
happen	in	the	future?	Only	the	present	is;	past	and	future	are	dreams.	Even	for	a
single	moment,	if	you	can	penetrate	into	reality	and	you	can	see	what	is,	face	to
face,	you	will	laugh	at	the	whole	absurdity	of	your	efforts.	What	are	you	trying?
--	 you	 are	 trying	 something	 impossible:	 you	 are	 fighting	 against	 reality.	 The
reality	 is;	 it	 knows	 no	 becoming,	 it	 is	 being.	 It	 knows	 no	 future;	 it	 is	 already
here.	It	has	always	been	already	here.	You	have	just	to	see	it	--	and	once	you	can
see	it,	all	worry,	all	anxiety	disappears.	Then	you	stop	trying,	pulling	yourself	up
by	 your	 shoestrings.	 Then	 you	 simply	 relax.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 tension.	 Then
rather,	you	start	delighting,	you	start	being	blissful	as	you	are.
Before	we	can	understand	it,	a	few	things	will	be	helpful.
One:	 ordinarily	 the	 Eastern	 psychology	 divides	 the	 human	 mind	 into	 three
divisions.	 The	 first	 is	 deep	 sleep,	 very	 deep	 sleep	 when	 there	 are	 no	 more
dreams:	 SUSHUPTI,	 dreamless	 sleep.	 In	 this	 state,	 ninety-nine	 percent
unconsciousness	 and	 only	 one	 percent	 consciousness	 exists.	 A	 very	 small
fragment	 of	 consciousness	 exists	 --	 the	 whole	 continent	 is	 dark,	 just	 one	 ray.
Because	of	that	ray,	in	the	morning	you	can	say,	"I	had	a	very	good	sleep.	It	was
absolutely	silent	and	peaceful.	There	was	not	any	dream."
Because	 of	 that	 one	 ray	 of	 consciousness,	 you	 can	 say	 this	 in	 the	morning.	 If
there	were	no	consciousness	at	all,	then	who	would	remember?	Then	who	would
say	 that	 the	sleep	was	beautiful,	nourishing?	Just	a	 small	 ray,	a	very	small	 ray
exists	in	dreams.
That	 is	 the	 second	stage	 --	dreaming	 --	 a	 little	more	consciousness	comes	 into
existence.
You	 remember	 in	 a	 general	way	 that	 you	 slept	well.	You	 can	 even	 remember
dreams,	details	of	the	dreams.	You	can	remember	even	the	colors,	the	story,	the
pattern,	the	motif	of	the	dream.	You	can	relate	the	whole	dream.	You	were	a	little
more	conscious.
Then	you	are	awake	in	the	morning;	that	is	the	third	stage:	wakefulness,	a	little
more	consciousness.	But	 the	greater	continent	of	your	soul	remains	dark.	Even
while	 you	 are	 awake,	 you	 are	 not	 totally	 awake.	 Just	 deep	 down	 in	 your
wakefulness,	dreams	are	floating.	You	can	watch	that.
Any	moment	 close	 your	 eyes,	 rest	 for	 a	 single	 minute,	 and	 you	 will	 see	 that
dreams	are	floating	there.	So	just	underneath	your	consciousness,	a	great	world
of	dreams	continues,	and	that	goes	on	affecting	your	consciousness.	Dreams	are
powerful	 things.	 They	 are	 projections;	 they	 go	 on	 shadowing	 your
consciousness.	 And	 deep	 down	 in	 your	 dreams	 you	 will	 find	 again	 a	 sort	 of
sleep.	That's	what	happens	when	you	fall	asleep	in	the	night.
When	you	have	fallen	asleep,	first	dreams	start.	That	is	the	second	stage.	Then
only	rarely	do	you	go	deep.	Then,	dreams	stop	and	you	are	in	deep	sleep.	Again
you	start	floating	towards	the	surface,	and	this	goes	on	continuously,	the	whole
night	 --	 up	 and	 down,	 up	 and	 down	you	move.	 In	 the	whole	 night	 if	 you	 can
touch	the	deep	layer	of	sleep	for	only	fifteen	minutes,	that	will	be	enough	rest.
That's	 why	 people	 who	 meditate	 don't	 need	 much	 sleep,	 because	 in	 deep
meditation	 they	can	easily	move	 into	 the	depth	of	 their	beings.	The	rest	of	 the
night	is	wasted	in	dreaming.	These	three	states	are	the	ordinary	states.
The	East	 says,	 "Unless	 you	 attain	 to	 a	 greater	 awareness,	 your	 life	will	 never
know	what	the	reality	is,	what	God	is."	That	greater	awareness	means	becoming
totally	aware,	not	leaving	a	single	corner	of	your	consciousness	dark,	dropping
all	unconsciousness.	What	the	Freudians	call	the	unconscious	disappears	by	and
by.	By	methods	of	meditation,	prayer,	 love,	 it	disappears;	more	and	more,	you
become	 conscious.	 One	 moment	 comes	 when	 your	 whole	 being	 becomes
conscious,	full	of	light,	luminous.	Then	there	is	no	dreaming	and	no	sleep.	Just
awareness	is	the	stuff	you	are	made	of.	In	that	moment	you	will	become	able	to
know	what	this	Baul	is	singing:
NOTHING	HAS	HAPPENED	AND
NOTHING	WILL	HAPPEN.
WHAT	IS	THERE,	IS	THERE.
And	if	you	understand	this,	even	a	glimpse	of	it,	then	how	can	you	remain	in	an
agonized	 existence,	 how	 can	 you	 worry,	 and	 how	 can	 you	 remain	 tense	 and
feeding	illnesses?
Henry	Thoreau	used	to	say	that	what	man	thinks	is	wealth	--	when	man	thinks
that	 he	 is	 becoming	 by	 and	 by	wealthy	 --	 is	more	 like	 'illth'	 than	wealth.	We
become	more	and	more	ill.	Well-being	does	not	happen	through	it,	so	why	call	it
wealth?	Man	 thinks	he	 is	becoming	more	and	more	powerful,	 and	deep	down,
more	and	more	impotence	happens.
On	 the	 outside	 you	 think	 you	 are	 achieving	many	 things,	 but	 deep	 down	 you
remain	empty,	hollow.	The	sooner	you	realize	this	hollowness	the	better	because
then	you	will	not	waste	your	time	and	energy.	Then	your	whole	life	will	be	of	a
totally	 different	 quality:	 the	 search	 will	 begin.	 Then	 you	 will	 not	 be	 chasing
dreams.
And	 dreams	 look	 very	 real.	 They	 are	 not,	 but	 they	 look	 very	 real.	 To	 an
unconscious	 mind,	 dreams	 look	 as	 if	 they	 are	 the	 only	 reality.	 Have	 you	 not
watched	that	deep	 in	sleep,	dreaming,	every	night	again	you	become	a	victim?
You	again	start	thinking	that	this	is	real.	In	the	morning	you	realize	it	was	false,
just	 a	 dream,	 but	 in	 the	 night,	 again	 and	 again	 you	 are	 a	 victim	 and	 you	 start
thinking	it	is	real.
Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 to	his	 disciples,	 "Unless	you	 realize	 in	your	dreams	 that
they	 are	 dreams,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 awake."	 So	 he	 used	 to	 give	 them
techniques	of	how	to	realize	while	dreaming	that	it	is	a	dream,	how	to	recognize
that	it	is	a	dream.	But	the	moment	you	recognize	a	dream	as	a	dream,	it	stops.	It
immediately	stops.	It	cannot	be	there	then.	With	your	recognition	of	the	dream	as
dream,	the	dream	dies.	It	exists	only	through	your	cooperation	and	recognition;
you	give	it	reality.	Pull	your	hands	away	and	it	drops	flat,	and	it	has	nothing	in	it.
The	dream	has	power	only	because	you	impart	power	to	it.
Watch	people	on	 the	 street,	 in	 the	marketplace.	 Just	 stand	by	 the	 side	 and	 just
look	 at	 people	 --	 you	 will	 be	 surprised.	 It	 is	 so	 obvious	 that	 they	 are
sleepwalkers.	 They	 are	 walking	 like	 somnambulists.	 Somehow,	 they	 are
managing,	but	they	are	walking	fast	asleep.	You	can	watch	their	lips	moving	as	if
they	are	 talking	with	 somebody,	 and	 there	 is	nobody.	They	can	even	be	 found
making	gestures	to	somebody	who	is	not	present.	Watch	their	faces;	their	faces
have	not	the	aura	of	awareness	--	a	dullness,	a	dark	shadow,	as	if	somehow	they
are	forcing	themselves	to	be	aware,	ready	to	fall	any	moment	into	dreaming,	into
sleep.	Drunk	with	their	dreams,	people	go	on	moving.
First	watch	others,	 because	 it	will	 be	 easy	 for	 you	 to	watch	others.	Then	 start
watching	 yourself.	 Then	 start	 catching	 yourself	 red-handed.	 Then	 sometimes,
just	walking	on	the	road,	suddenly	stop	and	see	whether	you	are	here	or	you	are
moving	somewhere	in	a	dream.
The	 more	 you	 become	 alert	 about	 your	 dreams,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 see	 gaps
arising	 in	 your	 consciousness	 when	 dreams	 are	 not	 there	 and	 reality	 can	 be
approached.	But	we	have	great	investments	in	our	dreams.	We	may	be	afraid	of
nightmares,	but	we	are	not	yet	fed-up	with	dreaming.	We	still	go	on	cherishing
sweet	dreams.
I	have	heard....
A	man	was	 talking	 to	one	of	his	 friends.	 "I	had	a	dream	 the	other	night,"	 said
Casey	to	his	pal	McGinn,	"and	it	taught	me	a	great	lesson."
"What	was	it?"	asked	McGinn.
"I	dreamed	I	was	in	Rome	and	I	had	an	audience	with	the	Pope.	Would	I	have	a
drink,	he	asked	me.	Thinks	I,	 'Would	a	duck	swim?'	And	seein'	the	whisky	and
lemons	 and	 sugar	 on	 the	 sideboard,	 I	 told	 him	 that	 I	wouldn't	mind	 a	 drop	 of
punch.'Cold	or	hot?'	he	asked	me.	'Hot,	your	Holiness,'	said	I,	an'	that's	where	I
made	me	mistake!"
"I	don't	see	anything	wrong,"	said	the	friend.
"His	Holiness	 stepped	 toward	 the	 kitchen	 to	 boil	 the	water,	 and	 before	 he	 got
back	I	woke	up."
"What	lesson	did	you	learn?"	asked	McGinn.
"Next	 time,"	swore	Casey,	"I	will	say,	 'I	will	 take	it	cold,	your	Holiness,	while
the	water	is	getting	hot.'"
We	have	investments	in	our	dreams.	They	don't	exist	without	our	help;	we	make
them	exist.	Sweet	dreams,	golden	dreams;	we	have	a	romance	with	them,	a	very
long	romance	of	many	lives.	We	go	on	courting	dreams,	and	of	course	when	we
court	 them	they	are	 there,	and	 they	bring	nothing	but	frustration.	Because	 they
are	against	reality,	they	can	never	bring	fulfillment.	There	is	no	way	to	make	two
plus	two	equal	five;	there	is	no	way.
Whatsoever	you	do,	two	plus	two	will	always	be	four,	and	you	go	on	hoping	that
someday	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 five.	 Then	 you	 are	 simply	 in	 a	mathematical	 error.
Dreams	can	never	be	real;	your	thoughts	can	never	be	real;	your	hopes	can	never
be	realized;	your	desires	can	never	be	fulfilled.	The	only	outcome	can	be	more
and	more	frustration.
That's	why	children	look	so	beautiful:	because	they	are	yet	full	of	hope,	full	of
dreams,	and	they	have	not	yet	known	frustration.	Old	people	start	looking	very
very	dead.	Hopes	have	leaked	out,	by	and	by,	and	only	frustration	--	a	very	bad
taste	on	the	tongue.
Experience	makes	people	bitter.	Experience	makes	people	lose	their	innocence,
lose	 their	 hope,	 lose	 their	 trust.	But	 it	 is	 not	 experience	 really	 --	 because	 they
wanted	 to	make	 their	 dreams	 real,	 that's	why.	Otherwise	 you	 could	 remain	 as
innocent	to	the	very	end	of	your	life	as	in	the	beginning	--	in	fact,	even	more	--
because	the	innocence	that	happens	in	childhood	is	just	natural.	It	has	not	been
tested	against	fire;	it	is	very	fragile.	It	has	no	crystallization	in	it.	It	is	just	a	gift;
it	has	not	been	earned.	But	when	an	old	man	is	childlike,	innocent,	then	nothing
can	destroy	it.	Then	it	has	a	solidity	to	it,	then	it	is	substantial;	he	has	earned	it.
But	how	does	one	earn	innocence?	--	by	learning	from	frustration,	by	going	deep
into	 frustrations	 and	 realizing	 the	 fact	 that	 each	 frustration	 is	 an	 outcome	of	 a
certain	 dream.	 If	 you	 don't	 want	 frustrations,	 drop	 dreaming.	 Life	 is	 not
frustrating,	dreaming	is	frustrating.
I	have	heard	Mulla	Nasrudin	say	to	his	son,	"It	is	none	of	your	business	to	know
or	enquire	how	I	first	met	your	mother,	but	I	can	tell	you	one	thing:	it	sure	cured
me	of	whistling."
If	your	life	can	cure	you	of	whistling	and	dreaming,	it	will	be	enough,	more	than
enough,	more	than	life	can	give	to	you.	It	will	be	a	great	realization.
But	what	happens?	The	moment	one	dream	is	frustrated,	we	immediately	replace
it,	substitute	it	with	another	dream,	maybe	an	even	bigger	dream.	We	never	look
into	the	reality.	We	go	on	saying	that	man	proposes	and	God	disposes.	God	has
never	disposed	anything.	It	 is	you,	in	your	very	dream,	who	both	proposes	and
disposes.	It	is	your	own	proposal	that	carries	the	seeds	of	disposal,	because	it	is
not	in	tune	with	reality.	It	is	your	expectation	that	carries	the	seeds	of	frustration.
God,	or	call	 it	 reality,	has	never	 frustrated	anybody.	 It	 is	 always	 showering	on
you;	it	is	always	ready	to	fulfill	you	to	the	deepest	core	of	your	being.	But	you
won't	listen	to	reality.	You	are	too	much	with	dreams.
This	 is	 what	 I	 call	 religious	 conversion:	 listening	 to	 reality	 and	 dropping	 the
dreams	 is	 religious	 conversion.	 It	 will	 be	 difficult,	 hard,	 arduous	 in	 the
beginning,	because	the	dreams	persuade	you	so	easily,	and	they	show	you	such
wonderful	visions,	fantasies.
Dreams	are	great	poets:	they	paint,	they	poetize,	they	fantasize;	they	create	such
beautiful	hopes	in	you,	paradises,	heavens.	They	are	all	dreams.	But	you	can	live
hoping,	and	today's	misery	can	be	tolerated	because	of	tomorrow's	dream.
It	is	very	difficult	to	drop	tomorrow's	dream	because	then	suddenly	you	become
aware	of	the	misery	that	is	here	today.	But	remember,	that	misery	is	created	by
yesterday's	dream.
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 today.	 Yesterday's	 dream	 has	 created	 misery	 today;
tomorrow's	 dream	 will	 create	 misery	 again.	 So	 when	 you	 drop	 tomorrow's
dream,	you	will	not	suddenly	become	happy,	because	yesterday's	dream	will	still
linger	on.	You	have	sown	the	seeds	--	who	is	going	to	reap	the	crop?	But	half	is
done	when	you	drop	tomorrow's	dream.	Yesterday's	dream,	its	frustration,	has	to
be	passed	 through.	That's	what	 in	 India	we	call	TAPAS,	austerity.	 "Yesterday's
dream	was	my	dream.	 I	have	 sown	 it,	 so	 I	have	 to	go	 through	 the	 suffering.	 I
have	to	pass	through	the	frustration.	I	accept	it;	it	is	my	own	doing.	Nobody	else
is	responsible,	but	now	I	am	not	going	to	sow	any	more	seeds."
First,	drop	tomorrow's	dream,	then	by	and	by	yesterday's	dream	and	its	hang-ups
and	hangovers	disappear.	Then	a	man	becomes	aware.	When	your	eyes	are	not
full	of	dreams,	your	eyes	are	full	of	awareness.
It	 happened:	MacGonigal	was	 staggering	 up	 the	 street	 from	 telephone	 pole	 to
lamp-post	and	back	again.	Father	Daly	stopped	him	and	said,	"Drunk	again?"
"Are	you?"	said	MacGonigal.	"So	am	I,	Father."
"This	is	no	time	for	levity,"	admonished	the	priest.	"After	taking	the	pledge	and
promising	 me	 two	 weeks	 ago	 that	 you	 would	 never	 drink	 again!	 It	 is	 a	 sin
against	God	and	the	church,	and	I	am	sorry	to	be	saying	so."
"You	are	sorry	to	see	me	so?"
"Indeed	I	am!"
"Are	you	sure	you	are	sorry?"
"Yes,	very,	very	sorry."
"Then	if	you	are	so	sorry,"	said	the	drunkard,	"I	will	forgive	you	Father."
Drunk,	in	our	dreams,	we	go	on	interpreting	in	our	own	ways.	We	go	on	seeing
things	which	are	not.	We	go	on	listening	to	things	which	have	not	been	said.	We
go	on	pretending	what	we	are	not,	and	we	go	on	holding	a	dream-world	around
ourselves.
The	 befuddled	 group	was	 hanging	 around	 a	 bar,	when	 the	 door	 opened	 and	 a
voice	shouted,	"McGuire,	your	house	is	on	fire!"
One	fellow	rushed	out,	and	after	running	a	block	at	breakneck	speed,	suddenly
skidded	to	a	halt.
"Hell,"	he	said	to	nobody	in	particular,	"my	name	isn't	McGuire."
This	 is	what	 is	happening	 to	everybody:	you	don't	know	your	name,	you	don't
know	your	essence,	you	don't	know	who	you	are,	you	don't	know	why	you	are
here,	you	don't	know	why	you	are	running	so	fast.	Where	are	you	going?	Why
are	 you	 in	 such	 a	 hurry?	 Reality	 is	 here.	 Where	 are	 you	 going?	 But	 some
conditioning	 --	 what	 Hindus	 call	 SAMSKAR,	 from	 many	 lives	 of	 dreaming,
desiring:	that	has	become	your	only	reality.	You	go	on	after	it,	not	knowing	why.
It	 has	 become	 a	 habit.	You	 cannot	 resist	 it;	 you	 are	 always	 on	 the	move.	The
reality	is	here	and	you	are	always	on	the	move,	hence	there	happens	no	meeting.
Unless	that	meeting	happens,	you	will	never	be	happy.
Happiness	is	when	you	are	in	tune	with	reality.	Happiness	is	a	harmony	between
you	 and	 the	 real.	 So	 if	 you	 are	 unhappy,	 remember,	 you	must	 be	 going	 away
from	reality.	Be	aware	that	you	must	be	somehow	not	falling	in	line	with	reality.
There	must	be	a	conflict	between	you	and	the	real,	and	of	course	you	cannot	win
against	the	real;	there	is	no	way.
You	have	tried	all	the	ways.	The	whole	humanity	has	tried	all	the	ways	possible,
but	there	is	no	way	to	win	over	reality	and	against	reality.
You	have	to	follow	reality,	you	have	to	come	into	a	deep	accordance	with	reality,
in	tune	with	it.	You	have	to	become	a	note	in	the	great	orchestra	that	reality	is	--
not	fighting	but	surrendering,	submitting	to	 it,	 ready	to	dissolve	into	 it.	That	 is
what	 Bauls	 call	 love:	 the	 readiness	 to	 dissolve	 into	 reality,	 the	 readiness	 to
merge,	melt,	the	readiness	to	be	one	with	reality.	You	will	be	losing	something	--
your	 dreams,	 your	 individuality,	 your	 ego;	 you	 will	 be	 losing	 that	 separation.
You	 will	 disappear	 as	 a	 drop	 of	 water,	 but	 it	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 worried	 about,
because	you	will	become	the	ocean.	You	will	not	be	what	you	have	been	up	to
now:	your	ego,	confined	in	a	form,	in	a	name.	Your	fences	will	disappear.	You
will	not	be	an	island,	you	will	become	part	of	the	continent	but	you	will	become
the	continent.
Nothing	is	lost	by	losing	yourself;	everything	is	lost	by	resisting.	But	we	go	on
misunderstanding	reality.	If	reality	tries	to	absorb	us,	it	looks	like	death.
So	many	times,	almost	every	day,	somebody	or	other	comes	to	me.	Meditating
deeply,	 when	 reality	 starts	 absorbing	 you,	 you	 become	 frightened	 because	 it
looks	 like	death.	 It	 is	 like	death,	but	 it	 is	not	death.	 It	 is	 the	door	 to	 life	more
abundant,	to	life	infinite	and	eternal.	But	yes,	in	a	way	it	is	death	--	death	to	the
past,	death	to	you	as	you	are.	But	then,	what	are	you?	Why	are	you	so	afraid	of
dying?	You	have	nothing	to	lose	--	only	a	miserable	self,	only	an	imprisonment
will	 be	 burned	 down,	 only	 the	 structure	 of	 misery	 and	 agony	 will	 be	 burned
down.	You	have	nothing	to	lose.	Why	do	you	go	on	clinging	to	it?	But	you	have
become	 very	 familiar	 with	 it,	 and	 you	 become	 afraid.	 Whenever	 in	 deep
meditation	sometimes,	by	chance,	coincidence,	you	come	close	to	reality	and	the
reality	starts	spreading	in	you,	you	become	afraid	and	you	escape.
Your	interpretation	has	to	be	dropped.	You	have	to	learn	how	to	listen	to	the	real
--	so	when	reality	approaches	you,	welcome	it.	If	God	comes	towards	you,	if	you
cannot	move	towards	Him,	at	least	don't	run	away.	And	He	IS	coming	towards
you	 in	millions	of	ways.	He	wants	 to	overpower	you,	 to	 reclaim	you.	 It	 is	not
only	that	you	are	seeking	Him;	He	is	also	seeking	you.	In	fact,	your	seeking	is
just	pseudo.	You	talk	about	seeking	God	but	you	don't	really	mean	it.	You	would
like	to	find	Him	by	the	way.	You	don't	want	to	stake	anything.	You	don't	want	to
pay	for	it.	You	don't	want	to	earn	Him.	You	would	like	to	get	Him	free;	that	is
not	the	way.
You	will	have	 to	 lose	yourself;	you	will	have	 to	 lose	all.	People	don't	mean	 it,
and	 when	 God	 approaches	 them	 --	 and	 He	 approaches	 you;	 I	 have	 seen	 His
hands	many	 times	coming	close	 to	you	 --	 I	 have	 seen	you	 running	away.	And
again,	when	you	are	far	away	you	start	seeking	Him	and	you	say,	"How	to	find
God?"	Now	 this	game	has	continued	 for	 too	 long,	and	 it	has	become	almost	a
habit	that	when	He	is	far	away	you	seek,	when	He	comes	close	you	escape.	This
pattern	has	to	be	broken.
I	have	heard....
It	was	a	Sunday	morning	when	the	clarinet	player	who	had	recently	moved	next
to	 the	 small	 church	 started	 practicing	 some	hot	 licks	 that	 brought	 the	minister
over	on	a	run.
"See	here,"	said	the	minister,	"did	you	ever	hear	'keep	holy	thy	sabbath'?"
"No,"	said	the	cat,	"but	if	you	whistle	a	few	notes,	I	will	do	my	best."
Our	understanding	is	our	understanding;	our	interpretation	is	our	interpretation.
Beware	--
when	 reality	 approaches	 you,	 don't	 try	 to	 interpret.	 Just	 wait,	 be	 patient;	 the
reality	that	is	coming	closer	to	you	will	reveal	itself	to	you.	But	before	it	reveals,
if	 you	 take	 some	 interpretation	 to	 your	 heart,	 then	 you	 are	 again	 closed.	 You
close	 your	 doors	 and	 then	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	 know	what	was	 really	 going	 to
happen.
Just	 the	 other	 night	 a	 SANNYASIN	was	 crying,	weeping:	 she	 had	 become	 so
afraid	of	Dynamic	Meditation,	because	she	saw	one	SANNYASIN	almost	going
mad	 in	 it.	 So	 she	 became	 very	 afraid.	 The	 fear	 arose	 in	 her	 that	 if	 this	 could
happen	 to	one	person,	 this	could	happen	 to	her	also.	The	very	words	 'dynamic
meditation',	 she	 could	 not	 utter,	 because	 the	moment	 she	would	 say	 'dynamic
meditation',	 she	 would	 start	 shaking	 and	 crying.	 She	 could	 not	 relate	 it
accurately,	what	had	happened,	because	the	very	words
'dynamic	meditation'...She	became	so	much	afraid	of	the	very	word	that	she	was
not	able	to	relate	the	whole	thing,	what	had	happened.	Only	in	fragments	could
she	say	that	somebody	was	becoming	almost	mad,	and	not	only	that,	but	the	one
who	 was	 becoming	 mad	 just	 by	 her	 side	 started	 pulling	 her	 hand	 also.	 That
became	very	symbolic.	This	madman	was	going	mad	himself,	and	trying	to	pull
her	in	also.	But	a	deep	fear	of	madness	is	in	everybody.
If	you	are	too	afraid	of	madness	you	cannot	be	in	love,	you	cannot	meditate,	you
cannot	pray,	because	all	of	 these	dimensions	are,	 in	 a	way,	mad	dimensions	 --
you	 wi]l	 be	 going	 beyond	 the	 normal	 boundary	 of	 humanity.	 The	 normal,
routine,	 workaday	 world,	 the	 normal	 logic,	 reason,	 the	 so-called	 normal
humanity	--	you	will	be	going	beyond	it,	you	will	be	transcending	it.	It	will	look
like	madness.
Bauls	say,
Mad,	mad,	we	are	all	mad!
Why	is	this	word
so	derogatory	then?
Diving	deep
into	the	heart's	stream,
you	will	find	that	no	one	is	better
than,	the	one	who	is	mad.
Madness	 is	 possible	 in	 two	ways:	 either	you	 fall	 below	 the	normal,	 or	 you	go
above	the	normal.	In	both	ways	you	become	mad.	If	you	fall	below	the	normal
you	are	ill;	you	need	psychiatric	treatment	to	be	pulled	back	to	normality.	If	you
go	beyond	the	normal	you	are	not	ill.	For	the	first	time	you	are	becoming	really
healthy,	because	for	 the	first	 time	you	are	filled	with	wholeness.	Then	don't	be
afraid.	If	your	madness	brings	you	more	sanity	in	life,	then	don't	be	afraid.	And
remember,	 the	madness	 that	 is	below	 the	normal	 is	 always	 involuntary;	 that	 is
the	symptom:	it	is	involuntary.	You	cannot	do	it,	it	happens;	you	are	pulled	into
it.	And	the	madness	that	is	above	the	normal	is	voluntary	--	you	can	do	it	--
and	because	you	can	do	 it,	you	remain	 the	master	of	 it.	You	can	stop	 it	at	any
moment.	 If	 you	 don't	 want	 to	 go	 further,	 you	 can	 stop	 it;	 if	 you	 want	 to	 go
further,	you	can	go	on	--
but	you	remain	always	in	control.
In	these	meditations	here,	our	whole	effort	is	to	give	you	a	taste	of	the	madness
that	is	beyond	the	normal,	but	you	remain	the	master.	Any	moment	you	want	to
come	back,	you	can	come	back.	This	 is	 the	 indication	 that	you	don't	need	any
psychiatric	help.	This	is	totally	different	from	ordinary	madness:	you	are	going
on	your	own.	And	remember,	if	you	go	on	your	own,	you	will	never	be	neurotic
because	 you	 will	 release	 all	 possibilities	 of	 madness.	 You	 will	 not	 go	 on
accumulating	them.	Ordinarily,	we	go	on	repressing.
The	SANNYASIN	who	was	 so	 afraid	 had	 repressed	much	madness	 in	 herself.
Now	she	was	afraid	to	do	meditation.	That	can	create	trouble	someday.	One	day,
the	cup	can	be	too	full	and	overflowing;	then	she	will	not	be	able	to	control	it.
Right	now	is	the	moment	to	allow	it,	to	move	into	catharsis,	to	throw	it	out,	to
act	it	out,	so	you	are	cleaned	of	it	and	your	system	is	cleaned	of	it.	But	then	you
interpret,	and	fear	arises.
Whenever	God	approaches	you,	you	will	see	 that	you	are	going	mad.	You	will
vibrate	 into	a	new	rhythm;	your	whole	body	will	be	full	of	shivering,	shaking;
you	will	 feel	 a	new	energy	pouring	 into	you,	 and	 the	energy	 is	 so	 tremendous
that	your	capacity	is	not	that	much.	By	and	by,	your	capacity	will	grow.	By	and
by,	you	will	be	able	to	absorb	it.
By	and	by,	the	shaking	and	trembling	will	disappear.	By	and	by,	you	will	become
perfectly	silent	--	but	it	takes	time.
The	Bauls	say,
That	enchanting	river
reflects	the	very	form
of	the	formless	one.
Sense	the	essence
of	matter....
You	see	only	a	little	bit	of	life	and	remain	involved	in	it	in	drunken	stupor.	You
are	satisfied	with	very,	very	little,	with	a	very	small	fragment.	While	you	could
have	been	a	king,	you	are	content	with	being	a	beggar.	You	are	born	to	be	a	king,
but	you	have	become	habituated	to	being	a	beggar	--	and	you	think	this	is	your
vocation,	to	be	a	beggar.	In	sleep,	we	are	dreaming	something	which	we	are	not.
Today's	poem	says,
NOTHING	HAS	HAPPENED
AND	NOTHING	WILL	HAPPEN.
WHAT	IS	THERE,	IS	THERE.
I	BECAME	A	KING
IN	MY	DREAM
AND	MY	SUBJECTS
OCCUPIED	THE	ENTIRE	EARTH.
I	SAT	ON	A	THRONE
RULING	LIKE	A	LION,
LIVING	A	HAPPY	LIFE.
THE	WORLD	OBEYED	ME.
AS	I	TURNED	IN	MY	BED
ALL	WAS	CLEAR:
I	WAS	NOT	A	LION,
BUT	A	LION'S	UNCLE,
A	JACKASS,
THE	VILLAGE	IDIOT....
Turn	 in	 your	 sleep	 and	 you	will	 see;	 immediately	 the	 dream	 changes.	 That	 is
what	I	call	SANNYAS	--	turning	in	your	sleep.	Take	a	turn,	and	you	will	see	the
dream	changes.
Just	a	small	turn	from	this	side	to	that,	and	you	can	never	catch	hold	of	the	same
dream	 again	 --	 because	 dreams	 are	 not	 real.	 You	 cannot	 re-continue	 a	 broken
dream.	Once	broken,	it	is	broken	forever.	It	is...there	is	no	way	to	catch	hold	of
it.	You	cannot	re-connect	yourself	with	the	dream.	And	in	dreams	we	are	many
things.
Chuang	Tzu	says,	"In	dream,	I	saw	myself	becoming	a	butterfly.	In	the	morning
I	was	very	worried	because	a	great	problem	arose:	if	I	can	become	a	butterfly	in
the	dream,	if	Chuang	Tzu	can	become	a	butterfly	in	the	dream,	then	the	reverse
is	also	possible.	Now	the	butterfly	may	be	dreaming,	and	dreaming	that	she	has
become	 a	 Chuang	 Tzu.	 If	 Chuang	 Tzu	 can	 become	 a	 butterfly,	 why	 can't	 a
butterfly	become	a	Chuang	Tzu?"
So	Chuang	Tzu	gathered	together	his	disciples	and	asked,	"Please	tell	me,	who
am	I	--	the	butterfly	dreaming?"
In	fact,	he	was	giving	a	koan	to	his	disciples.	I	know	that	he	had	never	dreamt.
Men	like	Chuang	Tzu	don't	dream.	When	dreaming	stops,	then	a	man	becomes
like	Chuang	Tzu.
He	was	giving	a	koan,	and	a	very	beautiful	koan,	a	great	puzzle	to	be	solved	and
meditated	 over.	Those	who	meditate	 over	 it	will	 find:	 you	 are	 neither	Chuang
Tzu,	 nor	 a	 butterfly;	 both	 are	 dreams.	 You	 are	 neither	 the	 lion	 nor	 the	 lion's
uncle;	both	are	dreams.
You	are	the	one	who	recognizes	the	dream;	you	are	the	witness.
Only	the	witness	is	the	real.
In	the	day,	you	are	awake,	doing	a	thousand	and	one	things.	In	the	night,	you	fall
asleep	and	you	forget	all	about	the	day:	your	wife,	your	husband,	your	children	-
-	so	close	to	you	--	even	they	are	no	more	there.	You	forget	all	about	the	world.
You	 enter	 into	 a	 totally	 different	 dimension.	 You	 forget	 your	 degrees,	 your
riches,	 your	 bank	 balance;	 you	 forget	 everything,	 even	 your	 name.	 Another
world	 opens.	 You	 take	 another	 name,	 another	 identity,	 another	 wife,	 other
children,	another	profession.	In	the	morning	again	you	are	back	in	the	old	dream,
and	this	goes	on.	If	a	person	lives	ninety	years,	he	will	dream	for	thirty	years.	It
is	not	a	small	time.	One-third	of	the	time	you	are	dreaming,	in	sleep.	Thirty	years
out	of	ninety	years	is	as	big	as	your	so-called	world.	The	world	is	also	a	dream,
maybe	 a	 common	 dream	 --	we	 dream	 together;	 and	 in	 the	 night	 the	 dream	 is
private	 --	 you	 dream	 alone,	 but	 it	makes	 no	 difference:	 private	 or	 common,	 a
dream	is	a	dream.
But	what	is	the	definition	of	a	dream	then?	How	to	define	dream,	how	to	make	it
distinct,	 and	how	 to	distinguish	 it	 from	reality?	The	Eastern	definition	 is:	 if	 in
your	mind	there	is	any	thought,	then	it	is	dream.	If	the	mind	is	thoughtless,	then
whatsoever	is,	is	real	--
because	the	thought	process	creates	 the	flux-like	life.	It	gives	an	appearance	to
the	permanent,	as	if	it	is	momentary.
The	Bauls	say,
A	man	unknown	to	me,	and	I,
we	both	live	together,
but	with	a	gap
of	millions	of	miles
between	us.
That	is	what	they	call	the	essential	man.
You	are	two:	one	is	the	essential	man	at	the	center,	and	one	is	the	acquired	man
at	 the	 periphery.	 And	 these	 two	 exist	 far	 apart,	 and	 you	 have	 become	 too
identified	with	the	periphery.	How	to	fall	back	to	the	center,	to	the	essential	man,
the	ADHAR	MANUSH?
Witnessing	is	the	way.	Do	whatsoever	you	are	doing	but	remain	a	witness.	Watch
it,	 observe	 it,	 continue	 to	 remember	 yourself.	Walking	 on	 the	 road,	 remember
that	 there	 is	a	point	 inside	you	which	 is	not	walking,	which	has	never	walked,
which	cannot	walk	with	you.	 It	has	no	 legs	 to	walk.	That	point	 is	your	center.
Through	that	center	you	will	come	to	know	the	reality,	the	reality	that	Bauls	sing
of:
NOTHING	HAS	HAPPENED,
AND	NOTHING	WILL	HAPPEN.
WHAT	IS	THERE,	IS	THERE.
Once	you	touch	your	source	of	permanence,	your	eternity,	you	have	touched	the
eternity	of	life	also.	Parallel	to	you,	things	happen.	If	you	are	at	the	center,	you
are	capable	of	 looking	 into	 the	very	center	of	 life.	 If	you	are	on	 the	periphery,
you	are	capable	of	only	looking	at	the	periphery	of	life.	The	periphery	goes	on
changing.
Have	you	seen	a	bullock-cart	moving?	The	wheel	moves,	goes	on	moving,	but	at
the	 center	 of	 the	wheel	 something	 remains	 permanent.	On	 that	 permanent	 hub
the	wheel	moves.	On	that	unmoving	hub	the	wheel's	movement	exists.	Exactly
like	 that,	 you	 have	 a	 hub	 --	 that	 hub	 is	 unmoving;	 and	 you	 have	 a	wheel-like
personality	that	goes	on	moving.
You	have	travelled	far,	thousands	of	miles	and	thousands	of	lives,	and	the	wheel
knows	many	roads	and	many	paths,	but	the	hub	has	remained	where	it	is.	Now
you	can	look	at	reality	in	two	ways:	either	from	the	wheel	--	then	everything	is
changing	every	moment;	or	from	the	hub	--	then	nothing	is	changing.
"Nothing	has	happened	and	nothing	will	happen.	What	is	there,	is	there."
How	to	find	this	hub	of	life?	--	by	becoming	a	witness,	one	finds	it.	Eating,	eat	--
but	remember	that	there	is	a	point	inside	you	which	has	never	eaten.	Food	goes
into	 the	 body;	 your	 consciousness	 remains	 watching.	 Somebody	 insults	 you,
anger	 arises;	 you	 remain	 a	 witness.	 The	 insult	 comes	 from	 outside,	 the	 anger
arises	on	the	periphery,	and	you	remain	at	the	center,	watching.	Yes,	somebody
has	 done	 something,	 provoked	 your	 periphery,	 and	 there	 is	 anger	 on	 the
periphery,	and	 the	anger	 is	surrounding	you	 like	a	smoke	cloud,	but	you	are	at
the	hub,	watching.	You	are	not	 identified	with	 the	periphery.	Then	the	insult	 is
outside,	and	the	anger	is	also	outside	of	you.	Both	are	separate	and	far	away.
Both	are	different	from	you.
When	 this	 awareness	 grows,	 dreaming	 stops,	 by	 and	 by.	When	 this	 awareness
grows,	the	wheel	moves	slower	and	slower,	because	there	is	no	point.	You	never
move,	so	what	is	the	point	of	travelling	the	whole	earth?	You	remain	the	same;
then	desires	slow	down.
One	day	it	happens:	the	wheel	is	as	silent,	as	unmoving	as	the	hub.	That	is	the
point	when	enlightenment	happens.
The	Bauls	say,
Scanning	the	cosmos
you	waste	your	hours.
He	is	present
in	this	little	vessel.
In	this	little	body
He	has	made	His	abode.
He	is	here
in	this	little	vessel;
in	you.
He	is	there,
the	God	of	Gods,
the	King	of	Kings,
the	Beloved.
Scanning	the	cosmos	you	waste	your	hours.	Moving	from	this	point	to	that	you
are	unnecessarily	troubling	yourself,	creating	misery.	Look,	see	into	your	being;
penetrate	 into	 the	 hub.	And	 the	Bauls	 say	 this	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 become
very	humble.
That's	why	they	say,
I	BECAME	A	KING
IN	MY	DREAM,
AND	MY	SUBJECTS
OCCUPIED	THE	ENTIRE	EARTH.
The	dream	is	always	egoistic;	the	ego	is	the	dream.
I	BECAME	A	KING
IN	MY	DREAM
AND	MY	SUBJECTS
OCCUPIED	THE	ENTIRE	EARTH.
I	SAT	ON	THE	THRONE
RULING	LIKE	A	LION,
LIVING	A	HAPPY	LIFE.
THE	WORLD	OBEYED	ME.
This	is	what	ego	is....
AS	I	TURNED	IN	MY	BED
ALL	WAS	CLEAR:
I	WAS	NOT	A	LION
BUT	A	LION'S	UNCLE,
A	JACKASS,
THE	VILLAGE	IDIOT....
When	one	understands,	one	becomes	humble.	Then	one	says,	"I	am	just	an	idiot,
a	jackass.''	One	laughs	at	one's	own	ridiculousness.
The	Bauls	sing,
The	act	of	finding
is	not	for	the	highest.
By	being	humble
you	can	reach	life's	goal.
Clouds	pour	down
on	the	hollow	of	the	earth,
but	the	lowest	of	the	wells
guards	the	water
as	a	blessing.
Become	humble.	 If	you	start	becoming	humble,	dreams	will	 start	disappearing
because	 dreams	 are	 possible	 only	 with	 the	 ego.	 The	 ego	 is	 the	 dreamer,	 the
creator	 of	 the	 dreams,	 the	 projector.	 That's	 why	 all	 the	 religions	 insist	 on
humbleness.	Jesus	goes	on	saying	to	his	disciples,	"Be	poor	in	spirit...blessed	are
the	poor,	blessed	are	the	meek,	for	they	shall	inherit	the	earth."	Nobody	has	ever
seen	the	poor	inheriting	the	earth.	Nobody	has	ever	seen	the	meek	inheriting	the
earth.	Then	why	does	Jesus	go	on	repeating	it?	He	himself	was	crucified;	even
he	was	 not	 able	 to	 inherit	 the	 earth.	But	 he	 is	 talking	 about	 some	other	 earth,
about	some	other	reality	--	a	separate	reality.	He	is	not	talking	about	this	earth.
This	earth	is	the	battlefield	of	the	egos,	great	competition	of	the	egos:	struggle,
fight,	war.	But	when	he	 says,	 "Blessed	are	 the	meek,	blessed	are	 the	poor,	 for
they	shall	inherit	the	earth,"	he	means,	they	shall	inherit	the	real.	People	who	are
in	 their	 egos	 may	 inherit	 kingdoms	 in	 dreams,	 but	 their	 kingdoms	 are	 futile
because	they	are	just	their	own	dreams,	nothing	else.
The	act	of	finding
is	not	for	the	highest.
By	being	humble
you	can	reach	life's	goal.
Clouds	pour	down
on	the	hollow	of	the	earth,
but	the	lowest	of	the	wells
guards	the	water
as	a	blessing.
I	have	heard	a	story:	Willy	Jones	dreamed	that	he	had	died.	After	the	funeral,	he
found	himself	in	a	gigantic	room,	lavishly	furnished.	He	rested	on	an	overstuffed
couch	 for	 a	 while,	 but	 after	 an	 hour	 or	 so	 he	 began	 to	 get	 bored.	 "Is	 there
anybody	here?"	he	shouted.
In	a	minute,	a	white	robed	attendant	appeared.
"What	do	you	want?"	he	asked.
"What	can	I	have?"	Willy	asked.
The	attendant	shrugged,	"Anything	you	want."	Willy	asked	for	something	to	eat.
"What	 do	 you	want	 to	 eat?"	 the	 attendant	 asked.	 "You	 can	 have	 anything	 you
want."	And	so	they	brought	him	just	what	he	wanted,	and	he	went	on	eating	and
sleeping	and	having	a	fine	time.
He	began	to	feel	bored	after	a	while,	and	finally	he	shouted	for	the	attendant	and
insisted,
"I	want	something	to	do!"
"I'm	 sorry,"	 the	 attendant	 told	 him,	 "but	 that	 is	 the	 one	 thing	 that	 we	 can't
provide."
Willy	looked	around	him.	"I	am	sick	and	tired	of	it,"	he	said.	"I	would	rather	go
to	hell."
"Well,"	said	the	attendant,	"where	do	you	think	you	are?"
The	hell	is	a	place	where	you	cannot	do	anything,	because	doing	is	possible	only
in	reality.	Dreaming	is	possible	in	hell,	doing	is	not	possible.	If	you	are	living	in
your	 dreaming,	 you	 are	 living	 in	 a	 hell.	 You	may	 dream	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
things,	but	you	cannot	DO	anything.
Watch...you	want	 to	be	happy,	but	why	can't	you	be	happy?	Suddenly,	you	are
impotent.
You	 want	 to	 be	 happy,	 you	 dream	 about	 it,	 but	 who	 is	 preventing	 you?	 Be
happy?	--	then	suddenly	you	feel	impotent.	You	want	peace,	silence;	you	desire
your	dream.	But	who	is	preventing	you?	--	just	be	silent;	then	suddenly	you	feel
powerless.	 Doing	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 you	 are	 in	 contact	 with	 reality.
Dreaming	is	possible	on	your	own;	you	can	go	on	dreaming.
So	let	this	be	your	criterion:	if	you	really	want	to	be	happy,	then	find	out	a	way
to	 be	 in	 contact	with	 reality,	 and	 you	will	 be	 happy.	 Just	 go	 on	 dreaming	 and
don't	 try	 to	 find	 a	 way	 to	 reality	 --	 then	 you	 will	 be	 dreaming,	 and	 you	 will
become	more	 and	 more	 unhappy,	 because	 again	 and	 again	 you	 will	 find	 that
happiness	is	not	happening.
Doing	is	a	function	of	the	real;	dreaming	is	the	function	of	the	unreal.
The	Bauls	say,
You	must	be	single-minded
to	visit	the	court
of	my	beloved.
If	your	mind	is	torn	in	two,
you	will	swim	in	a	quandary
and	never	reach	the	shore.
The	dreamer's	mind	is	divided	in	two:	in	witnessing	and	dreaming.	Then	you	are
not	one;	you	are	split.	While	you	are	simply	witnessing	you	are	one.	There	is	no
duality	in	you.
You	are	--	 that's	all.	So	try	 to	become	one,	single-minded.	Whatsoever	you	are
doing,	try	to	become	one.	To	say	that	you	are	dual	is	not	true	--	you	are	many,
you	 are	 a	 crowd.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 that	 you	 are	 two,	 you	 are	 many.	 Bring	 these
fragments	 together.	 Any	 one	 thing,	 continuously	 followed,	 will	 help	 you	 to
crystallize.
For	example:	meditators	 try	 to	meditate	continuously.	They	do	a	 thousand	and
one	things,	other	things,	but	one	thing	continues	as	a	current,	as	a	thread	running
underground.	They	eat,	but	they	make	a	meditation	out	of	eating.	They	walk,	but
they	make	a	meditation	out	of	walking.	They	 talk,	but	 they	make	a	meditation
out	of	talking.	They	listen,	but	they	listen	meditatively.	They	do	many	things,	but
they	connect	everything	with	meditation.
That	becomes	their	one-mindedness.
Lovers,	 the	 followers	of	 the	path	of	 love,	Bauls,	make	 love	 their	undercurrent.
They	eat,	but	 they	eat	with	love.	The	walk,	but	 they	walk	with	love	--	because
the	earth	is	holy	ground.	They	sit	under	a	tree;	they	sit	with	love	--	because	the
tree	is	divine.	They	look	at	somebody;	they	look	with	love	--	because	there	also
is	divinity.	Everywhere	they	see	their	beloved,	in	each	movement	they	remember
their	beloved.	It	becomes	their	constant	remembrance.
But	whether	on	the	path	of	meditation	or	on	the	path	of	love,	one	thing	has	to	be
done.
Doing	a	thousand	and	one	things,	you	have	to	connect	them	with	one	thing.	That
connection,	that	running	thread	will	make	you	one-pointed,	one-minded.	It	will
give	you	integration.	In	that	integration,	dreams	dissolve.	It	is	the	crowd	within
you	which	dreams,	it	is	the	split	that	dreams.	When	the	split	is	bridged,	dreams
disappear	 --	 because	 then	 you	 start	 enjoying	 being	 here	 and	 now	 so
tremendously	 that	 who	 bothers	 to	 desire?	 Who	 has	 time	 to	 think	 about	 the
tomorrow?	Today	is	more	than	enough.	A	single	moment	of	undivided	being	is
so	big,	bigger	than	eternity.
Then	nobody	thinks	about	the	past	--	the	gone	is	gone;	and	nobody	thinks	about
the	future
--	that	which	has	not	come	yet,	has	not	come	yet.	One	simply	goes	deeper	and
deeper	into	the	present,	and	that	is	the	door	of	God.
The	present	is	the	door,	and	your	single-mindedness	is	the	key.
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	The	only	criterion	is	your	thirst
24	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606240
ShortTitle:
BELOV104
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
98
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
HOW	TO	START	THE	JOURNEY?	WHAT	DOES	IT	EXACTLY	MEAN	TO
TRANSCEND	SEX?
THE	JOURNEY	HAS	ALREADY	STARTED;	you	are	in	the	journey.	This	has
to	be	recognized.	Unconsciously,	you	are	inthe	journey:	that's	why	it	feels	as	if
you	 have	 to	 start	 it.	 Recognize	 it,	 become	 conscious	 about	 it;	 the	 very
recognition	 becomes	 the	 beginning.	 The	 moment	 you	 recognize	 that	 you	 are
always	 moving	 going	 somewhere-knowingly,	 unknowingly,	 willingly,
unwillingly-but	 you	 are	 going...some	 great	 force	 is	 constantly	 working	within
you:	God	is	evolving.	He	is	constantly	creating	something	within	you,	so	it	is	not
how	 to	 start	 it.	The	 right	question	will	 be,	how	 to	 recognize	 it.	 It	 is	 there,	 but
recognition	is	not	there.
For	example,	trees	die,	but	they	don't	know;	birds	and	animals	die,	but	they	don't
know.
Only	man	 knows	 that	 he	 has	 to	 die.	 That	 knowledge	 is	 also	 very	 cloudy,	 not
clear	--	and	the	same	is	so	with	life.	The	birds	are	alive,	but	they	don't	know	that
they	are	alive	--
because	how	can	you	know	 life	 if	 you	don't	 know	death?	How	can	you	know
that	you	are	alive	if	you	don't	know	that	you	are	going	to	die?	Both	recognitions
come	together.	They	are	alive,	but	they	don't	recognize	that	they	are	alive.	Man
recognizes,	 a	 little,	 that	 he	 is	 going	 to	 die,	 but	 that	 recognition	 remains	 very
cloudy,	hidden	in	deep	smoke.	And	the	same	is	true	about	life:	you	are	alive,	but
you	don't	know	exactly	what	being	alive	means.
That	too	is	cloudy,	not	clear.	When	I	say	recognition,	I	mean	becoming	alert	to
what	 this	 life	 energy	 is,	 that	 is	 already	on	 the	way.	To	become	aware	of	 one's
own	being	is	the	beginning	of	the	journey.	To	come	to	a	point	where	you	are	so
absolutely	alert	that	not	even	a	fragment	of	darkness	exists	around	you	is	the	end
of	 the	 journey.	 But	 in	 fact,	 the	 journey	 never	 starts	 and	 never	 ends.	 You	will
continue	 even	 after	 that,	 but	 then	 the	 journey	 will	 have	 a	 totally	 different
meaning,	a	totally	different	quality	to	it	--	it	will	be	sheer	delight.	Right	now	it	is
near	misery.
"How	to	start	the	journey?"	--	become	more	alert	about	your	actions,	about	your
relationships,	 about	 your	movements.	Whatsoever	 you	 do	 --	 even	 an	 ordinary
thing	like	walking	on	the	street	--	try	to	become	alert,	try	to	take	steps	with	full
awareness.	Buddha	used	to	say	to	his	disciples,	"When	you	take	a	step	with	the
right	 foot,	 remember,	now	this	 is	 the	right	 foot;	when	you	 take	a	step	with	 the
left,	remember,	now	this	is	the	left.
When	 you	 breathe	 in,	 remember,	 "Now	 I	 am	breathing	 in";	when	 you	 breathe
out,	remember,	"Now	I	am	breathing	out."	Not	that	you	have	to	verbalize	it.	Not
that	you	have	to	say	in	words	"I	am	breathing	in",	but	 just	becoming	alert	 that
now	 the	 breath	 is	 going	 in.	 I	 am	 saying	 it	 to	 you	 so	 I	 have	 to	 use	words,	 but
when	 you	 are	 becoming	 alert	 you	 need	 not	 use	words	 because	words	 are	 like
smoke.	Don't	 use	words	 --	 just	 feel	 the	 breath	 going	 in	 and	 filling	 your	 lungs
then	being	emptied.	Just	watch,	and	soon	you	will	come	to	a	recognition,	a	great
recognition.	 that	 it	 is	not	simply	breathing	 that	goes	 in	and	out,	 it	 is	 life	 itself.
Each	 breath	 in	 is	 life	 infusing	 its	 energy	 into	 you.	 Each	 breath	 out	 is	 a	 short
death.	With	each	breath,	you	die	and	you	are	reborn.	Each	breath	is	a	crucifixion
and	a	resurrection.
And	 when	 you	 watch	 it,	 you	 will	 come	 to	 know	 a	 beautiful	 feeling	 of	 trust.
When	you	breathe	out,	there	is	no	certainty	that	you	wiil	ever	be	able	to	breathe
in	 again.	What	 is	 the	 certainty?	Who	 has	 guaranteed	 it?	Who	CAN	guarantee
that	you	will	be	able	to	breathe	in	again?	But	somehow,	a	deep	trust;	you	know
that	 "I	 will	 breathe	 again".	 Otherwise	 breathing	 would	 become	 impossible.	 If
you	 become	 so	 afraid	 that,	 "Who	 knows	 if	 I	 let	 my	 breath	 out,	 and	 if	 I	 go
through	 this	 small	 death,	what	 is	 the	 certainty	 that	 I	will	 be	 able	 to	breathe	 in
again?	 If	 I	can't	breathe,	 then	 it	 is	better	not	 to	breathe	out",	 then	you	will	die
immediately.	 If	 you	 stop	breathing	out,	 you	will	 die.	But	 a	deep	 trust	 exists	 --
that	trust	is	part	of	life.	Nobody	has	taught	you.
When	a	child	starts	walking	for	the	first	time,	tremendous	trust	exists	in	him	that
he	will	be	able	to	walk.	Nobody	has	taught	him.	He	has	just	seen	other	people
walk,	that's	all.
But	how	can	he	come	to	a	conclusion	that	"I	will	be	able	to	walk"?	He	is	so	tiny.
People	 are	 so	 big,	 giants	 compared	 to	 him,	 and	 he	 knows	 that	 whenever	 he
stands	he	falls	down	-
-	but	still	he	tries.	Trust	is	in-built.	It	is	in	your	every	cell	of	life.	He	tries,	many
times	he	will	fall;	he	will	try	again	and	again	and	again.	And	one	day,	trust	wins
over	and	he	starts	walking.
If	you	watch	your	breath	you	will	become	aware	of	a	deep	layer	of	trust,	a	subtle
trust	in	life	--	no	doubt,	no	hesitation.	If	you	walk,	and	walk	alert,	by	and	by	you
will	become	aware	that	you	are	not	walking,	you	are	'being	walked	by'.	That's	a
very	 subtle	 feeling:	 that	 life	 is	moving	 through	 you,	 not	 that	 you	 are	moving.
When	you	feel	hungry,	if	you	are	aware	you	will	see	life	is	feeling	hungry	within
you,	not	you.
Becoming	more	alert	will	make	you	conscious	of	the	fact	that	there	is	only	one
thing	you	have	got	that	you	can	call	yours	and	that	is	witnessing.	Everything	else
belongs	to	the	universe;	only	witnessing	belongs	to	you.	But	when	you	become
aware	 of	witnessing,	 even	 the	 idea	 of	 being	 I	 is	 dissolved.	 That	 too	 does	 not
belong	 to	you.	That	was	part	of	darkness,	part	of	 the	clouds	 that	had	gathered
around	 you.	 In	 the	 clear	 light,	 when	 the	 sky	 is	 open	 and	 the	 clouds	 have
disappeared	and	the	sun	is	bright,	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	idea	of	being	I.
Then	simply	witnessing	is;	nothing	belongs	to	you.	That	witnessing	is	the	goal	of
the	journey.
How	 to	 start	 the	 journey?	 --	 start	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 a	 witness.
Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 do	 it	with	 deep	 alertness;	 then	 even	 small	 things	 become
sacred.	Then	cooking	or	cleaning	become	sacred;	they	become	worship.	It	is	not
a	question	of	what	you	are	doing,	the	question	is	how	you	are	doing	it.	You	can
clean	the	floor	like	a	robot,	a	mechanical	thing;	you	have	to	clean	it,	so	you	clean
it.	Then	you	miss	something	beautiful.	Then	you	waste	 those	moments	 in	only
cleaning	 the	 floor.	Cleaning	 the	 floor	 could	have	been	a	great	 experience;	you
missed	 it.	The	 floor	 is	cleaned	but	something	 that	could	have	happened	within
you	has	not	happened.	If	you	were	aware,	not	only	the	floor	but	YOU
would	 have	 felt	 a	 deep	 cleansing.	Clean	 the	 floor	 full	 of	 awareness,	 luminous
with	awareness.	Work	or	sit	or	walk,	but	one	thing	has	to	be	a	continuous	thread:
make	more	 and	more	moments	 of	 your	 life	 luminous	with	 awareness.	 Let	 the
candle	of	awareness	burn	in	each	moment,	in	each	act.	The	cumulative	effect	is
what	enlightenment	is.	The	cumulative	effect,	all	the	moments	together,	all	small
candles	together,	become	a	great	source	of	light.
And	 the	 second	part	 of	 the	 question	 is:	 "WHAT	DOES	 IT	EXACTLY	MEAN
TO
TRANSCEND	SEX?"
Sex	 is	 a	 subtle	 subject,	 delicate,	 because	 centuries	 of	 exploitation,	 corruption,
centuries	of	perverted	ideas,	conditioning,	are	associated	with	the	word	'sex'.	The
word	is	very	loaded.
It	is	one	of	the	most	loaded	words	in	existence.	You	say	'God';	it	seems	empty.
You	say
'sex';	 it	 seems	 too	 loaded.	 A	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 arise	 in	 the	mind:	 fear,
perversion,	 attraction,	 a	 tremendous	 desire,	 and	 a	 tremendous	 anti-desire	 also.
They	all	arise	together.
Sex	--	the	very	word	creates	confusion,	a	chaos.	It	is	as	if	somebody	has	thrown
a	rock	in	a	silent	pool;	millions	of	ripples	arise	--	just	the	word	'sex'!	Humanity
has	lived	under	very	wrong	ideas.
So	the	first	 thing:	why	do	you	ask	how	to	transcend	sex?	Why	do	you	want	 in
the	first	place	to	transcend	sex?	You	are	using	a	beautiful	word,	'transcend',	but
out	of	a	hundred,	ninety-nine	are	the	possibilities	that	you	mean,	'How	to	repress
sex?'
A	person	who	has	understood	that	sex	has	to	be	transcended	is	not	even	worried
about	 transcending	 it,	 because	 transcendence	 comes	 through	 experience.	 You
cannot	manage	it.
It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 have	 to	 do.	 You	 simply	 pass	 through	 many
experiences,	and	those	experiences	make	you	more	and	more	mature.
Have	you	watched	 that	 at	 a	 certain	 age,	 sex	becomes	 important?	Not	 that	 you
make	it	important.	It	is	not	something	that	you	make	happen;	it	happens.	At	the
age	of	fourteen,	somewhere	near	there,	suddenly	the	energy	is	flooded	with	sex.
It	 happens	 as	 if	 the	 flood-gates	 have	 been	 opened	 in	 you.	 Subtle	 sources	 of
energy	 which	 were	 not	 yet	 open	 have	 become	 open,	 and	 your	 whole	 energy
becomes	sexual,	colored	with	sex.	You	think	sex,	you	sing	sex,	you	walk	sex	--
everything	 becomes	 sexual.	 Every	 act	 is	 colored.	 This	 happens;	 you	 have	 not
done	anything	about	it.	It	is	natural;	transcendence	is	also	natural.
If	 sex	 is	 lived	 totally,	with	no	 condemnation,	with	no	 idea	of	 getting	 rid	of	 it,
then	at	the	age	of	forty-two	--	just	as	at	the	age	of	fourteen	sex	gets	opened	and
the	whole	energy	becomes	sexual,	at	the	age	of	forty-two	or	near	about	--	those
flood-gates	close	again.
And	that	too	is	as	natural	as	sex	becoming	alive;	it	starts	disappearing.
Sex	 is	 transcended	not	by	any	effort	on	your	part.	 If	you	make	any	effort	 that
will	be	 repressive,	because	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	you.	 It	 is	 in-built	 in	your
body,	in	your	biology.	You	are	born	as	sexual	beings;	nothing	is	wrong	in	it.	That
is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 be	 born.	 To	 be	 human	 is	 to	 be	 sexual.	 When	 you	 were
conceived,	your	mother	and	your	father	were	not	praying,	they	were	not	listening
to	a	priest's	sermon.	They	were	not	in	the	church,	they	were	making	love.	Even
to	think	that	your	mother	and	father	were	making	love	when	you	were	conceived
seems	to	be	difficult.	They	were	making	love;	their	sexual	energies	were	meeting
and	merging	into	each	other.	Then	you	were	conceived;	in	a	deep	sexual	act	you
were	conceived.	The	first	cell	was	a	sex	cell,	and	then	out	of	that	cell	other	cells
have	arisen.	But	each	cell	remains	sexual,	basically.	Your	whole	body	is	sexual,
made	of	sex	cells.	Now	they	are	millions.
Remember	 it:	you	exist	as	a	sexual	being.	Once	you	accept	 it,	 the	conflict	 that
has	 been	 created	 down	 through	 the	 centuries	 dissolves.	 Once	 you	 accept	 it
deeply,	with	no	ideas	in	between,	when	sex	is	thought	of	as	simply	natural,	you
live	 it.	 You	 don't	 ask	 me	 how	 to	 transcend	 eating,	 you	 don't	 ask	 me	 how	 to
transcend	breathing	--	because	no	religion	has	taught	you	to	transcend	breathing,
that's	why.	Otherwise,	you	would	be	asking,	"How	to	transcend	breathing?"	You
breathe!	You	are	a	breathing	animal;	you	are	a	sexual	animal	also.	But	there	is	a
difference.	Fourteen	years	of	your	life,	in	the	beginning,	are	almost	non-sexual,
or	 at	 the	most,	 just	 rudimentary	 sexual	 play	which	 is	 not	 really	 sexual	 --	 just
preparing,	 rehearsing,	 that's	 all.	At	 the	 age	of	 fourteen,	 suddenly	 the	 energy	 is
ripe.
Watch...a	 child	 is	 born	 --	 immediately,	 within	 three	 seconds	 the	 child	 has	 to
breathe,	otherwise	he	will	die.	Then	breathing	is	to	remain	the	whole	of	his	life,
because	 it	 has	 come	 at	 the	 first	 step	 of	 life.	 It	 cannot	 be	 transcended.	Maybe
before	 you	 die	 then,	 just	 three	 seconds	 before,	 it	 will	 stop,	 but	 not	 before	 it.
Always	remember:	both	ends	of	life,	the	beginning	and	end,	are	exactly	similar,
symmetrical.	The	child	 is	born,	he	 starts	breathing	 in	 three	 seconds.	When	 the
child	is	old	and	dying,	 the	moment	he	stops	breathing,	within	three	seconds	he
will	be	dead.
Sex	enters	at	a	very	late	stage:	for	fourteen	years	the	child	has	lived	without	sex.
And	if	the	society	is	not	too	repressed	and	hence	obsessed	with	sex,	a	child	can
live	 completely	oblivious	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 sex,	or	 that	 anything	 like	 sex,	 exists.
The	child	can	 remain	absolutely	 innocent.	That	 innocence	 is	 also	not	possible,
because	people	are	so	repressed.
When	repression	happens,	then	side	by	side,	obsession	also	happens.
So	priests	go	on	repressing;	and	there	are	anti-priests,	Hefners	and	others	--	they
go	on	creating	more	and	more	pornography.	So	on	one	side	there	are	priests	who
go	 on	 repressing,	 and	 then	 there	 are	 others,	 anti-priests,	 who	 go	 on	 making
sexuality	more	and	more	glamorous.	They	both	exist	 together	 --	aspects	of	 the
same	 coin.	 When	 churches	 disappear,	 only	 then	 Playboy	 magazines	 will
disappear,	not	before	 it.	They	are	partners	 in	 the	business.	They	 look	enemies,
but	don't	be	deceived	by	that.	They	talk	against	each	other,	but	that's	how	things
work.
I	have	heard	about	two	men	who	were	out	of	business,	had	gone	broke,	so	they
decided	for	a	business,	a	very	simple	business.	They	started	journeying,	touring
from	one	town	to	another	town.	First	one	would	enter,	and	in	the	night	he	would
throw	coal	tar	on	people's	windows	and	doors.	After	two	or	three	days	the	other
would	 come	 to	 clean.	 He	 would	 advise	 that	 he	 could	 clean	 any	 coal	 tar,	 or
anything	that	had	gone	wrong,	and	he	would	clean	the	windows.	In	that	time	the
other	would	be	doing	half	of	the	business	in	another	town.	This	way,	they	started
earning	much	money.	This	 is	what	 is	happening	between	 the	church	and	Hugh
Hefners	and	people	who	are	continuously	creating	pornography.
I	have	heard....
Pretty	Miss	Keneen	sat	in	the	confessional.	"Father,"	she	said,	"I	want	to	confess
that	I	let	my	boyfriend	kiss	me."
"Is	that	all	you	did?"	asked	the	priest,	very	interested.
"Well,	no.	I	let	him	put	his	hand	on	my	leg	too."
"And	then	what?"
"And	then	I	let	him	pull	down	my	panties."
"And	then,	and	then...?"
"And	then	me	mother	walked	into	the	room."
"Oh	shit,"	sighed	the	priest.
It	is	together;	they	are	partners	in	a	conspiracy.	Whenever	you	are	too	repressed,
you	start	finding	a	perverse	interest.	A	perverted	interest	is	the	problem,	not	sex.
Now	this	priest	is	neurotic.	Sex	is	not	the	problem,	but	this	man	is	in	trouble.
Sisters	Margaret	 Alice	 and	 Francis	 Catherine	 were	 out	 walking	 along	 a	 side-
street.
Suddenly	they	were	grabbed	by	two	men,	dragged	into	a	dark	alley,	and	raped.
"Father,	forgive	them,"	said	Sister	Margaret	Alice,	"for	they	know	not	what	they
do."
"Shut	up!"	cried	Sister	Catherine,"	this	one	does."
This	 is	bound	 to	be	 so.	So	never	carry	a	 single	 idea	against	 sex	 in	your	mind,
otherwise	you	will	never	be	able	 to	 transcend	it.	People	who	transcend	sex	are
people	who	accept	it	very	naturally.	It	is	difficult,	I	know,	because	you	are	born
in	a	society	which	is	neurotic	about	sex.	Either	this	way	or	that,	but	it	is	neurotic
all	the	same.	It	is	very	difficult	to	get	out	of	this	neurosis,	but	if	you	are	a	little
alert,	you	can	get	out	of	it.	So	the	real	thing	is	not	how	to	transcend	sex,	but	how
to	 transcend	 this	 perverted	 ideology	 of	 the	 society:	 this	 fear	 of	 sex,	 this
repression	of	sex,	this	obsession	with	sex.
Sex	is	beautiful.	Sex	in	itself	is	a	natural	rhythmic	phenomenon.	It	happens	when
the	child	is	ready	to	be	conceived,	and	it	is	good	that	it	happens	--	otherwise	life
would	not	 exist.	Life	 exists	 through	 sex;	 sex	 is	 its	medium.	 If	 you	understand
life,	if	you	love	life,	you	will	know	sex	is	sacred,	holy.	Then	you	live	it,	then	you
delight	in	it;	and	as	naturally	as	it	has	come	it	goes,	on	its	own	accord.	By	the
age	of	forty-two,	or	somewhere	near	there,	sex	starts	disappearing	as	naturally	as
it	had	come	into	being.	But	it	doesn't	happen	that	way.
You	will	be	surprised	when	I	say	near	about	forty	two.	You	know	people	who	are
seventy,	eighty,	and	yet	they	have	not	gone	beyond.	You	know	'dirty	old	people'.
They	 are	 victims	 of	 the	 society.	 Because	 they	 could	 not	 be	 natural,	 it	 is	 a
hangover	 --	 because	 they	 repressed	 when	 they	 should	 have	 enjoyed	 and
delighted.	In	those	moments	of	delight	they	were	not	totally	in	it.	They	were	not
orgasmic,	they	were	half-hearted.
So	whenever	you	are	half-hearted	in	anything,	it	lingers	longer.	If	you	are	sitting
at	 your	 table	 and	 eating,	 and	 if	 you	 eat	 only	 half-heartedly	 and	 your	 hunger
remains,	then	you	will	continue	to	think	about	food	the	whole	day.	You	can	try
fasting	and	you	will	see:	you	will	continuously	think	about	food.	But	if	you	have
eaten	well	--	and	when	I	say	eaten	well,	I	don't	mean	only	that	you	have	stuffed
your	stomach.	Then	it	is	not	necessarily	so	that	you	have	eaten	well.	You	could
have	stuffed	yourself,	but	eating	well	is	an	art.	It	 is	not	just	stuffing.	It	 is	great
art:	 to	taste	the	food,	to	smell	the	food,	to	touch	the	food,	to	chew	the	food,	to
digest	the	food,	and	to	digest	it	as	divine.	It	is	divine;	it	is	God's	gift.
Hindus	 say,	ANAM	BRAHMA:	 food	 is	 divine.	 So	with	 deep	 respect	 you	 eat,
and	 while	 eating	 you	 forget	 everything,	 because	 it	 is	 prayer.	 It	 is	 existential
prayer.	You	are	eating	God,	and	God	is	going	to	give	you	nourishment.	It	is	a	gift
to	 be	 accepted	 with	 deep	 love	 and	 gratitude.	 And	 you	 don't	 stuff	 the	 body,
because	stuffing	the	body	is	being	anti-body.
It	is	the	other	pole.	There	are	people	who	are	obsessed	with	fasting,	and	there	are
people	who	are	obsessed	with	 stuffing	 themselves.	Both	 are	wrong	because	 in
both	the	ways	the	body	loses	balance.
A	real	lover	of	the	body	eats	only	to	the	point	where	body	feels	perfectly	quiet,
balanced,	 tranquil;	where	body	feels	 to	be	neither	 leaning	 to	 the	 left	nor	 to	 the
right,	but	just	in	the	middle.	It	is	an	art	to	understand	the	language	of	the	body,	to
understand	the	language	of	your	stomach,	to	understand	what	is	needed,	to	give
only	that	which	is	needed,	and	to	give	that	in	an	artistic	way,	in	an	aesthetic	way.
Animals	eat,	man	eats.	Then	what	is	the	difference?	Man	makes	a	great	aesthetic
experience	out	of	 eating.	What	 is	 the	point	of	having	a	beautiful	dining	 table?
What	is	the	point	of	having	candles	burning	there?	What	is	the	point	of	incense?
What	is	 the	point	of	asking	friends	to	come	and	participate?	It	 is	 to	make	it	an
art,	not	just	stuffing.	But	these	are	outward	signs	of	the	art;	the	inward	signs	are
to	 understand	 the	 language	 of	 your	 body:	 to	 listen	 to	 it,	 to	 be	 sensitive	 to	 its
needs.	And	then	you	eat,	and	then	the	whole	day	you	will	not	remember	food	at
all.	Only	when	the	body	is	hungry	again	will	the	remembrance	come.	Then	it	is
natural.
With	sex	the	same	happens.	If	you	have	no	anti-attitude	about	it,	you	take	it	as	a
natural,	divine	gift,	with	great	gratitude.	You	enjoy	it;	with	prayer	you	enjoy	it.
Tantra	 says	 that	 before	 you	make	 love	 to	 a	 woman	 or	 to	 a	man,	 first	 pray	 --
because	 it	 is	going	 to	be	a	divine	meeting	of	energies.	God	will	 surround	you.
Wherever	 two	 lovers	 are,	 there	 is	 God.	 Wherever	 two	 lovers'	 energies	 are
meeting	 and	 mingling,	 there	 is	 life,	 alive,	 at	 its	 best;	 God	 surrounds	 you.
Churches	are	empty;	love-chambers	are	full	of	God.
If	you	have	tasted	love	the	way	Tantra	says	to	taste	it,	 if	you	have	known	love
the	way	Tao	says	 to	know	 it,	 then	by	 the	 time	you	 reach	 forty-two,	 love	starts
disappearing	on	its	own	accord.	And	you	say	goodbye	to	it	with	deep	gratitude,
because	you	are	fulfilled.	It	has	been	delightful,	it	has	been	a	blessing;	you	say
good-bye	to	it.
And	 forty-two	 is	 the	 age	 for	 meditation,	 the	 right	 age.	 Sex	 disappears;	 that
overflowing	energy	 is	no	more	 there.	One	becomes	more	 tranquil.	Passion	has
gone,	compassion	arises.	Now	there	is	no	more	fever;	one	is	not	interested	in	the
other.	With	sex	disappearing,	the	other	is	no	more	the	focus.	One	starts	returning
towards	one's	own	source	--	the	return	journey	starts.
Sex	is	transcended	not	by	your	effort.	It	happens	if	you	have	lived	it	totally.	So
my	 suggestion	 is,	 drop	 all	 anti-attitudes,	 anti-life	 attitudes	 and	 accept	 the
facticity:	sex	is,	so	who	are	you	to	drop	it?	And	who	is	trying	to	drop	it?	--	it	is
just	the	ego.	Remember,	sex	creates	the	greatest	problem	for	the	ego.
So	 there	 are	 two	 types	of	 people:	 very	 egoistic	 people	 are	 always	 against	 sex;
humble	people	are	never	against	sex.	But	who	listens	to	humble	people?	In	fact,
humble	people	don't	go	preaching,	only	egoists.	Why	is	there	a	conflict	between
sex	 and	 ego?	 --	 because	 sex	 is	 something	 in	 your	 life	 where	 you	 cannot	 be
egoistic,	where	the	other	becomes	more	important	than	you.	Your	woman,	your
man,	 becomes	more	 important	 than	 you.	 In	 every	 other	 case,	 you	 remain	 the
most	 important.	 In	 a	 love	 relationship	 the	other	becomes	very,	very	 important,
tremendously	 important.	 You	 become	 a	 satellite	 and	 the	 other	 becomes	 the
nucleus;	and	the	same	is	happening	for	the	other:	you	become	the	nucleus	and	he
becomes	a	satellite.	It	is	a	reciprocal	surrender.	Both	are	surrendering	to	the	God
of	love,	and	both	become	humble.
Sex	 is	 the	 only	 energy	 that	 gives	 you	hints	 that	 there	 is	 something	which	 you
cannot	control.	Money	you	can	control,	politics	you	can	control,	the	market	you
can	control,	knowledge	you	can	control,	 science	you	can	control,	morality	you
can	control.
Somewhere,	 sex	brings	 in	a	 totally	different	world:	you	cannot	control	 it.	And
the	 ego	 is	 the	 great	 controller.	 It	 is	 happy	 if	 it	 can	 control;	 it	 is	 unhappy	 if	 it
cannot	control.	So	there	starts	a	conflict	between	ego	and	sex.	Remember,	it	is	a
losing	battle.	The	ego	cannot	win	it	because	ego	is	just	superficial.	Sex	is	very
deep-rooted.	Sex	is	your	life;	ego	is	just	your	mind,	your	head.	Sex	has	roots	all
over	you;	ego	has	roots	only	in	your	ideas	--	very	superficial,	just	in	the	head.
So	who	is	trying	to	transcend	sex?	--	the	head	is	trying	to	transcend	sex.	If	you
are	too	much	in	the	head	then	you	want	to	transcend	sex,	because	sex	brings	you
down	 to	 the	 guts.	 It	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 remain	 hanging	 in	 the	 head.
Everything	else	you	can	manage	from	there;	sex	you	cannot	manage	from	there.
You	cannot	make	 love	with	your	heads.	You	have	 to	come	down,	you	have	 to
descend	from	your	heights,	you	have	to	come	closer	to	earth.	Sex	is	humiliating
to	the	ego,	so	egoist	people	are	against,	always	against	sex.	They	go	on	finding
ways	and	means	 to	 transcend	 it.	They	can	never	 transcend	 it.	They	can,	 at	 the
most,	become	perverted.	Their	whole	effort	from	the	very	beginning	is	doomed
to	failure.
I	have	heard....
A	 boss	 was	 interviewing	 applicants	 to	 replace	 his	 private	 secretary	 who	 was
resigning	because	of	expectant	motherhood.	The	boss's	right-hand	man	sat	with
him	as	he	looked	the	applicants	over.	The	first	girl	was	a	beautiful	buxom	blond.
She	turned	out	to	be	intelligent,	and	had	excellent	secretarial	skills.	The	second
was	a	dark-haired	beauty	who	was	even	more	intelligent	and	proficient	than	the
first.	The	 third	one	was	 cross-eyed,	 had	buck	 teeth,	 and	weighed	one	hundred
and	ninety	pounds.	After	interviewing	all	three	candidates,	the	boss	informed	his
associate	that	he	was	hiring	the	third	applicant.
"But	why?"	asked	the	astonished	employee.
"Well,"	boomed	the	boss,	"in	the	first	place,	she	looks	very	intelligent	to	me!	In
the	second	place,	it	is	none	of	your	damned	business,	and	in	the	third	place,	she
is	my	wife's	sister."
So	you	may	pretend	that	you	have	won	over	sex,	but	an	undercurrent....	You	may
rationalize,	you	may	find	reasons,	you	may	pretend,	you	may	create	a	very	hard
shell	 around	 you,	 but	 deep	 down	 the	 real	 reason,	 the	 reality,	 wi]l	 stand
untouched:	 "She	 is	 my	 wife's	 sister"	 --	 that	 is	 the	 real	 reason.	 "She	 looks
intelligent";	that	is	just	a	rationalization.
"And	 it	 is	 none	 of	 your	 damned	 business";	 that	 too	 is	 getting	 annoyed	 and
irritated	--
because	 the	person	 is	afraid	 that	 the	other	 is	poking	his	nose	and	may	find	 the
real	cause.
But	the	real	cause	will	explode;	you	cannot	hide	it,	it	is	not	possible.
So	you	can	try	to	control	sex,	but	an	undercurrent	of	sexuality	will	run	and	it	will
show	itself	in	many	ways.	Out	of	all	your	rationalizations,	it	will	again	and	again
raise	its	head.
I	will	not	suggest	that	you	make	any	effort	to	transcend	it.	What	I	suggest	is	just
the	 contrary:	 forget	 about	 transcending	 it.	Move	 into	 it	 as	 deeply	 as	 you	 can.
While	the	energy	is	there,	move	as	deeply	as	you	can,	love	as	deeply	as	you	can,
and	make	 an	 art	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 to	 be	 done.	That	 is	 the	whole	meaning	 of
Tantra:	 making	 an	 art	 of	 lovemaking.	 There	 are	 subtle	 nuances	 which	 only
people	who	enter	with	a	great	aesthetic	sense	will	be	able	 to	know.	Otherwise,
you	can	make	love	for	your	whole	life	and	still	remain	unsatisfied	--	because	you
don't	know	that	satisfaction	is	something	very	aesthetic.	It	is	like	a	subtle	music
arising	 in	your	 soul.	 If	 through	sex	you	 fall	 into	harmony,	 if	 through	 love	you
become	non-tense	and	relaxed,	 if	 love	 is	not	 just	 throwing	energy	because	you
don't	know	what	to	do	with	it,	if	it	is	not	just	a	relief	but	a	relaxation,	if	you	relax
into	your	woman	and	your	woman	relaxes	into	you,	if	for	a	few	seconds,	for	a
few	moments	or	a	few	hours	you	forget	who	you	are	and	you	are	completely	lost
in	oblivion,	you	will	come	out	of	it	purer,	more	innocent,	more	virgin.	And	you
will	have	a	different	type	of	being	--	at	ease,	centered,	rooted.
If	this	happens,	one	day	suddenly	you	will	see	that	the	flood	has	gone	and	it	has
left	 you	 very,	 very	 rich.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 sorry	 that	 it	 has	 gone.	 You	 will	 be
thankful,	 because	now	 richer	worlds	 open.	When	 sex	 leaves	you,	 the	doors	 of
meditation	open.	When	sex	leaves	you,	then	you	are	not	trying	to	lose	yourself	in
the	other.	You	become	capable	of	losing	yourself	in	yourself.
Now	another	world	of	orgasm,	inner	orgasm,	of	being	with	oneself,	arises.	But
that	 arises	 only	 through	 being	with	 the	 other;	 one	 grows,	matures	 through	 the
other.	Then	a	moment	comes	when	you	can	be	alone,	tremendously	happy.	There
is	no	need	for	any	other.	The	need	has	disappeared	but	you	have	learned	much
through	 it	 --	 you	 have	 learned	 much	 about	 yourself.	 The	 other	 became	 the
mirror,	 and	 you	 have	 not	 broken	 the	mirror.	You	 have	 learned	 so	much	 about
yourself.	Now	there	is	no	need	to	look	into	the	mirror.	You	can	close	your	eyes
and	you	can	see	your	 face	 there.	But	 that	 face	you	would	not	be	able	 to	see	 if
there	had	been	no	mirror	from	the	very	beginning.
Let	your	woman	be	your	mirror;	let	your	man	be	your	mirror.	Look	into	her	eyes
and	see	your	face;	move	into	her	to	know	yourself.	Then	one	day	the	mirror	will
not	be	needed.
But	you	will	not	be	against	 the	mirror;	you	will	be	so	grateful	 to	it	--	how	can
you	be	against	 it?	You	will	be	so	 thankful	--	how	can	you	be	against	 it?	Then,
transcendence.
Transcendence	 is	not	 repression.	Transcendence	 is	a	natural	outgrowing	 --	you
grow	 above,	 you	 go	 beyond	 --	 just	 as	 a	 seed	 breaks	 and	 a	 sprout	 starts	 rising
above	the	ground.
When	sex	disappears,	the	seed	disappears.	In	sex,	you	were	able	to	give	birth	to
somebody	 else,	 a	 child.	When	 sex	 disappears,	 the	 whole	 energy	 starts	 giving
birth	to	yourself.	This	is	what	Hindus	have	called	DWIJA,	the	twice-born.	One
birth	has	been	given	to	you	by	your	parents,	the	other	birth	is	waiting.	It	has	to
be	given	to	you	by	yourself.	You	have	to	father	and	mother	yourself.	Then	your
whole	energy	is	turning	in	--
it	becomes	an	inner	circle.
Right	now	it	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	make	an	inner	circle.	It	will	be	easier	to
connect	it	with	another	pole	--	a	woman	or	a	man	--	and	then	the	circle	becomes
complete.	Then	you	can	enjoy	the	blessings	of	the	circle.	But	by	and	by	you	will
be	 able	 to	 make	 the	 inner	 circle,	 because	 inside	 you	 also	 you	 are	 man	 and
woman,	 woman	 and	 man.	 Nobody	 is	 just	 man	 and	 nobody	 is	 just	 woman	 --
because	you	come	from	man	and	woman's	communion.	Both	have	participated;
your	mother	has	given	something	to	you,	you	father	has	given	something	to	you.
Fifty-fifty,	they	have	contributed	to	you.	Both	are	there.
There	 is	 a	 possibility	 that	 both	 can	 meet	 inside	 you.	 Again	 your	 father	 and
mother	can	love	inside	you.	Then	your	reality	will	be	born.	Once	they	met	when
your	body	was	born;	now	 if	 they	can	meet	 inside	you,	your	 soul	will	be	born.
That's	what	transcendence	of	sex	is:	it	is	a	higher	sex.
Let	 me	 tell	 you	 this:	 when	 you	 transcend	 sex,	 you	 reach	 to	 a	 higher	 sex.
Ordinary	 sex	 is	 gross,	 higher	 sex	 is	 not	 gross	 at	 all.	Ordinary	 sex	 is	 outward-
moving,	higher	sex	is	inward-moving.	In	ordinary	sex,	two	bodies	meet,	and	the
meeting	happens	on	the	outside.	In	higher	sex,	your	own	inner	energies	meet.	It
is	not	physical,	it	is	spiritual	--	it	is	Tantra.	Tantra	is	transcendence.	If	you	don't
understand	this	and	you	go	on	fighting	with	sex....
The	question	has	been	asked	by	Prageeta.	 I	know	she	 is	passing	 through	some
critical	moments	 in	 her	mind.	 She	would	 like	 to	 be	 independent,	 but	 it	 is	 too
early.	She	would	like	not	to	be	bothered	by	anybody	else,	but	it	is	too	early,	and
it	is	too	egoistic.	Right	now	transcendence	is	not	possible,	repression	is	possible.
And	if	you	repress	now,	in	your	old	age	you	will	repent	--	because	then	things
become	very	messed	up.	Each	thing	has	its	own	right	time.	Each	thing	has	to	be
done	 in	 its	moment.	While	young,	don't	be	afraid	of	 love.	 If	you	are	 afraid	of
love	 while	 young,	 in	 old	 age	 you	 will	 become	 obsessed;	 and	 then	 it	 will	 be
difficult	to	move	deeply	in	love,	and	the	mind	will	be	obsessed.
This	 is	 my	 understanding:	 that	 people,	 if	 they	 have	 lived	 rightly,	 lovingly,
naturally,	then	by	the	forty-second	year	they	start	transcending	sex.	If	they	have
not	lived	naturally	and	they	have	been	fighting	with	sex,	then	forty	two	becomes
their	most	dangerous	time	--
because	by	 the	 time	 they	are	 forty-two	 their	 energies	 are	declining.	When	you
are	young	you	can	repress	something	because	you	are	very	energetic.	Look	at	the
irony	of	the	fact:	a	young	man	can	repress	sexuality	very	easily	because	he	has
energy	to	repress	it.	He	can	just	put	it	down	and	sit	upon	it.	When	the	energies
are	going,	declining,	then	sex	will	assert	itself	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	control
it.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:	Stein,	aged	sixty-five,	visited	the	office	of	his	son,	Dr.
Stein,	 and	 asked	 for	 something	 that	 would	 increase	 his	 sexual	 potential.	 The
M.D.	gave	his	father	a	shot,	and	then	refused	to	accept	a	fee.	Nevertheless,	Stein
insisted	 on	 giving	 him	 ten	 dollars.	 A	 week	 later	 Stein	 was	 back	 for	 another
injection,	and	this	time	handed	his	son	twenty	dollars.
"But	Pop,	shots	are	only	ten	dollars."
"Take	it!"	said	Stein,	"the	extra	ten	is	from	Momma."
That	 will	 continue...so	 before	 you	 become	 a	 poppa	 or	 a	 momma,	 please	 be
finished	 with	 it.	 Don't	 wait	 for	 old	 age,	 because	 then	 things	 go	 ugly.	 Then
everything	goes	out	of	season.
The	second	question:
Question	2
IT	IS	SAID	THAT	UNLESS	ONE	IS	IN	CONTACT	WITH	ONE	WHO	IS
AWAKENED,	IT	IS	IMPOSSIBLE	TO	COME	OUT	OF	ONE'S	IGNORANCE
OR
DEEP	SLEEP.	HOW	TO	FIND	OUT	THAT	ONE	IS	AWAKENED?
It	 is	 a	 difficult	 question.	 Not	 that	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 find	 out	 --	 the	 question	 is
difficult	because	if	you	don't	yet	have	the	urge	to	find	out,	then	there	is	no	way
to	help	you	to	find.
If	you	have	the	urge,	that	very	urge	helps.	There	is	no	other	help	needed.	Your
very	urge	becomes	your	path.
How	do	you	find	if	you	are	thirsty,	in	a	desert;	how	will	you	find	water,	how	will
you	find	an	oasis?	You	will	run	hither	and	thither;	you	will	do	all	that	you	can	do
because	thirst	will	be	killing.	And	your	thirst	will	decide	whether	you	have	come
across	 real	 water	 or	 not,	 because	 your	 thirst	 will	 be	 quenched	 whenever	 you
come	across	real	water.	If	it	is	a	mirage	and	from	far	away	it	looked	like	water
and	you	 ran	 to	 it,	when	you	come	 face	 to	 face	with	 it	 you	will	 know	 it	 is	 not
water.
But	the	only	criterion	is	your	thirst.
How	do	you	know	that	something	is	food?	--	 if	you	are	hungry	and	it	satisfies
you,	you	know.	It	is	very	difficult	for	a	man	who	has	no	appetite	to	find	out	what
food	is.
Psychologists	have	come	across	a	very	significant	fact:	that	if	small	children	are
left	to	themselves,	they	always	choose	the	right	thing	to	eat.	You	put	everything
around,	you	leave	it	on	the	dining	table,	don't	force	anything,	and	don't	say	what
to	eat	and	what	not	to	eat.	It	has	been	a	tremendous	discovery	that	children	eat
only	the	right	thing	in	the	right	time.	If	a	child	is	suffering	from	something	and	a
certain	thing	is	needed	which	will	be	helpful	for	it,	he	will	choose	to	eat	it.	By
the	time	that	suffering	disappears	he	will	stop	eating	that.	We	confuse	them.	We
tell	 them	 to	 eat	 this	 and	 don't	 eat	 that.	 Then	 by	 and	 by,	 their	 natural	 instinct
functions	no	more.
Have	you	seen	animals	eating?	They	are	not	dieticians,	and	they	never	go	to	any
dietician,	 but	 a	 buffalo	 or	 a	 cow	 just	 chooses	 the	 right	 grass	 for	 itself,
instinctively.	They	will	 leave	other	grasses;	 they	will	 eat	only	 the	grass	 that	 is
right	for	them.	You	cannot	deceive.	Somehow	their	 inner	nature,	 their	appetite,
decides.
The	problem	arises:	how	to	find	whether	someone	is	enlightened,	awakened,	or
not?	 If	 you	 have	 an	 appetite	 there	 will	 be	 no	 problem.	 If	 you	 don't	 have	 an
appetite	 then	 I	 say	 the	problem	 is	very	difficult,	 almost	 impossible	 to	 solve.	 If
you	have	appetite	and	hunger,	then	something	around	an	enlightened	person	will
start	 fulfilling	your	desire.	Something	will	start	 falling	 in	harmony	and	 in	 line.
Your	chaos	will	start	subsiding.	You	will	see	a	silence	arising	--	a	new	being	is
born.	That	is	the	only	way.	But	if	you	don't	have	a	real	thirst,	or	if	you	have	been
confused	by	the	society,	and	if	you	cling	to	outer	symptoms....
For	 example,	 a	 JAINA	 thinks	 an	 enlightened	 person	 should	 be	 naked.	Now	 if
you	come	across	a	person	who	is	not	naked,	even	Buddha	or	Jesus,	the	JAINA
will	not	be	satisfied.
He	will	say,	"He	is	not	an	enlightened	person	because	an	enlightened	person	is
always	naked."	This	is	foolish.	He	has	no	appetite.	He	has	learned	only	through
scriptures,	 he	 has	 learned	 only	 through	 tradition.	 Now	 if	 you	 have	 been	 a
Christian,	brought	up	as	a	Christian,	and	you	know	only	that	a	Christ	is	one	who
is	 crucified,	 then	what	will	 you	do	 if	 you	 come	across	Krishna	playing	on	his
flute?	You	will	say,	"This	man	looks	like	a	clown.	How	can	he	be	an	enlightened
person?	An	enlightened	person	is	always	on	the	cross	suffering	for	others,	trying
to	take	everybody's	sin	on	his	own	head,	and	this	man	is	singing	and	dancing."
No,	with	the	mind	that	is	too	conditioned	by	the	cross,	a	flute	will	not	suit.	It	will
be	 simply	 impossible	 to	 believe	 that	 a	 flute	 can	 also	 be	 a	 symbol	 of
enlightenment.	A	cross,	of	course,	is.
And	the	same	happens	with	the	follower	of	Krishna.	He	knows	the	flute,	singing,
dancing.	He	cannot	believe	for	what	Jesus	was	on	the	cross.	If	you	ask	him	he
will	say,
"He	must	have	done	some	very	wrong	deeds	in	his	past	life.	Otherwise,	how	is
he	 crucified?	 Crucifixion	 happens	 only	 to	 great	 sinners.	 He	 must	 have	 done
something	 great,	 a	 very	 great	 sin.	 That	 is	 why	 he	 is	 suffering	 --	 because	 no
Hindu	AVATAR	has	ever	suffered	like	this.	This	is	not	possible."
Hindus	have	the	theory	of	KARMA;	whatsoever	happens	is	your	karma:	Krishna
is	playing	on	 the	 flute	because	he	has	beautiful	KARMAS	which	 sing	 in	him,
and	Jesus	must	have	been	a	sinner.	 It	 is	not	a	question	 that	others	have	 forced
him	on	the	cross.
Nobody	 can	 force	 anybody	 except	 your	 KARMAS.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 Judas	 has
betrayed	him;	it	is	his	own	past.	Nobody	can	betray	anybody.	If	your	KARMAS
are	good,	nobody	can	make	you	suffer.
Now	this	is	problematic.	These	people	listen	only	to	the	scriptures,	the	tradition,
the	society	they	were	born	into	--	accidental	things.	They	don't	have	real	thirst.
If	you	have	real	thirst,	you	will	find	that	where	Krishna	is	playing	on	his	flute,
you	 will	 be	 satisfied.	 And	 if	 you	 have	 real	 thirst,	 you	 will	 find	 the	 same
satisfaction	near	Jesus	also.	Maybe	he	is	on	the	cross	and	Krishna	is	playing	on
his	 flute,	but	you	will	 find	 that	both	are	 food.	Jesus	says	so	many	 times	 to	his
disciples,	"Eat	me;	make	me	your	food.
Drink	my	blood	and	eat	my	body."	He	is	food;	that's	what	he	is	saying.
The	questioner	 asked,	 "It	 is	 said	 that	 unless	one	 is	 in	 contact	with	one	who	 is
awakened,	it	is	impossible	to	come	out	of	one's	ignorance	and	deep	sleep.	How
to	find	out	that	one	is	awakened?"
I	have	heard....
A	man	walked	 into	 the	police	 station	 to	 report	 that	 his	wife	was	missing.	The
sergeant	began	writing	up	the	case.
"How	tall	is	she?"
"About	so	high,	give	or	take	a	little."
"How	much	does	she	weigh?"
"About	average,	I	guess."
"Color	of	eyes?"
"I	would	say	they	were	neutral.	I'm	not	too	sure."
"Color	of	hair?"
"I	don't	know,	it	changes."
"What	was	she	wearing?"
"I	suppose	a	hat	and	coat."
"Was	she	carrying	anything?"
"Yes,	she	had	a	dog	on	a	leash."
"What	kind	of	dog?"
"A	 pedigreed	 brindle-and-white	German	 shepherd,	 weighing	 forty	 pounds,	 six
hands	high,	licence	No.	401278976	C.D.7,	wearing	a	brown	collar,	slightly	deaf
in	the	right	ear,	and	answers	to	the	name	Rover."
When	 it	 was	 a	 question	 of	 the	 dog,	 then	 the	man	 came	 alive.	When	 it	 was	 a
question	of	his	wife:	how	tall	is	she?	--	about	so	high,	give	or	take	a	little;	and
how	much	 does	 she	weigh?	 --	 about	 average,	 I	 guess;	 and	 color	 of	 eyes?	 --	 I
would	say	they	were	neutral.	I'm	not	too	sure.
Whenever	it	is	your	desire,	you	know.	If	it	is	not	your	desire,	then	it	is	difficult.
So	the	person	who	has	asked	the	question	may	be	greedy,	but	he	has	no	desire
yet.
And	 I	know	 the	man,	and	he	has	been	 to	Sivananda	ashram,	 to	 the	Aurobindo
ashram,	to	Shri	Ramana	Maharshi's	ashram,	to	Satya	Sai	Baba,	and	to	 this	and
that;	 he	 has	 been	 everywhere.	 Now	 I	 am	 his	 last	 victim,	 and	 he	 cannot	 find
anything	 anywhere	 that	 is	 satisfying.	He	 has	 not	 asked	 the	 basic	 question:	 are
you	 hungry?	 Just	 by	 going	 to	 this	 restaurant	 and	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help;
appetite	 is	needed.	The	man	is	greedy	but	he	has	no	appetite.	The	man	is	very
learned	 but	 is	 not	 very	 aware.	 He	 knows	 the	 scriptures,	 he	 can	 repeat	 them
parrot-like,	but	he	has	no	understanding.	He	goes	on	asking	such	questions	again
and	 again.	 This	 is	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that	 I	 am	 answering,	 because	 when	 the
appetite	is	not	there	it	is	futile	to	talk	about.	It	is	better	that	he	should	go	and	live
in	the	world	and	forget	all	about	religion.	Let	the	appetite	come,	this	life	or	next.
There	 is	 no	 hurry;	God	 can	wait.	 But	 let	 it	 come.	 It	 should	 be	 authentic.	His
appetite	 is	 just	 false.	He	has	 listened	 to	 talks	 about	 food,	or	he	has	 listened	 to
advertisements	on	the	television	about	food,	and	he	has	become	greedy.	But	he
never	looks	inside	to	see	that	he	has	no	appetite,	so	nothing	happens.
Once	he	came	to	me	and	he	said,	"I	have	been	to	Shri	Aurobindo	ashram,	I	have
been	to	Ramana	ashram,	to	Sivananda,	 to	Rishikesh,	 to	Arunachal,	 to	here	and
there,	and	nothing	happens.	Now	I	am	here."
I	 said,	 "Before	you	say	about	me	also	 that	nothing	happens,	 let	me	say	 to	you
that	nothing	will	happen	--	because	I	don't	see	any	desire	in	you.	I	don't	see	any
flicker,	any	passionate	urge."
He	has	money	so	he	can	go	anywhere.	He	is	fed-up	with	his	life,	bored	with	his
life,	 so	 he	 goes	 on	 finding,	 trying	 to	 find	 at	 least	 some	 thrill,	 some	 kick
somewhere.	And	he	is	a	very	egoistic	man,	so	he	cannot	try	to	find	non-spiritual
kicks.	He	tries	to	find	spiritual	kicks	and	nothing	happens.
Watch...	 the	basic	 thing	 to	be	 remembered	 is	whether	you	have	 an	 appetite.	 If
you	don't	have,	why	bother?	It	is	not	for	you.	Let	these	people	talk	about	God;	it
is	 not	 for	 you.	You	 don't	 go	 to	 a	musical	 concert	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 an	 ear	 for
music,	 and	 you	 don't	 get	 bothered	 about	 it.	 You	 don't	 go	 to	 listen	 to	 some
musician,	you	don't	go	to	see	a	dancer,	you	don't	go	to	visit	an	art	gallery	to	look
at	paintings	if	you	don't	have	any	sense,	artistic	sense;	you	don't	go	there.
But	this	is	one	of	the	problems	about	religion:	people	who	don't	have	any	sense
of	religiousness,	they	also	become	greedy	about	religion.	And	now	he	is	getting
old,	and	death	is	approaching.	Now	he	wants	to	achieve	something	which	he	can
carry	beyond	death.	He	is	simply	afraid.	He	has	not	lived	his	life	--	and	unless
you	have	lived	your	life,	you	cannot	move	into	religion.
Only	one	who	lives	his	life	truly,	one	day	comes	to	the	point	where	a	new	desire
for	life	beyond	arises.	See	the	difference	between	the	two.	You	can	be	afraid	of
death;	 then	your	desire	will	be	 false.	 If	you	have	 lived	 life	and	 loved	 life,	 and
loved	it	so	much	that	you	would	now	like	to	know	the	unknown	life	also	--	it	is
not	 out	 of	 fear	 of	 death,	 it	 is	 out	 of	 love	 for	 life	 --	 then,	 you	 will	 recognize
immediately	whenever	you	come	across	an	enlightened	person.	It	is	impossible
to	miss.	You	will	recognize	immediately.	This	recognition	needs	no	knowledge.
It	will	simply	happen.
How	 do	 you	 recognize	 when	 a	 beautiful	 woman	 passes	 by?	 Have	 you	 any
criterion?	 But	 if	 you	 have	 desire,	 suddenly	 you	 recognize	 that	 the	 woman	 is
beautiful.	If	somebody	asks	you	and	tries	to	force	you	to	confess	to	what	exactly
beauty	is,	you	will	be	in	trouble.
You	will	not	be	able	to	define.	Nobody	has	yet	been	able	to	define.	Centuries	and
centuries	of	philosophers	have	been	working	on	it,	trying	to	define	what	beauty
is,	and	ultimately	 they	decide	that	 it	 is	 indefinable.	But	still	you	feel	beauty.	If
you	 talk	 to	a	 small	 child	whose	desire	has	not	yet	 ripened,	 and	you	say,	 "This
woman	is	beautiful,"	he	will	 look	at	you	surprised,	shrug	his	shoulders,	and	go
on	his	way	--	"Gone	mad.	All	women	are	alike."	For	a	small	child,	it	makes	no
difference.	 He	 cannot	 see	 why	 one	 woman	 should	 be	 thought	 beautiful	 and
another	not.
In	fact,	he	knows	only	one	woman	who	is	beautiful:	she	is	his	mother	--	and	that
too,	 for	some	other	reasons,	not	 for	beauty.	She	 is	his	nourishment,	his	 life,	so
she	is	beautiful.
But	one	day	when	his	desire	arises	and	his	love	ripens,	he	will	start	looking	with
different	 eyes.	 Then	 all	women	 are	 not	 alike.	 Then	 certainly	 there	 are	women
who	are	beautiful;	then	certainly	there	are	men	who	are	tremendously	appealing
and	magnetic.	But	one	day	again,	when	one	becomes	very	alert,	understanding,
again	all	men	and	women	are	alike.
Then	again	beauty	or	ugliness	don't	matter.	Then	again	duality	is	transcended.
When	 you	 come	 across	 an	 enlightened	man,	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 desire,	 nothing
will	happen.
You	will	just	shrug	your	shoulders	--	"Why	are	people	so	attracted	to	this	man?"
You	can't	see	anything;	there	is	nothing.	He	is	as	ordinary	as	you,	or	maybe	even
more	ordinary	than	you.	You	can't	see	why	people	are	mad.	But	if	the	desire	is
there,	if	the	search	has	started,	if	you	have	lived	this	life	rightly	and	deeply,	then
you	have	earned	that	desire	for	another	life.	Then	immediately,	when	you	come
across	such	a	one,	you	will	start	feeling.
It	 is	 said,	 a	 beautiful	myth	 about	Mahavir,	 that	 people	who	 had	 desire	would
become	aware	of	Mahavir	from	a	very	faraway	distance,	twenty-four	miles.	The
area	 of	 twenty	 four	 miles	 around	 Mahavir	 was	 so	 filled	 with	 his	 being	 that
people	who	would	come	into	that	area,	if	they	had	some	desire,	would	be	pulled
by	Mahavir,	against	 themselves.	They	might	have	been	going	somewhere	else,
but	 they	would	not	 be	 able	 to	go.	They	would	be	pulled.	They	would	have	 to
come;	they	would	find	this	man	in	some	unknown	way.	And	he	would	be	sitting
under	some	tree	or	hiding	in	a	cave,	and	they	would	find	him.	And	there	were
people	who	would	pass	just	 in	front	of	him	and	would	be	thinking	that	he	was
mad	--	not	only	mad,	but	like	a	criminal,	standing	there	naked.	Either	he	was	a
criminal	or	he	was	a	fool,	and	they	would	beat	him,	they	would	throw	him	out	of
their	town,	they	would	force	him	to	leave	their	place.	And	both	were	people:	one
sort	of	person	throws	him	away,	beats	him;	the	other	sort	of	person	is	pulled.	It
depends	on	you.
I	have	heard	one	anecdote:
"Well	my	man,	what	is	on	your	mind?"	the	worldly	matron	asked	the	marriage
broker.
"I	have	picked	out	a	wife	for	your	son,"	he	announced	triumphantly.	"She	is	the
Princess	 Sessusi	 Wilnanee,	 the	 richest	 young	 woman	 in	 the	 world,"	 said	 the
marriage	broker.
"The	 richest	 woman	 in	 the	 world?"	 snapped	 the	 mother.	 "Why	 have	 I	 never
heard	of	her?"
"But	she	 is	a	wonderful	girl,"	 insisted	 the	marriage	broker.	"She	 is	gorgeous,	a
terrific	skin-diver	and	skier,	and	golfs	in	the	low	seventies.	She	is	royalty	all	the
way."
"It	does	not	make	sense	to	me,	but	all	right,	I	will	give	you	my	consent.	I	will	let
my	son	marry	the	princess."
"Well,"	sighed	the	marriage	broker,	"that's	half	the	battle.	"
Half	the	battle	about	religion	starts	with	you.	If	you	have	the	desire,	that	is	half
the	battle
--	and	the	other	half	is	very	easy.	Then	you	have	the	eyes.	But	if	you	don't	have
an	appetite,	then	it	is	almost	impossible	to	recognize:	you	are	blind,	you	cannot
see.	 If	 a	 blind	man	 comes	 and	 asks,	 "When	 I	 come	 across	 light,	 how	 am	 I	 to
recognize	it?"	what	to	say	to	him?	How	can	he	recognize?	--	he	will	need	eyes.
You	always	find	that	which	you	REALLY	desire;	it	never	happens	otherwise.	In
fact,	 let	me	tell	you:	whatsoever	you	have	found	is	 that	which	you	had	desired
passionately	 --	maybe	 it	 is	hell,	but	you	desired	 it	 --	and	whatsoever	you	have
not	found,	you	have	not	desired	passionately.
Every	time	Mulla	Nasrudin	came	home	drunk,	the	wife	would	bawl	the	daylights
out	of	him.	One	day	a	kindly	neighbor	gave	her	some	advice:	"You	should	not	do
that.	You	should	not	call	attention	to	his	drinking.	Be	lovable,	be	kind,	and	you
will	find	he	is	a	new	man.	Tonight	when	he	comes	home,	give	him	a	great	big
kiss."
That	night	Mulla	staggered	in,	but	the	wife	remembered	the	advice	and	puckered
her	lips:
"Darling,	give	me	a	kiss."
He	puckered	his	lips,	staggered	to	her,	and	kissed	her	on	the	forehead.	He	tried
again,	missed,	and	kissed	her	on	the	ear.	The	third	time	he	missed	again,	landing
his	lips	on	her	cheek.
"You	bum,"	she	said,	pointing	to	her	mouth,''if	this	were	a	saloon	you	would	find
it."
You	 always	 find	 that	 which	 you	 really	 want	 to	 find.	 Whatsoever	 you	 desire
happens.	If	it	is	not	happening,	look	inside;	somewhere	you	must	be	missing	in
your	desire.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	Hindu	annals	about	a	great	saint,	Valmiki.	He	was	a
robber,	a	murderer.	He	has	written	the	story	of	Rama,	one	of	the	most	beautiful
epics	in	the	world.
He	became	converted.	His	conversion	happened	in	such	a	way	that	it	 is	almost
unbelievable.	He	was	a	great	sinner,	but	he	went	to	a	great	teacher	and	asked	him
how	he	could	purify	himself	of	his	sins.	"Chant	Rama	a	thousand	times	a	day,"
advised	the	great	teacher.
The	sinner	went	to	a	solitary	mountain	and	chanted	and	chanted,	but	in	spite	of
his	good	will,	he	made	a	mistake	and	chanted	Mara	instead	of	Rama.
It	happens	 that	 if	you	chant	Rama	Rama	Rama	fast,	you	can	get	messed	up;	 it
can	become	Mara	Mara	Mara.	That's	how	it	happened:	he	was	chanting	so	fast,
and	he	had	never	heard	this	name.	It	was	almost	an	unknown	language	to	him.
He	 tried	 hard	 to	 remember,	 but	 somehow	 he	 forgot,	 and	 for	 years	 he	 chanted
Mara,	Mara,	Mara.
After	 years	 of	 chanting	 he	 went	 back	 to	 the	 great	 teacher	 who	 immediately
realized	that	 the	man	was	now	pure	--	not	only	pure,	he	was	enlightened.	"Did
you	sing	the	sacred	name?"	the	teacher	asked.
"Yes,	 great	 one,"	 the	 ex-sinner	 answered,	 "for	 ten	 years	 every	 single	 day,
thousands	of	times	I	have	chanted	Mara,	Mara,	Mara."
The	teacher	burst	into	a	laughter	that	shook	the	mountains.	As	his	laughter,	like	a
pebble	in	the	lake,	vibrated	farther	and	wider	into	the	cosmos,	the	great	teacher
took	the	ex-sinner	into	his	arms.	"Your	will	to	good,	to	do	good,	has	saved	you,"
he	 said,	 "even	 though	 you	 chanted	Mara,	 Mara,	 Mara,	 millions	 of	 times:	 the
name	of	the	devil."
Rama	is	 the	name	of	God;	Mara	 is	 the	name	of	 the	devil	 --	but	 if	 the	desire	 is
there,	the	thirst	is	there,	then	everything	is	okay.	Even	the	name	of	the	devil	will
do.	Just	his	intention,	just	his	tremendous	passion	for	God,	to	purify	himself,	for
ten	years,	day	in	and	day	out,	thousands	of	times	he	was	continuously	chanting
Mara,	Mara,	Mara.	Even	a	wrong	technique	will	help	if	the	desire	is	intense,	and
even	a	right	technique	will	not	be	of	much	help	if	the	desire	is	impotent.
Remember	it:	 if	you	can't	recognize	enlightened	people	when	you	come	across
them,	don't	throw	the	responsibility	on	them.	Watch	inside	--	are	you	ready	yet?
It	 has	happened	 that	 people	who	were	not	 enlightened	have	 sometimes	helped
people	 to	 become	 enlightened.	 If	 the	 desire	 of	 the	 seeker	 is	 tremendous,	 then
even	an	unenlightened	Master	is	enough.
It	is	reported	about	one	great	mystic,	Milarepa:
When	he	went	to	his	Master	in	Tibet,	he	was	so	humble,	so	pure,	so	authentic,
that	other	disciples	became	 jealous	of	him.	 It	was	certain	 that	he	would	be	 the
successor.	And	of	course	there	was	politics,	so	they	tried	to	kill	him.
One	 day	 they	 said	 to	 him,	 "If	 you	 really	 believe	 in	 the	Master,	 can	 you	 jump
from	the	hill?	If	you	really	believe,	if	the	trust	is	there,	then	nothing	--	no	harm	is
going	 to	 happen."	 And	Milarepa	 jumped	 without	 even	 hesitating	 for	 a	 single
moment.	They	 rushed	 down	 because	 it	was	 almost	 a	 three-thousand-foot	 deep
valley.	They	went	down	to	find	his	scattered	bones,	but	he	was	sitting	there	in	a
lotus	posture,	very	happy,	tremendously	happy.
He	opened	his	eyes	and	said,	"You	are	right;	trust	saves."
They	thought	 it	must	be	some	coincidence,	so	when	the	house	was	on	fire	one
day,	they	told	him,	"If	you	love	your	Master	and	you	trust,	you	can	go	in."	He
rushed	in	to	save	the	woman	and	the	child	who	were	left	 inside.	He	came,	and
the	 fire	was	 too	great	and	 they	were	hoping	 that	he	would	die,	but	he	was	not
burned	at	all.	And	he	became	more	and	more	radiant,	because	the	trust....
One	day	 they	were	going	somewhere,	 they	were	 to	cross	a	river,	and	 they	 told
him,	"You	need	not	go	in	the	boat.	You	have	such	great	trust;	you	can	walk	on
the	river"	--	and	he	walked.
That	was	the	first	time	the	Master	saw	him.	He	was	not	aware	that	he	had	been
told	 to	 jump	 into	 the	valley	and	 told	 to	go	 into	 the	burning	house;	he	was	not
aware.	But	that	time	he	was	there	on	the	bank	and	he	saw	him	walking,	and	he
said,	"What	are	you	doing?	It	is	impossible!"
And	Milarepa	said,	"Not	impossible	at	all!	I	am	doing	it	by	your	power,	sir."
Now	the	Master	thought,	"If	my	name	and	my	power	can	do	this	to	this	ignorant,
stupid	man....	 I	 have	never	 tried	 it	myself"...so	 he	 tried.	He	drowned.	Nothing
has	been	heard	about	him	after	that.
Even	an	unenlightened	Master,	with	deep	trust,	can	revolutionize	your	life.	And
the	reverse	 is	also	 true:	even	an	enlightened	Master	may	not	be	of	any	help.	 It
depends	on	you,	it	depends	totally	on	you.
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Kali	and	Krishna	are	one
25	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606250
ShortTitle:
BELOV105
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
76
mins
COME	IF	YOU	WISH	TO	MEET
THE	NOVEL	MAN.
HE	HAS	ABANDONED
HIS	WORLDLY	POSSESSIONS
FOR	THE	BEGGAR'S	SACK
THAT	HANGS	FROM	HIS	SHOULDER.
HE	SPEAKS	OF	THE	ETERNAL	MOTHER
(KALI,	THE	GODDESS	OF	TIME)
EVEN	AS	HE	ENTERS	THE	GANGES.
SIMPLE	WORDS	CAN	OVERCOME
IGNORANCE	AND	DISBELIEF:
KALI	AND	KRISHNA	ARE	ONE.
THE	WORDS	MAY	DIFFER	--
THE	MEANING	IS	PRECISELY	THE	SAME.
HE	WHO	HAS	BROKEN
THE	BARRIER	OF	WORDS,
HAS	CONQUERED	LIMITS:
ALLAH	OR	JESUS,	MOSES	OR	KALI,
THE	RICH	OR	THE	POOR,
SAGE	OR	FOOL,
ALL	ARE	ONE	AND	THE	SAME	TO	HIM.
LOST	IN	HIS	OWN	THOUGHTS,
HE	SEEMS	INSANE	TO	OTHERS.
HE	OPENS	HIS	ARMS
TO	WELCOME	THE	WORLD,
CALLING	ALL	TO	THE	FERRY	BOAT
TIED	TO	THE	COAST	OF	LIFE.
COME	IF	YOU	WISH	TO	MEET	THE	NOVEL	MAN
THE	WHOLE	 BAUL	 SEARCH	 IS	 FOR	 THE	 SEARCH	 FOR	 THE	 NOVEL
MAN,	THE
NEW	MAN.	Who	is	this	new	man?
You	can	live	your	 life	 in	 two	ways.	Either	you	can	become	a	man	of	being,	or
you	can	become	a	man	of	having.	Either	you	can	have	yourself	or	you	can	have
many	 worldly	 things	 instead.	 Either	 you	 can	 possess	 many	 things	 and	 be
possessed	 by	 them,	 or	 you	 can	 possess	 yourself	 and	 be	 not	 possessed	 by
anything.	The	man	of	having	has	a	totally	different	direction.	That's	what	Bauls
call	'the	worldly	man'.	He	thinks	in	terms	of	money,	in	terms	of	commodities,	in
terms	of	bank	balances;	he	thinks	in	terms	of	things.	And	he	thinks	that	the	more
he	has,	the	more	he	is.	That	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	fallacies.
You	can	have	 the	whole	world	and	you	can	remain	a	beggar.	You	can	have	all
that	the	world	can	give	and	yet	remain	empty.
The	great	Alexander	died.	He	is	the	very	symbol	of	the	worldly	man.	He	wanted
to	conquer	 the	whole	world,	and	he	had	done	it,	almost.	But	before	he	died	he
told	his	generals,	 "Then	 let	both	my	hands	hang	out	of	 the	coffin."	They	 said,
"We	have	never	heard.	It	is	not	traditionally	done.	And	why	do	you	want	to	do
such	an	absurd	thing?"
Alexander	said,''It	 is	not	absurd.	It	has	a	certain	relevance	with	my	life.	 I	want
people	to	see	that	I	am	going	with	empty	hands.	So	let	both	my	hands	hang	out
of	 the	 coffin,	 so	 everybody	 can	 see	 that	 even	Alexander	 is	 going	with	 empty
hands.	I	came	with	empty	hands,	I	am	going	with	empty	hands,	and	the	whole
life	has	been	a	wastage."
He	must	have	been	very	perceptive,	because	many	more	die	still	clinging,	still
not	aware	that	their	hands	are	empty,	still	not	aware	that	their	hearts	are	empty,
still	 not	 aware	 that	 they	 have	wasted	 their	whole	 lives,	 that	 it	 has	 been	 just	 a
nightmare.
The	 man	 of	 having	 continues	 to	 accumulate	 more	 and	 more.	 What	 he
accumulates	is	not	the	point;	his	emphasis	is	on	accumulation.	His	soul	exists	in
his	 accumulations.	What	he	 accumulates	 is	 not	 important.	He	may	accumulate
money,	 he	 may	 accumulate	 knowledge;	 he	 may	 accumulate	 ego,	 he	 may
accumulate	 humility;	 he	may	 accumulate	 things	of	 this	world,	 or	 he	may	 start
accumulating	virtues,	 things	 of	 the	 other	world,	 but	 he	 accumulates.	He	 exists
through	 things.	He	 feels	good	when	he	has	much,	when	he	 feels	his	hands	are
full,	at	least	apparently	full.	He	feels	good,	he	feels	he	is	achieving,	he	is	being
successful.	This	is	'the	old	man'	--	in	the	terminology	of	the	Bauls,	this	is	the	old
man.	It	has	always	existed.	This	is	the	rotten	man,	this	is	the	diseased	man.	It	is	a
sort	of	illness,	this	very	idea	of	having	too	many	things,	wasting	your	time	and
energy	and	not	knowing	at	all	who	you	are.	The	Bauls	call	that	direction	noble	in
which	you	start	thinking	in	terms	of	being,	in	terms	of	a	certain	inner	solidity,	of
a	 certain	 inner	 consciousness,	 of	 a	 certain	 rootedness,	 centering,	 of	 a	 certain
realization	of	who	you	are.
Have	you	watched	 it,	 that	 sometimes	 you	 come	 across	 a	 person	who	may	not
have	anything	visible,	but	still	you	feel	a	 tremendous	energy	surrounding	him?
His	 impact	 is	 almost	 magnetic,	 mesmeric.	 He	 looks	 into	 your	 eyes	 and	 you
cannot	look	into	his	eyes	--
a	great	power.	It	is	not	the	power	of	things;	he	may	not	have	any.	He	may	be	just
a	beggar	on	the	road.	It	is	not	the	power	that	comes	through	politics.	He	may	not
be	 a	 prime	 minister	 or	 a	 president	 because	 that	 power	 is	 bogus.	 That	 power
belongs	 to	 the	 chair,	 not	 to	 the	 man.	 It	 belongs	 to	 the	 chair	 and	 not	 to	 the
chairman.	Once	he	is	out	of	the	chair,	he	is	as	powerless	as	you.
Look	 at	 Richard	 Nixon:	 a	 tremendous	 power	 was	 there	 when	 he	 was	 the
president.	Now,	he	is	just	simply	citizen	Nixon.	All	power	has	disappeared.	That
power	was	not	 his;	 it	was	 a	 reflected	glory.	And	you	 can	 see	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 very
difficult.	You	know	men	who	have	much	power	--	power	of	things,	power	of	big
palaces,	power	of	politics,	money,	prestige,	heritage	but	you	can	see	that	they	are
poor	 people.	 They	 don't	 have	 any	 personal	 power.	 They	 don't	 have	 any
magnetism	in	 their	souls.	If	you	put	 their	 things	aside,	 t]hey	are	more	ordinary
than	ordinary.	All	extraordinariness	disappears.	Kings	and	queens,	once	they	are
not	 kings	 and	 queens,	 are	 simply	 ordinary	 human	 beings	 --	 almost	 empty,
nothing	in	them.
But	you	sometimes	come	across	a	person	whose	power	is	not	derived	from	the
outside,	whose	power	comes	from	some	inner	spring,	some	inner	source.	He	is	a
reservoir	of	power.	Wherever	he	sits,	the	place	becomes	sacred;	wherever	he	sits,
the	place	becomes	a	throne;	wherever	he	moves,	he	moves	like	a	king	amongst
men.	But	his	kingdom	is	of	the	within.	That's	what	Jesus	goes	on	talking	about:
the	kingdom	of	God	is	within	you.	He	knows	his	within.	He	has	come	to	face	his
own	within-ness.	His	eyes	are	turned	within.
He	 is	 no	 longer	 dependent	 on	 the	 outside	 world.	 His	 glory	 is	 not	 a	 reflected
glory,	it	is	his	own,	authentic.	He	can	be	thrown	into	imprisonment,	but	he	will
remain	a	king	there.
It	is	said	about	Diogenes,	one	of	the	contemporaries	of	Alexander	the	Great,	that
even	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 became	 jealous	 of	 Diogenes.	 He	 was	 just	 a	 naked
fakir:	he	had	nothing.	He	had	renounced	everything;	he	was	searching	his	own
inner	world.	It	 is	said	about	him	that	when	he	renounced	the	world,	he	used	to
carry	a	small	begging	bowl.	But	then	one	day	he	saw	a	dog	drinking	water	from
a	river.	He	threw	that	begging-bowl.	He	said,	"If	the	dog	can	do	without	it,	then
am	 I	 worse	 than	 the	 dog?"	 Then	 everything	 was	 thrown	 away.	 He	 remained
naked.
Many	stories,	rumors,	were	reaching	Alexander	that	this	man	had	something	in
him.
Finally,	 fascinated,	Alexander	went	 to	 see	him,	 and	he	 could	 see	 that	 the	man
had	 something	 that	 he	 had	 not.	 He	 was	 just	 lying	 down	 --	 it	 was	 a	 winter
morning,	it	was	cool	and	the	sun	was	rising.	He	was	lying	down	by	the	side	of	a
river,	 bathing	 himself	 in	 the	 early	 sun,	 naked.	 Alexander	 said,	 "Can	 I	 do
something	for	you,	sir?	I	have	much,	and	whatsoever	you	desire,	I	will	be	happy
to	do	it	for	you."
Diogenes	laughed	and	said,	"The	only	thing	that	you	can	do	is	to	please	stand	by
the	side.
Don't	 prevent	 the	 sun	 from	 coming	 to	 me.	 Nothing	 else	 do	 I	 need.	 And
remember	 it,	 because	you	 seem	 to	be	dangerous:	 never	 stand	between	 the	 sun
and	anybody	else.	Don't	disturb	anybody	else's	life.	That's	enough;	nothing	else
do	I	want	from	you	--	because	all	that	I	want	is	within	me."
And	Alexander	could	feel	that	the	man	was	true,	literally	true	--	the	solidity,	the
crystallized	being,	the	'vibe'	of	one	who	has	attained,	the	surround,	the	climate	of
the	person	who	is	filled	with	inner	light,	inner	realization,	inner	riches.	He	could
see	it.	He	bowed	down	and	he	said,	"If	next	time	I	am	to	come	into	the	world,	I
would	ask	God	not	to	make	me	Alexander,	but	Diogenes."
Diogenes	laughed	and	said,	"There	is	no	need	to	wait	that	long.	You	can	become
a	Diogenes	 just	now!	For	what	are	you	struggling	and	conquering	people,	 and
moving	continuously	and	warring?	For	what?"
Said	Alexander,	"First	 I	want	 to	conquer	Middle	Asia,	 then	India,	 then	 the	Far
East..."
And	 Diogenes	 went	 on	 asking,	 "Then	 what?	 Then	 what?"	 Finally,	 when
Alexander	said	he	had	conquered	the	whole	world,	he	said	he	would	then	like	to
rest.
And	Diogenes	said,	"You	look	to	me	almost	stupid,	because	I	am	resting	without
conquering	the	world.	You	can	rest	by	my	side.	See,	the	bank	is	so	big;	we	can
share	it.
And	nobody	comes	here.	You	can	rest	to	your	heart's	desire.	Who	is	preventing
you?	And	I	don't	see	the	point,	that	one	needs	to	conquer	the	world	first	just	to
rest	in	the	end.	You	can	rest	any	moment."
In	that	moment	Alexander	must	have	felt	his	poverty.	He	said,	"You	are	right.	I
am	mad,	but	now	it	is	difficult	for	me	to	come	back.	I	have	to	conquer,	only	then
can	I	come."
And	when	he	was	 leaving,	Diogenes	said,	"Remember,	nobody	can	come	back
unless	one	is	aware.	And	if	you	are	aware	right	this	moment,	the	journey	stops.
If	you	are	not	aware,	you	will	never	come	back."	And	Alexander	never	could	go
back.	He	died	before	he	reached	back	home.
The	man	of	being	is	called	'the	novel	man',	the	new	man.	Why	call	him	new?	--
because	in	a	sense	he	is	as	old	as	humanity;	but	he	is	so	rare	that	whenever	he
comes	 he	 is	 always	 new	 --	 rarely	 a	Buddha,	 rarely	 a	 Jesus,	 a	Krishna	 --	 very
rarely.	In	this	rotten	mass	of	humanity,	very	rarely	does	somebody	arise	with	an
authentic	 being	 and	 declare	 that	 his	 kingdom	 is	 of	 the	 within,	 It	 happens	 so
rarely	that	Bauls	are	right	to	call	him	'the	novel	man',	the	new	man.
So	this	is	the	distinction	to	be	understood:	the	man	who	is	after	having	more	and
more	will	go	on	losing	his	being	--	because	the	only	way	to	have	more	is	to	pay
with	being.
Then	you	have	to	cut	your	being	and	throw	it	away.	Everything	has	 to	be	paid
for,	nothing	is	free.	Even	futile	things	have	to	be	paid	for.
One	day	the	man	of	having	is	almost	gone.	He	has	much	but	he	is	no	more.	He
has	bargained	with	his	soul.	He	has	exchanged:	he	has	dollars,	rupees,	pounds,
but	no	soul	in	him.	Just	a	negative	emptiness	exists.	He	is	the	beggar,	but	he	may
look	to	you	like	a	king.	Don't	be	deceived	by	appearances.	Those	who	look	like
kings	are	not	kings.	Look	deeply,	watch	deeply.	They	may	have	achieved	much
which	 can	 be	 counted,	which	 can	 be	 shown	 and	 exhibited,	 but	 they	 have	 lost
something	of	the	invisible,	something	of	their	being.
Have	you	not	observed	it?	--	whenever	you	purchase	something	you	have	to	pay.
If	you	want	to	compete	with	people	you	will	have	to	pay.	You	will	become	less
and	less	loving.
A	man	who	is	a	competitor	cannot	be	loving	simultaneously;	it	is	impossible.	A
man	who	 is	 trying	 to	 compete,	 a	man	who	 is	 ambitious,	has	 to	be	non-loving.
Then	he	is	paying	with	love.
Politicians	 cannot	 be	 loving,	 they	 know	 only	 war.	 That's	 natural;	 they	 exist
through	 conflict.	 So	 they	 may	 talk	 about	 peace,	 but	 their	 whole	 talk	 is.	 just
nonsense,	just	gibberish.	They	talk	about	peace	and	they	prepare	for	war.	They
never	prepare	for	peace.
They	prepare	for	war	and	they	never	talk	about	war,	they	talk	about	peace.	And
when	the	time	comes,	 they	even	war	and	fight	for	peace.	They	say	it	has	to	be
done	to	save	peace.
But	 basically,	 the	mind	 of	 the	 competitor	 is	 violent.	 One	who	 is	 ambitious	 is
violent	and	cannot	be	loving.
The	hippie	slogan	--	Make	love	not	war	--	is	very,	very	meaningful.	If	the	world
were	more	 loving,	war	would	 disappear	 automatically,	 because	who	would	 be
ready	to	fight?
For	what?
No	country	wants	its	people	to	be	very	loving.	No	country	wants	its	people	to	be
deep	in	 love	--	because	 if	 they	are	deep	in	 love	they	become	incapable	of	war.
Their	 sex,	 their	 love,	 has	 to	 be	 repressed.	 When	 love	 and	 sex	 are	 repressed,
people	are	ready	to	jump	out	of	their	skins.	They	are	so	boiling;	they	are	always
ready	 to	 fight.	 That's	why	 a	 poor	 country	 can	 fight	 better	 than	 a	 rich	 country.
That	is	the	story	of	Vietnam.
The	American	 soldier	knows	a	 little	of	 love	 --	he	has	 the	 facility,	he	 is	not	 so
repressed.
That	is	the	problem	with	America	now:	America	is	not	so	repressed.	It	has	tasted
of	love.
But	when	you	fight	with	a	small	country	like	Vietnam	you	cannot	win,	because
their	 soldiers	 are	 very	 repressed.	 It	 has	 always	 happened	 in	 the	 past:	 a	 richer
country	is	always	in	danger	of	being	invaded	by	a	poorer	country.
It	has	happened	 in	 India	many	 times.	For	 two,	 three	 thousand	years,	 India	had
been	 continuously	 conquered	 by	 barbarians	who	were	 not	 rich,	who	were	 not
affluent,	 who	 were	 not	 cultured	 at	 all.	 But	 India	 was	 defeated	 continuously.
People	were	loving	--	they	had	forgotten	how	to	fight,	they	were	not	interested	in
fighting.	There	was	no	need	inside	for	them	to	be	continuously	at	war.	Whenever
a	civilization	 reaches	 to	 the	point	where	 it	becomes	affluent,	 it	 is	 in	danger	of
being	invaded	by	barbarians.	This	is	unfortunate,	but	this	is	so.
So	every	country	and	every	politician	tries	not	to	allow	love	too	much.	It	has	to
be	given	only	in	small	quantities.	If	love	is	free,	and	people	are	very	loving	and
they	exist	 in	an	ocean	of	 love,	war	 is	not	possible.	Without	war,	politics	 is	not
possible;	 without	 politics,	 presidents	 and	 premiers	 are	 not	 possible.	 They	will
simply	disappear.
The	hippie	is	the	greatest	danger	signal	to	politicians	yet.	In	the	whole	of	history,
for	 the	first	 time	a	new	sort	of	generation	 is	arising.	 If	 this	generation	goes	on
flowering,	 spreading,	 politics	 is	 going	 to	 be	 just	 out	 of	 date.	 The	 days	 of
presidents	and	premiers	are	gone!	And	the	whole	thing	depends	on	love,	because
love	is	a	quality	of	being.
Competition	 is	 for	 things,	 ambition	 is	 for	 things,	 ambition	 is	 for	 the	 kingdom
without.
The	inner	kingdom	knows	no	competition.	You	can	simply	delight	in	it	this	very
moment.
It	needs	no	future,	it	needs	no	achievement	on	your	part.	Already,	as	you	are,	you
are	ready	to	enjoy	and	delight	and	celebrate.	Nothing	is	missing.	Everything	is
absolutely	available;	as	it	should	be,	it	is.	You	just	have	to	drop	your	ambitious
mind,	and	the	celebration	starts.
Can	you	see	 this?	If	you	can	see	 this	you	will	be	able	 to	understand	 'the	novel
man'.
The	 Bauls	 say,	 "The	 man	 who	 has	 understood	 the	 futility	 of	 things	 becomes
religious."	 If	 you	 are	 running	 after	 having,	 you	 will	 become	 a	 manipulator:
constantly	in	conflict	with	others,	constantly	trying	to	crush	others,	by	any	way
and	any	means	trying	to	reach	to	the	top.	You	will	lose	all	spontaneity.
The	man	of	being,	 'the	novel	man',	 is	spontaneous.	He	lives	in	the	moment,	he
lives	 herenow.	 He	 knows	 no	 other	 way	 to	 live,	 he	 is	 unpredictable.	 You	 can
predict	 a	 man	 of	 competition.	 You	 can	 predict,	 because	 the	 mind	 of	 the
competitor	runs	like	a	mathematical	formula.	It	has	a	logical	syllogism	in	it.	But
the	mind	of	one	who	is	moving	inwards,	the	man	of	being,	is	almost	dissolving.
The	mind	of	the	inward	traveller	 is	dissolving;	you	cannot	predict	him.	He	has
no	 mathematical	 formula	 about	 him	 --	 he	 simply	 lives	 in	 the	 moment,	 he
responds	to	the	moment.
Now	 let	 me	 tell	 you	 one	 thing:	 the	man	 of	 having	 is	 very	 clear.	 The	man	 of
having	has	a	destination,	very	clear,	cut.	If	he	wants	to	become	the	president	of
the	United	States	or	the	premier	of	India,	he	has	a	clear-cut	destination.
What	about	the	man	of	being?	--	he	has	a	direction,	but	he	has	no	destination.	He
has	a	very	subtle	direction,	but	no	destination.	He	has	a	quality:	he	has	a	 light
inside,	and	wherever	he	moves	that	light	falls	on	his	path.	He	has	eyes	to	see,	a
direction,	but	no	destination.	He	is	enjoying	and	he	is	moving,	but	his	movement
is	not	prefabricated.	He	has	no	plan.	He	is	like	a	river,	not	like	a	railway	train.
Direction	is	there,	but	not	like	a	railway	train,	not	running	in	a	fixed	pattern.	Zig-
zag	 his	 life	 will	 be.	 Sometimes	 he	 will	 be	 moving	 towards	 the	 north	 and
sometimes	he	will	be	moving	 towards	 the	 south.	He	cannot	be	very	consistent
because	consistency	is	part	of	the	logical	mind,	it	is	not	part	of	the	being.	He	will
be	 found	 many	 times	 to	 be	 inconsistent,	 even	 contradictory;	 but	 those
contradictions	 are	 just	 on	 the	 surface.	 If	 you	 look	 deep	 you	will	 find	 a	 subtle
direction.
Even	in	contradictions	the	direction	is	there.
But	 to	 know	 the	man	 of	 being	 you	 need	 very	 deep	 eyes,	 penetrating	 eyes.	 To
know	 the	 man	 of	 having,	 nothing	 is	 needed	 --	 just	 a	 little	 mind	 will	 do,	 a
mediocre	mind	will	do	--
because	the	man	of	having	is	also	of	the	category	of	mediocre	minds.	But	when
you	move	into	the	inner	world,	all	surfaces	are	lost	and	depth	is	infinite.
The	Bauls	call	this	spontaneous	man,	SAHAJA	MANUSH.	The	novel	man,	he's
the	new	man.	He	is	the	man	as	everyone	should	be.	And	unless	you	become	the
novel	 man,	 you	 will	 miss	 --	 you	 will	 miss	 treasures,	 blessings,	 benedictions
which	were	showering	all	around	you,	but	you	were	blind	and	you	could	not	see
it.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	was	in	love	with	a	woman.
"Look	darling,"	he	said	to	her,	"here	is	a	diamond	engagement	ring	for	you."
"Oh,	it	is	beautiful!"	she	claimed	"But	honey,	the	diamond	has	a	flaw	in	it."
"You	 should	 not	 notice	 that,"	 said	 the	Mulla.	 "Why,	 you	 are	 in	 love	 and	 you
know	what	they	say	--	'love	is	blind'."
"Blind,	yes,"	she	said,	"but	not	stone	blind."
Even	 in	 love	you	continue	 to	 remain	 the	man	of	 the	outside.	Even	 in	 love	you
continue	 to	 think	 in	 terms	 of	money,	 prestige,	 power.	 Even	 in	 love	 you	 don't
allow	the	unpredictable	to	assert,	you	don't	allow	your	innermost	being	to	have
its	say.	Even	then	you	remain	a	manipulator.
Our	 minds	 are	 almost	 always	 interested	 in	 the	 very	 ordinary.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 so
because	mind	is	outward-oriented.	The	very	orientation	 is	 towards	 the	without.
That's	how	Jesus	was	not	understood;	he	was	a	Baul,'the	novel	man'.	 If	he	had
been	 born	 in	 Bengal,	 the	 land	 of	 the	 Bauls,	 he	 would	 have	 been	 understood
better.	They	would	not	have	crucified	him.	For	centuries	they	have	known	mad
people	of	God.	They	would	have	understood	his	language.
Jews	could	not	understand	his	language.	His	language	was	not	of	the	mind,	his
language	was	 not	 of	money,	 of	 the	 outside.	He	 talked	 about	 the	 kingdom	 and
they	asked,	"Where	is	your	kingdom?	About	what	kingdom	are	you	talking?"	--
because	 they	 thought	 he	was	 talking	 about	 the	 kingdom	which	 is	 outside.	 He
said,	 "I	 am	 the	king,"	 and	 they	were	worried.	And	 they	 suspected	 that	 he	was
trying	 to	sabotage	 the	society,	or	 that	he	was	 trying	 to	conquer	 the	society	and
become	the	king.	They	thought	that	he	was	a	revolutionary.
He	was	a	rebellious	man,	not	a	revolutionary	at	all.	He	was	not	planning	for	a
revolution;	he	was	not	a	politician.	But	the	Jews	were	afraid:	 they	thought	that
he	was	 trying	 to	 conquer	 this	world.	And	 the	Romans	were	 afraid.	They	were
afraid	because	 it	was	 thought	 that	he	was	 the	king	of	men	 --	 the	king	 is	born.
When	the	king	of	the	Romans	heard	that	a	child	was	going	to	be	born	who	would
become	the	king	of	men,	he	became	so	afraid	that	he	ordered	a	massacre:	to	kill
all	the	children	below	the	age	of	two	years.
When	the	 three	wise	men	of	 the	East	reached	the	capital	 in	search	of	 the	child
Jesus,	the	king	heard	of	it.	He	invited	them	to	the	palace,	and	he	asked	them	for
what	 they	 had	 come.	They	 said	 they	were	 looking	 for	 the	 king	who	had	 been
born	 in	his	country:	"You	should	be	happy	that	a	king	 is	born	 in	your	country,
and	 the	 greatest	 king	 will	 walk	 on	 your	 earth."	 But	 the	 king	 was	 very	 afraid
because	he	thought,	"How	can	there	exist	two	kings	in	one	country?	Then	I	will
be	dethroned."	But	he	played	diplomatic.	He	said	 to	 the	wise	men,	"I	am	very
happy,	so	if	you	succeed	in	finding	him	please	come	and	inform	me."	But	he	was
planning	to	kill	the	boy,	and	the	three	wise	men	understood	it	because	they	could
see	in	his	eyes.	He	was	a	cunning	man.
Politicians	are	cunning.
After	 they	had	met	Jesus	and	worshipped	Jesus,	 they	had	 to	find	another	route
because	they	were	afraid	that	the	king	would	be	waiting,	and	they	didn't	want	to
become	a	part	of	this	catastrophe.	They	didn't	want	to	become	part	in	killing	and
murdering	Jesus.	So	they	had	to	travel	very	far.	They	had	to	do	a	long	journey
because	the	shortcut	was	the	one	they	had	come	by.	And	they	were	very	old	men,
but	still	they	took	a	very	long	route	through	deserts	and	mountains	to	reach	back
to	their	country.	They	didn't	want	to	go	back	by	the	same	route	because	it	would
pass	through	the	capital,	and	the	king	would	be	waiting.
Jesus	 was	 crucified	 because	 of	 his	 terminology,	 but	 he	 was	 talking	 about	 the
inner	kingdom.	He	was	not	talking	about	the	kingdom	of	the	outside,	and	he	was
not	talking	about	the	treasures	that	you	know,	but	the	treasures	of	the	unknown.
As	far	as	the	outside	world	is	concerned,	all	treasures	are	just	false.
I	have	heard	a	beautiful	anecdote....
A	man	walking	along	a	city	street	fell	through	an	open	sewer	hole	and	broke	his
leg.	He	engaged	a	famous	attorney,	brought	suit	against	the	city	for	ten	thousand
dollars,	 and	 won	 the	 case.	 The	 city	 appealed	 the	 decision	 right	 on	 up	 to	 the
Supreme	 Court,	 but	 again	 the	 lawyer	 won	 the	 decision.	 After	 the	 claim	 was
settled,	the	lawyer	sent	for	his	client	and	handed	him	a	dollar	bill.
"What	is	this?"	inquired	the	man,	looking	at	the	dollar.
"That's	 your	 damages	 after	 deducting	 my	 fee,	 the	 cost	 of	 appeals	 and	 other
expenses,"
replied	the	attorney.
Out	of	ten	thousand	dollars,	only	one	dollar!
The	 man	 looked	 at	 the	 dollar	 again,	 turned	 it	 over	 and	 scanned	 it	 carefully.
"What	is	the	matter	with	this	dollar?"	he	said.	"Is	it	counterfeit?"
But	 all	money	 outside	 is	 counterfeit:	 all	 dollars	 are	 counterfeit,	 all	 rupees	 are
counterfeit.
The	real	money	does	not	exist	 that	way;	the	real	money	does	not	exist	outside.
This	conversion	from	the	counterfeit	to	the	real	is	what	Bauls	call	the	birth	of	the
novel	man.
COME	IF	YOU	WISH	TO	MEET
THE	NOVEL	MAN.
HE	HAS	ABANDONED
HIS	WORLDLY	POSSESSIONS
FOR	THE	BEGGAR'S	SACK
THAT	HANGS	FROM	HIS	SHOULDERS.
He	 has	 abandoned	 worldly	 possessions	 to	 become	 a	 beggar.	 Why	 abandon
worldly	possessions?	The	worldly	possessions	 can	be	 abandoned	 in	 two	ways.
Again	you	have	to	understand:	the	man	who	has	lived	his	whole	life	in	collecting
possessions	can	abandon	them	out	of	greed.	Then	the	novel	man	is	not	born.	He
can	abandon	them	in	order	to	get	some	advance	booking	in	heaven,	paradise.	He
can	abandon	his	worldly	possessions	 seeing	 that	death	will	 take	 them	away.	 If
that	is	the	case,	then	the	old	man	remains	old,	even	if	he	abandons	all.
In	 India	 it	 happens	 many	 times,	 more	 often	 than	 not:	 people	 abandon	 their
possessions,	 they	 renounce,	 but	 if	 you	watch	 them	you	will	 see	 they	 have	 not
abandoned	their	greed.
In	fact,	they	have	renounced	BECAUSE	of	the	greed.
I	know	one	man	who	renounced	almost	a	million	rupees	many	years	ago,	but	he
still	goes	on	talking	about	it.	Thirty	years	have	passed,	and	whenever	I	meet	him,
he	will	 again	 and	 again	 bring	 the	 subject	 up	 that	 he	 has	 renounced	 a	million
rupees.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 the	 light	 that	 starts	 shining	 in	 his	 eyes	 --	 a	 million
rupees!
The	last	time	I	saw	him	I	asked	him,	"If	you	have	really	renounced	then	why	talk
about	it?	What	is	the	point?	As	far	as	I	can	see,	you	have	not	renounced	at	all.
The	 novel	 man	 is	 not	 born.	 You	 are	 as	 much	 attached	 to	 those	 one	 million
rupees,	or	maybe	even	more	than	you	were	before.	Now	the	very	idea	that	you
have	 renounced	a	million	 rupees	has	become	your	bank	balance.	Now	you	are
living	on	it.''	I	told	him	that	if	he	went	to	God,	the	first	thing	he	would	relate	to
Him	would	be	his	million	 rupees:	"Do	you	know	or	not	 that	 I	have	 renounced
one	million	rupees?"	And	he	would	be	expecting	something	special	for	himself.
This	man	is	the	same;	the	novel	man	is	not	born.	It	has	been	a	miscarriage.
You	can	renounce,	but	if	you	enjoy	ego	through	it,	if	you	feel	that	you	are	a	great
man	of	renunciation,	a	MAHATMA,	a	great	soul	because	you	have	renounced,
you	are	not	an	ordinary	man,	you	are	not	worldly,	then	your	renunciation	is	not
true.
When	 is	 the	 renunciation	 true?	 --	when	you	understand	 the	 futility.	Not	out	of
greed,	not	because	you	have	to	earn	something	in	the	other	world,	but	just	seeing
the	 futility	 of	 it	 all,	 you	 renounce.	This	 renunciation	 has	 no	 effort	 in	 it,	 just	 a
deep	insight.	Every	morning	you	clean	your	house	and	throw	the	rubbish	on	the
rubbish	heap,	but	you	don't	go	declaring	and	advertising	to	the	whole	town	that
again	you	have	 renounced	much	 rubbish,	 again	 this	morning	you	have	done	 a
great	deed	of	renunciation.	No,	you	know	that	it	 is	rubbish	--	finished.	What	is
there	to	tell	about	it?
The	novel	man	is	born	when	you	have	a	deep	insight	that	worldly	things	have	no
value;	 they	 are	 all	 counterfeit,	 unreal	 diamonds,	 and	 unreal	 real	 diamonds	 are
also	so.	Real	dollars	are	also	as	unreal	as	unreal	dollars.	When	the	whole	outside
world	has	no	value	for	you,	that	is	a	real	renunciation.	Then	you	are	not	attached
at	all.
And	Bauls	say,
My	plaited	hair
is	still	intact	and	dry.
Though	I	stand	in	the	stream
and	splash	and	swim	about	the	river,
I	cannot	be	touched	by	the	water.
Keep	your	soles	dry
as	you	coast	the	sea.
Let	attachments	share	the	same	home,
but	live	unattached.
Groping	for	the	river,
Oh	my	senseless	heart!
In	vain	do	you	wander	from	place	to	place.
The	ocean	of	your	heart
bears	a	priceless	gem.
What	good	is	life
if	you	fail	to	contact
the	spontaneous	man
who	dwells	in	your	own	body?
Your	destiny	is	shamed.
Do	not	give	up	gold
for	a	piece	of	glass,
nor	leave	heaven
for	a	visit	to	hell.
What	good	is	there
in	rushing	round	the	world?
The	eternal	hero	Iives
in	your	own	little	room.
Who	is	there
for	you	to	call	your	own?
My	heart,
for	whom	do	you	shed
your	futile	tears?
Brothers	and	friends,	let	them	be;
the	world	is	there.
Your	own	dear	life
is	hardly	your	own.
You	have	come	alone,
you	will	go	alone....
The	 whole	 idea	 of	 renunciation	 is	 of	 a	 vision,	 of	 a	 great	 understanding,	 of
looking	into	things	in	their	reality.	You	need	not	escape	from	the	world.	You	can
remain	 in	 the	world	 and	become	absolutely	unattached.	But	 if	 you	 feel,	 "Why
carry	 the	burden	unnecessarily?"	you	can	 leave	 the	world	also.	But	 remember,
the	world	has	no	value	this	way	or	that.	If	it	has	no	value,	its	renunciation	also
cannot	 have	 any	 value.	 If	 it	 is	 valuable,	 only	 then	 can	 its	 renunciation	 be
valuable.	But	then	there	is	no	point	in	renouncing	it;	it	is	simply	valueless.	It	is
like	a	dream.	When	you	awake,	everything	disappears.
You	 have	 come	 alone,	 you	 will	 go	 alone,	 and	 between	 these	 two	 exists	 the
dream.	To	understand	the	dream,	to	become	alert	 to	it,	 is	 the	birth	of	the	novel
man.	"Come	if	you	wish	to	meet	the	novel	man,"	says	the	Baul.	He	invites	the
whole	world:	Come	to	see	me;	the	novel	man	is	born.	"His	worldly	possessions
he	has	abandoned	for	the	beggar's	sack	that	hangs	from	his	shoulder."
HE	SPEAKS	OF	THE	ETERNAL	MOTHER
(KALI,	THE	GODDESS	OF	TIME)
EVEN	AS	HE	ENTERS	THE	GANGES.
The	novel	man	lives	in	eternity,	the	ordinary	man	lives	in	time.
This	word	 'Kali'	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	Kali	 is	 the	mother	 of	 time.	 In	 Sanskrit
time	is	called	KALA,	and	the	mother	of	KALA	is	Kali,	mother	of	time.	But	the
mother	of	time	is	beyond	time.	Time	is	born	out	of	it,	but	the	womb	out	of	which
time	is	born	is	eternity.
Eternity	is	the	mother	of	time.	Time	is	just	a	reflection	of	the	eternal.	The	Bauls
worship	Kali,	 the	mother	of	 time;	 they	worship	eternity.	They	seek	and	search
eternity	 --	 not	 that	which	 changes	 but	 that	which	 remains	 always	 and	 always,
that	which	 is	beyond	all	 flux,	absolutely	permanent,	unmoving.	They	seek	 that
hub	of	the	existence.	Symbolically	it	is	called	Kali.
This	word	'KALA'	is	very	meaningful:	one	meaning	is	time,	another	meaning	is
death.
The	same	word	means	time	and	death.	It	is	beautiful,	because	time	is	death.	The
moment	you	enter	into	time,	you	are	ready	to	die.	With	birth,	death	has	entered
into	 you.	When	 the	 child	 is	 born,	 he	 has	 entered	 into	 the	 realm	of	 death.	The
birthday	is	also	the	deathday.
Now	only	one	 thing	 is	certain:	 that	he	will	have	 to	die.	Everything	else	 is	 just
uncertain;	it	may	happen,	it	may	not	happen.	But	the	moment	a	child	is	born,	the
moment	the	child	has	taken	his	first	breath,	one	thing	is	absolutely	certain	--	that
he	will	die.
Entering	into	life	is	entering	into	death;	entering	into	time	is	entering	into	death.
Time	 is	death,	hence	 the	Sanskrit	word	KALA	is	very	beautiful.	 It	means	both
time	and	death.
And	Kali	means	beyond	time	and	beyond	death.	Eternity	is	deathlessness.	How
to	find	eternity?	What	is	the	way?	One	has	to	understand	the	process	of	time.
The	 process	 of	 time	 is	 horizontal:	 one	 moment	 passes,	 then	 comes	 another
moment;	that	passes,	then	another	moment	--	a	procession	of	moments,	a	queue
of	 moments	 --	 one	 passes,	 then	 another	 comes;	 another	 passes,	 then	 another
comes.	It	is	horizontal.
Eternity	is	vertical:	you	go	deep	into	the	moment,	not	moving	in	a	line,	but	into
depth.
You	drown	yourself	in	the	moment.	If	you	stand	on	the	bank,	then	the	river	goes
on	passing.	Ordinarily	we	are	standing	on	 the	bank	of	 time.	The	 river	goes	on
moving;	 one	 moment,	 another	 moment,	 and	 another,	 and	 the	 sequence	 of
moments	continues.	This	is	how	we	ordinarily	live,	this	is	how	we	live	in	time.
Then	there	is	another	way	--	take	a	jump	into	the	river,	drown	in	the	moment,	the
herenow.	 Then	 suddenly,	 time	 stops.	 Then	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 an	 altogether
different	 dimension;	 the	 vertical	 dimension	 is	 eternity.	 That	 is	 the	meaning	 of
Jesus'	cross.
The	cross	is	a	time	symbol.	It	is	made	of	two	lines:	one	vertical,	one	horizontal.
On	 the	 horizontal	 line	 are	 the	 hands	 of	 Christ,	 and	 on	 the	 vertical	 line	 is	 his
whole	 being.	Hands	 are	 symbolic	 of	 action:	 doing,	 having.	Having	 is	 in	 time;
being	is	in	eternity.	So	whatsoever	you	DO	is	in	time,	whatsoever	you	ARE	is	in
eternity;	 whatsoever	 you	 achieve	 is	 in	 time,	 whatsoever	 is	 your	 nature	 is	 in
eternity.	 Change	 from	 having,	 doing,	 towards	 being.	 This	moment	 the	 turning
can	happen.	This	 very	moment,	 if	 you	 forget	 past	 and	 future,	 then	 time	 stops.
Then	nothing	moves,	then	everything	is	absolutely	silent	and	you	start	drowning
in	the	here-now.	That	'now'	is	eternity.
Kali	is	a	symbol	of	now,	of	the	eternal,	of	the	absolutely	real.	To	live	moment	to
moment	 and	 not	 to	 bother	 about	 past	 and	 future	 is	 the	way	 towards	 the	 novel
man.
SIMPLE	WORDS	CAN	OVERCOME
IGNORANCE	AND	DISBELIEF:
KALI	AND	KRISHNA	ARE	ONE.
THE	WORDS	MAY	DIFFER	--
THE	MEANING	IS	PRECISELY	THE	SAME.
HE	WHO	HAS	BROKEN
THE	BARRIER	OF	WORDS
HAS	CONQUERED	LIMITS:
ALLAH	OR	JESUS,	MOSES	OR	KALI,
THE	RICH	OR	THE	POOR,
SAGE	OR	FOOL,
ALL	ARE	ONE	AND	THE	SAME	TO	HIM.
Very	 significant	 sentences:	 "Simple	 words	 can	 overcome	 ignorance	 and
disbelief."	 If	 you	 can	 listen,	 then	 very	 simple	 words	 are	 enough.	 If	 you	 are
capable	 of	 being	 receptive,	 just	 simple	 words	 uttered	 by	 one	 who	 knows	 are
enough.	 But	 if	 you	 don't	 understand,	 then	 things	 become	 very	 complex.	 Your
non-understanding	 or	 non-receptivity	 makes	 things	 complex.	 It	 creates
confusion,	 it	 puzzles	 you,	 it	 creates	 a	 chaos	 in	 your	 being.	 If	 you	 can	 listen
silently	 without	 your	 mind	 interfering,	 then	 simple	 words	 can	 overcome
ignorance	and	disbelief.
The	Bauls	say,
Even	if	you	forbid,	dear	friend,
I	am	helpless.
My	songs	contain	my	prayers.
Some	flowers	pray
through	the	glamour	of	colors,
and	others,	being	dark,
with	fragrance.
As	the	VEENA	prays
with	its	vibrating	strings,
do	I	with	my	songs.
Bauls	don't	know	much	philosophy;	they	are	not	philosophers.	They	are	simple
people	of	the	earth.	They	are	very	simple	people	who	can	sing	and	dance.	Their
words	are	simple.
If	you	love,	if	you	trust,	their	small	gestures	can	reveal	much.
And	 it	 is	 always	 a	 question	 of	 love	 and	 trust.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 great
metaphysical	skill,	because	the	more	metaphysics	you	know,	the	more	you	will
be	 puzzled.	And	 the	more	 you	 are	 acquainted	with	 philosophy,	 the	 less	 is	 the
possibility	 to	come	 to	understanding.	The	more	you	are	 full	of	knowledge,	 the
less	will	be	your	understanding.
You	 will	 be	 too	 clouded,	 and	 too	 many	 thoughts	 will	 not	 allow	 you	 vision,
clarity.	Your	mirror	will	be	full	of	dust.
SIMPLE	WORDS	CAN	OVERCOME
IGNORANCE	AND	DISBELIEF;
KALI	AND	KRISHNA	ARE	ONE.
Bauls	say,	"We	don't	make	any	distinction	between	a	Hindu	and	a	Mohammedan
and	a	Christian...Kali	and	Krishna	are	one."	They	say,	"We	don't	even	make	any
distinction	 between	 male	 and	 female...	 Kali	 and	 Krishna	 are	 one,	 male	 and
female	are	one."	That	is	one	of	their	great	insights:	that	if	you	really	dance	and
sing	in	deep	trust	and	love,	you	will	come	to	feel	that	man	and	woman	are	not
two	things,	are	not	two	beings.	Inside	you,	a	new	alchemy	starts,	and	your	inside
man	melts	with	the	inside	woman...and	Kali	and	Krishna	become	one.
They	sing,
As	the	man	and	the	woman	in	me
unite	in	love,
the	brilliance	of	beauty,
balanced	on	the	bi-petalled	lotus
blooms	in	me,
dazzles	my	eyes.
The	rays	outshine	the	moon,
and	the	jewels
glowing	on	the	hoods	of	snakes.
My	skin	and	bone	are	turned	to	gold
when	the	inner	man	and	woman	meet,
when	Krishna	and	Kali	become	one.
My	skin	and	bone	are	tumed	to	gold,
I	am	the	reservoir	of	love,
alive	as	the	waves.
A	single	drop	of	water
has	grown	into	a	sea,
unnavigable....
The	 whole	 problem	 of	 man	 is	 how	 to	 meet	 with	 the	 woman,	 and	 the	 whole
problem	of	the	woman	is	how	to	meet	man.
In	one	ancient	myth	prevalent	 in	many	countries	of	 the	Far	East,	 they	say	God
created	man	 and	woman	 together,	 not	 as	 two	 beings;	 they	were	 joined	 in	 one
body.	 But	 then	 it	 became	 difficult.	 There	 were	 conflicts	 and	 problems.	 The
woman	wanted	to	go	to	the	East	and	the	man	was	not	willing.	Or,	the	man	was
ready	 to	do	 something	and	 the	woman	wanted	 to	 rest.	But	 they	were	 together,
their	bodies	were	joined.	So	they	complained	and	God	cut	their	bodies	separate.
Since	then,	every	man	is	searching	the	woman,	his	woman,	and	every	woman	is
searching	her	man.	Now	it	is	such	a	big	crowd	that	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	who
is	your	woman,	who	is	your	man.	So	much	misery,	and	one	goes	on	stumbling
and	groping	in	the	dark.	It	 is	almost	impossible	to	find	your	woman.	How	will
you	find	her?
The	myth	says	that	if	you	can	find,	everything	fits;	you	again	become	one.	But	it
is	very	difficult	to	find.
But	 there	 is	 a	 way	 to	 find	 your	 woman,	 because	 the	 woman	 is	 not	 outside.
Outside,	at	the	most,	are	parallel	similarities.
When	 you	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 a	 woman,	 what	 really	 happens?	 This	 is	 what
happens:	 somehow	 the	 outside	woman	 fulfills	 your	 inner	woman's	 image,	 fits
with	that	image	--
maybe	not	a	hundred	percent,	but	enough	to	fall	in	love.	When	you	fall	in	love
with	a	man,	what	happens?	Something	inside	you	clicks	and	says,	"Yes,	 this	 is
the	man,	the	right	man."	It	is	not	a	logical	conclusion,	it	is	not	a	syllogism.	It	is
not	that	you	find	out	all	the	pros	and	cons	about	the	man	and	then	you	decide,	or
you	compare	the	man	with	all	the	other	men	in	the	world,	then	you	decide.	No,
something	happens	out	of	the	blue.
Suddenly	you	see	that	this	is	the	man	for	whom	you	were	waiting,	for	whom	you
were	waiting	for	lives.
What	 happens?	 You	 carry	 an	 image	 of	 man,	 you	 carry	 an	 image	 of	 woman
inside.	You	are	both,	and	you	go	on	looking	outside.	Nobody	is	going	to	fit	one
hundred	percent,	because	the	woman	that	you	find	outside	has	her	own	images
about	you;	you	have	your	own	images.	It	is	very	difficult	to	fit	with	each	other.
So	all	marriages	are	always	on	 the	 rocks,	and	people,	by	and	by,	 learn	how	 to
carry	 on	 peacefully.	 They	 learn	 not	 to	 'rock	 the	 boat'.	 But	 nothing	 more	 can
happen	outside.
Bauls	 say,	 "Deep	 inside	 you	 both	 exist	 --	 Krishna	 and	 Kali.	 Let	 them	 meet
there."	That	 is	 the	whole	Tantra	method:	how	to	allow	your	 inner	man	to	meet
with	the	inner	woman.
And	when	this	becomes	a	circle,	when	this	meeting,	when	this	inner	copulation
happens,	 a	 great	 orgasm,	 a	 great	 explosive	 orgasm	 begins	 which	 knows	 a
beginning	but	knows	no	end.	Then	you	live	an	orgasmic	life.
A	single	drop	of	water
has	grown	into	a	sea,
unnavigable....
Then	you	are	no	more	finite,	you	become	infinite.
SIMPLE	WORDS	CAN	OVERCOME
IGNORANCE	AND	DISBELIEF:
KALI	AND	KRISHNA	ARE	ONE.
THE	WORDS	MAY	DIFFER	--
THE	MEANING	IS	PRECISELY	THE	SAME.
HE	WHO	HAS	BROKEN
THE	BARRIER	OF	WORDS,
HAS	CONQUERED	LIMITS...
Break	the	barrier	of	words.	Now,	I	am	talking	to	you;	I	am	using	words.	You	can
listen	to	my	words	--	then	you	have	not	listened	to	me.	You	can	listen	in	such	a
way	 that	 the	words	are	no	more	a	barrier,	but	become	vehicles.	They	no	more
create	problems,	but	you	listen	exactly	between	the	words,	between	two	words,
in	the	gaps.	You	listen	to	my	silence;	 then	words	and	their	barriers	are	broken.
Then	limits	are	conquered.
ALLAH	OR	JESUS,	MOSES	OR	KALI,
THE	RICH	OR	THE	POOR,
SAGE	OR	FOOL,
ALL	ARE	ONE	AND	THE	SAME	TO	HIM.
This	 is	 the	 novel	 man.	 Now	 he	 knows	 no	 duality.	 He	 does	 not	 make	 any
distinction	between	the	sage	and	the	fool.	He	makes	no	distinction	between	the
man	and	the	woman.
All	dualities	have	come	to	be	united,	all	dualities	have	dissolved.	Once	you	drop
the	words,	dualities	drop.
Language	creates	duality,	language	exists	through	duality.	It	cannot	indicate	the
non-dual.
If	 I	 say	 'day',	 immediately	 I	 create	 night.	 If	 I	 say	 'life',	 immediately	 I	 create
death.	If	I	say
'good',	immediately	bad	is	created.	If	I	say	'no',	just	by	the	side	of	the	no,	yes	is
existing.
Language	can	exist	only	through	the	opposite.	That's	why	we	see	life	as	always
divided	--
God	and	devil.	Drop	language,	drop	this	linguistic	pattern.	Once	language	is	no
more	on	your	mind	and	you	look	directly	into	reality,	day	IS	night.	Suddenly	you
will	start	laughing	at	why	you	missed	it	so	long!	Day,	every	day	turns	into	night;
night	 turns	 into	 day	 every	morning	 again,	 and	 you	 have	 been	missing.	Life	 is
always	turning	into	death,	death	always	turns	again	into	life,	and	you	have	been
missing.	They	are	not	two,	they	are	one	whole.	This	is	the	non-dual,	ADWAITA.
This	is	the	most	essential	religion.
LOST	IN	HIS	OWN	THOUGHTS,
HE	SEEMS	INSANE	TO	OTHERS...
...	because	his	consciousness	is	no	longer	divided	by	language.	He	is	no	longer
looking	at	the	world	through	words.	He	looks	insane:	he	is	absorbed	in	his	own
being,	he	is	lost	in	his	own	vision.	And	the	vision	is	so	vast,	as	if	a	thousand	and
one	suns	have	risen	together.	It	is	so	dazzling.
LOST	IN	HIS	OWN	THOUGHTS,
HE	SEEMS	INSANE	TO	OTHERS.
HE	OPENS	HIS	ARMS
TO	WELCOME	THE	WORLD,
CALLING	ALL	TO	THE	FERRY	BOAT
TIED	TO	THE	COAST	OF	LIFE.
And	he	goes	on	calling,	"Come	to	me,	come,	if	you	wish	to	meet	the	novel	man,"
and	the	boat	is	ready.	And	his	boat	is	not	against	life,	it	is	tied	to	the	coast	of	the
life.	He	is	not	negative.
And	 he	 says,	 "Come,	 and	 I	 can	 take	 you	 to	 the	 other	 shore.	Come,	 and	 I	 can
make	you	new.	Come,	and	I	can	take	you	into	eternity."
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Direction	a	non-ending	process
26	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606260
ShortTitle:
BELOV106
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
98
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
YESTERDAY	YOU	SAID	THAT	AN	INWARD	TRAVELLER	HAS	ONLY
DIRECTION	 AND	 NOT	 DESTINATION.	 WILL	 YOU	 PLEASE	 FURTHER
CLARIFY
THE	DISTINCTION	BETWEEN	THE	TWO?
THE	DISTINCTIOIN	IS	VERY	SUBTLE,	but	it	is	the	same	distinction	as	there
is	between	 the	mind	and	 the	heart,	as	 there	 is	between	 logic	and	 love,	or	even
more	appropriate,	as	there	is	between	prose	and	and	poetry.
A	destination	is	a	very	clear-cut	thing;	direction	is	very	intuitive.	A	destination	is
something	outside	you,	more	like	a	thing.	A	direction	is	an	inner	feeling;	not	an
object,	 but	 your	 very	 subjectivity.	You	 can	 feel	 direction,	 you	 cannot	 know	 it.
You	 can	 know	 the	 destination,	 you	 cannot	 feel	 it.	Destination	 is	 in	 the	 future.
Once	 decided,	 you	 start	 manipulating	 your	 life	 towards	 it,	 steering	 your	 life
towards	it.
How	can	you	decide	the	future?	Who	are	you	to	decide	the	unknown?	How	is	it
possible	to	fix	the	future?	Future	is	that	which	is	not	known	yet.	Future	is	open
possibility.	By	fixing	a	destination	your	future	is	no	more	a	future,	because	it	is
no	more	open.	Now	you	have	chosen	one	alternative	out	of	many,	because	when
all	 the	 alternatives	 were	 open	 it	 was	 future.	 Now	 all	 alternatives	 have	 been
dropped;	only	one	alternative	has	been	chosen.	It	 is	no	longer	future,	 it	 is	your
past.
The	 past	 decides	when	 you	 decide	 a	 destination.	Your	 experience	 of	 the	 past,
your	knowledge	of	 the	past	decides.	You	kill	 future.	Then	you	go	on	repeating
your	own	past	-
-	 maybe	 a	 little	 modified,	 a	 little	 changed	 here	 and	 there	 according	 to	 your
comfort,	convenience;	 repainted,	 renovated	--	but	still	 it	comes	out	of	 the	past.
This	 is	 the	way	 one	 loses	 track	 of	 future:	 by	 deciding	 a	 destination	 one	 loses
track	of	future.	One	becomes	dead.	One	starts	functioning	like	a	mechanism.
Direction	 is	 something	alive,	 in	 the	moment.	 It	knows	nothing	of	 the	 future,	 it
knows	nothing	of	the	past,	but	it	throbs,	pulsates	here	and	now.	And	out	of	this
pulsating	moment,	the	next	moment	is	created.	Not	by	any	decision	on	your	part
--	but	just	because	you	live	this	moment	and	you	live	it	so	totally,	and	you	love
this	 moment	 so	 wholly,	 out	 of	 this	 wholeness	 the	 next	 moment	 is	 born.	 It	 is
going	to	have	a	direction.	That	direction	is	not	given	by	you,	it	is	not	imposed	by
you;	 it	 is	 spontaneous.	 That's	 what	 the	 Bauls	 call	 SAHAJA	 MANUSH,	 the
spontaneous	man.
The	spontaneous	man	is	the	way	to	the	real	man,	to	the	essential	man,	to	the	God
within.
You	cannot	decide	direction,	you	can	only	live	this	moment	that	is	available	to
you.	By	living	it,	direction	arises.	If	you	dance,	the	next	moment	is	going	to	be
of	a	deeper	dance.
Not	 that	 you	 decide	 but	 you	 simply	 dance	 this	 moment.	 You	 have	 created	 a
direction:	 you	 are	 not	manipulating	 it.	 The	 next	moment	will	 be	more	 full	 of
dancing,	and	still	more	will	be	following.
Destination	 is	 fixed	 by	 the	mind;	 direction	 is	 earned	 by	 living.	 Destination	 is
logical:	one	wants	to	be	a	doctor,	one	wants	to	be	an	engineer,	one	wants	to	be	a
scientist	or	one	wants	to	be	a	politician,	one	wants	to	be	a	rich	man,	famous	man
--	these	are	destinations.
Direction?	--	one	simply	lives	the	moment	in	deep	trust	that	life	will	decide.	One
lives	 this	moment	so	 totally	 that	out	of	 this	 totality	a	 freshness	 is	born.	Out	of
this	totality	the	past	dissolves	and	the	future	starts	taking	shape.	But	this	shape	is
not	given	by	you,	this	shape	is	earned	by	you.
One	Zen	master,	Rinzai,	was	dying;	he	was	on	the	death-bed.	Somebody	asked,
"Master,	people	will	ask	after	you	are	gone,	what	was	your	essential	 teaching?
You	 have	 said	 many	 things,	 you	 have	 talked	 about	 many	 things	 --	 it	 will	 be
difficult	for	us	to	condense	it.	Before	you	leave,	please,	you	yourself	condense	it
into	a	single	sentence,	so	we	will	treasure	it.	And	whenever	people	who	have	not
known	you	desire,	we	can	give	them	your	essential	teaching."
Dying,	Rinzai	opened	his	eyes,	gave	a	great	Zen	shout,	a	lion's	roar!	They	were
all	 shocked!	 They	 couldn't	 believe	 that	 this	 dying	 man	 could	 have	 so	 much
energy,	 and	 they	 were	 not	 expecting	 it.	 The	 man	 was	 unpredictable;	 he	 had
always	been	so.	But	even	with	this	unpredictable	man	they	were	not	in	any	way
expecting	that	dying,	at	the	last	moment,	he	would	give	such	a	lion's	roar.	And
when	 they	 were	 shocked	 --	 and	 of	 course	 their	 minds	 stopped,	 they	 were
surprised,	taken	aback	--	Rinzai	said,	"This	is	it!"	closed	his	eyes,	and	died.
This	is	it....
This	 moment,	 this	 silent	 moment,	 this	 moment	 uncorrupted	 by	 thought,	 this
silence	that	was	surrounding,	this	surprise,	this	last	lion's	roar	over	death;	this	is
it.
Yes,	 direction	 comes	 out	 of	 living	 this	 moment.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you
manage	 and	 plan.	 It	 happens,	 it	 is	 very	 subtle,	 and	 you	 will	 never	 be	 certain
about	 it.	You	can	only	 feel	 it.	That's	why	 I	 say	 it	 is	more	 like	poetry,	 not	 like
prose;	more	like	love,	not	like	logic;	more	like	art	than	like	science.	Wake,	and
that's	its	beauty;	hesitant,	as	hesitant	as	a	dewdrop	on	a	grass	leaf,	slipping,	not
knowing	where,	not	knowing	why;	in	the	morning	sun,	just	slipping	on	a	leaf	of
grass.
Direction	 is	 very	 subtle,	 delicate,	 fragile.	 That's	 why	 everybody	 has	 chosen
destination.
Society	 tries	 to	 fix	 a	 destination	 for	 you.	 Parents,	 teachers,	 culture,	 religion,
government:	they	all	try	to	give	you	a	fixed	pattern	of	life.	They	don't	want	you
to	be	free,	left	alone,	moving	into	the	unknown.	But	that's	how	they	have	created
boredom.	If	you	know	your	future	beforehand,	it	is	already	boring.	If	you	know
that	you	are	going	to	be	this,	it	is	already	boring.
In	the	Koran,	Mohammed	talks	about	paradise,	but	he	makes	it	so	predictable,	so
much	 like	a	destination	 that	 it	 already	 looks	worthless.	The	word	 'paradise',	or
the	Muslim	 equivalent	 of	 it,	 FIRDAUS	 --	 they	 both	 come	 from	 a	 single	 root
which	means	a	walled	garden	--	and	in	that	walled	garden	of	God	everything	is
fixed,	almost	every	detail.
Nothing	is	left	to	imagination.	Streams	are	there,	streams	of	wine;	and	people	are
sitting	 in	 the	shade.	Of	course,	Mohammed	must	have	suffered	 too	much	from
the	heat	and	 the	desert.	People	are	 sitting	 in	 the	shade,	enjoying	 their	wives	 --
not	wife,	but	wives	--
because	Mohammed	had	nine	wives.	What	else	do	they	do?	There	is	nothing	else
to	 do	 but	 drink	wine	 from	 the	 springs,	 sit	 on	 couches	 under	 the	 shade	 of	 big
trees,	enjoy	their	wives.
But	then	he	was	disturbed,	because	when	you	die	your	wife	will	be	old.	So	what
to	do?	--
he	made	an	arrangement	for	that	also:	that	for	good	people,	those	who	had	lived
according	to	religion,	God	would	make	their	wives	young	again.	So	remember,	if
you	are	not	good	you	will	have	to	remain	with	your	old	wife.	Then	you	will	be
stuck	with	her	forever	and	ever.	Be	good!	Everything...and	servants	are	there	to
fulfill	any	desire.	But	just	think	of	it!
But	it	is	so	ready-made,	manufactured,	predictable:	it	loses	all	meaning.	Hindus,
Jainas,	Buddhists,	are	more	subtle.	Buddhists	are	the	most	subtle.	They	don't	talk
about	NIRVANA.	They	say:	one	has	to	know	it	to	know	it;	one	has	to	be	in	it	to
know	 it	 --	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 They	 don't	 describe.	 They	 don't	 give	 any
description	 because	 all	 descriptions	 will	 be	 dangerous.	 All	 words	 become
definitive	and	the	mystery	is	lost.
Future	should	be	a	direction,	not	a	destination.	It	should	be	more	like	NIRVANA.
The	word	Buddha	 uses	means:	 all	 that	 you	 know	will	 not	 be	 there.	 That's	 his
definition	 clf	 nirvana:	 all	 that	 you	 know	 will	 not	 be	 there,	 all	 that	 you	 have
experienced	will	not	be	there,	all	that	you	are	will	not	be	there	--	SOMETHING
TOTALLY	NEW,	something	that	you	cannot	understand	because	you	don't	have
the	 language	 to	 understand	 it,	 you	 don't	 have	 the	 experience	 to	 understand	 it.
Something	absolutely	new;	it	cannot	be	talked	about.	NIRVANA	is	a	direction.
FIRDAUS,	paradise,	Christian	 and	Mohammedan,	 are	destinations,	very	 clear-
cut.
The	 mediocre	 mind	 demands	 clear-cut	 goals	 because	 he	 is	 so	 insecure	 --	 he
cannot	trust	his	own	awareness,	and	he	cannot	trust	 life.	The	mediocre	mind	is
very	afraid	of	discovery,	and	discovery	is	the	greatest	secret	in	life.	To	be	ready
to	be	surprised,	 to	be	always	ready	 to	be	surprised	means	 that	one	 is	 innocent,
trying	to	discover.	And	life	is	such	that	you	can	go	on	discovering.	The	more	you
discover	it,	the	more	you	come	to	know	that	much	more	is	still	left.	It	is	a	non-
ending	 process.	Direction	 is	 a	 non-ending	 process.	Remember,	 it	 is	 a	 process,
movement;	destination	is	a	dead	thing.
Destination	belongs	to	the	ego;	direction	belongs	to	life,	to	being.	To	move	in	the
world	 of	 direction	 one	 needs	 tremendous	 trust,	 because	 one	 is	 moving	 in
insecurity,	one	is	moving	in	darkness.	But	the	darkness	has	a	thrill	in	it:	without
any	map,	without	 any	guide	you	are	moving	 into	 the	unknown.	Each	 step	 is	 a
discovery,	 and	 it	 is	 not	 only	 a	discovery	of	 the	outside	world.	Simultaneously,
something	is	discovered	in	you	also.	A	discoverer	not	only	discovers	things.	As
he	goes	on	discovering	more	and	more	unknown	worlds,	he	goes	on	discovering
himself	 also,	 simultaneously.	 Each	 discovery	 is	 an	 inner	 discovery	 also.	 The
more	you	know,	the	more	you	know	about	the	knower.	The	more	you	love,	the
more	you	know	about	the	lover.
I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 give	 you	 a	 destination.	 I	 can	 only	 give	 you	 a	 direction	 --
awake,	throbbing	with	life;	and	unknown,	always	surprising,	unpredictable.	I'm
not	going	to	give	you	a	map.	I	can	give	you	only	a	great	passion	to	discover.	Yes,
a	map	 is	 not	 needed;	 great	 passion,	 great	 desire	 to	 discover	 is	 needed.	Then	 I
leave	you	alone.	Then	you	go	on	your	own.	Move	into	the	vast,	into	the	infinite,
and	by	and	by,	learn	to	trust	it.	Leave	yourself	in	the	hands	of	life,	because	life	is
God.	When	 Jesus	 says,	 "Thy	 Kingdom	 come,	 Thy	 will	 be	 done,"	 he's	 saying
this...a	great	trust.	Even	if	God	brings	death,	there	is	nothing	to	be	afraid	of.	It	is
He	who	is	bringing	death,	so	there	must	be	a	reason	in	it,	there	must	be	a	hidden
secret	in	it,	there	must	be	a	teaching	in	it.	He's	opening	a	door.
The	man	who	trusts,	the	man	who	is	religious	is	thrilled	even	at	the	gate	of	death
--	he	can	give	a	lion's	roar.	Even	dying	--	because	he	knows	nothing	dies	--	at	the
very	moment	of	death	he	can	say,	"This	is	it!"	Because	each	moment,	this	is	it.	It
may	 be	 life,	 it	may	 be	 death;	 it	may	 be	 success,	 it	may	 be	 failure;	 it	may	 be
happiness,	it	may	be	unhappiness.
Each	moment...
...	this	is	it.
This	 is	what	I	call	 the	real	prayer.	And	then	you	will	have	direction.	You	need
not	worry	about	it,	you	need	not	fix	it;	you	can	move	with	trust.
The	second	question:
Question	2
HOW	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 THE	 INSCRIPTION	 ON	 THE	 GREEK	 TEMPLE	 TO
DELPHI	SAYS:	KNOW	THYSELF,	AND	NOT:	LOVE	THYSELF?
The	Greek	mind	has	 an	 obsession	with	 knowledge.	The	Greek	mind	 thinks	 in
terms	 of	 knowledge,	 how	 to	 know.	 That's	 why	 Greeks	 produced	 the	 greatest
tradition	of	philosophers,	great	thinkers,	logicians,	great	rational	minds.	But	the
passion	is	to	know.
In	 the	world,	as	 I	 see	 it,	 there	are	only	 two	 types	of	minds:	 the	Greek	and	 the
Hindu.	 The	 Greek	 mind	 has	 a	 passion	 to	 know,	 and	 the	 Hindu	 mind	 has	 a
passion	to	be.	The	Hindu	passion	is	not	too	concerned	about	knowing,	but	about
being.	SAT,	being,	is	the	very	search	--	who	am	I?	--	not	to	know	it	in	a	logical
way,	but	to	drown	in	one's	own	existence	so	one	can	taste	it,	so	one	can	be	it	--
because	there	is	no	other	way	to	know,	really.	If	you	ask	Hindus,	 they	will	say
there	 is	no	other	way	 to	know	 than	 to	be.	How	can	you	know	 love?	The	only
way	is	to	become	a	lover.	Be	a	lover	and	you	will	know.	And	if	you	are	trying	to
stand	 outside	 the	 experience	 and	 just	 be	 an	 observer,	 then	 you	 may	 know
ABOUT	love,	but	you	will	never	know	love.
The	Greek	mind	has	produced	the	whole	scientific	growth.	Modern	science	is	a
by-product	 of	 the	Greek	mind.	Modern	 science	 insists	 on	 being	 dispassionate,
standing	outside,	watching,	unprejudiced.	Be	objective,	be	impersonal.	These	are
the	basic	 requirements	 if	 you	want	 to	become	a	 scientist:	 be	 impersonal,	 don't
allow	your	emotions	to	color	anything;	be	dispassionate,	almost	not	interested	in
any	hypothesis	in	whatsoever	way.	Just	watch	the	fact.	Don't	get	involved	in	it,
remain	outside.	Don't	be	a	participant.
This	is	the	Greek	passion:	a	dispassionate	search	for	knowledge.
It	 has	 helped,	 but	 it	 has	 helped	 only	 in	 one	 direction:	 that	 is	 the	 direction	 of
matter.	That	is	the	way	to	know	matter.	You	can	never	come	to	know	mind	that
way,	only	matter.	You	can	never	come	to	know	consciousness	that	way.	You	can
know	the	outside,	you	can	never	know	the	inside	--	because	in	the	inside	you	are
already	involved.	There	is	no	way	to	stand	out	of	it.	You	are	already	there.	The
inside	is	you	--	how	can	you	get	out	of	it?	I	can	watch	a	stone,	a	rock,	a	river,
dispassionately	because	I	am	separate.	How	can	I	watch	myself	dispassionately?
I	 am	 involved	 in	 it.	 I	 cannot	be	outside	 it.	 I	 cannot	 reduce	myself	 to	being	an
object.	I	will	remain	the	subject,	and	I	will	remain	the	subject.
Whatsoever	I	do,	I	am	the	knower,	I'm	not	the	known.
So	the	Greek	mind	shifted,	by	and	by,	towards	matter.	The	motto,	the	inscription
at	 Delphi's	 temple:	 Know	 Thyself,	 became	 the	 source	 of	 the	 whole	 scientific
progress.	 But	 by	 and	 by,	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 dispassionate	 knowledge	 led	 the
Western	mind	away	from	its	own	being.
The	Hindu	mind,	the	other	type	of	mind	in	the	world,	has	another	direction:	the
direction	 is	 of	 being.	 In	 the	Upanishads,	 the	great	master	Udallack	 says	 to	his
son	and	his	disciple	Swetketu,	"That	art	thou"	--	TATWAMASI	Swetketu.	That
art	thou	--	there	is	no	distinction	between	that	and	thou.	That	is	your	reality;	thou
is	the	reality	--	there	is	no	distinction.	There	is	no	possibility	to	know	it	as	you
know	a	rock.	There	 is	no	possibility	 to	know	it	as	you	know	other	 things;	you
can	only	BE	it.
On	 the	 temple	 of	 Delphi,	 of	 course,	 it	 was	 written:	 Know	 Thyself.	 It	 is
expressive	of	the	Greek	mind.	Because	the	temple	is	in	Greece	the	inscription	is
Greek.	If	the	temple	had	been	in	India	then	the	inscription	would	have	been:	Be
Thyself	--	because	that	art	thou.
The	Hindu	mind	moved	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 one's	 own	 being	 --	 that's	 why	 it
became	 non-scientific.	 It	 became	 religious	 but	 non-scientific.	 It	 became
introvert,	 but	 then	 it	 lost	 all	 moorings	 in	 the	 outside	 world.	 The	 Hindu	mind
became	very	rich	inside,	but	the	outside	became	very	poor.
A	great	synthesis	is	needed,	a	great	synthesis	between	the	Hindu	and	the	Greek
mind.	 It	 can	 be	 the	 greatest	 blessing	 for	 the	 earth.	Up	 to	 now	 it	 has	 not	 been
possible,	 but	 now	 the	basic	 requirements	 are	 there	 and	 a	 synthesis	 is	 possible.
The	 East	 and	West	 are	meeting	 in	 a	 very	 subtle	way.	 The	 Eastern	 people	 are
going	to	the	West	to	learn	science,	to	become	scientists,	and	the	Western	seekers
are	going,	moving	 towards	 the	East	 to	 learn	what	 religion	 is.	A	great	mingling
and	merging	is	happening.
In	 the	 future,	 the	East	 is	not	going	 to	be	East	 and	 the	West	 is	not	going	 to	be
West.	The	earth	 is	going	 to	become	a	global	village	 --	a	 small	place	where	all
distinctions	will	 disappear.	And	 then	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 great	 synthesis	will
arise,	the	greatest	ever	--
which	will	not	think	in	extremes,	which	will	not	think	that	if	you	go	outside,	if
you	are	a	searcher	after	knowledge	then	you	lose	your	roots	in	being;	or	if	you
search	 in	 your	 being	 you	 lose	 your	 roots	 in	 the	world,	 in	 the	 scientific	 realm.
Both	can	be	together,	and	whenever	this	happens	a	man	has	both	wings	and	he
can	fly	to	the	highest	sky	possible.
Otherwise	you	have	only	one	wing.
As	I	see	it,	Hindus	are	lopsided	as	much	as	the	Greek	mind	is	lopsided.	Both	are
half	of	the	reality.
Religion	 is	 half;	 science	 is	 half.	 Something	 has	 to	 happen	 which	 can	 bring
religion	 and	 science	 together	 in	 a	 greater	whole,	where	 science	 does	 not	 deny
religion	and	where	religion	does	not	condemn	science.
"How	 is	 it	 that	 the	 inscription	 on	 the	 Greek	 temple	 to	 Delphi	 says:	 Know
Thyself,	and	not:	Love	Thyself?"
Love	thyself	is	possible	only	if	you	become	thyself,	if	you	be	thyself.	Otherwise
it	is	not	possible.	Otherwise	the	only	possibility	is	to	go	on	trying	to	know	who
you	are,	and	that	too	from	the	outside;	watching	from	the	outside	who	you	are,
and	that	too	in	an	objective	way,	not	in	an	intuitive	way.
The	Greek	mind	developed	a	tremendous	logical	capacity.	Aristotle	became	the
father	of	all	 logic	and	all	philosophy.	The	Eastern	mind	 looks	 illogical	 --	 it	 is.
The	very	insistence	on	meditation	is	illogical	because	meditation	says:	you	can
know	only	when	the	mind	is	dropped,	when	thinking	is	dropped	and	you	merge
yourself	 into	 your	 being	 so	 totally	 that	 not	 even	 a	 single	 thought	 is	 there	 to
distract	you.	Only	then	can	you	know.	And	the	Greek	mind	says:	you	can	know
only	when	thinking	is	clear,	logical,	rational,	systematic.	The	Hindu	mind	says:
when	thinking	disappears	completely,	only	then	is	there	any	possibility	to	know.
They	are	totally	different,	moving	in	diametrically	opposite	directions;	but	there
is	a	possibility	to	synthesize	both.
A	 person	 can	 use	 his	 mind	 when	 working	 on	 matter;	 then	 logic	 is	 a	 great
instrument.	And	the	same	person	can	put	aside	the	mind	when	he	moves	into	his
meditation	chamber	and	moves	into	the	no-mind.	Because	mind	is	not	you	--	it	is
just	an	instrument	just	like	my	hand,	just	like	my	legs.	If	I	want	to	walk	I	use	my
legs,	if	I	don't	want	to	walk	I	don't	use	my	legs.	Exactly	in	the	same	way	you	can
use	 the	 mind	 logically	 if	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 know	 about	 matter.	 It	 is	 perfectly
right,	it	fits	there.	And	when	you	are	moving	inwards,	put	it	aside.	Now	legs	are
not	 needed;	 thinking	 is	 not	 needed.	 Now	 you	 need	 a	 deep	 silent	 state	 of	 no-
thought.
And	 this	 can	happen	 in	 one	person.	And	when	 I	 say	 it,	 I	 say	 it	 from	my	own
experience.	I	have	been	doing	both.	When	it	is	needed,	I	can	become	as	logical
as	any	Greek.	When	 it	 is	not	needed,	 I	 can	become	as	absurd,	 illogical	as	any
Hindu.	So	when	I	say	it	I	mean	it,	and	it	is	not	a	hypothesis.	I	have	experienced
It	 that	way.	The	mind	can	be	used	and	can	be	put	 aside.	 It	 is	 an	 instrument,	 a
very	beautiful	 instrument;	no	need	 to	be	so	obsessed	with	 it.	No	need	 to	be	so
fixed,	fixated	with	it.	Then	it	becomes	a	disease.	Just	think	of	a	man	who	wants
to	sit	but	cannot	sit	because	he	says,	"I	have	legs	--	how	can	I	sit?"	Or,	think	of	a
man	who	wants	to	keep	quiet	and	silent	and	cannot	keep	quiet	and	silent	because
he	says,	"I	have	a	mind."	It	is	the	same.
One	should	become	so	capable	that	even	the	closest	instrument	of	mind	can	be
put	aside	and	can	be	put	off.	It	can	be	done,	it	has	been	done,	but	it	has	not	been
done	 on	 a	 great	 scale.	But	more	 and	more	 it	will	 be	 done.	 This	 is	what	 I	 am
trying	to	do	here	with	you.
I	talk	to	you,	I	discuss	problems	with	you;	that's	logical,	that	is	using	the	mind.
And	 then	I	 say	 to	you,	"Drop	 the	mind	and	move	 into	deep	meditation.	 If	you
dance,	 dance	 so	 totally	 that	 there	 is	 not	 a	 single	 thought	 inside,	 your	 whole
energy	 becomes	 dance.	 Or	 sing,	 then	 just	 sing.	 Or	 sit,	 then	 just	 sit	 --	 be	 in
ZAZEN,	 don't	 do	 anything	 else.	Don't	 allow	 a	 single	 thought	 to	 pass	 through.
Just	be	quiet,	absolutely	quiet."	These	are	contradictory	things.
Every	 morning	 you	 meditate	 and	 every	 morning	 you	 come	 and	 listen	 to	 me.
Every	 morning	 you	 listen	 to	 me	 and	 then	 you	 go	 and	 meditate.	 This	 is
contradictory.	If	I	were	just	Greek,	I	would	talk	to	you,	I	would	make	a	logical
communication	with	you,	but	then	I	would	not	say	to	meditate.	That	is	foolish.	If
I	were	just	Hindu,	there	would	be	no	need	to	talk	to	you.	I	can	say,	"Just	go	and
meditate,	because	what	is	the	point	of	talking?	One	has	to	become	silent."	I	am
both.	And	this	is	my	hope:	that	you	will	also	become	both	--
because	 then	 life	 is	very	enriched,	 tremendously	enriched.	Then	you	don't	 lose
anything.
Then	 everything	 is	 absorbed;	 then	 you	 become	 a	 great	 orchestra.	 Then	 all
polarities	meet	in	you.
For	the	Greeks,	the	very	idea	of	'love	thyself'	would	have	been	absurd,	because
they	would	say,	and	they	would	say	logically,	that	love	is	possible	only	between
two	persons.
You	can	love	somebody	else,	you	can	even	love	your	enemy,	but	how	can	you
love	 yourself?	Only	 you	 are	 there,	 alone.	 Love	 can	 exist	 between	 a	 duality,	 a
polarity;	how	can	you	love	yourself?	For	the	Greek	mind,	the	very	idea	of	loving
oneself	is	absurd:	for	love,	the	other	is	needed.
For	the	Hindu	mind,	in	the	Upanishads	they	say:	you	love	your	wife	not	for	your
wife's	 sake;	 you	 love	 your	 wife	 just	 for	 your	 own	 sake.	 You	 love	 yourself
through	her.	Because	she	gives	you	pleasure,	that's	why	you	love	her	--	but	deep
down	you	love	your	own	pleasure.	You	love	your	son,	you	love	your	friend,	not
because	 of	 them	 but	 because	 of	 you.	Deep	 down	 your	 son	makes	 you	 happy,
your	 friend	 gives	 you	 solace.	 That's	 what	 you	 are	 hankering	 for.	 So	 the
Upanishads	say:	you	love	yourself	really.	Even	if	you	say	that	you	love	others,
that	is	just	a	via	media	to	love	yourself,	a	long	roundabout	way	to	love	yourself.
Hindus	 say	 that	 there	 is	 no	 other	 possibility:	 you	 can	 love	 only	 yourself.	And
Greeks	say	there	is	no	possibility	to	love	oneself	because	at	least	two	are	needed.
If	 you	 ask	me,	 I'm	 both	Hindu	 and	Greek.	 If	 you	 ask	me	 I	will	 say	 love	 is	 a
paradox.	It	is	a	very	paradoxical	phenomenon.	Don't	try	to	reduce	it	to	one	pole;
both	 polarities	 are	 needed.	 The	 other	 is	 needed,	 but	 in	 deep	 love	 the	 other
disappears.	 If	 you	watch	 two	 lovers,	 they	 are	 two	and	one	 together.	That's	 the
paradox	of	love,	and	that's	the	beauty	of	it:	they	are	two,	yes,	they	are	two;	and
yet	they	are	not	two,	they	are	one.	If	this	oneness	has	not	happened	then	love	is
not	possible.	They	may	be	doing	something	else	in	the	name	of	love.	If	they	are
still	two	and	not	one	also,	then	love	has	not	happened.	And	if	you	are	just	alone
and	 there	 is	 nobody	 else,	 then	 too	 love	 is	 not	 possible.	 Love	 is	 a	 paradoxical
phenomenon.	It	needs	two	in	the	first	place,	and	in	the	last	place	it	needs	two	to
exist	as	one.	It	is	the	greatest	enigma;	it	is	the	greatest	puzzle.
If	you	have	loved	somebody,	you	will	understand	what	I	mean.	You	know	that
the	other	is	other,	and	yet	deep	down	you	feel	something	has	been	bridged.	It	is
as	 if	 travelling	 in	 a	 sea	 you	 come	 across	 an	 island.	 It	 is	 separate	 from-the
continent,	yes.	But	deep	down,	underneath	 the	sea,	 the	 land	 is	one.	 It	 is	 joined
with	the	continent;	it	is	not	really	separate.
It	is	separate	yet	not	separate;	that's	what	love	is.
So	if	you	ask	me,	I	will	say	it	is	possible	to	love	yourself,	but	then	you	will	have
to	 divide	 yourself	 in	 two.	 Then	 you	 will	 have	 to	 become	 the	 lover	 and	 the
beloved	both.	And	 it	 is	also	possible	 to	 love	somebody	else,	but	 then	you	will
have	to	become	one.	Love	is	something	that	happens	between	two	persons,	but
when	it	happens	they	are	no	more	two,	they	become	one.
The	third	question:
Question	3
THE	SAME	DAWN,	THE	SAME	DUSK,	THE	SAME	CHASING,	THE	SAME
THOUGHT	 OF	 AWARENESS,	 THE	 SAME	 TALK	 OF	 AWARENESS,	 THE
SAME
AND	THE	SAME....
It	depends....
In	a	way	it	 is	the	same.	How	can	it	be	otherwise?	The	same	sun,	the	same	sun
rising	every	morning,	and	the	same	sunset,	yes	--	but	if	you	watch	closely,	have
you	ever	seen	two	sunrises	exactly	the	same?	Have	you	watched	the	colors	in	the
sky?	Have	you	seen	the	cloud	formations	around	the	sun?
No	 two	 sunrises	 are	 the	 same;	 no	 two	 sunsets	 are	 the	 same.	 The	 world	 is	 a
discontinuous	continuity	--	discontinuous	because	every	moment	something	new
is	 happening,	 and	 yet	 continuous	 because	 it	 is	 not	 absolutely	 new.	 It	 is
connected.	So	both	proverbs	are	right.
There	is	a	proverb	which	says:	there	is	nothing	new	under	the	sun;	and	the	other
proverb	which	seems	contradictory	to	 it	which	says:	 there	 is	nothing	old	under
the	sun.	Both	are	true.
Nothing	 is	 new	 and	 nothing	 is	 old.	 Everything	 goes	 on	 changing	 and	 yet
somehow	 remains	 the	 same,	 somehow	 remains	 the	 same	 and	 yet	 goes	 on
changing.	That's	the	beauty,	the	mystery,	the	secret.	You	cannot	reduce	it	to	any
category:	you	cannot	say	it	 is	the	same,	you	cannot	say	it	 is	not	the	same.	You
cannot	 reduce	 life	 into	 your	 categories;	 your	 pigeon-holes	 are	 just	 worthless.
When	it	comes	to	life,	you	have	to	drop	all	your	pigeon-holes,	your	categories.	It
is	bigger	than	your	categories,	transcendental	to	all	categories.	It	is	so	vast	that
you	cannot	find	its	beginning	or	its	end.
The	 questioner	 says,	 "The	 same	 dawn,	 the	 same	 dusk,	 the	 same	 chasing,	 the
same	thought	of	awareness,	the	same	talk	of	awareness,	the	same	and	the	same."
Yes,	in	a	way	it	is	the	same;	and	in	another	way,	nothing	is	the	same.	Yesterday
also	 I	was	 here,	 but	 I	 am	 not	 the	 same.	How	 can	 I	 be?	 --	 so	much	water	 has
flowed	 down	 the	Ganges.	 I	 am	 twenty-four	 hours	 older,	 twenty-four	 hours	 of
experience	are	added	to	me,	twenty-four	hours	of	intense	awareness.	I	am	richer;
I'm	not	the	same	--	death	has	come	a	little	closer.	You	are	also	not	the	same,	and
yet	I	look	the	same	and	you	look	the	same.
You	have	to	see	the	point.	This	is	what	I	mean	when	I	say	life	is	a	mystery:	you
cannot	classify	it,	you	cannot	say	definitely	that	this	is	so.	The	moment	you	say,
immediately	you	will	become	aware	that	life	has	falsified	you.
Are	these	trees	the	same	as	they	were	yesterday?	Many	leaves	have	fallen,	many
new	leaves	have	come	up,	many	flowers	are	gone.	They	have	risen	higher.	How
can	 they	 be	 the	 same?	 See,	 today	 the	 cuckoo	 is	 not	 singing.	 It	 is	 so	 silent.
Yesterday	the	cuckoo	was	singing.	It	was	a	different	silence:	it	was	full	of	song.
Today's	silence	is	different;	it	is	not	full	of	song.	Even	the	wind	is	not	blowing	--
everything	 has	 stopped.	 Yesterday	 there	 was	 great	 wind.	 Trees	 are	meditating
today;	 yesterday	 they	 were	 dancing.	 It	 cannot	 be	 the	 same,	 and	 yet,	 it	 is	 the
same.
It	depends	on	you	--	how	you	look	at	 life.	If	you	look	as	 if	 it	 is	 the	same,	you
will	be	bored.	Then	don't	throw	your	responsibility	on	somebody	else.	It	is	your
outlook.	If	you	say	it	is	the	same,	then	you	will	be	bored.	If	you	see	the	constant
change,	 flux-like,	 the	 great	 whirlwind-like	 movement	 all	 around	 you,	 the
dynamism	of	life,	each	moment	the	old	disappearing	and	the	new	coming	in;	if
you	 can	 see	 the	 continuous	 birth,	 if	 you	 can	 see	 God's	 hand	 continuously
creating,	 then	you	will	be	enchanted,	 thrilled.	Your	 life	will	not	be	bored.	You
will	be	continuously	wondering,	"What	next?..."	You	will	not	be	dull.
Your	intelligence	will	remain	sharp,	alive	and	young.
Now	 it	 depends	 on	 what	 you	 want.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 become	 like	 a	 dead	man,
stupid,	dull,	gloomy,	sad	and	bored,	then	you	believe	that	life	is	the	same.	If	you
want	to	become	very	young	and	alive,	fresh,	radiant,	then	believe	that	life	is	new
each	moment.
Says	old	Heraclitus,	"You	cannot	step	twice	into	the	same	river.''
You	 cannot	meet	 the	 same	 person	 twice	 and	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 same	 sunrise
twice	It	is	up	to	you.	And	if	you	understand	me,	I	will	say,	don't	choose.	If	you
choose	 the	 idea	 that	 everything	 is	 old,	 you	 become	 old.	 If	 you	 choose	 that
everything	 is	young	and	new,	you	become	young.	 If	you	understand	me,	 I	 say
don't	choose;	see	that	both	are	true.	Then	you	transcend	all	categories.	You	are
neither	 old	 nor	 young.	 Then	 you	 become	 eternal,	 then	 you	 become	 God-like,
then	you	become	life-like.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:
A	Judge	Dunne	was	seated	in	court	in	New	York,	or	rather	in	Brooklyn,	while	a
very,	very	stupid	witness	was	being	interrogated.	The	attorney	said,	"Were	you	at
the	corner	of	Fourth	and	Elm	the	day	of	the	accident?"
The	witness	said,	"Who?	Me?"
"Yes,	 you,"	 said	 the	 attorney.	 "Did	 you	 notice	 whether	 or	 not	 the	 ambulance
came	to	care	for	the	wounded	woman?"
"Who?	Me?"
"Yes,	you!	Did	you	notice	whether	or	not	the	woman	was	seriously	injured?"
"Who?	Me?"
By	this	time,	the	Prosecuting	Attorney	was	exasperated.	He	said,	"Certainly	you!
Why	do	you	think	you	are	here?"
The	witness	said,	"I	came	here	to	see	justice	done."
Judge	Dunne	said,	"Who?	Me?"
If	you	believe	 that	everything	 is	 the	same,	 then	 this	will	be	a	constant	 thing	 --
Who?	Me?
--	and	you	are	going	to	be	bored.	The	repetition	will	kill	you.	To	be	sharp	and
alive	 one	 needs	 something	which	 is	 not	 repetitive.	 Something	 new,	 constantly
happening,	makes	you	alive,	keeps	you	alive,	keeps	you	alert.
Have	you	watched	a	dog	sitting	silently?	A	rock	 is	 Iying	down	just	 in	 front	of
him;	 he	will	 not	 be	worried.	 But	 let	 the	 rock	 start	moving.	 Just	 have	 a	 small
thread	 connected	 to	 the	 rock	 and	 pull	 it,	 and	 the	 dog	will	 jump.	He	will	 start
barking.	Movement	makes	you	 sharp;	 then	all	 dullness	 is	gone.	Then	he	 is	no
longer	sleepy.	Then	he	is	no	longer	dreaming	about	flies	and	other	things.	Then
he	will	simply	jump	out	of	his	slumber.
Something	has	changed.
Change	gives	you	movement,	 but	 constant	 change	also	 can	be	very	uprooting.
As	constant	no-change	can	be	very	deadening,	constant	change	can	also	be	very
uprooting.
That	is	happening	in	the	West;	people	are	changing.	The	statisticians	say	that	in
America	 the	 average	 limit	 of	 a	 person	 doing	 a	 job	 is	 three	 years.	 People	 are
changing	 their	 jobs,	 changing	 their	 towns,	 changing	 their	 spouses,	 trying	 to
change	 everything	 --	 changing	 their	 car	 every	 year,	 their	 house	 --	 the	 whole
value	has	changed.	 In	England	 they	make	Rolls	Royce.	Their	 idea	 is	 so	 that	 it
lasts	forever,	life-long	at	least.	In	America	they	make	beautiful	cars,	but	stability
is	not	the	quality	to	be	bothered	about	--	because	who	is	going	to	keep	a	car	for
his	 whole	 life?	 If	 it	 lasts	 for	 one	 year,	 enough.	 When	 the	 American	 goes	 to
purchase	a	car,	he	does	not	bother	about	stability;	he	asks	about	exchangeability.
The	English	still	ask	about	durability,	stability,	whether	 the	car	will	be	durable
because	he	purchases	once,	and	finished.	He's	very	old-fashioned.	He	does	not
know	 any	 divorce,	 even	 with	 a	 car.	 Once	 married,	 married.	 He's	 very
monogamous	even	with	a	car.	He's	very	sincere.	The	American	lives	in	a	world
of	change	--	everything	is	changing	--	but	then	the	American	has	lost	the	roots.
In	my	 old	 village	where	 sometimes	 I	 used	 to	 go,	 I	was	 surprised.	 Everything
remains	the	same.	The	same	coolie	would	greet	me	at	the	station	--	because	there
is	only	one	coolie	--
and	 the	 same	 TONGA,	 and	 the	 same	 road,	 and	 I	 would	 see	 the	 same	 people
moving	 around.	 Everything	 remains	 almost	 the	 same.	 Rarely	 somebody	 dies;
rarely	somebody	is	born	--	otherwise	everything	remains	almost	the	same.	And
even	when	people	die,	they	are	replaced	by	their	sons,	and	they	look	almost	the
same.	Nothing	has	changed.	The	houses	are	the	same,	the	gossip	is	the	same.	It
seems	time	does	not	exist.
I	was	 always	 surprised	going	back	 to	my	 town.	That	was	 the	 first	 thing	 that	 I
would	see:	that	in	this	town	time	does	not	exist.	Everything	seems	to	be	eternally
the	 same.	But	 then	 people	 have	 roots.	They	 are	 dull	 but	 they	 are	 very	 rooted.
They	 are	 very	 comfortable,	 happy.	 They	 are	 not	 alienated.	 They	 don't	 feel
strangers.	How	can	they	feel	strangers?	--
everything	is	so	similar.	When	they	were	born	it	was	the	same;	when	they	die	it
will	 be	 the	 same.	 Everything	 is	 so	 stable.	 How	 can	 you	 feel	 a	 stranger?	 The
whole	town	is	like	a	small	family.
In	America	everything	is	uprooted.	Nobody	knows	where	one	belongs.	The	very
sense	of	belonging	is	lost.	If	you	ask	somebody;	"Where	do	you	belong?"	he	will
shrug	 his	 shoulders	 --	 because	 he	 has	 been	 to	 so	 many	 towns,	 to	 so	 many
colleges,	to	so	many	universities.	He	cannot	even	be	certain	of	who	he	is	because
the	 identity	 is	 very	 loose,	 fluid.	 In	 a	way	 it	 is	 good	 because	 the	man	 remains
sharp	and	alive,	but	roots	are	gone.
For	me,	both	things	have	been	tried:	stability,	rootedness,	nothing	new	under	the
sun	--
we	have	tried	it	in	the	past,	for	many	centuries.	It	rusted	the	human	mind.	People
were	comfortable	but	not	very	alive.
Then	in	America,	something	new	has	happened	and	it	 is	spreading	all	over	the
world,	 because	 America	 is	 the	 future	 of	 the	 world.	Whatsoever	 is	 happening
there	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 everywhere,	 sooner	 or	 later.	 America	 sets	 the	 trend.
Now	people	are	very	alive	but	unrooted,	don't	know	where	they	belong.	A	great
desire	 to	belong	has	arisen.	A	great	desire	 to	be	 rooted	 somewhere,	 to	possess
someone	and	to	be	possessed	by	someone:	something	durable,	something	stable,
something	 like	 a	 center	 --	 because	 people	 are	 moving	 like	 wheels	 and	 there
seems	to	be	no	rest.	And	it	is	great	stress:	continuously	changing,	continuously
changing.	 And	 change	 is	 accelerating	 every	 day,	 becoming	 faster	 and	 faster.
Now	they	say	that	big	books	cannot	be	written	because	by	the	time	you	write	a
big	book	it	is	out	of	date.	Knowledge	is	changing	so	fast,	so	only	small	booklets
are	possible.	So	 they	reach	--	before	knowledge	changes,	 they	reach	 to	people.
Otherwise,	before	 they	 reach	 the	market,	already	 the	books	will	be	out	of	date
and	useless,	rubbish.
Everything	 is	 in	 such	 a	 great	 change	 and	 turmoil	 and	 chaos,	 and	 man	 feels
deeply	stressed,	great	strain	and	tension.	Both	have	their	benefits	and	both	have
their	curses.
To	me,	a	synthesis	has	to	be	made	between	these	two	orientations.	One	should	be
aware	 that	 life	 is	both	 the	old	and	new	together,	simultaneously	--	old	because
the	whole	past	is	present	in	the	present	moment;	new	because	the	whole	future	is
potentially	present	in	the	present	moment.	The	present	moment	is	a	culmination
of	the	whole	past	and	the	beginning	of	the	whole	future.	In	this	moment,	all	that
has	 happened	 is	 hidden,	 and	 all	 that	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 is	 also	 hidden.	 Each
moment	is	past	and	future	both,	a	convergence	of	past	and	future.	So	something
is	old	and	something	is	new,	and	if	you	can	become	aware	of	both	together,	you
will	 have	 sharpness	 and	 roots	 both	 together.	You	will	 be	 at	 ease,	without	 any
stress.	You	will	not	become	dull,	and	you	will	be	very	conscious	and	alert.
I	have	heard....
Mistress	MacMahon	went	beserk	one	afternoon.	She	broke	every	dish	and	cup
and	 reduced	 her	 usually	 spotless	 kitchen	 to	 shambles.	 The	 police	 arrived	 and
took	 her	 to	 the	 city's	 mental	 institution.	 The	 head	 psychiatrist	 sent	 for	 her
husband.
"Do	you	know	any	reason,"	asked	 the	shrink,	"why	your	wife	should	suddenly
lose	her	mind?"
"I'm	 just	 as	 surprised	 as	 you	 are,"	 answered	Mr.	MacMahon.	 "I	 can't	 imagine
what	got	into	her.	She	has	always	been	such	a	quiet,	hardworking	woman.	Why,
she	has	not	been	out	of	the	kitchen	in	twenty	years!"
Now	then,	one	is	going	to	go	mad.	It	is	as	simple	as	two	plus	two	make	four.	If
for	 twenty	years	one	has	not	been	out	of	 the	kitchen,	 it	 is	maddening.	But	 the
opposite	is	always	maddening.	If	you	have	never	been	to	your	home	for	twenty
years,	 and	 have	 just	 become	 a	 vagabond,	 always	 arriving	 and	 never	 arriving
anywhere,	always	reaching	and	never	reaching	anywhere;	if	you	have	become	a
gypsy	and	you	don't	have	any	home,	then	too	you	will	start	going	mad.
Both	are	dangerous	taken	separately.	Taken	together	they	make	life	very	rich.	All
polarities	make	life	rich:	yin	and	yang,	man	and	woman,	dark	and	light,	life	and
death,	 god	 and	 devil,	 saint	 and	 sinner.	 All	 polarities	 taken	 together	make	 life
rich.	 Otherwise	 life	 becomes	 monotonous.	 Don't	 choose	 a	 monotonous	 life.
Become	richer.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
AFTER	EACH	CAMP,	I	AM	LEFT	DEEPLY	FRUSTRATED	AND	ANXIOUS,
AS	IF
I	HAVE	BEEN	WAITING	FOR	SOMETHING	TO	HAPPEN	THAT	NEVER
HAPPENS,	AND	 I	 SAY	TO	MYSELF:	HEERA,	YOU	ARE	BACK	 IN	THE
SAME
BOAT	AGAIN.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Let	me	first	tell	you	one	anecdote.
The	newly-arrived	convict	was	complaining	to	the	warden,	"I	don't	like	the	food
here,	I	don't	like	the	quarters,	and	I	don't	like	your	face."
"Well,"	said	the	warden,	"is	there	anything	else	you	don't	like?"
"That's	all	for	the	time	being,"	said	the	convict.	"I	don't	want	you	to	think	that	I
am	unreasonable."
Heera,	you	are	very	unreasonable.
First,	 for	 hundreds	 and	 hundreds	 of	 lives	 you	 have	 never	 meditated.	 Not	 to
meditate	has	gone	deep	into	your	bones,	into	your	very	heart	--	it	has	become	a
hard	pattern.	Now,	suddenly	you	meditate	and	you	start	expecting	too	much.	It	is
unreasonable.
In	fact,	all	expectations	are	unreasonable,	but	when	one	expects	something	out	of
meditation	 it	 is	 ABSOLUTELY	 unreasonable.	 Because	 the	 very	 base	 of
meditation,	 the	very	 foundation	of	meditation	 is	 to	understand	 that	expectation
has	to	be	dropped;	otherwise	meditation	never	starts.	It	is	expectation	that	keeps
your	mind	continuously	spinning	thoughts.	It	is	expectation	that	keeps	you	tense.
It	 is	 expectation,	when	not	 fulfilled,	 that	makes	 you	 feel	 frustrated,	miserable.
Drop	expectation	and	meditation	will	flower,	but	it	can	flower	only	when	you	are
not	 expecting.	 You	 can	 go	 on	 expecting	 for	 many	 lives;	 you	 will	 not	 allow
meditation	to	flower.	That	is	not	the	way.
I	have	heard....
Lanahan's	hair	kept	falling	and	he	complained	to	his	barber.	"That	stuff	you	gave
me,"	he	cried	"is	terrible.	You	said	two	bottles	of	it	would	make	me	hair	grow,
but	nothing	has	happened."
"I	don't	understand,"	said	the	barber,	"that	is	the	best	hair	restorer	made."
"Well,"	said	Lanahan,	"I	don't	mind	drinking	another	bottle,	but	it	better	work!"
Now,	with	expectation,	doing	meditation	is	like	drinking	a	bottle	of	hair	restorer.
It	is	not	going	to	work.	It	can	even	be	destructive,	it	can	be	dangerous.
It	is	better	not	to	meditate	than	to	meditate	with	expectation,	because	at	least	you
will	 not	 suffer	 the	 frustration.	 Don't	 meditate.	 But	 if	 you	 have	 decided	 to
meditate,	then	be	clear.
Meditation	does	not	guarantee	anything	to	you.	Not	that	nothing	happens	out	of
it;	 it	happens,	but	there	is	no	guarantee.	Tremendous	possibilities	open	but	you
cannot	 expect	 them.	 If	 you	 expect,	 doors	 remain	 dosed.	 It	 is	 your	 expectation
that	blocks	the	way.
Two	friends	met	on	the	street.
"I'm	so	unhappy	I	could	cry,"	said	the	first.
"Why?"
"Two	weeks	ago,	my	uncle	died	and	left	me	one	million	dollars."
"That's	no	reason	to	cry,"	said	the	second.
"That	would	make	you	happy,	that's	true,"	said	the	first,	"but	last	week	another
uncle	died	and	left	me	two	million	dollars."
"But	why	are	you	so	unhappy	then?"
The	man	said,	"I	only	had	two	uncles!"
Expectation	 is	 very,	 very	 dangerous.	 With	 expectation,	 even	 if	 something
happens	you	will	not	 feel	 fulfilled,	because	expectation	 is	almost	 insanity.	You
go	on	expecting	more	and	more	--	now	the	man	is	miserable	because	he	had	only
two	 uncles.	Whatsoever	 happens	 is	 not	 going	 to	make	 you	 happy	 if	 you	 start
with	expectations.	Drop	expectation	-
-	 that	 is	 not	 the	 right	 thing	 to	 bring	 into	meditation	 --	 and	 immediately	 things
will	start	happening.
Next	camp,	or	 from	tomorrow,	 just	meditate.	Enjoy	 it	 intrinsically.	There	 is	no
need	to	look	for	any	result.	Let	it	happen.	Let	the	future	come	of	its	own	accord.
Don't	make	a	destination	out	of	meditation	--	just	simple	direction	will	do.	Enjoy
it.	Celebrate	it.	Be	festive	about	it.
The	very	act	of	meditation	is	a	great	joy.	Just	to	be	able	to	dance,	just	to	be	able
to	sing,	 just	 to	be	able	 to	sit	 silently	and	breathe	and	be,	 is	more	 than	enough.
Don't	 ask	 for	 anything	 else.	 Because	 of	 your	 asking	 you	 are	 corrupting	 your
being.	You	have	 tried	 that	way,	now	 listen	 to	me	and	 try	my	way.	You	simply
meditate.
"After	each	camp,	I	am	left	deeply	frustrated	and	anxious..."
The	problem	does	not	arise	after	 the	camp,	 it	arises	before	 the	camp.	First	you
sow	the	seeds	of	expectation,	then	who	is	going	to	suffer?	You	will	suffer.	You
will	have	to	reap	the	crop.
"...	as	if	I	have	been	waiting	for	something	to	happen	that	never	happens..."
That	is	never	going	to	happen.	Whatsoever	you	are	waiting	for,	you	are	waiting
in	vain.	It	is	not	going	to	happen,	and	what	is	going	to	happen	has	nothing	to	do
with	your	expectations	and	your	desires.	You	just	let	it	come	in;	don't	block	the
way.	Remove	yourself	out	of	your	own	way.	This	time,	with	no	expectations,	no
desires,	no	hopes,	just	meditate.
"...	and	I	say	to	myself:	Heera,	you	are	back	in	the	same	boat	again."
If	 you	 listen	 to	me	you	will	 never	 again	be	 in	 the	 same	boat.	 It	 is	 the	boat	 of
expectation.
Frustration	is	a	by-product.	You	want	to	get	rid	of	the	frustration	but	you	don't
want	to	get	rid	of	the	expectation.	Then	it	is	impossible.
Buddha	is	reported	to	have	said,	"If	you	want	to	get	rid	of	death,	get	rid	of	birth."
There	 is	no	other	way.	 If	you	want	 to	get	 rid	of	misery,	get	 rid	of	 the	 lust	 for
happiness.	And	when	there	is	no	misery,	there	IS	happiness.	But	it	is	not	because
you	desire	it;	it	is	because	you	don't	have	any	desire.	In	a	deep	desireless	state,
you	are	full	of	bliss.
The	last	question:
It	is	from	Parijat.
Question	5
YOUR	CONTRADICTIONS	USED	TO	THROW	ME	INTO	SUCH	UNHAPPY
EMOTIONAL	 STATES.	 NOW	 I	 LISTEN	 TO	 YOU	 BUT	 WITHOUT
THINKING,	 REMAINING	 TRANQUIL.	 HAVE	 I	 ESCAPED	 BEFORE	 THE
POT	CAME	TO	THE
BOIL?
First,	one	anecdote.
A	mother	was	examining	a	new	mechanical	toy	at	the	corner	shop	and	wondered
if	it	were	not	too	complicated	for	a	small	boy.
"Oh,	no,"	the	salesman	beamed,	"it	is	an	educational	toy.	It	is	especially	designed
to	 teach	 the	 child	 something	 about	 our	 current	 civilization:	 no	matter	 how	 he
puts	it	together,	he's	wrong."
Don't	 try	 to	 put	me	 together,	 otherwise	 you	will	 be	wrong.	 It	 is	 designed	 that
way.	To	contradict	myself	is	my	way.	To	never	allow	you	to	settle	anywhere	is
my	way.	To	go	on	goading	you	on	and	on,	is	my	way.
But	 now,	 Parijat	 has	 learned	 the	 trick:	 listen	 in	 deep	 tranquility.	 Don't	 be
bothered	 about	whether	 I	 am	 contradicting	 something	 that	 I	 have	 said	 before.
Listen	to	me	this	moment;	don't	bring	the	past	in.	If	you	don't	bring	the	past	in
there	is	no	contradiction.	If	you	bring	the	past	in	then	there	is	contradiction.	Just
don't	 bring	 the	 past	 in:	 that	 is	 what	 tranquility	 is.	 You	 just	 listen	 to	 me	 this
moment;	then	where	is	the	contradiction?	And	that's	my	whole	effort	--	to	go	on
contradicting.	One	day	or	other	you	will	decide	that	if	you	have	to	listen	to	this
man,	you	have	to	forget	all	about	what	he	has	said	before.	That's	a	way	to	make
you	alert	that	the	past	has	not	to	be	brought	in.	If	I	go	on	saying	very	consistent
things	you	will	stop	listening	to	me	--	because	there	is	no	need:	"He	is	saying	the
same	thing."	Even	if	you	sleep	you	will	not	miss	anything.	But	I	will	not	allow
you	to	sleep	because	you	can	miss,	you	can	never	rely.
There	was	one	advertisement	in	a	newspaper:	a	nightguard	was	needed	by	a	rich
man.	 He	 had	 three	 conditions:	 one,	 he	 should	 be	 very	 tall,	 strong,	 violent-
looking;	second,	he	should	not	be	addicted	to	any	sort	of	alcoholic	beverages,	he
should	be	alert;	and	third,	he	should	be	reliable.
Mulla	Nasrudin	applied.	He	was	called,	but	the	rich	man	was	surprised	because
he	 is	 a	 very	 small	 man,	 not	 tall	 at	 all,	 and	 not	 violent-looking,	 a	 very	 meek
fellow.
The	rich	man	said,'	I	am	surprised	why	you	troubled	yourself	to	come	here,	and
why	 you	 answered	 my	 advertisement.	 Can't	 you	 see?	 These	 are	 the	 three
conditions:	first,	that	the	man	should	be	tall,	at	least	six	feet.	You	don't	seem	to
be	more	 than	 five.	The	man	should	be	violent	 looking;	 I	have	not	 seen	such	a
simple,	 almost	 simpleton,	 type	man.	You	 look	so	meek.	Why	have	you	come?
Do	you	drink	or	not?"
Nasrudin	said,	"I	drink	too	much.''
"Then	why	are	you	wasting	my	time?	Why	have	you	come?"
Nasrudin	said,	"I	have	come	only	to	say	that	I	am	not	reliable	either."
I	 also	 am	 not	 reliable.	 I	 completely	 go	 on	 forgetting	what	 I	 have	 said	 to	 you
yesterday.	 I	 am	a	 drunkard.	That's	why	 I	 can	 contradict	 so	 easily,	 otherwise	 it
would	be	very	difficult.
It	never	comes	to	my	mind	that	I	am	contradictory.	Whatsoever	I	am	saying,	this
is	it!	I	don't	bother	about	what	I	have	said	before.	I'm	not	concerned	with	it.	That
was	 the	 truth	 of	 that	 moment,	 this	 is	 the	 truth	 of	 this	 moment,	 and	 I'm	 not
reliable.	I	am	not	saying	anything	that	I	am	going	to	say	again	tomorrow.	Who
knows?	I	don't	know	myself.	If	you	really	listen	to	me,	by	and	by	you	will	listen
to	the	moment.	That's	the	whole	effort.
I	am	not	trying	to	give	you	a	philosophy,	a	doctrine,	a	dogma.	A	dogma	has	to	be
consistent,	 a	 creed	 has	 to	 be	 consistent.	 I	 am	 not	 trying	 to	 convert	 you	 to	 a
certain	belief;	a	belief	has	to	be	consistent.	I	am	trying	to	give	you	a	vision,	not	a
belief.	I	am	trying	to	help	you	to	come	to	my	window	to	see	the	sky,	to	see	the
truth.	That	 truth	cannot	be	described.	And	 that	 truth	cannot	be	made	a	dogma,
and	 that	 truth	 contains	 all	 contradictions	 --	 because	 it	 is	 so	 vast.	 So	 I	 go	 on
giving	you	glimpses,	aspects	of	it:	one	aspect	is	contradictory	to	another	aspect.
But	in	the	whole	truth,	all	aspects	meet	and	mingle	and	are	one.
The	right	way	to	listen	to	me	is	this:	where	Paritosh	has	arrived.	Everybody	has
to	 arrive	 if	 you	want	 to	 listen	 to	me.	 If	 you	want	 to	 be	with	me,	 you	 have	 to
arrive	to	that	tranquility	where	you	don't	pay	any	attention	to	the	past.	You	forget
what.	I	have	said	as	deeply	as	I	go	on	forgetting.	You	are	simply	to	listen	to	this
moment.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 contradiction	 because	 there	 is	 no	 comparison.	 And
then	 you	 don't	 cling	 to	 what	 I	 say.	 It	 becomes	 just	 a	 direction	 and	 not	 a
destination.	 It	 just	helps	you	 to	become	more	alert	and	aware.	 It	does	not	give
you	 a	 philosophy.	Rather,	 it	 gives	 you	 a	 very	 subtle	milieu,	 a	 totally	 different
vision	of	life.	It	imparts	my	eyes	to	you.
A	salesman	walked	into	a	busy	executive's	office	and	asked,	"How	about	buying
some	of	the	latest	styles	in	ties?"
"I	don't	need	any,"	said	the	executive.	"Scram!"
"They	are	pure	silk,"	continued	the	salesman.
"Look,	I	said	beat	it,	and	I	mean	it."	Then,	his	patience	exhausted,	the	executive
picked	up	the	salesman	and	tossed	him	out;	sample	cases	were	scattered	all	over
the	place.	The	salesman,	undaunted,	picked	up	his	wares,	brushed	off	his	clothes,
and	walked	back	into	the	office.
"Now	that	you	have	got	that	off	your	chest,"	he	said,	"I	am	ready	to	take	down
your	order."
The	 same	 I	 say	 to	 Parijat:	 now	 that	 you	 have	 got	 that	 off	 your	 chest,	 those
contradictions,	 and	 getting	 troubled	 by	 them	 and	 emotionally	 disturbed	 about
them	 --	 because	 you	 were	 seeking	 a	 philosophy,	 you	 were	 seeking	 a	 mental
belief,	you	were	trying	to	find	something	to	cling	to	and	I	will	not	allow	--	now
that	it	is	off	your	chest,	I	am	ready	to	take	down	your	order.
Now,	the	really	last	question:
Question	6
I	WANT	TO	TELL	YOU,	TO	THANK	YOU	FOR	ALL	THE	MIRACLES	AND
BLESSINGS,	BUT	I	CAN'T	FIND	A	WAY	BIG	ENOUGH.	IT	IS	ALL	SO
OVERWHELMING.
A	little	anecdote....
A	hippie-type	hobo	wandered	 into	a	church	and	on	 the	way	out	 told	 the	vicar,
"Man,	you	were	swinging	daddy,	like	way	out,	man."
"I	beg	your	pardon?"	said	the	vicar.
"I	mean,	man,"	said	the	hippie	hobo,	"I	really	dig	your	jive,	man.	I	read	you	loud
and	clear.	I	put	a	little	cash	in	your	old	plate	there,	daddyo."
"Aha!"	beamed	the	vicar,	grasping	the	down-and-out's	hand.	"Cool	man,	cool!"
That's	what	 I	 say	 to	 you	 --	 cool	man,	 cool.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 express	 your
gratitude;	 it	will	be	difficult.	 If	you	can	express	 it,	 it	 is	not	of	worth.	If	 it	 is	of
worth,	you	cannot	express	it.	If	you	are	just	giving	me	a	formal	thank	you,	then
you	can	express	it.	But	I	know,	I	know	the	person	who	has	said	this.	Something
is	really	happening.	It	is	overwhelming,	but	there	is	no	need	to	express	it.	I	know
it.
In	 fact,	 I	 know	 it	 before	 you	 come	 to	 know	 it.	 Whenever	 it	 is	 happening	 to
somebody,	 I	 am	 the	 first	 to	 know	 here.	 You	 will	 be	 the	 second,	 even	 if	 it	 is
happening	to	you	--
because	it	will	take	a	little	time	to	reach	your	mind.	It	has	to	travel	a	little	longer.
It	travels	to	me	more	fast.	I	know	it	is	overwhelming,	but	there	is	no	need;	just
cool	down.
Become	more	cool.	And	I	will	know	it,	and	everybody	else	will	know	it,	and	the
whole	world	--	even	the	trees	and	the	rocks	and	the	rivers	will	know	it.
When	 it	 really	 happens,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 say	 it.	 The	 whole	 existence
immediately	 feels	 it:	 something	 has	 happened.	 Somebody	 has	 opened,	 some
flower	flowered,	a	lotus	bloomed.
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#7
Chapter	 title:	 Dying	 with	 death,	 You	 must	 live	 to	 seek	 27	 June	 1976	 am	 in
Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606270
ShortTitle:
BELOV107
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
91
mins
COMMIT	YOURSELF	TO	THE	EARTH
WHILE	ON	THE	EARTH,
MY	HEART,
IF	YOU	WISH	TO	ATTAIN
THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
PLACE	AT	HIS	FEET
YOUR	FLOWERS	OF	FEELINGS
AND	THE	PRAYERS	OF	TEARS
FLOODING	YOUR	EYES.
THE	MAN	YOU	SEEK
IS	EARTHED
IN	THE	EARTH,
DECEASED	WHILE	BEING.
DYING	WITH	DEATH,
YOU	MUST	LIVE	TO	SEEK....
THE	RELIGION	OF	THE	BAULS	IS	THE	RELIGION	OF	THE	EARTH.	It's
radical,	 because	 it	 pertains	 to	 the	 very	 roots	 of	 being.	 When	 I	 say	 it	 is	 the
religion	of	the	earth,	I	mean	many	things:	it	is	the	religion	of	the	body,	it	is	the
religion	of	nature,	it	is	the	religion	of	reality.	The	Bauls	don't	believe	in	fantasy
and	they	don't	believe	in	some	heavenly	paradise;	they	don't	believe	in	far-away
goals,	they	are	not	utopians.	They	are	very	realistic	people,	down-to-earth.	This
is	something	very	special	in	the	world	of	religions,	because	ordinarily	religions
are	 nothing	 but	 wish-fulfillments,	 dreams	 of	 a	 suffering	 humanity.	 Because
humanity	is	suffering	it	substitutes	for	reality	by	dreaming.
A	poor	man	can	console	himself	that	at	least	in	the	kingdom	of	God	he	will	be
the	first.
He	 can	 console	 himself	with	 sayings	 like:	Blessed	 are	 the	meek	 because	 they
shall	inherit	the	earth;	the	poor	in	spirit	are	the	people	of	God;	those	who	are	last
will	 be	 the	 first	 in	 the	 kingdom	 of	 God.	 The	 poor	 man	 needs	 all	 these
consolations.
Man	 is	 afraid	 of	 death.	He	 needs	 to	 be	 again	 and	 again	 reassured	 that	 he	 is	 a
soul,	 deathless,	 immortal;	 only	 the	 body	 dies,	 not	 you.	 Man	 is	 suffering	 a
thousand	 and	 one	 complexities.	 The	 whole	 life	 is	 almost	 an	 oceanic	 sadness,
suffering,	sorrow.	It	is	difficult	to	bear	it.	Dreams	are	needed,	hopes	of	a	better
future,	of	a	better	world,	are	needed.
Maybe	it	is	beyond	death,	but	just	the	idea	that	it	is	there	waiting	for	you	and	the
suffering	 is	 only	 for	 today,	 you	 pass	 it	 somehow;	 you	 believe	 in	 tomorrow.
Sooner	or	later	you	will	be	relieved	of	it.	Ordinary	religions	are	the	religions	of
tomorrow.	They	simply	indicate	that	because	man	lives	in	suffering,	man	needs
dreaming.
The	 religion	of	 the	Bauls	 is	very	down-to-earth;	 it	believes	 in	 the	here-now.	 It
does	not	say	that	paradise	is	somewhere	else;	it	is	here,	and	you	cannot	postpone
it,	 and	all	 postponement	 is	dangerous,	 suicidal.	 If	you	cannot	discover	 it	 here-
now,	you	will	never	discover	it	anywhere	else	because	you	will	remain	the	same.
And	whenever	you	will	be,	life	will	always	come	in	the	form	of	here-now.	So	the
only	door	to	reality	is	here,	this	very	moment.
The	Bauls	say,	"This	is	the	reality	and	there	is	no	that."	They	don't	divide	reality
into	 two:	 they	 don't	 say	 illusory	 and	 the	 real,	 they	 don't	 say	 MAYA	 and
BRAHMA,	they	don't	say	this	and	that.	They	say,	"This	is	all."	This	moment	is
total,	 and	 all	 division	 is	 dangerous	 because	 reality	 is	 nowhere	 divided;	 it	 is
indivisible.
Hence,	 they	 don't	 talk	 about	 a	 God	 somewhere	 sitting	 in	 the	 seventh	 heaven.
They	talk	about	a	totally	different	God	--	rooted	in	you,	rooted	here	in	the	earth,
rooted	 in	 this	 body,	 rooted	 in	 these	 emotions,	 lust	 and	 love,	 rooted	 here	 in
tension	and	stress.	The	God	of	the	Bauls	is	a	very	real	God.	You	can	touch	Him,
you	can	love	Him,	you	can	embrace	Him,	you	live	with	Him,	you	can	live	Him.
It	is	not	far	away,	it	is	very	close;	closer	than	close,	because	it	is	you.	They	don't
use	the	word	'God'	at	all.	Their	word	for	God	is	ADHAR
MANUSH,	the	essential	man.	Man	himself	 is	divine.	If	you	enter	yourself	you
will	be	entering	God.	If	you	enter	this	world	you	will	be	entering	God.
This	 does	 not	mean	 that	 there	 is	 no	God.	This	 is	 a	 radical	 standpoint,	 but	 not
negation.	 It	 is	a	very	 revolutionary	attitude,	but	not	negative.	 It	does	not	mean
that	 God	 does	 not	 exist.	 In	 fact,	 it	 means	 that	 God	 exists	 here,	 now,	 and	 the
responsibility	is	yours	to	discover	Him.	And	there	is	no	alibi,	there	is	no	excuse
to	postpone.
In	Chinese,	Taoists	have	reached	to	the	same	viewpoint:	 they	dropped	the	very
word
'God'.	They	started	using	the	word,	 'CHI'LAN'.	CHI'LAN	means	nature;	 that	 is
God.
CHI'LAN	means	that	which	happens	of	itself,	 that	which	is	already	happening,
that	which	 has	 always	 been	 happening	 and	will	 go	 on	 happening.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	of	the	word
'Tao'	also.	 In	 the	Vedas,	Hindus	have	a	beautiful	word:	 they	call	 it	RITAMBH.
That	 is	exactly	what	Tao	or	CHI'LAN	is.	RITAMBH	means	nature,	not	God	--
because	 whenever	 you	 say	 'God',	 somehow	 it	 is	 always	 somewhere	 else,	 not
here;	at	least	not	in	you,	not	in	your	neighbor.	The	earth	seems	to	be	not	worthy
enough	for	God	to	be	here.
Jainas	and	Buddhists	use	the	word	DHAMMA	--	that	exactly	means	nature.	The
Sanskrit	word	DHARMA	also	means	nature.	It	 is	not	equivalent	 to	 the	English
word	 'religion';	no,	not	at	all.	 In	fact,	both	are	polar	opposites.	Religion	means
that	which	binds	you,	gives	you	a	certain	organization	--	a	church	--	gives	you	a
certain	 belonging.	 DHARMA	 means	 that	 which	 frees	 you	 from	 all	 churches,
from	 all	 organizations.	 DHARMA	 is	 individual,	 religion	 is	 social.	 Religion
belongs	 to	 the	 collective	 crowd,	 religion	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 individual.
Christianity,	 Hinduism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism,	 are	 all	 religions;	 they	 are	 not
DHARMAS.	DHARMA	has	 no	 adjective	 to	 it.	 Everybody	 has	 to	 discover	 his
own	DHARMA;	everybody	has	to	discover	his	own	nature.
The	Bauls'	 attitude	 that	God	 is	 here	 in	 you	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 as	 deeply	 as
possible,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 other	 God.	 In	 fact,	 because	 religions	 have	 been
talking	about	a	God	somewhere	else,	that's	why	the	world	has	become	more	and
more	 godless.	 Because	 the	 God	 that	 is	 not	 here	 and	 cannot	 be	 touched	 and
cannot	 be	 seen	 and	 cannot	 be	 lived	 with,	 cannot	 be	 very	 appealing.	 As	 man
grows	to	be	mature,	that	God	will	start	disappearing,	withering	away.	Whenever
man	becomes	very	mature,	those	gods	of	the	dreams	will	disappear	and	man	will
be	 left	without	God.	That's	what	has	happened	 to	 this	age.	 It	 is	not	because	of
atheists	that	man	has	become	godless,	it	is	because	of	a	wrong	notion	of	God.
Marx	could	condemn	the	God	of	the	Christians,	Marx	cannot	condemn	the	God
of	the	Bauls.	Scientists	can	deny	the	God	of	the	so-called	religious,	but	scientists
cannot	 deny	 the	 God	 of	 the	 Baul	 --	 because	 he	 never	 proposes	 anything
dreamlike.	He	is	simply	realistic.
I	have	heard	a	beautiful	anecdote.
A	 commissar	 in	 Russia	 asked	 a	 peasant	 how	 the	 new	 potato-crop-production
plan	was	coming	under	their	glorious	leader.
Said	the	peasant,	"Our	potato	crop	has	been	miraculous.	If	we	were	to	put	all	the
potatoes	in	a	pile,	they	would	make	a	mountain	reaching	to	the	feet	of	God."
'But	you	know	there	is	not	any	God,"	said	the	commissar.
"I	know,"	said	the	peasant,	"but	there	are	not	any	potatoes	either."
A	God	in	the	sky	is	a	false	God.	Not	that	the	sky	is	without	God,	no;	the	sky	is	as
full	of	God	as	the	earth.	But	the	first	understanding	of	God	is	going	to	be	rooted
in	the	earth.
The	 first	 understanding	 has	 to	 be	 of	 the	 roots,	 and	 out	 of	 those	 roots	 your
understanding	will	grow	and	spread	to	 the	farther	corners	of	existence.	But	 the
journey	starts	at	home.	It	starts	deep	within	you.	The	first	glimpse	of	God	has	to
be	in	the	innermost	shrine	of	your	heart.	If	you	have	not	seen	Him	there,	you	can
go	on	talking	about	Him,	but	you	will	not	ever	be	able	to	see	Him	anywhere.	The
first	encounter	has	to	happen	within	you.	Once	it	happens,	you	will	be	surprised
that	 you	 start	 seeing	 God	 everywhere.	 Once	 you	 have	 seen	 Him	 within	 your
heart,	how	can	you	miss	Him.	--	because	everywhere	the	heart	is	throbbing	with
Him.	The	tree	is	full	of	Him	and	the	rock	also,	and	the	river	and	the	ocean,	and
the	animals	and	the	birds,	everywhere.	Once	you	have	felt	His	pulse,	once	you
have	felt	Him	circulating	in	your	own	blood,	once	you	have	had	an	experience	in
your	own	marrow,	then	everywhere,	wherever	you	look	you	will	find	Him.	But,
it	cannot	happen	otherwise.	 If	you	are	empty	of	His	experience,	you	can	go	 to
the	farthest	corner	of	 the	world;	your	travelling	will	be	in	vain.	You	will	never
reach	His	 temple	 because	 you	missed	 the	 very	 root	 of	 it.	 You	missed	Him	 at
home.	 If	your	own	house	does	not	become	His	 temple,	 then	no	 temple	can	be
His	abode.	 If	your	own	house	has	become	His	 temple,	 then	all	houses	are	His
abode.
When	the	Bauls	say	that	one	has	to	be	very	earth	oriented,	they	don't	mean	that
the	sky	 is	empty	of	God.	But	 they	say,	"If	 the	earth	 is	not	 full,	 then	 the	sky	 is
absolutely	empty.	If	even	the	earth	is	not	full,	how	can	the	sky	be	full	of	Him?	If
He	is	not	here,	how	can	He	be	there?	If	He	is	not	this,	how	can	He	be	that?	If	He
is	not	today,	how	can	He	be	tomorrow?	If	He	is	not	in	this	life,	how	can	He	be	in
the	next?"	Their	logic	is	simple	and	irrefutable.
But	man	has	created	a	God	in	the	skies.	Why?	This	God	is	not	a	real	God,	it	is	a
substitute	 --	 because	 you	 are	missing	Him	 here,	 and	 you	 are	missing	Him	 so
tremendously	that	you	have	to	put	Him	somewhere	or	other.	Otherwise	you	will
feel	very	alone.	You	will	 feel	so	 lonely	 that	you	will	miss	 the	meaning	of	 life.
And	 it	 is	 good	 to	 put	Him	very	 far	 away,	 because	 then	 there	 is	 no	 hurry.	The
journey	is	so	far	that	you	cannot	complete	it	today.	Even	this	life	is	not	enough,
so	 enough	 space	 to	 postpone,	 enough	 space	 to	 say,	 "Yes,	 one	 day	 I	 will	 do,"
enough	space	to	pretend	that	you	are	interested	in	Him	and	continuing	to	be	of
the	world,	and	going	on	talking	at	the	same	time	about	God.
This	is	the	double-talk,	the	double-bind	of	ordinary	humanity.	People	talk	about
God	and	live	according	to	the	devil.	They	go	to	the	temple	but	they	never	reach.
They	 read	 the	 Bible,	 they	 read	 the	 Koran,	 but	 they	 never	 listen.	 These	 are
pretensions,	only	on	the	surface.	This	is	how	the	hypocritical	humanity	is	born	--
a	false,	pseudo-humanity.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	went	to	his	psychiatrist	once	and	said,	"Doctor,	I	wonder	if	you
can	split	my	personality	for	me?"
"Why?	Why	would	you	want	to	do	that?"	asked	the	doctor,	surprised.
"Because,"	said	the	Mulla,	"I	am	so	lonesome."
Man	feels	very	alone	without	God,	and	to	find	the	real	God	is	arduous.	It	is	very
easy	to	create	a	pseudo-God	which	looks	like	God,	which	appears	like	God.	It	at
least	gives	consolation	that	you	are	not	alone.	Have	you	watched	your	concept	of
God?	Has	it	arisen	out	of	the	experience	of	your	own	being,	or	has	it	arisen	out
of	your	experience	of	your	loneliness?	This	is	the	criterion:	if	you	believe	in	God
because	 you	 feel	 lonely,	 your	God	 is	 going	 to	 be	 false;	 if	 you	 believe	 in	God
because	you	have	experienced	Him	in	your	aloneness,	if	it	has	come	out	of	your
own	being,	 then	 the	God	 is	 real.	Then	 let	Nietzsche	declare	 that	God	 is	 dead;
your	 God	 can	 never	 be	 dead.	 Your	 God	 is	 alive	 in	 you.	 How	 can	 Nietzsche
declare	 that	 God	 is	 dead?	 But	 he	 could	 declare,	 and	 not	 only	 declare;	 his
declaration	 became	 a	 prophecy.	 Within	 a	 hundred	 years,	 his	 declaration	 has
become	 a	 reality.	The	God	 of	 the	 churches	 is	 dead,	 the	God	 of	 the	 temples	 is
dead,	 the	 God	 of	 the	 books	 is	 dead.	 Nobody	 has	 ever	 been	 so	 prophetic	 as
Nietzsche	has	been.	God	is	disappearing;	the	very	word	has	become	ugly.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 reading	 a	 Christian	 priest's	 book.	 I	 was	 surprised,
because	I	have	heard	about	cases	in	which,	particularly	in	India,	people,	if	they
want	 to	 read	Playboy,	hide	 it	 in	 their	Gita	or	 in	 their	Bible	 and	 read	 it.	That	 I
have	heard.	But	that	Christian	says	that	he	was	so	afraid	to	read	the	Bible	that	he
was	hiding	his	Bible	 behind	 the	 cover	 of	 a	Playboy	magazine!	 It	 has	 come	 to
happen	in	the	West.	So	when	he	would	go	every	Sunday	to	his	beauty	parlor,	he
would	 take	his	Bible.	But	 afraid	 that	 others	might	 see	 that	 he	was	 reading	 the
Bible,	so	out	of	date,	he	would	hide	it	in	a	Playboy	magazine	and	would	read	his
Bible	there.
One	day	in	the	Bible	he	came	across	Jesus'	saying:	If	you	deny	me,	remember,	at
the	last	day	of	judgment	I	will	also	deny	you.	So	he	became	afraid	because	this
was	a	sort	of	denial	--	reading	the	Bible	behind	the	cover	of	Playboy.	He	became
so	 afraid	 that	 he	 started	 perspiring,	 because	 Jesus	 says,	 "If	 you	deny	me,	 then
before	God	I	will	not	recognize	you."	So	he	threw	away	the	Playboy	magazine
and	he	felt	so	good.	He	went	to	his	priest	and	said,	"Today	I	have	done	a	great
deed.	I	gathered	courage	to	let	people	know	that	I	read	the	Bible."
God	IS	dead,	MUST	be	dead.	Have	you	watched	yourself?	--	if	you	are	carrying
a	Bible	you	 feel	 a	 little	 awkward.	Or,	 if	you	are	going	 to	 the	 temple	you	 start
finding	 excuses:	 that	 you	 are	 going	 because	 your	 wife	 has	 gone	 and	 there	 is
some	 work	 to	 be	 done,	 or	 your	 father	 is	 there,	 or	 you	 are	 just	 going	 for
formality's	sake;	it	is	just	social.	Have	you	watched	how	things	change?
I	was	reminded	when	I	was	reading	this	of	a	beautiful	story.
One	dacoit,	a	great	robber,	became	interested	in	the	American	ways	of	dacoity.
Everybody	has	to	be	interested	now,	because	everybody	in	his	own	profession	is
trying	 to	go	 to	America.	Doctors	 are	going,	 engineers	 are	going,	 so	 the	dacoit
thought,	"Why	not	us?	We	can	also	learn	the	modern	techniques."	So	he	went	to
America,	he	joined	a	gang,	and	he	was	watching	and	observing	what	they	were
doing,	the	modern	techniques.	He	was	surprised,	because	first	they	kidnapped	a
beautiful	woman,	 and	 then	 they	wrote.	But	he	 said,	 "This	 is	okay,	because	we
also	do	the	same	in	India:	we	kidnap	a	woman	and	then	we	write	a	letter	to	the
husband	that	if	within	three	days	he	doesn't	give	fifty	thousand	rupees,	then	we
will	kill	his	wife."	So	he	wondered,	"But	what	is	new	in	it?"
Then	he	looked	at	what	they	were	writing	in	the	letter.	He	was	surprised;	he	said,
"What	are	you	doing?"	--	because	in	the	letter	they	were	writing,	"If	within	three
days	you	don't	send	us	fifty	thousand	dollars,	we	will	send	your	wife	back."
The	world	has	tremendously	changed.	People	used	to	read	Playboys	hiding	them
in	 their	Bible	 covers,	 but	 now	 they	 are	 hiding	 their	Bibles	 in	 Playboy	 covers.
Nietzsche	was	right
--	God	is	dead.	But	the	real	God	cannot	die;	that	is	impossible.	To	say	that	God	is
dead	is	to	say	that	life	is	dead.	If	God	means	life,	then	the	statement	'God	is	dead'
is	 simply	stupid,	meaningless,	contradictory	 --	because	 life	 is	 that	which	 lives,
that	which	goes	on	living.
The	Bauls	would	laugh.	They	would	say,	"Then	you	have	not	understood	the	real
God.
Yes,	your	God	is	dead	because	he	was	false,	but	the	God	of	the	Bauls	is	not	dead,
cannot	be	dead,	because	we	never	talked	about	God	--	we	talk	about	life,	love.	If
all	 the	temples	were	destroyed	and	all	 the	mosques	and	GURUDWARAS	were
burnt,	nothing	would	happen	to	God.	Because	the	God	enshrined	there	is	not	the
real	 God.	 The	 God	 enshrined	 in	 you	 is	 the	 real	 God,	 and	 that	 cannot	 be
destroyed.	Life	cannot	be	destroyed;	life	goes	on.	It	is	an	eternal	river."
But	 man	 feels	 lonely.	 In	 his	 loneliness	 he	 creates	 fantasies,	 dreams.	Man	 has
become	so	 lonely	 that	he	 finds	 solace	 in	any	way,	anywhere.	 It	 is	unfortunate.
But	this	is	no	way	to	find	the	real.
I	was	reading	one	anecdote:
Ira	quit	college,	got	himself	a	backpack	and	began	hitchhiking	around	the	United
States.
After	he	had	been	gone	more	than	a	year	he	telephoned	home.	"Hello,	Ma,	how
are	you?"
"Just	fine,	son.	When	are	you	coming	home?	I	will	fix	you	some	chopped	liver
and	chicken	soup	and	a	beautiful	potroast.	"
"I'm	still	pretty	far	away."
"Oh,	 son!"	 cried	 the	 desperate	 woman.''Just	 come	 home,	 and	 I	 will	 fix	 your
favorite	--
oatmeal	cookies."
"I	don't	like	oatmeal	cookies,"	said	the	boy.
"You	don't?"	asked	the	woman.
"Say,"	said	Ira,	"is	this	Century	5-7682?"
"No."
"Then	I	must	have	the	wrong	number."
"Does	that	mean	you	are	not	coming	home,	boy?"	asked	the	woman.
People	are	really	lonely.	Even	if	it	is	not	your	son,	at	least	somebody	is	coming.
You	can	pretend,	you	can	believe,	you	can	console.
The	God	that	exists	in	the	temples	is	not	a	real	God.	That	God	that	exists	in	the
sky	is	your	projection;	the	real	God	is	within	you.	That	which	you	are	seeking	is
not	 somewhere	 else,	 it	 is	 in	 your	 very	 seeking.	 It	 is	 in	 the	 very	 seeker	 --	 the
sought	 is	 in	 the	seeker.	You	are	 the	 truth,	alive,	 in	flesh.	God	is	reborn	in	you,
God	is	incarnated	in	you,	God	has	taken	a	body	in	you.	Where	are	you	seeking,
where	are	you	going?	The	Bauls	say,	"Wait,	listen,	go	within."
They	sing,
The	God	is	living	in	man,
wholly	intermingled.
Oh,	my	unseeing	heart,
your	eyes	are	unwise!
How	then	can	you	locate
the	treasured	man?
The	unseen	man
dwelling	in	the	brilliance	of	light
hides	his	identity
from	those	blinded	by	stupor.
He	is	stationed	in	man,
appearing	and	vanishing
as	the	eyelids	blink.
They	go	on	singing	again	and	again:
All	of	us	in	different	ways
think	of	God
beyond	senses	and	feelings.
And	yet	it	is	only
in	the	essence	of	loving
that	God	is	found.
On	the	other	shore	of	the	ocean
of	one's	own	self
quivers	a	drop	of	fluid
as	the	origin	of	all.
The	root	of	all	is	based	in	you.
Explore	the	base
to	reach	the	essence,
release	the	sensation	of	taste
on	your	tongue,
open	the	doors	of	feeling
for	the	Beloved.
Nectar,	showering	on
the	lotus	of	spontaneity,
lust	and	love	are	housed
in	one	single	place,
where	sorrows	and	joys	do	not	exist.
They	believe	in	man.	They	believe	in	the	tremendous	potentiality	of	man.	They
believe	 that	 man	 is	 the	 shrine	 of	 God.	 They	 believe	 in	 the	 body.	 No	 religion
except	Tantra	has	ever	endeavored	 to	understand	 this	miraculous	happening	of
consciousness	located	in	the	body,	of	consciousness	residing	in	the	body.	All	the
other	religions	have	remained	anti-body,	anti-life,	life-negative,	body-negative	--
as	if	the	more	you	destroy	your	body,	the	more	you	become	divine,	or	the	more
you	come	close	to	God.	Bauls	say,	"If	you	destroy	the	body,	you	destroy	the	very
base.	 If	 you	 destroy	 sensation,	 you	 destroy	 sensitivity.	 If	 you	 destroy	 your
senses,	then	how	will	you	taste	Him,	how	will	you	hear	Him,	how	will	you	see
Him?	 If	 you	 destroy	 your	 love,	 how	will	 you	 love	Him?	 If	 you	 destroy	 your
passion,	then	you	will	be	impotent."
They	have	a	really	revolutionary	religion	to	preach	to	the	world.	They	are	very
illiterate	people,	but	of	great	insight.	Maybe	that's	why	they	are	so	full	of	insight,
because	they	are	illiterate...because	they	don't	know	much	about	scriptures,	and
they	don't	know	much	about	philosophy	and	metaphysics.	Because	they	cannot
read	 the	 books	 they	 read	 their	 own	 bodies;	 because	 they	 cannot	 understand
conceptualizations	they	try	to	find	out	who	they	are;	because	they	cannot	be	very
learned	--	poor	beggars	moving	from	one	village	to	another,	singing	and	dancing,
enjoying	--	they	have	come	very	close	to	reality.
They	are	very	authentic,	uncorrupted	by	nature,	society,	education.	They	are	very
innocent	 people.	And	 this	 is	 their	 understanding:	 that	 body	 is	 divine.	 Body	 is
sacred,	because	everything	is	sacred.	But	this	word	'sacred'	is	not	very	good.	In
the	 Old	 Testament,	 the	 word	 'sacred'	 comes	 from	 a	 root	 which	 means	 the
separate.	 God	 is	 called	 sacred	 in	 the	Old	 Testament	 because	He	 is	 a	 separate
reality	from	this	reality.
Bauls	would	laugh.	They	will	say,	"You	have	gone	insane!	There	is	no	separate
reality.
God	 is	THIS	 reality."	Bauls	make	 the	whole	 reality	 sacred,	holy,	divine.	Their
vision	is	so	vast	that	even	matter	is	no	longer	thought	of	as	matter.	Even	matter,
in	their	vision,	becomes	luminous.	Even	body	is	not	just	body	--	it	is	of	the	earth,
but	it	carries	the	divine	within	it.
I	have	heard	about	a	Hassid	 rabbi:	Rabbi	Bonum	was	his	name.	When	he	was
dying	he	 left	 this	 last	message	for	his	disciples.	He	said,	"Everyone	must	have
two	pockets,	so	that	he	can	reach	into	one	or	the	other	according	to	his	needs.	In
his	right	pocket	are	to	be	the	words:	For	my	sake	was	the	world	created;	and	in
his	left:	I	am	nothing	but	earth."
Beautiful	it	is.	He	is	saying:	Man	is	nothing	but	earth	--	keep	this	message	in	one
pocket;	and	in	the	other:	The	whole	world	is	created	for	me.	I	am	the	God	of	the
whole	world	--
keep	 this	 message	 in	 the	 other	 pocket.	 Both	 messages	 are	 true	 because	 one
shows	the	reality,	the	other	shows	the	potentiality.	One	shows	the	fact,	the	other
shows	the	truth.
The	fact	is	that	we	are	made	of	earth;	the	truth	is	that	we	are	made	in	His	image.
We	are	both	 --	God	enshrined	 in	earth.	We	are	of	 the	earth,	and	yet,	 there	 is	a
great	passion	 inside	us	 to	 rise	 to	 the	highest	 sky.	Look	at	 the	 trees	 --	what	are
they	doing?	They	come	from	the	earth,	they	belong	to	the	earth,	they	are	rooted
in	the	earth,	and	they	are	trying	to	reach	to	the	sun,	trying	to	reach	to	the	stars.
Rooted	in	the	earth,	they	move	towards	heaven.	That	is	the	Baul	symbol:	the	tree
rooted	 in	 the	 earth,	 reaching	 towards	 heaven;	 rooted	 in	 the	 body,	 reaching
towards	the	soul.
Then	these	two	are	not	contraries;	they	are	both	of	one	process,	of	one	dynamic
force.
Just	before	the	Zen	Master,	Baso,	was	dying	at	the	age	of	sixty,	he	sat	up	in	the
lotus	 posture,	 and	 to	 those	 gathered	 around	 him	 said,	 "Don't	 be	misled.	 Look
directly.	What	is	this?"	He	repeated	it	loudly,	and	calmly	died.
Let	me	repeat	what	he	said:	"Don't	be	misled.	Look	directly.	What	is	this?"	He
repeated	it	loudly,	then	calmly	died.	THIS	conveys	the	whole	meaning;	the	very
directness	of	it.
There	is	no	THAT.	THIS	is	THAT!	This	is	so	vast,	there	is	no	need	for	any	that
to	exist.
This	implies	all	that.
"Don't	 be	 misled,"	 he	 said	 --	 because	 the	 greatest	 misguidance	 comes	 from
people	 who	 separate	 God	 from	 reality,	 who	 separate	 truth	 from	 fact,	 who
separate	spirit	from	body,	who	separate	lust	from	love,	who	separate	mud	from
the	lotus.	They	are	the	great	misguiders	of	the	world.
They	 are	 the	 poisoners,	 because	 once	 they	 have	 made	 it	 clear	 to	 your	 mind,
conditioned	 your	 mind	 that	 the	 lotus	 can	 never	 be	 of	 the	 mud,	 they	 have
destroyed	the	very	possibility	of	the	lotus.	Then	you	can	have	a	plastic	lotus;	but
a	real	lotus,	never	--	because	the	real	lotus	is	always	rooted	in	the	mud.	It	is	part
of	the	mud,	it	is	a	flowering	of	the	mud.	It	is	earth	come	to	its	glory;	it	is	earth's
essence.	Once	you	can	see	lust	and	love	as	one,	passion	and	compassion	as	one,
body	and	soul	as	one	--	maybe	two	rhythms	of	the	same	energy,	two	formations
of	the	same	force,	two	concretizations	of	the	same	stuff,	but	the	stuff	is	the	same
--	if	you	can	see	the	world	and	God	just	like	mud	and	lotus,	lust	and	love,	you
have	the	vision	of	the	Baul.
If	you	don't	have	that	vision,	 there	 is	every	possibility	 that	you	will	be	misled.
And	 the	 misguiders	 are	 very	 cunning;	 they	 are	 great	 rationalizers.	 They	 can
convince	you,	they	can	argue	for	their	standpoint.
I	have	heard....
Mistress	 Goldfarb	 walked	 into	 a	 kosher	 butcher	 shop,	 asked	 the	 owner	 for	 a
fresh	 chicken,	 and	 immediately	 began	 inspecting	 it.	 She	 lifted	 the	wing,	 stuck
her	nose	underneath	and	dedared,	"Phew!	It	smells!"	Then	she	pulled	up	a	leg,
sniffed	and	said,
"Phaugh!"	 After	 smelling	 the	 hind	 end,	 Mistress	 Goldfarb	 held	 her	 nose	 and
exclaimed,
"It	stinks!	You	call	this	a	fresh	chicken?"
"Tell	me,	lady,"	said	the	butcher,	"you	could	stand	such	an	inspection?"
These	 people	 who	 go	 on	 condemning	 the	 world,	 condemning	 the	 body,
condemning	everything,	just	ask	them,	"Will	your	God	be	able	to	stand	all	 this
inspection?"	Then	nothing	is	left,	because	all	reality	is	condemned.	Then	just	a
concept,	 an	 abstraction	 is	 left.	 Yes,	 abstraction	 cannot	 be	 condemned	 because
then	God	will	not	stink.	Then	He	will	not	perspire	because	He	will	have	nothing
to	do	with	the	earth.	Then	His	hands	will	not	be	muddy;	then	He	will	be	just	an
abstraction.
Have	you	noticed	the	fact	that	all	religions	have	tried	to	convince	the	world	that
their	founders	were	almost	unreal?	Jainas	say	Mahavir	never	perspired,	because
how	 can	 a	 man	 of	 God	 perspire?	 Ordinary	 humanity	 perspires,	 not	 Mahavir.
They	say	that	Mahavir	was	hit,	but	blood	never	came	out	of	his	body.	What	came
out	of	his	body?.	--	milk.	How	could	blood	have	come	out	Mahavir's	body,	this
ordinary	humanity?	Now	they	are	trying	to	put	Mahavir	on	such	a	pedestal	that
he	 is	 bound	 to	 become	 unreal.	 Then	 if	 people	 come	 and	 they	 say,	 "We	 don't
believe	in	your	Mahavir,	he	seems	just	a	myth,"	they	are	right.
How	can	he	be	real?	Reality	you	deny,	you	condemn.
The	same	has	happened	with	all	the	great	Masters	of	the	world:	followers	try	to
make	 them	 unreal.	 Followers	 are	 always	 afraid	 because	 if	 the	 hands	 of	 their
Masters	look	dirty....'Dirty'	is	not	a	dirty	word,	remember;	it	comes	from	'dirt'.	It
simply	says	earthly,	earthy.	A	gardener	works	in	the	garden;	his	hands	are	dirty	--
not	dirty,	just	dirt	is	there	--
but	dirt	 is	good.	We	are	made	of	dirt,	we	are	made	of	dust.	The	word	 'human'
comes	 from	HUMUS;	HUMUS	means	 the	earth.	The	word	 'Adam'	also	comes
from	 ADAMUS;	 ADAMUS	 means	 the	 earth.	 "We	 are	 made	 of	 earth";	 that's
what	Bauls	say.	We	are	made	of	earth	but	not	made	only	of	earth.	We	are	made
of	earth,	but	deep	inside	is	enshrined	the	divine.
You	must	 have	 seen	 earthen	 lamps	 in	 India.	 They	 are	made	 of	 earth,	 but	 the
flame	is	not	of	the	earth.	The	lamp	is	of	the	earth,	the	lamp	belongs	to	the	earth,
and	the	flame	is	continuously	running	upwards,	upwards,	and	upwards,	towards
the	divine.	Man	 is	an	earthen	 lamp	 --	made	of	earth,	yet	enshrining	 the	divine
flame.
The	 Bauls	 are	 very	 down-to-earth	 realists.	 They	 have	 a	 beauty	 in	 their	 great
vision.	They	are	not	denyers:	they	don't	say	no	to	the	world.	Remember,	if	you
say	 no	 to	 the	 world	 too	 much,	 sooner	 or	 later	 your	 God	 will	 be	 just	 an
abstraction	--	because	the	very	no	to	the	world	will	go	on	reducing	God's	reality.
Whatsoever	you	say	no	to	will	be	a	reduction	of	your	God.	By	and	by,	when	you
have	said	no	to	the	whole	world,	God	is	nothing	but	a	concept,	a	word:	empty,
impotent,	just	a	container	without	any	content.	The	reality	is	earthly.
The	world	has	been	denied	and	God	has	been	put	as	if	He	is	an	opposite	force,	as
if	He	is	against	the	world.	Now	look	at	the	absurdity:	these	same	people	go	on
saying,	"God	created	the	world."	He	cannot	be	against	it,	otherwise	why	should
He	create	it?	The	creator	cannot	be	against	His	own	creation.	The	very	creation
is	a	proof	that	God	loves	it
--	 the	 creation	 is	His	 appreciation,	 the	 creation	 is	His	 play,	 the	 creation	 is	His
love,	His	vocation.	God	creates	the	world	because	He	loves	it.
Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 that	 all	 the	 religions	 are	 against	 God	 because	 they	 are
against	His	creation.	How	can	you	be	for	the	poet	if	you	are	against	his	poetry?
How	can	you	be	for	the	man	if	you	are	against	his	character?	How	can	you	be
for	the	painter	if	you	are	against	his	painting?	Gurdjieff	seems	to	be	very	logical,
absolutely	right:	religions	seem	to	be	against	God.	They	talk	about	God,	but	they
are	against	Him	because	they	are	against	His	world.	They	teach	you	to	deny	the
world;	but	you	cannot	deny	it	because	you	are	rooted	in	it.	Then	what	happens?	-
-	you	become	pseudo,	you	become	false,	you	become	a	pretender,	you	become
double	faced.	You	have	one	face	to	show	to	the	world,	and	another	face	to	live
with.	This	is	an	emergency	measure;	man	could	not	do	anything	else.
What	 to	 do?	 You	 cannot	 deny	 the	 reality,	 and	 you	 cannot	 allow	 it,	 and	 you
cannot	accept	it	--	because	your	religions	teach	you	to	be	against	it.	So,	man	has
found	the	golden	mean:	don't	deny	it	 in	reality,	 just	go	on	denying	it	 in	words.
Show	 that	 you	 deny	 it,	 that's	 all.	 Pay	 your	 respects	 to	 God	 and	 go	 on	 living
reality.
Religions	 have	 not	 helped	 man	 to	 become	 sane.	 They	 have	 helped	 man	 to
become	insane,	neurotic,	split.
It	happened	in	a	church:
A	 man	 was	 confessing.	 "And	 how	 much	 of	 that	 stack	 of	 hay	 did	 you	 steal,
Kavanagh?"
the	priest	asked	at	confession.
"I	 might	 just	 as	 well	 confess	 to	 the	 whole	 stack,	 your	 Reverence,"	 said
Kavanagh.	"I	am	going	after	the	rest	of	it	tonight."
He's	 confessing,	 and	 yet	 he's	 planning	 to	 do	 the	 same	 thing	 again	 this	 night.
Then	why	confess?	No,	he	is	putting	himself	at	ease	because	people	say	'this	is
bad'	 and	 'this	 is	 sin',	 and	 people	 have	 made	 a	 virtue	 of	 confession	 --	 as	 if
confession	in	itself	is	a	virtue.	Unless	it	is	authentic,	it	is	meaningless.
It	happened	on	a	road:
A	Protestant	minister	was	given	a	brand	new	car	by	his	congregation,	and	he	was
driving	it	through	downtown	Dublin.	Suddenly	the	car	in	front	of	him	came	to	a
screeching	stop,	and	the	minister	crashed	into	it.	The	furious	clergyman	climbed
out	and	stormed	up	to	the	car	in	front	of	him	with	murder	in	his	eyes.	Then	he
noticed	that	the	driver	of	the	other	vehicle	was	a	Catholic	priest.
"Your	Reverence,''	said	the	minister	through	clenched	teeth,	"were	it	not	for	the
fact	that	I	am	a	man	of	the	cloth,	I	would	be	tempted	to	thrash	you	within	an	inch
of	your	life."
"Your	Reverence,"	said	the	priest,	sticking	his	head	out	the	window,	"were	it	not
that	I	too	am	a	man	of	the	cloth,	and	that	it	happens	to	be	a	Friday,	I	would	be
tempted	to	bite	your	balls."
This	 is	 how	 the	 whole	 effort	 of	 all	 religion	 has	 made	 man	 just	 pretentious,
hypocritical.
Their	 reality	 is	 something	different;	 their	masks	are	absolutely	different.	Bauls
are	against	it.	They	say,	"Love	the	world	and	find	your	God	through	that	love,	so
that	there	is	no	division	created	in	you.	"
Man	had	to	become	a	hypocrite;	it	became	just	a	safety	measure.	Religions	have
not	 left	any	possibility,	any	way	for	him	to	be	real.	Now	look	at	 the	absurdity:
they	go	on	 teaching	 'be	 true',	 and	 their	whole	 teaching	creates	untruth.	On	 the
one	hand	they	teach	you	to	be	true,	to	be	authentic,	and	on	the	other	hand	their
whole	teaching	creates	such	a	situation	that	if	you	want	to	be	true	you	will	have
to	commit	suicide;	you	cannot	live.
Either	commit	suicide	if	you	want	to	be	true	but	then	what	is	the	point	of	being
true	if	you	commit	suicide?	You	will	not	be	here	to	be	true.	If	you	want	to	live,
you	will	have	to	be	untrue.	But	the	fault	is	not	with	you;	the	fault	is	in	the	whole
program	that	has	been	fed	into	your	brain.	The	whole	program	is	faulty.
Man	has	 to	be	real,	 real	 to	reality.	Whatsoever	 the	reality,	man	has	 to	accept	 it
and	live	it	in	deep	gratitude,	and	live	it	with	such	reverence,	respect	--	because	it
is	God's	reality.	It	is	His	temple.
When	Moses	 reached	 on	 the	mount	where	 he	 encountered	God,	 he	 saw	 a	 fire
burning	under	a	bush.	And	the	bush	was	not	burnt;	the	bush	was	as	green	as	ever
and	 flames	 were	 coming	 out	 of	 it.	 He	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes.	 He	 started
moving	 towards	 the	 bush;	 he	 was	 almost	 magnetized	 by	 what	 he	 saw.	 Then
suddenly	God	shouted,	"Moses!	Take	your	shoes	off!	You	are	walking	on	holy
ground."
I	have	always	loved	that	parable.	But	I	say	to	you,	not	only	on	Mount	Sinai,	but
wherever	you	are	walking,	you	are	walking	on	holy	ground	--	because	all	is	His
ground,	because	all	is	He.
The	 Beloved	 is	 present	 in	 so	many	 forms.	 Lust	 is	 also	 His,	 love	 is	 also	 His.
Bauls	say,
"Don't	deny	anything	because	denial	is	an	irreverence.	It	is	a	rejection	of	God."
One	day	 I	 saw	 that	Mulla	Nasrudin	was	 teaching	his	 son	 to	be	 able	 to	defend
himself,	so	he	taught	him	the	finer	points	of	boxing.
I	 asked	him,	 "But	 suppose,	Mulla,	 he	 comes	up	against	 a	bigger	kid	who	also
knows	how	to	box?	Then	what?"
"I	have	already	 thought	of	 that,"	 said	Nasrudin,	 "so	 I	 am	 teaching	him	how	 to
run	too."
On	one	hand	we	go	on	 teaching	people	 to	be	 true,	and	on	 the	other	hand,	 in	a
subtle	way,	we	go	on	teaching	them	not	to	be	true.	Each	child	is	made	neurotic
by	the	parents,	by	the	society;	and	we	know	that	we	are	doing	it,	and	we	know
that	others	have	done	the	same	to	us.	Stop	doing	it	to	yourself	and	stop	doing	it
to	 others.	 Become	 alert.	 Just	 be	 real.	 I	 emphasize	 reality	 more	 than	 truth.
Because	 truth	 has	 been	 used	 by	 the	 anti-life	 people	 so	 much,	 it	 has	 wrong
associations.	Be	real.	If	you	are	real,	one	thing	will	start	disappearing	from	your
heart,	and	that	is	guilt.
One	psychoanalyst	and	therapist,	Shepard,	has	coined	a	word:'unguilting'.	I	like
the	word.
Real	 religion	 is	 always	 a	 process	 of	 unguilting;	 false	 religions	 are	 always	 a
process	of	guilting.	They	try	to	make	you	more	and	more	guilty:	anger	is	there,
lust	is	there,	sex	is	there,	greed	is	there,	attachment	is	there,	hate	is	there,	love	is
there	 --	 and	 everything	 is	 condemned.	 You	 become	 guilty,	 you	 start	 feeling
wrong;	you	are	wrong,	you	start	feeling	condemned,	you	start	hating	yourself.	If
you	 start	 hating	 yourself	 you	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 find	 God,	 because	 He	 is
hiding	in	you.
Unguilt;	 drop	 all	 guilt!	Whatsoever	 you	 are,	 whosoever	 you	 are,	 wheresoever
you	are,	God	has	accepted	you.	When	God	has	accepted	you,	why	be	worried?.	-
-	accept	yourself.
Start	 living	 your	 life	 not	 through	 concepts;	 start	 living	 your	 life	 through	 your
feelings,	emotions,	your	body.	Start	living	life	as	if	you	were	never	corrupted	by
any	 society,	 as	 if	 you	 have	 just	 come	 new	 into	 the	world	 directly	 from	God's
hands	and	nobody	has	taught	you	anything.	Start	living:	that	life	is	the	real	life.
Then	you	 listen	 to	your	own	heart,	you	 listen	 to	your	body.	You	don't	 repress,
you	try	to	understand;	and	through	understanding	is	transformation.
The	Bauls	sing	the	song	for	today:
COMMIT	YOURSELF	TO	THE	EARTH
WHILE	ON	THE	EARTH,
MY	HEART,
IF	YOU	WISH	TO	ATTAIN
THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
Commit	yourself	to	the	earth	--	don't	be	committed	to	some	heaven	somewhere
else,	be	committed	to	the	here	and	now,	to	the	reality	that	is	your	surround.	Be
committed	to	your	humanity,	to	the	earth	that	is	just	below	you:	commit	yourself
to	the	earth	while	on	the	earth.
Bauls	 say,	 "We	will	 think	 --	when	we	 have	moved	 to	 heaven	 and	 gone	 to	 the
other	world,	 then	we	will	 see.	Once	you	have	 learned	how	to	be	committed	 to
the	here	and	now,	there	also	you	will	be	committed."	Because	whenever	future
comes,	 it	always	comes	as	 the	present.	Even	 the	other	world	will	come	as	 this
world.	Have	you	seen	that	you	move	from	one	shore	of	a	river	to	the	other,	and
when	you	reach	closer	to	the	other	shore,	the	other	shore	becomes	this	shore,	and
the	 first	 shore	 that	used	 to	be	 this	shore	becomes	 that	 shore?	So	wherever	you
are,	you	are	surrounded	by	this-ness.
I	have	heard....
Once	Mulla	Nasrudin	drank	too	much,	and	was	walking	on	a	road,	zig-zagging
from	 this	 side	 to	 that.	 He	was	 asking	 people,	 "Where	 is	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the
road?"
Somebody	said,	"The	other	side	is	there."
He	went	there	and	he	asked	people,	"Where	is	the	other	side	of	the	road?"	And
they	said,
"The	other	side	is	there."
He	said,	"These	people	seem	to	be	very	foolish.	When	I	go	to	that	side,	people
say	the	other	side	is	there.	When	I	come	here,	people	say	the	other	side	is	there.
Are	they	mad?"
The	other	side	is	always	there.	And	wherever	you	are,	you	are	always	here;	this-
ness	surrounds	you.
Just	the	other	day	I	quoted	one	very	great	saying	of	Udallak	to	his	son,	Swetketu
--	''That	art	thou";	TATWAMASI	SWETKETU.	The	Bauls	would	like	to	make	a
little	change	 in	 it.	They	would	say,	"THIS	art	 thou"	--	not	 that,	because	THAT
gives	a	far	away	idea	of	God.	THIS	is	more	earthly.
COMMIT	YOURSELF	TO	THE	EARTH
WHILE	ON	THE	EARTH,
MY	HEART,
IF	YOU	WISH	TO	ATTAIN
THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
That	unattainable	man,	the	ADHAR	MANUSH,	the	essential	man;	if	you	want
to	attain	it,	then	be	committed	to	the	here	and	now.	Be	committed	to	the	present,
be	committed	to	the	reality	that	is	available	to	you	in	this	moment.	There	is	no
other	commitment.
PLACE	AT	HIS	FEET
YOUR	FLOWERS	OF	FEELINGS
AND	THE	PRAYERS	OF	TEARS
FLOODING	YOUR	EYES.
They	are	very	real	people.	They	say	 'the	 flowers	of	 feelings'.	Ordinary	flowers
won't	do.
You	can	pick	flowers	from	the	trees	and	go	to	the	God	of	your	temple	and	put
those	flowers	there,	but	the	God	is	abstract,	the	flowers	borrowed.	In	fact,	they
were	more	in	tune	with	God	on	the	trees.	They	were	more	in	tune	with	God	on
the	trees	--	at	least	they	were	alive.	You	have	not	made	them	closer	to	God,	you
have	killed	them.
When	I	used	to	live	in	Jabalpur	I	had	a	very	beautiful	garden,	and	I	was	a	victim,
a	continuous	victim	of	 religious	people.	Because	 there	used	 to	be	 two	 temples
just	 close	by,	 so	any	worshippers	would	come,	and	without	asking	 they	would
start	picking	flowers.	In	that	part	of	the	country	it	is	thought	that	if	somebody	is
picking	 flowers	 for	 his	God,	 it	 is	 not	 good	 to	 prevent	 it.	 So	 I	 had	 to	 put	 up	 a
notice,	 because	 if	 I	 prevented	 them	 they	 would	 say,	 "These	 are	 for	 religious
purposes."	I	had	to	put	up	a	notice:	You	can	pick	for	any	other	purpose,	but	not
for	religious	purposes	--	because,	as	I	see	it,	the	flowers	are	more	surrendered	to
God	on	the	plants,	alive.	You	will	kill	them.	Your	God	is	bogus	and	you	will	kill
the	flowers.	This	whole	worship	is	pseudo.
The	 Bauls	 say	 'your	 flowers	 of	 feelings	 place	 at	 his	 feet':	 your	 love,	 your
compassion,	 your	 understanding,	 your	 lived	 experiences,	 your	 visions,	 your
taste,	your	richness.
"Place	at	his	 feet	your	flowers	of	 feelings	and	 the	prayers	of	 tears'-'	 --	because
words	won't	do.	How	can	words	become	prayers?	Words	are	dead	 things:	 they
don't	mean	much.	Yes,	there	is	much	noise	in	them,	but	they	don't	mean	much.
Silent	 tears	would	be	better.	So	you	can	find	Bauls	standing	by	 the	side	of	 the
road	crying,	and	if	you	ask,
"What	are	you	doing?"	they	will	say,	"Praying."	And	you	don't	see	any	shrine,	no
temple,	not	even	a	tree-god.	They	are	just	standing	on	the	road,	crying.	You	will
ask,	 "Where	 is	your	God?"	and	 they	will	 say,	 "Everything!	Everywhere	He	 is.
Whenever	the	right	moment	is	available	to	pray,	whenever	I	feel	in	a	receptive
moment,	 that	 is	 the	 right	moment	 to	 pray.	 I'm	 praying."	With	 tears	 they	 pray,
with	dance	they	pray,	with	singing	they	pray,	but	their	prayer	is	very	alive.
The	Bauls	say,
With	a	beggar's	humility
I	have	come	to	your	doors.
No	one	is	ever	turned	away
from	your	home	of	unending	stores.
You	have	all	the	riches,
and	so	much	have	you	given
without	my	demand.
No	more	do	I	need	any	wealth,
O	my	Master,
give	me	your	feet!
"No	more	do	I	need	any	wealth,	O	my	Master,	give	me	your	 feet"	 --	 just	your
feet	are	enough,	so	I	can	cry,	so	my	tears	can	wash	your	feet.
PLACE	AT	HIS	FEET
YOUR	FLOWERS	OF	FEELINGS
AND	THE	PRAYERS	OF	TEARS
FLOODING	YOUR	EYES.
THE	MAN	YOU	SEEK
IS	EARTHED	IN	THE	EARTH,
DECEASED	WHILE	BEING.
DYING	WITH	DEATH,
YOU	MUST	LIVE	TO	SEEK...
The	man	you	seek	is	earthed,	is	incarnated	in	the	body.	The	body	is	your	earth.
And	 the	man	 you	 seek	 is	 here,	 enshrined	 in	 the	 earth,	 enshrined	 in	 death:	 the
flame	 of	 life	 enshrined	 in	 death...so	 don't	 be	 afraid	 of	 the	 earth,	 and	 don't	 be
afraid	 of	 death;	 they	 make	 it	 possible	 for	 you	 to	 live.	 Life	 is	 possible	 only
because	of	death,	soul	is	possible	only	because	of	the	body.	The	tree	is	possible
only	because	of	the	roots,	so	don't	be	afraid	of	the	roots,	and	don't	be	afraid	of
death.	Don't	be	afraid	of	the	body.	Accept	this	reality.
DYING	WITH	DEATH,
YOU	MUST	LIVE	TO	SEEK...
Live	when	life	is	there.	Be	committed	to	the	earth	while	on	the	earth;	die	when
death	 comes.	Move	with	 life	 and	move	with	 death.	Dying,	 don't	 cling	 to	 life.
Dying,	don't	resist	death;	dying,	die.	Living,	live;	dying,	die.	Let	the	moment	be
total.	 Float	with	 it,	 be	 committed	 to	 it.	When	 death	 comes,	 then	 don't	 be	 sad.
Then	accept	death.	Then	accept	it	with	such	totality	that	even	death	cannot	kill
you.
A	total	person	cannot	be	killed,	and	a	divided	person	never	lives.	A	total	person
is	already	beyond	death.	Totality	is	beyond	death.	Divided,	separated,	falling	into
parts,	 not	 together,	 you	 just	 look	 alive	 but	 you	 are	 not	 alive.	 Dying,	 die;
surrender	to	death.	Now	it	is	God	who	has	come	as	death.
For	 the	Baul	everything	 is	divine	 --	 life,	death.	Nothing	 is	undivine.	The	devil
does	not	exist.
You	must	have	heard	the	parable	in	Jesus'	life	that	when	Mary	Magdalene	came
to	 see	 him,	 she	 was	 possessed	 by	 seven	 demons.	 He	 touched	 her	 and	 all	 the
seven	demons	rushed,	ran	towards	the	sea	and	drowned	themselves	there.	Now
this	 parable	 is	 very	 significant.	 The	 word	 'demon'	 comes	 from	 a	 root	 which
means	division.	If	you	transiate	this	parable	into	psychological	terms,	it	simply
means	Mary	Magdalene	 was	 divided	 into	 seven	 parts.	 Jesus	 touched	 her,	 she
became	total,	unpossessed;	the	demons	disappeared.
Demons	mean	divisions.
The	Baul	lives	an	undivided	life;	he	never	divides.	He	is	not	against	anything,	he
is	not	for	anything;	he	simply	lives.	Whatsoever	comes	in	the	moment,	he	lives
it.	 He	 is	 surrendered	 to	 reality;	 that	 is	 his	 prayer.	 Death	 comes,	 he	 yields
beautifully,	gracefully.
He	dies.	He	cooperates	with	death.	There	is	not	a	little	bit	of	resistance,	not	even
a	little	bit.	He	is	not	fighting;	he	embraces	death.
DYING	WITH	DEATH,
YOU	MUST	LIVE	TO	SEEK....
And	then	he	goes	on	and	on.	His	search	is	unending.	God	can	never	be	 totally
known	because	He	is	infinite.	We	can	go	on	knowing	Him	more	and	more	and
more.	We	 go	 on	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 and	 closer,	 but	 God	 is	 not	 a	 goal.
Nobody	can	say,	"I	have	arrived."	If	somebody	says	it,	then	something	is	wrong.
The	Upanishads	 say	 the	one	who	says	 "I	have	known	God",	has	not	known	 --
because	 how	 can	 you	 know	 the	 eternal?	Yes,	 you	 can	 live	Him,	 you	 can	 love
Him,	you	can	be	in	Him,	but	you	cannot	know	Him	--
because	knowledge	will	become	a	definition,	knowledge	will	make	Him	finite.
That	which	is	known	totally	becomes	finite,	but	God	remains	unknowable.	The
more	you	know,	the	more	doors	open,	the	more	mysteries	open.	Then	each	death
is	a	closing	of	the	past	and	a	new	vision	of	the	future.
DYING	 WITH	 DEATH,	 YOU	 MUST	 LIVE	 TO	 SEEK....	 and	 one	 goes	 on
seeking.	The	pilgrimage	is	eternal.
The	Bauls	sing,
SHUT	THE	DOORS	ON	THE	FACE	OF	LUST,
ATTAIN	THE	GREATEST,	THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN,
AND	ACT	AS	THE	LOVERS	ACT:
MEET	THE	DEATH	BEFORE	YOU	DIE.
To	 die	 with	 death	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 have	 met	 death	 before	 you	 die.
Otherwise	it	will	be	difficult.	You	need	some	acquaintance.	If	death	comes	and
you	are	not	acquainted	with	 it,	 it	will	be	difficult	 for	you	 to	 surrender.	That	 is
what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about:	 meeting	 death	 before	 you	 die;	 making	 a	 few
acquaintances,	a	few	encounters	with	death,	so	you	start	loving	the	beauty	of	it,
so	you	start	falling	in	love	with	it,	so	you	can	see	the	divine	face	even	in	death.
Only	a	meditator	can	die	without	 fighting,	otherwise	fight	 is	unconscious.	 It	 is
not	 that	 you	 will	 fight;	 you	 will	 find	 yourself	 fighting,	 and	 it	 will	 be	 almost
impossible	for	you	not	to	fight.	Resistance	is	unconscious,	it	is	built	in.
Meditate	or	love,	because	these	are	the	two	ways	to	be	acquainted	with	death.	If
you	love,	it	is	a	small	death.	If	you	love	very	deeply,	it	is	a	great	death.	If	you	are
really	 in	 love,	 you	 are	 no	more	 the	 same	 as	 you	were	 before.	 Something	 has
disappeared;	you	are	 reborn.	Love	 is	a	 rebirth.	So,	many	 times	 in	 life,	 through
meditation	 and	 love,	 you	 should	 become	 acquainted	 with	 death	 so	 that	 when
death	really	comes	you	know	the	guest	so	well	that	you	are	not	afraid.	You	can
welcome	 the	 guest,	 you	 can	 receive	 the	 guest	 with	 great	 love,	 with	 great
rejoicing,	celebration.
The	 Bauls	 say	 about	 the	 ADHAR	MANUSH,	 the	 essential	 man:	 Poison	 and
ambrosia
are	one	and	the	same	to	him.
He	is	dead	while	wholly	living.
If	 you	 become	 acquainted	with	 death	 through	 love	 and	meditation,	 by	 and	 by
you	will	 see	 that	 life	 and	 death	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin;	 poison	 and
ambrosia	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin;	matter	and	mind	--	two	aspects	of	the
same	coin;	good	and	bad,	all	dualities	--	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	Then	you
are	 not	 worried.	 Then	 you	 don't	 choose.	 Then	 you	 live	 a	 life	 of	 choiceless
awareness.	Then	all	is	the	same.	If	you	choose	life	you	have	chosen	death.	If	you
avoid	death	you	will	avoid	life	--	so	there	is	no	point	in	choosing,	and	there	is	no
point	 in	 avoiding.	 One	 simply	 waits	 and	 accepts	 whatsoever	 gift	 comes	 from
God's	grace.
This	 is	what	Bauls	call:	He	 is	dead	while	wholly	 living.	He	 is	absolutely	alive
and	yet,	in	a	sense,	dead,	because	all	dualities	have	come	into	him	and	become	a
synthesis.	He	 is	wholly	dead	and	wholly	alive.	You	are	neither	alive	nor	dead;
you	are	in	a	limbo.
The	 perfect	 man	 is	 both	 together.	 In	 him,	 all	 dualities	 are	 transcended.	 He	 is
tremendously	enriched	because	life	goes	on	pouring	into	him,	death	also	goes	on
pouring	 into	 him.	Whatsoever	 life	 can	 give,	 he	 accepts;	whatsoever	 death	 can
give,	he	accepts.
Whatsoever	 happiness	 gives	 he	 accepts,	 and	whatsoever	 unhappiness	 gives	 he
accepts.
And	 remember,	 there	 are	 treasures	 hidden	 in	 unhappiness	 also,	 as	 there	 are
treasures	hidden	 in	happiness.	 If	 you	have	known	only	 treasures	of	 happiness,
then	you	have	not	known	much.	 If	 you	have	known	only	 treasures	of	 joy	you
have	 not	 known	 much;	 there	 are	 treasures	 of	 sadness	 also.	 There	 are	 a	 few
treasures	which	only	sadness	can	give	to	you.	There	are	treasures	of	laughter	and
treasures	of	tears.
The	 Bauls	 say	 that	 one	 should	 be	 so	 capable	 that	 one	 allows	 all	 dualities	 to
merge	and	come	into	oneself.	Then	only	is	the	essential	man	revealed.	And	the
essential	man	is	the	God	of	the	Bauls.
COMMIT	YOURSELF	TO	THE	EARTH
WHILE	ON	THE	EARTH,
MY	HEART,
IF	YOU	WISH	TO	ATTAIN
THE	UNATTAINABLE	MAN.
PLACE	AT	HIS	FEET
YOUR	FLOWERS	OF	FEELINGS
AND	THE	PRAYERS	OF	TEARS
FLOODING	YOUR	EYES.
THE	MAN	YOU	SEEK
IS	EARTHED
IN	THE	EARTH,
DECEASED	WHILE	BEING.
DYING	WITH	DEATH,
YOU	MUST	LIVE	TO	SEEK....
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	The	body	is	an	abode
28	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606280
ShortTitle:
BELOV108
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
93
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
THE	BAULS	CELEBRATE	THEIR	LIVES	IN	THEIR	BODIES.	COULD	YOU
SAY
MORE	 ABOUT	 THIS?	 AMERICANS	 CHERISH	 THEIR	 BODIES	 WITH
HEALTH
FOOD,	 ROLFING,	MASSAGE,	 ETC.	 BUT	 I	 DON'T	 THINK	 THIS	 IS	 THE
SAME	AS
THE	BAULS.	COULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
THERE	 IS	 A	 LOT	 OF	 DIFFERENCE,	 and	 the	 difference	 is	 not	 only
quantitative,	it	 is	qualitative.	The	modern	world,	the	modern	mind,	knows	only
the	empty	temple.	It	has	completely	forgotten	about	the	one	who	is	enshrined	in
the	temple.	So	we	go	on	worshipping	the	temple,	but	the	God	is	forgotten.	Not
knowing	anything	about	 the	center	of	 life,	we	go	on	moving	and	 indulging	on
the	periphery.	The	American	cherishes	his	body	as	the	body,	Baul	worships	his
body	as	the	shrine	of	God.	Body	in	itself	is	nothing.
It	 is	 luminous	because	of	 something	 that	 is	beyond	 the	body.	The	glory	of	 the
body	is	not	in	the	body	itself	--	it	is	a	host	--	the	glory	is	because	of	the	guest.	If
you	forget	the	guest,	then	it	is	sheer	indulgence.	If	you	remember	the	guest,	then
loving	the	body,	celebrating	the	body	is	part	of	worship.
The	 Baul	 has	 a	 great	 vision.	 In	 that	 vision	 body	 is	 the	 lowest	 part,	 the	 most
visible	part,	the	most	tangible.	But	it	is	not	the	all,	it	is	just	the	beginning.	You
have	to	enter	through	the	body;	it	is	just	a	gate.	It	leads	to	deeper	mysteries.	The
Baul	cherishes	the	body	because	the	body	is	a	vehicle,	and	through	the	body	one
can	know	that	which	is	embodied,	that	which	is	not	body	itself.	The	body	is	the
earthen	 lamp	 and	 God	 is	 the	 flame.	 The	 lamp	 is	 worshipped	 because	 of	 the
flame.	Once	the	flame	is	gone,	who	worships	the	body,	who	celebrates	the	body?
Then	it	is	nothing;	then	dust	unto	dust,	it	returns	back	to	the	earth.
The	 body	 is	 throbbing	 with	 God,	 pulsating	 with	 God.	 If	 you	 can	 see	 that
pulsation,	then	even	dust	becomes	divine.	If	you	cannot	see	that	pulsation,	then	it
is	simply	dust.	Then	there	is	no	meaning	in	it.
The	American	worship	of	the	body	is	meaningless.	Hence,	people	go	after	health
food,	massage,	Rolfing,	 and	 in	 a	 thousand	and	one	ways	 they	 somehow	 try	 to
create	meaning	in	their	lives.	But	look	into	their	eyes;	a	great	emptiness	exists.
You	 can	 see	 they	 have	missed.	 The	 fragrance	 is	 not	 there,	 the	 flower	 has	 not
flowered.	Deep	 inside,	 they	 are	 just	 desert-like,	 lost,	 not	 knowing	what	 to	 do.
They	go	on	doing	many	things	for	the	body,	but	it	is	missing	the	target.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:
Rosenfeld	walked	into	the	house	with	a	grin	on	his	face.	"You	will	never	guess
what	a	bargain	I	just	got,"	he	told	his	wife.	"I	bought	four	polyester,	steel-belted,
radial	wide-tread,	white-walled,	heavy-duty	tires,	on	sale	yet!"
"Are	you	nuts?"	said	Mistress	Rosenfeld.	"What	did	you	buy	tires	for?	You	don't
even	have	a	car."
"So,"	said	Rosenfeld,	"you	buy	brassieres,	don't	you?"
If	 the	 center	 is	missing,	 then	 you	 can	 go	 on	 decorating	 the	 periphery.	 It	 may
deceive	 others,	 but	 it	 cannot	 fulfill	 you.	 It	 may	 even	 deceive	 you	 sometimes,
because	even	one's	own	lie	repeated	too	many	times	starts	appearing	like	a	truth.
But	it	cannot	fulfill	you,	it	cannot	give	contentment.	The	American	is	trying	hard
to	enjoy	life,	but	there	seems	to	be	no	rejoicing.	The	Baul	is	not	trying	at	all	to
enjoy	life.	There	is	no	effort	in	it;	he	simply	is	enjoying	it.	And	he	has	nothing	to
enjoy;	he	is	just	a	beggar	on	the	road,	but	he	has	something	of	the	inner,	some
glow	of	 the	unknown	surrounds	him.	His	 songs	are	not	only	songs;	 something
from	the	beyond	descends	in	them.	When	he	dances,	it	is	not	only	that	his	body
is	moving;	something	deeper	has	moved.	He's	not	trying	to	enjoy.
Remember	 it:	whenever	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 enjoy	 you	will	miss.	When	 you	 are
trying	to	achieve	happiness	you	will	miss.	The	very	effort	to	achieve	happiness
is	absurd	--
because	happiness	is	here:	you	cannot	achieve	it.	Nothing	has	to	be	done	about
it,	 you	 have	 simply	 to	 allow	 it.	 It	 is	 happening,	 it	 is	 all	 around	 you;	 within,
without,	only	happiness	is.	Nothing	else	is	real.	Watch,	look	deep	into	the	world,
into	trees,	birds,	rocks,	rivers,	into	the	stars,	moon	and	sun,	into	people,	animals
--	 look	 deep:	 existence	 is	 made	 out	 of	 the	 stuff	 of	 happiness,	 joy,
SATCHITANANDA.	 It	 is	made	of	bliss.	There	 is	nothing	 to	be	done	about	 it.
Your	very	doing	may	be	the	barrier.	Relax	and	it	fulfills	you;	relax	and	it	rushes
into	you;	relax,	it	overflows	you.
The	Baul	is	relaxed;	the	American	is	tense.	Tension	arises	when	you	are	chasing
something,	relaxation	arises	when	you	are	allowing	something.	That's	why	I	say
there	is	a	great	difference,	and	the	difference	is	qualitative.	It	is	not	a	question	of
quantity	 --	 that	Bauls	have	more	 than	Americans,	or	Americans	have	 less	 than
the	Bauls.	No,	the	Americans	have	nothing	of	happiness	that	the	Bauls	have;	and
what	the	Americans	have	-
-	the	misery,	the	tension,	the	anguish,	the	neurosis	--	the	Bauls	don't	have.	They
exist	in	a	totally	different	dimension.
The	 dimension	 of	 the	 Baul	 is	 here-now;	 the	 dimension	 of	 the	 American	 is
somewhere	 else	 --	 then-there,	 but	 never	 here-now.	 The	 American	 is	 chasing,
chasing	hard,	trying	to	get	something	out	of	life,	trying	to	squeeze	life.	Nothing
comes	out	of	it	because	that	is	not	the	way.	You	cannot	squeeze	life;	you	have	to
surrender	 to	 it.	 You	 cannot	 conquer	 life.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 so	 courageous	 to	 be
defeated	by	life.	Defeat	is	victory	there,	and	the	effort	to	be	victorious	is	going	to
prove	to	be	nothing	but	your	final,	UTTER	failure.
Life	cannot	be	conquered	because	the	part	cannot	conquer	the	whole.	It	is	as	if	a
small	drop	of	water	is	trying	to	conquer	the	ocean.	Yes,	the	small	drop	can	fall
into	 the	ocean	and	become	the	ocean,	but	 it	cannot	conquer	 the	ocean.	 In	 fact,
dropping	into	the	ocean,	slipping	into	the	ocean	is	the	way	to	conquer.
Dissolve	yourself.
The	Baul	is	one	who	is	dissolved	in	life.	He	has	said	an	absolute	yes	to	life.	He's
not	trying	to	squeeze	anything.	He	simply	waits	--	passive,	alert,	available.	When
God	knocks	on	his	door	the	doors	are	always	open,	that's	all.
He	is	not	chasing	God.	How	can	he	chase?	Where,	in	what	ways,	on	what	paths
can	we	find	Him?	Either	He	is	everywhere	or	He	is	nowhere.	You	cannot	address
your	life	towards	God;	you	cannot	make	a	target	out	of	Him.	He	is	the	total;	the
total	 cannot	 be	made	 a	 target.	Wherever	 you	 look,	He	 is.	Whatsoever	 you	do,
you	do	in	Him.	Even	when	you	are	miserable,	you	are	miserable	in	Him.	Even	in
your	misery	you	don't	lose	Him.	He	cannot	be	lost.	That	which	can	be	lost	is	not
God.
That's	why	Bauls	call	God	ADHAR	MANUSH	--	the	essential	man,	the	essential
consciousness.	 It	 is	so	essential	you	cannot	 lose	 it.	 It	 is	your	very	ground,	 it	 is
your	being.
He	celebrates	his	body	because	he	knows	that	someone	who	is	of	the	beyond,	the
stranger,	 is	 residing	 in	 the	body.	The	body	 is	 an	 abode.	 It	 is	 a	 temple,	 but	 not
empty.	It	is	full	of	light,	it	is	full	of	life	--	God	is	there.	Realizing	this,	he	dances;
realizing	this,	he	sings;	realizing	this,	he	smiles	and	cries	and	weeps,	and	tears
roll	down	his	face.	Seeing	the	miracle:	"I	have	not	earned	Him,	and	He	is	here;	I
have	not	even	sought	Him,	and	He	 is	here;	 I	have	not	even	begged,	and	He	 is
here,"	a	great,	tremendous	gratitude	arises.	The	Baul	dances	because	of	it.
Now	 let	 me	 say	 this:	 the	 American	 is	 trying	 to	 find	 happiness,	 hence	 his
overconcern	with	 the	 body.	 It	 is	 almost	 an	 obsession.	 It	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the
limits	 of	 concern,	 it	 has	 become	 obsessive:	 continuously	 thinking	 about	 the
body,	doing	this	and	that,	and	all	sorts	of	things.	He	is	making	an	effort	to	have
some	contact	with	happiness	through	the	body.
That	is	not	possible.
The	 Baul	 has	 ATTAINED	 it.	 He	 has	 already	 seen	 it	 inside	 himself.	 He	 has
looked	 deep	 into	 his	 body,	 not	 through	 massage,	 not	 through	 Rolfing,	 not
through	sauna	bath.	He	has	looked	into	it	through	love	and	meditation	and	he	has
found	that	it	is	there,	the	treasure	is	there.	Hence	he	worships	his	body;	hence	he
is	careful	about	his	body	because	the	body	is	carrying	the	divine.
Have	you	watched	how	a	woman	walks	when	she	is	pregnant	so	careful,	because
a	new	life	 is	enshrined	 in	her.	Have	you	seen	 the	 transfiguration	 that	comes	 to
the,	 face	 of	 a	 woman	 when	 she	 becomes	 pregnant?	 Her	 face	 is	 luminous,
hopeful,	 throbbing	 with	 new	 life,	 new	 possibility.	 Look	 at	 Prafulla;	 she	 is
pregnant	now.	Look	at	her	face	--	how	transfigured,	how	happy	she	looks.	She	is
carrying	a	 treasure,	 a	great	 treasure.	A	new	 life	 is	going	 to	be	created	 through
her.	She	walks	carefully,	moves	carefully.	A	grace	has	arisen	in	her	because	she
is	pregnant.	She	is	no	more	alone:	her	body	has	become	a	temple.	This	is	just	to
make	you	understand.
What	 to	 say	 about	 a	 Baul?	 God	 is	 there.	 He	 is	 pregnant	 with	 the	 divine.	 He
glows,	he	is	luminous,	he	dances	and	sings.	Possessing	nothing,	he	possesses	all;
having	nothing,	he	is	the	richest	man	in	the	world.	In	one	way	he	is	just	a	beggar
on	the	road,	and	in	another	way,	the	emperor.	Because	of	this	that	has	happened
inside	--	that	he	has	become	aware	--
he	is	happy	with	his	body,	he	takes	care	of	his	body,	he	loves	his	body.	This	love
is	totally	different.
And	 secondly:	 the	American	mind	 is	 competitive.	 It	 is	 not	 necessary	 that	 you
may	be	really	 in	 love	with	your	body;	you	may	be	 just	competing	with	others.
Because	others	are	doing	things,	you	have	to	do	them.	The	American	mind	is	the
most	 shallow,	ambitious	mind	 that	has	ever	existed	 in	 the	world.	 It	 is	 the	very
basic	worldly	mind.	That's	why	the	businessman	has	become	the	top-most	reality
in	America.	Everything	else	has	faded	into	the	background;	the	businessman,	the
man	who	controls	money	is	the	top-most	reality.	In	India,	BRAHMINS	were	the
top-most	 reality	 --	 the	 seekers	 of	God.	 In	Europe	 the	 aristocrats	were	 the	 top-
most	reality	--	well-cultured,	educated,	alert,	in	tune	with	subtle	nuances	of	life:
music,	art,	poetry,	sculpture,	architecture,	classical	dances,	languages,	Greek	and
Latin.	The	aristocrat,	who	had	been	conditioned	for	the	higher	values	of	life	for
centuries,	was	 the	 top-most	 reality	 in	Europe.	 In	Soviet	Russia	 the	 proletariat,
the	downtrodden,	the	oppressed,	the	laborer	is	the	top-most	reality.	In	America	it
is	the	businessman;	VAISHYA,	one	who	controls	money.
Money	is	the	most	competitive	realm.	You	need	not	have	culture,	you	need	only
have	money.	You	need	not	know	anything	about	music,	anything	about	poetry.
You	 need	 not	 know	 anything	 about	 ancient	 literature,	 history,	 religion,
philosophy	--	no,	you	need	not	know.	 If	you	have	a	big	bank	balance,	you	are
important.	That's	why	I	say	this	is	the	most	shallow	mind	that	has	ever	existed.
And	this	mind	has	turned	everything	into	commerce.
This	mind	is	continuously	in	competition.	Even	if	you	purchase	a	Van	Gogh	or	a
Picasso,	you	don't	purchase	it	for	Picasso.	You	purchase	because	the	neighbors
have	purchased.
They	have	a	Picasso	painting	in	their	drawing	room,	so	how	can	you	afford	not
to	have	 it?	You	HAVE	to	have	 it.	You	may	not	know	anything	--	you	may	not
know	even	how	to	hang	it,	which	side	is	which.	Because	it	is	difficult	to	know,
as	far	as	a	Picasso	is	concerned,	whether	the	picture	is	hanging	upside-down	or
right-side	up.	You	may	not	know	at	all	whether	 it	 is	authentically	a	Picasso	or
not.	You	may	not	look	at	it	at	all,	but	because	others	have	it	and	they	are	talking
about	Picasso,	you	have	to	show	your	culture.
You	 simply	 show	 your	 money.	 So	 whatsoever	 is	 costly	 becomes	 significant;
whatsoever	is	costly	is	thought	to	be	significant.
Money	 and	 the	 neighbors	 seem	 to	 be	 the	 only	 criterion	 to	 decide	 everything:
their	 cars,	 their	 houses,	 their	 paintings,	 their	 decorations.	 People	 are	 having
sauna	 baths	 in	 their	 bathrooms	 not	 because	 they	 love	 their	 bodies,	 not
necessarily,	but	because	it	is	the	'in'
thing	--	everybody	has	it.	If	you	don't	have	it	you	look	poor.	If	everybody	has	a
house	in	the	hills,	you	have	to	have	it.	You	may	not	know	how	to	enjoy	the	hills;
you	may	be	simply	bored	there.	Or	you	may	take	your	t.v.	and	your	radio	there
and	 just	 listen	 to	 the	 same	 radio	you	were	 listening	 to	at	home,	and	watch	 the
same	t.v.	program	as	you	were	watching	at	home.	What	difference	does	it	make
where	you	are	sitting,	the	hills	or	in	your	own	room?	But	others	have	it.	A	four-
car	garage	is	needed;	others	have	it.	You	may	not	need	four	cars.
The	American	mind	is	continuously	competing	with	others.	The	Baul	is	a	non-
competitor.	He	is	a	drop-out.	He	says,	"I	am	no	more	concerned	with	what	others
are	doing,	I	am	only	concerned	with	what	I	am.	I	am	not	concerned	with	what
others	have,	I	am	only	concerned	with	what	I	have."	Once	you	see	the	fact,	that
life	can	be	tremendously	blissful	without	having	many	things,	then	who	bothers?
That's	 one	 of	 the	 basic	 differences	 between	 other	 renunciates	 in	 India	 and	 the
Bauls.	 Bauls	 are	 beggars,	 Jain	 monks	 are	 also	 beggars,	 but	 there	 is	 a	 great
difference:	Jain	monks	have	the	American	mind.	They	have	left	the	world	with
great	 effort,	 they	 have	 renounced	 the	 world	 with	 great	 effort	 --	 because	 they
think	 this	 is	 the	 only	way	 to	 achieve	 the	 other	world,	 to	 earn	 virtue.	But	 they
remain	 businessmen.	 The	 Jains	 are	 the	 top-most	 businessmen	 in	 India.	 That's
why	I	say	they	have	the	American	mind.	Their	sannyasins	remain	the	same.
The	Baul's	renunciation	is	totally	different.	He	has	not	renounced	for	any	other
world.	 He	 has	 renounced	 seeing	 the	 foolishness	 of	 possessions,	 seeing	 the
unnecessary	burdening.
He	has	renounced	seeing	the	fact	that	you	can	be	so	happy	without	many	things.
Then	why	carry	them?	Carrying	them	creates	anxiety,	burdens	you	and	destroys
your	blissfulness.	The	 Jain	monk	 is	 thinking	of	 another	world:	 his	MOKSHA,
his	heaven.	The	Baul	is	not	worried	about	any	other	world.	He	says,	"This	is	the
only	world."	But	he	has	come	to	see	the	fact,	a	simple	truth:	that	the	more	you
have,	the	less	you	enjoy.	Can't	you	see	it?	It	is	a	simple	arithmetic	of	life	--	the
more	you	have,	 the	 less	 you	 enjoy,	 because	you	don't	 have	 any	 time	 to	 enjoy.
The	whole	 time	 is	 occupied	 by	 having.	 If	 you	 have	 too	many	 things,	 you	 are
occupied	by	those	many	things;	your	inner	space	is	occupied.	To	enjoy,	you	need
a	little	space;	to	enjoy,	you	need	a	little	unburdening;	to	enjoy,	you	need	to	forget
your	possessions	and	just	be.
The	 Baul	 loves	 life,	 hence	 he	 renounces.	 The	 Jain	monk	 hates	 life,	 hence	 he
renounces.
So	sometimes	the	gesture	may	appear	the	same,	but	it	need	not	be	the	same.	The
inner	significance	may	be	totally	different.
I	have	heard....
Old	Luke	and	his	wife	were	known	as	 the	 stingiest	 couple	 in	 the	valley.	Luke
died	and	a	few	months	later	his	wife	lay	dying.	She	called	in	a	neighbor	and	said
weakly,	"Ruthie,	bury	me	in	my	black	silk	dress,	but	before	you	do,	cut	the	back
out	and	make	a	new	dress	out	of	it.	It	is	good	material	and	I	hate	to	waste	it."
"Could	 not	 do	 that,"	 said	Ruthie.	 "When	 you	 and	 Luke	walk	 up	 them	 golden
stairs,	what	would	them	angels	say	if	your	dress	ain't	got	a	back	in	it?"
"They	won't	be	looking	at	me,"	she	said.	"I	buried	Luke	without	his	pants."
The	concern	is	always	the	other	--	Luke	will	be	without	pants	so	everybody	will
be	looking	at	him.	The	American	concern	is	with	the	other.	The	Baul's	concern	is
simply	with	himself.	The	Baul	is	very	selfish;	he	is	not	worried	about	you,	and
he	is	not	worried	about	anything	that	you	have	or	anything	that	you	have	done.
He	 is	not	concerned	at	 all	with	your	biography.	He	 lives	on	 this	earth	as	 if	he
were	alone.	Of	course,	he	has	a	tremendous	space	all	around	him	--	because	he
lives	 on	 this	 earth	 as	 if	 he	were	 alone.	He	moves	 on	 this	 earth	without	 being
concerned	with	others'	opinions.	He	lives	his	life,	he	is	doing	his	thing,	and	he	is
doing	 his	 being.	 Of	 course,	 he	 is	 happy	 like	 a	 child.	 His	 happiness	 is	 very
simple,	innocent.	It	is	not	manipulated,	it	is	not	manufactured.	It	is	very	simple,
essential,	basic,	like	a	child's.
Have	you	watched	 a	 child	 just	 running,	 shouting,	 dancing	 for	 nothing	 at	 all	 --
because	he	has	nothing?	If	you	ask	him,	"Why	are	you	so	happy?"	he	will	not	be
able	to	answer	you.
He	 will	 really	 think	 that	 you	 are	mad.	 Is	 there	 any	 need	 for	 any	 cause	 to	 be
happy?	He	will	simply	be	shocked	that	the	'why'	can	be	raised.	He	will	shrug	his
shoulders	and	will	go	on	his	way	and	start	singing	and	dancing	again.	The	child
has	nothing.	He	is	not	a	prime	minister	yet,	he	is	not	a	president	of	 the	United
States,	he	is	not	a	Rockefeller.	He	owns	nothing	--	maybe	a	few	shells	or	a	few
stones	that	he	has	collected	on	the	seashore,	that's	all.
That's	 all	 that	 Bauls	 own:	 a	 few	 seashells,	 a	 few	 stones	 --	 they	 will	 make	 a
MALA	of	 those	 stones,	 they	will	wear	 the	MALA;	 a	 little	 instrument	 to	 sing,
bells	 to	 ring	 for	 their	 innermost	 God,	 a	 small	 AEKTARA,	 a	 one-stringed
instrument	 --	 that	 too	one-stringed,	 because	 that	 is	 enough;	 a	 small	DUGGI,	 a
small	 drum	 --	 that's	 all.	 A	Baul	 sleeps	 unconcerned	with	 the	world.	 He	 lives,
moves	 unconcerned	 with	 the	 world.	 And	 his	 God	 is	 always	 within	 him	 so
wherever	he	is	is	his	shrine.	He	never	goes	to	the	temple	--	not	that	he	is	against
it;	he	never	goes	 to	 the	mosque	--	not	 that	he	 is	against	 it.	He	has	come	to	 the
real	temple,	and	now	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	He	worships,	he	prays,	he
loves,	but	his	love,	his	prayer,	his	worship,	is	of	the	essential	reality	that	he	is.
The	Baul's	life	does	not	end	when	life	ends;	the	American's	life	ends	when	life
ends.
When	the	body	ends,	the	American	ends.	Hence,	the	American	is	very	afraid	of
death.
Because	of	the	fear	of	death,	the	American	goes	on	trying	any	way	to	prolong	his
life,	sometimes	to	absurd	lengths.	Now	there	are	many	Americans	who	are	just
vegetating	 in	 hospitals,	 in	mental	 asylums.	 They	 are	 not	 living;	 they	 are	 long
since	 dead.	 They	 are	 just	 managed	 by	 the	 physicians,	 medicines,	 modern
equipment.	Somehow	they	go	on	hanging	on.
The	fear	of	death	is	so	tremendous:	once	gone	you	are	gone	forever	and	nothing
will	survive	--	because	the	American	knows	only	the	body	and	nothing	else.	If
you	know	only	the	body	you	are	going	to	be	very	poor.	First,	you	will	always	be
afraid	of	death,	and	one	who	is	afraid	to	die	will	be	afraid	to	live	--	because	life
and	death	are	so	together	that	if	you	are	afraid	to	die	you	will	become	afraid	to
live.	It	is	life	that	brings	death,	so	if	you	are	afraid	of	death,	how	can	you	really
love	 life?	The	 fear	will	be	 there.	 It	 is	 life	 that	brings	death;	you	cannot	 live	 it
totally.	If	death	ends	everything,	if	that	is	your	idea	and	understanding,	then	your
life	will	be	a	life	of	rushing	and	chasing.	Because	death	is	coming,	you	cannot	be
patient.	 Hence	 the	American	mania	 for	 speed:	 everything	 has	 to	 be	 done	 fast
because	death	is	approaching,	so	try	to	manage	as	many	more	things	as	possible
before	 you	 die.	 Try	 to	 stuff	 your	 being	with	 as	many	 experiences	 as	 possible
before	you	die,	because	once	you	are	dead,	you	are	dead.
This	creates	a	great	meaninglessness	and,	of	course,	anguish,	anxiety.	If	there	is
nothing	which	 is	going	 to	survive	 the	body,	 then	whatsoever	you	do	cannot	be
very	deep.	Then	whatsoever	you	do	cannot	satisfy	you.	If	death	 is	 the	end	and
nothing	survives,	then	life	cannot	have	any	meaning	and	significance.	Then	it	is
a	tale	told	by	an	idiot,	full	of	fury	and	noise,	signifying	nothing.
The	Baul	knows	that	he	is	IN	the	body,	but	he	is	not	the	body.	He	loves	the	body;
it	 is	 his	 abode,	 his	 house,	 his	 home.	He	 is	 not	 against	 the	 body	 because	 it	 is
foolish	to	be	against	your	own	home,	but	he	is	not	a	materialist.	He	is	earthly	but
not	a	materialist.	He	is	very	realistic,	but	not	a	materialist.	He	knows	that	dying,
nothing	dies.	Death	comes	but	life	continues.
I	have	heard:	The	funeral	service	was	over	and	Desmond,	the	undertaker,	found
himself	standing	beside	an	elderly	gent.
"One	of	the	relatives?"	asked	the	mortician.
"Yes,	I	am,"	answered	the	senior	citizen.
"How	old	are	you?"
"Ninety-four."
"Hmm,"	said	Desmond,	"hardly	pays	you	to	make	the	trip	home."
The	whole	idea	is	of	bodily	life:	if	you	are	ninety-four,;	finished.	Then	it	hardly
pays	to	go	back	home;	then	better	to	die.	What	is	the	point	of	going	back?	--	you
will	have	to	come	again.	It	hardly	pays...if	death	is	the	only	reality,	then	whether
you	are	ninety-four	or	twenty-four,	how	much	difference	does	it	make?	Then	the
difference	is	of	only	a	few	years.	Then	the	very	young	start	feeling	old,	and	the
child	starts	feeling	already	dead.
Once	you	understand	that	this	body	is	the	only	life,	then	what	is	the	point	of	it
all?	Then	why	carry	it	on?
Camus	has	written	that	the	only	basic	metaphysical	problem	for	man	is	suicide.	I
agree	with	him.	If	body	is	the	only	reality	and	there	is	nothing	within	you	that	is
beyond	body,	then	of	course	that	is	the	most	important	thing	to	consider,	brood,
and	 meditate	 on.	Why	 not	 commit	 suicide?	Why	 wait	 until	 ninety-four?	 And
why	suffer	all	sorts	of	problems	and	miseries	on	the	way?	If	one	is	going	to	die,
then	why	not	die	today?	Why	get	up	again	tomorrow	morning?	It	seems	futile.
So	on	the	one	hand	the	American	is	constantly	running	from	one	place	to	another
to	 somehow	 grab	 the	 experience,	 somehow	 not	 to	miss	 the	 experience.	 He	 is
running	 all	 around	 the	world,	 from	 one	 town	 to	 another,	 from	 one	 country	 to
another,	from	one	hotel	to	another.	He	is	running	from	one	guru	to	another,	from
one	 church	 to	 another,	 in	 search,	 because	death	 is	 coming.	On	 the	one	hand	 a
constant,	 mad	 chasing,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 a	 deep-down	 apprehension	 that
everything	is	useless	--	because	death	will	end	all.	So	whether	you	lived	a	rich
life	 or	 you	 lived	 a	 poor	 life,	 whether	 you	 were	 intelligent	 or	 unintelligent,
whether	you	were	a	great	lover	or	missed,	what	difference	does	it	make?
Finally	 death	 comes,	 and	 it	 equalizes	 everybody:	 the	wise	 and	 the	 foolish,	 the
sages	and	the	sinners,	the	enlightened	people	and	the	stupid	people,	all	go	down
into	 the	 earth	 and	 disappear.	 So	 what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 it	 all?	 Whether	 it	 be	 a
Buddha	or	a	Jesus	or	a	Judas;	what	difference	does	 it	make?	Jesus	dies	on	 the
cross,	Judas	commits	suicide	the	next	day
--	both	disappear	into	the	earth.
On	the	other	hand	there	is	a	fear	that	you	may	miss	and	others	may	attain,	and	on
the	other	hand	a	deep	apprehension	that	even	if	you	get,	nothing	is	got.	Even	if
you	arrive,	you	arrive	nowhere	because	death	comes	and	destroys	everything.
The	Baul	lives	in	the	body,	loves	his	body,	celebrates	it,	but	he	is	not	the	body.
He	 knows	 the	 essential	man,	 the	ADHAR	MANUSH.	He	 knows	 that	 there	 is
something	 in	 him	 which	 will	 survive	 all	 deaths.	 He	 knows	 that	 there	 is
something	in	him	which	is	eternal	and	time	cannot	destroy	it.	This	he	has	come
to	feel	through	meditation,	love,	prayer.
This	he	has	come	to	feel	inside	his	own	being.	He	is	unafraid.	He	is	unafraid	of
death	because	he	knows	what	 life	is.	And	he	is	not	chasing	happiness,	because
he	knows	God	is	sending	him	millions	of	opportunities;	he	has	just	to	allow.
Can't	you	see	the	trees	are	rooted	in	the	ground?	They	cannot	go	anywhere,	and
still	they	are	happy.	They	cannot	chase	happiness,	certainly;	they	cannot	go	and
seek	happiness.
They	 are	 rooted	 in	 the	 ground,	 they	 cannot	 move,	 but	 can't	 you	 see	 the
happiness?	 Can't	 you	 see	 their	 joy	when	 it	 is	 raining,	 their	 great	 contentment
when	winds	are	running	hither	and	thither?	Can't	you	feel	their	dance?
Now	researchers	say	 that	when	 the	gardener	comes	and	 the	gardener	 loves	 the
tree,	the	tree	feels	happy	and	rejoices.	If	you	love	the	tree	and	you	come	close	to
it,	 it	 rejoices,	 as	 if	 a	 great	 friend	 is	 coming	 close.	 Now	 there	 are	 scientific
instruments	 to	check	whether	 the	 tree	 is	happy	or	not.	 It	vibrates	 in	a	different
rhythm.	When	 the	 enemy	 comes	 --	 the	woodcutter,	 the	 carpenter	 --	 the	 tree	 is
simply	 in	 a	 turmoil,	 anxious,	 afraid.	 And	 when	 you	 cut	 one	 tree,	 now	 the
scientists	say	the	other	 trees	all	cry	and	weep.	It	 is	not	only	 that	when	you	cut
one	tree	that	tree	weeps	and	cries;	other	trees,	all	the	surrounding	trees,	cry	and
weep.	And	not	only	with	trees,	but	if	you	kill	a	bird,	all	the	trees	start	weeping	--
subtle	tears,	great	anguish,	agony	spreads.	But	they	are	rooted;	they	go	nowhere.
Still,	life	comes	to	them.
This	is	the	understanding	of	the	Baul:	that	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	Even
if	you	go	on	sitting	under	a	tree	as	it	happened	to	Buddha;	God	himself	came	to
him.	He	was	not	going	anywhere	--	just	sitting	under	his	tree.
All	comes	--	you	just	create	the	capacity;	all	comes	--	you	just	allow	it.	Life	is
ready	 to	 happen	 to	 you.	 You	 are	 creating	 so	 many	 barriers,	 and	 the	 greatest
barrier	 that	 you	 can	 create	 is	 chasing.	 Because	 of	 your	 chasing	 and	 running,
whenever	life	comes	and	knocks	at	your	door	she	never	finds	you	there.	You	are
always	somewhere	else.	When	life	reaches	there	you	have	moved.	You	were	in
Katmandu;	when	life	reaches	Katmandu	you	are	in	Goa.	When	you	are	in	Goa
and	life	somehow	reaches	Goa,	you	are	in	Poona.	And	by	the	time	life	reaches
Poona,	you	will	be	in	Philadelphia.	So,	you	go	on	chasing	life	and	life	goes	on
chasing	you,	and	the	meeting	never	happens.
Be...just	be,	and	wait,	and	be	patient.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BEFORE	COMING	TO	YOU	I	USED	TO	DO	A	BUDDHIST	MEDITATION
CALLED
MAITRI	 BHAVANA.	 IT	 STARTS	 BY	 SAYING	 TO	 ONESELF:	 MAY	 I	 BE
WELL,	MAY	 I	 BE	HAPPY,	MAY	 I	 BE	 FREE	 FROM	ENMITY,	MAY	 I	 BE
FREE	FROM	ILL-WILL	AGAINST	MYSELF.	AFTER	BEING	PENETRATED
BY	THE	FEELING
THESE	 THOUGHTS	 GENERATE,	 THE	 NEXT	 PHASE	 OF	 THE
MEDITATION
CONSISTS	 IN	 EXTENDING	 IT	 TO	 OTHERS:	 TO	 START	 WITH,
VISUALIZING
PEOPLE	YOU	LOVE	AND	GIVING	OUT	THIS	GOOD	FEELING	TO	THEM;
THEN
DOING	 THE	 SAME	 WITH	 PEOPLE	 YOU	 LOVE	 LESS,	 UNTIL	 YOU
MIGHT	EVEN
FEEL	COMPASSION	FOR	PEOPLE	YOU	HATE.
I	USED	TO	FEEL	THIS	MEDITATION	WAS	PRETTY	GOOD.	IT	SOMEHOW
OPENED	ME	TO	OTHERS.	AND	 I	 STILL	 FEEL	 THERE	 IS	 SOMETHING
REALLY
DEEP	AND	BASIC	TO	 IT.	BUT	 I	DROPPED	 IT	WHEN	 I	CAME	TO	YOU
BECAUSE
I	 SAW	 IN	 IT	 THE	 DANGER	 OF	 IT	 BEING	 SOME	 KIND	 OF	 SELF-
HYPNOSIS.	I	STILL	FEEL	FOR	THIS	MEDITATION	BUT	I	AM	CONFUSED
AS	 TO	 WHETHER	 I	 SHOULD	 TAKE	 IT	 UP	 AGAIN,	 MAYBE	 WITH	 A
DIFFERENT	ATTITUDE,	OR
JUST	DROP	IT.	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SPEAK	ABOUT	THIS	MEDITATION?	I
WOULD	BE	GRATEFUL.
MAITRI	BHAVANA	is	one	of	the	most	penetrating	meditations.	You	need	not	be
afraid	of	getting	into	some	sort	of	self-hypnosis;	it	is	not.	In	fact,	it	is	a	sort	of
de-hypnosis.	 It	 looks	 like	hypnosis	because	 it	 is	 the	 reverse	process:	you	have
come	 to	me	 from	 your	 home,	 you	walked	 the	way;	 now	 going	 back	 you	will
walk	 the	 same	 way.	 The	 only	 difference	 will	 be	 that	 now	 your	 back	 will	 be
towards	me.	The	way	will	be	the	same,	you	will	be	the	same,	but	your	face	was
towards	me	while	you	were	coming	towards	me;	now	your	back	will	be	towards
me.
Man	is	already	hypnotized.	It	is	not	a	question	now	of	being	hypnotized	or	not
hypnotized.	You	are	already	hypnotized.	The	whole	process	of	society	is	a	sort
of	hypnosis.	Somebody	 is	 told	 that	he	 is	 a	Christian,	 and	 it	 is	 so	 continuously
repeated	 that	 his	 mind	 is	 conditioned	 and	 he	 thinks	 himself	 a	 Christian.
Somebody	is	Hindu,	somebody	is	a	Mohammedan	--	these	are	all	hypnoses.	You
are	already	hypnotized.	If	you	think	you	are	miserable,	this	is	a	hypnosis.	If	you
think	you	have	too	many	problems,	this	is	a	hypnosis.	Whatsoever	you	are	is	a
sort	of	hypnosis.	The	society	has	given	you	those	ideas,	and	now	you	are	too	full
of	those	ideas	and	conditionings.
MAITRI	BHAVANA	is	a	de-hypnosis:	it	is	an	effort	to	bring	back	your	natural
mind;	it	 is	an	effort	 to	give	you	back	your	original	face;	 it	 is	an	effort	 to	bring
you	to	the	point	where	you	were	when	you	were	born	and	the	society	had	not	yet
corrupted	 you.	When	 a	 child	 is	 born	 he	 is	 in	MAITRI	 BHAVANA.	MAITRI
BHAVANA	means	a	great	feeling	of	friendship,	love,	compassion.	When	a	child
is	born,	he	knows	no	hatred,	he	knows	only	love.	Love	is	intrinsic;	hatred	he	will
learn	 later	 on.	 Love	 is	 intrinsic;	 anger	 he	 will	 learn	 later	 on.	 Jealousy,
possessiveness,	envy,	he	will	learn	later	on.	These	will	be	the	things	the	society
will	teach:	how	to	be	jealous,	how	to	be	full	of	hatred,	how	to	be	full	of	anger	or
violence.	These	things	will	be	taught	by	the	society.
When	 the	 child	 is	 born	he	 is	 simple	 love.	He	has	 to	be	 so	because	he	has	not
known	anything	else.	In	the	mother's	womb	he	has	not	come	across	any	enemy.
He	 has	 lived	 in	 deep	 love	 for	 nine	months,	 surrounded	 by	 love,	 nourished	 by
love.	He	knows	nobody	who	is	inimical	to	him.	He	knows	only	the	mother,	he
knows	 the	mother's	 love.	When	he	 is	born	his	whole	 experience	 is	of	 love,	 so
how	 can	 you	 expect	 him	 to	 know	 anything	 about	 hatred?	This	 love	 he	 brings
with	himself;	this	is	the	original	face.	Then	there	will	be	trouble,	then	there	will
be	many	other	experiences.	He	will	start	distrusting	people.	A	newborn	child	is
simply	born	with	trust.
I	have	heard....
A	man	and	a	little	boy	entered	a	barber	shop	together.	After	the	man	received	the
full	treatment	--	shave,	shampoo,	manicure,	haircut,	etcetera,	he	placed	the	boy
in	the	chair.
"I'm	 going	 to	 buy	 a	 green	 tie	 to	wear	 for	 the	 parade.	 I	will	 be	 back	 in	 a	 few
minutes."
When	 the	 boy's	 haircut	was	 completed	 and	 the	man	 still	 had	not	 returned,	 the
barber	said,
"Looks	like	your	daddy	has	forgotten	all	about	you."
"That	was	not	my	daddy,"	said	the	boy.	"He	just	walked	up,	took	me	by	the	hand
and	said,	'Come	on,	son,	we	are	gonna	get	a	free	haircut!'	"
Children	are	trusting,	but	by	and	by	there	will	be	experiences	in	which	they	will
be	deceived,	in	which	they	will	get	into	trouble,	in	which	they	will	be	opposed,
in	which	they	will	become	afraid.	By	and	by	they	will	learn	all	the	tricks	of	the
world.	That's	what	has	happened	to	everybody,	more	or	less.
Now,	 MAITRI	 BHAVANA	 is	 again	 creating	 the	 same	 situation:	 it	 is	 a	 de-
hypnosis.	It	is	an	effort	to	drop	hatred,	anger,	jealousy,	envy,	and	come	back	to
the	world	as	you	had	come	in	the	first	place.	If	you	go	on	doing	this	meditation,
first	you	start	loving	yourself	-
-	because	you	are	closest	to	you	than	anybody	else.	Then	you	spread	your	love:
your	 friendship,	 your	 compassion,	 your	 feeling,	 your	 well-wishing,	 your
benediction,	 your	 blessings,	 you	 spread	 these	 to	 people	 you	 love	 --	 friends,
lovers.	Then,	by	and	by,	you	spread	these	to	more	people	that	you	don't	love	so
much,	 then	people	 to	whom	you	are	 indifferent	 --	you	neither	 love	nor	hate	 --
then	 by	 and	 by	 to	 people	 you	 hate.	 Slowly	 you	 are	 de-hypnotizing	 yourself.
Slowly	you	are	again	creating	a	womb	of	love	around	yourself.
When	 a	 Buddha	 sits,	 he	 sits	 in	 existence	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 existence	 has	 again
become	his	mother's	womb.	There	is	no	enmity.	He	has	attained	to	his	original
nature,	 SWABHAWA.	He	 has	 come	 to	 know	 the	 essential	man.	Now	you	 can
even	kill	him	but	you	cannot	destroy	his	compassion.	Even	dying,	he	will	remain
full	 of	 compassion	 towards	 you.	You	 can	 kill	 him	 but	 you	 cannot	 destroy	 his
trust.	Now	he	knows	that	trust	is	something	so	basic	that	once	you	lose	trust	you
lose	all.	And	 if	you	don't	 lose	 trust	and	everything	 is	 lost,	nothing	 is	 lost.	You
can	take	everything	from	him	but	you	cannot	take	his	trust.
MAITRI	BHAVANA	is	beautiful;	you	can	do	it.	There	 is	no	need	to	drop	it.	 It
will	be	tremendously	helpful.	It	is	a	de-structuring.
The	ego	 is	made	with	hate,	 enmity,	 struggle.	 If	you	want	 to	drop	 the	ego,	you
will	have	 to	create	more	 love	 feelings.	When	you	 love,	 ego	disappears.	 If	you
love	tremendously	and	you	love	unconditionally	and	you	love	all,	 then	the	ego
cannot	exist.	The	ego	is	the	most	stupid	thing	that	can	happen	to	a	man	or	to	a
woman.	Once	it	has	happened	it	is	very	difficult	even	to	see	it	because	it	clouds
your	eyes.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	and	his	two	friends	were	talking	about	their	resemblances.
The	first	friend	said,	"My	face	resembles	that	of	Winston	Churchill.	I	have	often
been	mistaken	for	him."
The	second	said,	"In	my	case,	people	think	I	am	President	Nixon	and	ask	me	for
my	autograph."
Mulla	 said,	 "That's	 nothing.	Well,	 in	my	 case,	 I	 have	 been	mistaken	 for	 God
Himself."
The	first	and	second	asked	together,	"How?"
Mulla	Nasrudin	said,	"Well,	when	I	was	convicted	and	sent	to	jail	for	the	fourth
time,	on	seeing	me	the	jailer	exclaimed,	'Oh	God,	you	have	come	again!'	"
Once	 the	 ego	 has	 happened	 it	 goes	 on	 collecting	 from	 everywhere	 -sense,
nonsense	--	but	it	goes	on	feeling	itself	important.	In	love	you	say,	"You	are	also
important,	not	only	I."
When	you	 love	somebody,	what	are	you	saying?	You	may	be	speaking	or	not,
but	what	 is	 really	deep	 in	your	heart?	You	 are	 saying,	whether	 in	words	or	 in
silence,	 "You	are	 also	 important,	 as	much	as	 I	 am."	 If	 love	grows	deeper,	you
will	say,	"You	are	even	more	important	than	me.	If	there	arises	a	situation	where
only	 one	 can	 survive,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 die	 for	 you,	 and	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to
survive."	 The	 other	 has	 become	 more	 important.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of
'beloved':	you	are	even	ready	to	sacrifice	yourself	for	the	one	you	love.
And	if	this	goes	on	spreading,	as	it	goes	on	spreading	in	MAITRI	BHAVANA,
then	by	and	by	you	start	disappearing.	Many	moments	will	come	when	you	will
not	be	there	--
absolutely	 silent,	 not	 any	 ego	 at	 all,	 no	 center,	 just	 pure	 space.	 Buddha	 says,
"When	this	is	attained	permanently,	and	you	have	become	integrated	to	this	pure
space,	then	you	are	enlightened."
When	the	ego	is	lost	completely	you	are	enlightened;	when	you	have	become	so
egoless	 that	you	cannot	even	say	 'I	am',	you	cannot	even	say	 that	 'I	am	a	self'.
The	word	Buddha	uses	for	that	state	is	ANATTA:	no-being,	non-being,	no-self.
You	cannot	even	utter	the	word	'I';	the	very	word	becomes	profane.	In	deep	love
'I'	disappears.	You	are	destructured.
When	the	child	is	born	he	comes	without	any	 'I';	he	simply	is	--	a	blank	sheet,
nothing	is	written	on	him.	Now	the	society	will	start	writing,	and	the	society	will
start	narrowing	down	his	consciousness.	The	society	will,	by	and	by,	fix	a	role
for	him:	"This	is	your	role;	this	is	you";	and	he	will	stick	to	that	role.	That	role
will	never	allow	him	to	be	happy	because	happiness	is	possible	only	when	you
are	 infinite.	 When	 you	 are	 narrow,	 you	 cannot	 be	 happy.	 Happiness	 is	 not	 a
function	of	narrowness;	happiness	is	a	function	of	infinite	space.	When	you	are
so	spacious	that	the	whole	can	enter	into	you,	then	only	can	you	be	happy.
MAITRI	BHAVANA	can	be	a	tremendous	help.
The	third	question:
Question	3
THE	OTHER	DAY	YOU	SAID	THAT	BELIEF	WAS	LIKE	A	LANTERN	IN
THE
HANDS	OF	THE	BLIND.	MAY	I	KNOW	WHAT	FAITH	IS?
Faith	is	like	eyes:	you	see	yourself.	Belief	is	like	a	lantern	in	a	blind	man's	hand:
he	cannot	see,	he	cannot	even	use	the	lighted	lantern.	Even	that	 lighted	lantern
will	be	just	a	burden	to	him,	to	be	carried.	And	if	the	light	goes	off	he	will	never
become	aware	of	it.
Belief	is	just	believing	what	others	say.	It	is	not	faith;	faith	is	knowing.	Faith	is
existential,	belief	is	intellectual.
Buddha	says	something,	or	I	say	something;	you	listen	to	me,	it	appeals	to	your
intellect.
It	 seems	 to	be	convincing	 to	your	 reason	and	you	 start	believing	 in	 it.	Then	 it
will	 be	 a	 lantern	 in	 a	 blind	 man's	 hand.	 But	 if	 you	 listen	 to	 me,	 something
appeals	to	you	and	you	don't	stay	with	the	intellectual	understanding	but	you	try
to	make	that	your	own	experience..
If	 I	 talk	 about	 love	 and	 Iistening	 to	me	 you	 don't	 cling	 to	my	words	 but	 you
move	into	love,	you	take	the	risk	of	love,	you	move	into	the	danger	of	love,	then
you	will	come	to	an	understanding	which	will	be	like	eyes.	If	you	just	listen	to
me,	it	is	very	cheap.	Just	listening	to	me	you	can	collect	information	and	you	can
say,	"Yes,	I	know	much	about	love."	Your	knowing	will	be	a	deception.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	 Nasrudin	 and	 his	 wife	 went	 to	 Israel	 for	 their	 holidays	 and	 visited	 a
nightclub	 in	 Tel	 Aviv.	 A	 comedian	 was	 on	 the	 bill	 who	 did	 his	 whole	 act	 in
Hebrew.	 Nasrudin's	 wife	 sat	 through	 the	 comic's	 act	 in	 silence,	 but	 Nasrudin
roared	with	laughter	at	the	end	of	each	joke.
"I	 did	 not	 know	 you	 understood	 Hebrew,"	 she	 said	 to	 the	 Mulla	 when	 the
comedian	had	concluded	his	act.
"I	don't,"	replied	Nasrudin.
"Well,	how	come	you	laughed	so	much	at	his	jokes?"
"Oh,"	said	Nasrudin,	"I	trusted	him."
You	can	laugh	at	a	joke	without	understanding	it,	but	what	sort	of	laughter	will
that	be?	It	will	not	arise	in	you;	it	will	be	just	a	painted	laughter.	It	will	be	just
like	an	exercise	of	tne	lips	and	the	face.	It	will	not	have	any	center	in	your	being.
It	will	not	be	coming	from	anywhere	--	because	you	can't	understand	 the	 joke,
you	can't	understand	the	language	--
how	can	you	 laugh?	But	Mulla	 says,	 "I	 just	 trusted	him.	He	MUST	be	 saying
something	beautiful;	others	are	laughing."
Buddha	must	be	saying	something	beautiful	--	so	many	people	believe	in	him,	so
you	believe.	But	you	have	not	understood	the	joke;	the	laughter	is	not	yours.	It
will	 tire	you,	 it	will	 not	 refresh	you.	When	 laughter	happens	 to	you	 it	 spreads
from	your	very	being,	 from	your	 innermost	 core	of	being	 to	 the	 surface.	Your
whole	body	ripples	with	it,	pulsates,	throbs.	It	gives	you	a	sort	of	bath;	you	are
new	 after	 it.	 But	 if	 you	 simply	 trust,	 believe,	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help.	Many
people	have	just	been	deceived	by	their	beliefs	about	many	beautiful	things.	You
think	you	believe	in	God,	you	think	you	believe	in	soul,	you	think	you	believe	in
this	and	that,	and	you	have	not	known	anything	by	your	own	experience.	Then	it
is	better	not	to	believe	--	because	if	you	don't	believe,	if	you	know	that	you	don't
know,	 there	 is	a	possibility	 that	you	may	seek	and	search.	Your	belief	will	not
allow	you	even	to	seek	and	search	because	you	already	think	you	know.
Belief	is	dangerous.	Even	to	be	a	sceptic,	to	be	an	agnostic,	is	better.	To	be	true
when	you	don't	know	is	better	because	this	honesty	of	accepting	that	you	don't
know	will	help.	This	honesty	will	grow.	One	day	or	other	you	will	start	seeking,
because	 nobody	 can	 remain	 in	 deep	 ignorance	 for	 long.	 Everybody	 wants	 to
KNOW.	To	know	is	such	an	 intrinsic	desire	 in	man	 that	you	cannot	avoid	 it	 if
you	are	true.
Please	drop	your	beliefs	so	your	mind	is	not	clouded	with	rotten	furniture,	and
you	can	see	what	you	know	and	what	you	don't	know.
To	know	exactly	what	one	knows	and	what	one	does	not	know	is	the	basic	step
towards	knowledge.	To	be	absolutely	clear-cut	that	this	is	all	that	you	know	and
this	 is	 all	 that	 you	 don't	 know.	You	 cannot	 remain	 in	 this	 state.	You	will	 start
moving	towards	the	unknown,	because	it	is	human	to	seek	to	know.	Every	child
is	born	with	 infinite	curiosity;	 that's	why	children	bore	you	 to	death	with	 their
questions.	 They	 go	 on	 asking	 and	 asking.	 They	 don't	 bother	 whether	 you	 are
interested	in	answering	them	or	not;	they	go	on	asking.	You	want	to	keep	them
quiet	but	they	go	on	bubbling	again	and	again	with	new	questions.
What	 is	happening?	From	where	do	so	many	questions	come?	a	deep	desire	 to
know.	But	this	desire	is	crippled	by	your	beliefs.
Beliefs	give	you	an	appearance	as	if	you	know.	That	'as	if'	is	very	costly.
I	have	heard....
The	nervous	passenger	was	standing	with	the	pilot	of	the	river	steamboat	as	he
twisted	and	turned	the	wheel.
"Don't	you	worry	none,"	said	the	pilot.	"I	have	been	running	boats	on	this	river
so	long,	I	know	where	every	snag	and	sandbar	is."
Just	then	the	boat	struck	a	submerged	snag	with	such	force	that	the	whole	boat
shivered	from	stem	to	stern.	"There,"	said	the	pilot	triumphantly,	"that	is	one	of
them	now."
What	type	of	knowledge	is	this?	How	is	it	going	to	help?	Your	whole	so-called
knowledge	 is	 only	 like	 this;	 it	 does	 not	 help.	 It	 simply	 gives	 you	 a	 certain
egoistic	idea	that	you	know,	but	it	doesn't	help	in	life,	it	does	not	help	you	on	the
path,	 it	does	not	help	you	 to	avoid	ditches	and	pitfalls,	 it	does	not	help	you	 to
move	 towards	 the	 right	 direction,	 it	 does	 not	 help	 you	 in	 any	 way	 to	 avoid
calamities.	 Still	 you	 go	 on	 thinking	 that	 you	 know.	 Drop	 this	 so-called
knowledge.	This	burden	 is	useless;	don't	 carry	 it	on	your	head	anymore.	Once
you	drop	it	you	will	feel	clean,	fresh.
I	have	heard....
Aldous	Huxley	had	a	very	great	library,	his	whole	life's	efforts.	He	had	collected
many	rare	books.	And	one	day	it	caught	fire.	The	whole	library	burnt;	his	many
valuable	manuscripts	were	burnt,	many	valuable	art	pieces,	statues,	paintings.	He
had	 really	been	a	great	 seeker	of	beautiful	 things;	 they	were	all	burnt	down	 to
zero.	 He	 was	 standing	 in	 front	 of	 the	 fire,	 and	 nothing	 could	 be	 done.	 And
somebody	asked	him,	"You	must	be	feeling	very	very	sad."
He	said,	"I	am	surprised	at	what	I	am	feeling.	I	myself	am	surprised.	I	am	simply
feeling	very	clean,	as	if	the	whole	burden	is	gone.	I	have	never	felt	so	clean	and
unburdened.	I	am	surprised	myself,	because	I	was	thinking	I	would	feel	sorry,	I
would	feel	 tremendously	miserable,	 for	years	I	would	not	be	able	 to	forget	my
library	 and	 all	 these	 things	 I	 have	 collected,	 but	 suddenly,	 seeing	 everything
going	into	flames,	I	am	feeling	very	unburdened,	weightless,	clean."
When	 you	 throw	 your	 beliefs	 to	 the	 fire,	 you	will	 feel	 very	 clean.	 It	 is	 just	 a
burden.	It	is	not	yours;	it	cannot	help.
We	know	what	is	right	but	we	do	what	is	wrong.	We	know	anger	is	bad	and	we
go	on	being	angry	again	and	again.	We	know	what	should	be	done,	but	we	never
do	it;	we	do	just	the	opposite.	What	type	of	knowledge	is	this?	We	know	where
the	door	is	and	we	always	go	on	trying	to	get	out	through	the	wall.	We	stumble
and	we	are	knocked	down,	and	we	hurt	our	own	being,	but	again	and	again	we
try	to	get	out	through	the	wall.	We	say	we	know	the	door;	is	it	possible	that	you
know	the	door	and	still	you	try	to	get	out	through	the	wall,	and	you	get	hurt	and
hit	 in	 the	head?	It	 is	not	possible.	You	have	simply	heard	about	 the	door.	That
door	exists	only	in	your	fantasy,	not	in	reality.
Whatsoever	YOU	know,	 you	 always	 behave	 accordingly.	That's	why	Socrates'
famous	dictum:	Knowledge	 is	Virtue	 --	but	 it	 is	not	your	knowledge.	He	says,
"Once	one	knows	something	is	right,	one	does	it.	There	is	no	other	way."	When
you	know	two	plus	two	is	four,	you	cannot	make	it	five,	can	you?	Try	one	day	--
just	sit,	write	two	plus	two,	and	then	try	to	write	five.	It	will	be	impossible.	Even
if	 you	write	 it	 you	will	 laugh;	 you	 are	 joking,	 befooling.	Once	you	know	 two
plus	two	is	four,	there	is	no	way	to	forget	it.	The	basic	thing	is	to	have	known	it,
and	the	knowledge	should	be	your	experience.	Otherwise,	you	can	always	find
rationalizations.
I	have	heard	a	small	anecdote.
A	 small	 town	 chorine	 had	 theatrical	 ambitions.	 Her	 parents	 finally	 agreed	 to
allow	 her	 to	 try	 New	 York	 City,	 but	 on	 two	 conditions:	 first,	 no	 men	 were
allowed	in	her	apartment,	and	second,	she	had	to	call	home	at	least	once	a	week.
"Remember,"	said	her	mother,	"I	will	worry	about	you,	so	please	don't	forget	to
call."
Armed	with	a	letter	of	introduction,	she	went	to	see	an	agent.	He	agreed	to	help
her	and	started	squiring	her	about	town.	At	the	end	of	the	week	she	called	home.
It	was	late	and	mama	was	perturbed.
"Honey,"	 she	 said,	 "you	 know	 the	 bargain	we	made	 about	 no	men	 allowed	 in
your	apartment,	and	I	hear	a	man's	voice	in	the	background."
"Oh,"	 said	 the	 future	 actress,	 "that's	 my	 boyfriend.	 But	 don't	 worry,"	 she
hastened	to	assure	her	mother,	"we	are	in	his	apartment.	Let	HIS	mother	worry.''
We	can	always	find	ways,	rationalizations	to	avoid	that	which	we	want	to	avoid,
and	to	do	that	which	we	want	to	do.	And	if	your	knowledge	is	just	intellectual,
just	 verbal,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	 in	 actual	 life.	Actual	 life	 needs	 actual
knowledge.	 If	you	want	 to	write	a	book,	 it	will	be	okay.	 If	you	want	 to	give	a
lecture,	it	will	be	okay.	If	you	want	to	discuss	with	your	friends,	it	will	be	okay	--
because	a	verbal	knowledge	 is	enough	for	writing	a	book,	for	giving	a	 lecture,
for	discussing	with	your	friends.	But	if	you	want	to	translate	it	into	your	life,	it
will	 be	 impossible.	Life	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 that	which	 you	 have	 accumulated
very	cheaply.	Life	believes	only	in	that	which	has	been	earned	the	hard	way.
I	have	heard	about	a	Sufi	mystic,	Bayazid.	He	meditated	for	years,	and	it	is	said
God	was	very,	very	compassionate	towards	him.	He	had	made	such	great	effort;
arduous	was	his	 search,	 intense	was	his	prayer.	So	God	sent	an	angel,	 and	 the
angel	came	and	said	to	Bayazid,	"God	is	happy,	and	whatsoever	you	want	He	is
ready	 to	 give	 to	 you.	 You	 just	 ask.	 Your	 days	 of	 seeking	 and	 inquiry	 are
finished."
But	Bayazid	 said,	 "But	 no,	 that	 is	 not	 the	way.	 I	 don't	want	 to	 get	 so	 cheaply
because	 I	 know	 well...in	 life	 also	 I	 was	 deceived	 because	 of	 this	 cheap
possibility.	Now	you	cannot	deceive	me.	Tell	God	that	I	will	earn	the	hard	way."
But	the	angel	said,	"You	are	foolish!	He	is	ready	to	burn	the	innermost	light	of
your	being.	Just	ask!"
But	Bayazid	said,	"Thank	you,	and	give	Him	also	my	thanks,	but	I	am	not	going
to	do	 that	 because	 it	will	 be	borrowed;	 even	 if	 borrowed	 from	God,	 it	will	 be
borrowed.	Let	me	seek	and	search."
The	angel	said,	"God	will	feel	offended.	It	has	never	happened;	His	offer	has	to
be	accepted."
Then	 Bayazid	 looked	 around	 --	 he	 had	 a	 small	 lamp	 and	 the	 oil	 was	 almost
finished.	He	 said,	 "If	He	 really	wants	 to	 light	 something,	 tell	Him	 to	 light	my
lamp	because	the	oil	is	almost	finished	and	the	night	is	dark,	and	I	have	still	to
meditate.	Just	this	will	do.	You	just	tell	Him	to	give	me	one	blessing:	that	my	oil
should	never	finish	so	I	can	meditate	the	whole	night."
That's	all	he	asked	for,	and	it	is	said	that	God	was	very	happy	and	He	said,	"This
is	the	right	way."	If	he	had	asked	he	would	have	missed;	if	he	had	accepted	he
would	have	missed	--	because	whatsoever	comes	to	you	without	your	earning	it
is	never	yours.	You	possess	only	 that	which	you	have	 lived.	You	possess	only
that	which	YOU	have	known.
You	possess	only	that	which	you	have	earned.
A	young	boy	had	been	taking	swimming	lessons.	He	rushed	home	one	afternoon
and	breathlessly	announced	that	he	had	gone	off	the	diving	board	by	himself.
"That's	fine,	Johnny,"	said	his	father.	"But	I	thought	you	told	me	you	went	off	the
board	last	week."
"I	know,"	said	the	boy,	"but	last	week	somebody	shoved."
Going	by	yourself	 is	 really	 totally	different.	When	somebody	shoves	you,	 it	 is
qualitatively	different.	When	I	give	something	to	you,	it	is	not	the	same	as	when
you	earn	it.	Remember	it:	many	will	be	the	temptations	on	the	way.	When	things
are	available	very	cheaply,	avoid	them.	Always	remember	that	one	has	to	go	the
hard	way,	 because	 that	 is	 the	only	way.	All	 shortcuts	 are	 false,	 and	belief	 is	 a
shortcut.	Faith	is	a	hard	way.
The	last	question:
Question	4
MOST	BELOVED	OSHO,	THIS	MORNING	I	SIT	BEFORE	YOU	FLOODED
WITH
ORGASM,	 LIGHT	 AND	 FEATHERY,	 DEEP	 AND	 OVERWHELMING.	 I
HARDLY
NOTICE	YOU.	THE	INNER	IS	MORE,	BECAUSE	OF	YOU.	PARAS.
Good,	tremendously	good.	That's	how	it	should	be.	A	Baul	is	born	in	Paras,	and	I
hope	that	a	Baul	will	be	born	in	each	of	you.	Each	moment	God	is	available.	Just
allow	Him,	don't	prevent	Him,	don't	bar	the	way.	Just	get	out	of	your	own	way,
and	this	will	start	happening	to	each	and	everybody.
"This	morning	I	sit	before	you	flooded	with	orgasm,	light	and	feathery,	deep	and
overwhelming.	I	hardly	notice	you.	The	inner	is	more,	because	of	you."
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	It	is	always	god	who	loves
29	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606290
ShortTitle:
BELOV109
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
94
mins
WHAT	DEALINGS
CAN	YOU	EVER	CONCLUDE
WITH	SOMEONE	WHO	IS	UNAWARE
OF	THE	FEELINGS	IN	LOVING?
THE	OWL	STARES	AT	THE	SKY,
SITTING	BLIND
TO	THE	RAYS	OF	THE	SUN.
MAN	 IS	A	QUEST,	AN	ETERNAL	 INQUIRY,	A	PERENNIAL	QUESTION.
The	 quest	 is	 for	 the	 energy	 that	 holds	 existence	 together	 --	 call	 it	God,	 call	 it
truth,	 or	 whatsoever	 you	 like	 to	 call	 it.	 Who	 holds	 this	 infinite	 existence
together?	What	is	the	center	of	it	all,	the	core	of	it	all?
Science,	 philosophy,	 religion,	 all	 ask	 the	 same	 question.	 Their	 answers	 may
differ	 but	 their	 question	 is	 the	 same.	Religions	 call	 it	God.	 Scientists	will	 not
agree	with	the	word
'God';	 it	 looks	 too	personal.	 It	 looks	 too	anthropomorphic,	man-oriented.	They
call	it	electricity,	magnetism.	energy	fields;	but	only	the	name	is	different.	God	is
an	energy	field.
Philosophers	 go	 on	 giving	 different	 names	 to	 it:	 the	 ultimate	 stratum,	 the
absolute,	 the	BRAHMA.	From	Thales	 to	Bertrand	Russell,	 they	have	 supplied
many	answers.
Sometimes	 some	 philosopher	 says	 it	 is	 water,	 liquidity;	 sometimes	 somebody
else	 says	 it	 is	 fire	 --	 but	 the	 quest	 has	 been	 eternal.	What	 holds	 this	 infinite
universe	together?
Bauls	 call	 it	 love,	 and	 to	 me,	 their	 answer	 seems	 to	 be	 most	 pertinent.	 It	 is
neither	personal	nor	impersonal.	It	has	something	of	God	in	it,	and	something	of
magnetism	in	it	also;	something	of	the	divine,	and	something	of	the	earth.
Love	has	two	faces.	It	is	Janus-like:	one	face	looks	towards	the	earth,	the	other
face	looks	towards	the	sky.	It	is	the	greatest	synthesis	conceivable:	it	comes	out
of	 lust	 and	moves	 towards	 prayer;	 it	 comes	 out	 of	 mud	 and	 becomes	 a	 lotus
facing	the	sun.
This	word	'love'	has	to	be	understood.	What	do	we	mean	by	the	word	'love'?	One
thing	we	certainly	all	mean	is	that	it	has	a	pull	in	it,	great	energy.	When	you	fall
in	 love,	 it	 is	not	 that	you	do	something	 --	you	are	pulled	 in.	 It	has	a	magnetic
force.	 You	 gravitate	 towards	 the	 object	 of	 your	 love,	 you	 gravitate	 almost
helplessly,	you	gravitate	even	against	your	will.	It	has	a	pull,	a	magnetic	field	--
that's	why	we	call	it	'falling	in	love'.
Who	wants	to	fall?	--	but	who	can	avoid	it?	When	the	energy	calls	you,	suddenly
you	 are	 no	 more	 your	 old	 self.	 Something	 bigger	 than	 you	 is	 pulling	 you,
something	 greater	 than	 you	 is	 invoking	 you.	 The	 challenge	 is	 such	 that	 one
simply	runs	into	it	headlong.
So	the	first	thing	to	understand	is:	love	is	a	great	energy	pull.	The	second	thing:
whenever	 you	 fall	 in	 love,	 suddenly	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 ordinary;	 something
miraculously	 changes	 in	 your	 consciousness.	 Love	 transforms	 you.	 Falling	 in
love,	 a	 violent	 man	 becomes	 kind	 and	 tender.	 A	 murderer	 can	 become	 so
compassionate,	it	is	almost	impossible	to	believe.
Love	is	miraculous	--	it	transforms	the	baser	metal	into	gold.	Have	you	watched
people's	 faces	and	eyes	when	they	fall	 in	 love?	--	you	cannot	believe	 that	 they
are	 the	 same	 persons.	 When	 love	 takes	 possession	 of	 their	 souls	 they	 are
transfigured,	 transported	 into	 another	 dimension;	 and	 suddenly...and	 with	 no
effort	of	their	own,	as	if	they	are	caught	in	the	net	of	God.	Love	transforms	the
base	 into	 the	 higher,	 transforms	 earth	 into	 sky,	 transforms	 the	 human	 into	 the
divine.
These	two	things:	first,	love	is	an	energy	field	--	scientists	will	agree	--	second,
love	is	a	transforming	force;	it	helps	you	to	become	weightless,	puts	you	on	your
wings.	You	can	move	towards	the	beyond.	Religious	thinkers	will	agree	that	love
is	 both	 God	 and	 electricity;	 love	 is	 divine	 energy.	 Bauls	 have	 chosen	 love
because	 this	 is	 the	most	 significant	 experience	 in	man's	 life.	Whether	 you	 are
religious	 or	 not	 makes	 no	 difference;	 love	 remains	 the	 central	 experience	 of
human	 life.	 It	 is	 the	 most	 common	 and	 the	 most	 uncommon.	 It	 happens	 to
everybody,	 more	 or	 less,	 and	 whenever	 it	 happens	 it	 transmutes	 you.	 It	 is
common	and	uncommon.	It	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	the	ultimate.
Remember	the	three	L's:	life,	love,	light.
Life	 is	 given	 to	 you;	 you	 are	 alive.	 Light	 is	 present,	 but	 you	 have	 to	make	 a
bridge	between	life	and	light.	That	bridge	is	love.	With	these	three	L's	you	can
make	a	total	way	of	life,	a	way	of	being,	a	new	way	of	being.
Bauls	 are	not	philosophers.	They	are	more	 like	poets	 --	 they	 sing,	 they	dance,
they	don't	philosophize.	In	fact,	they	are	almost	anti-philosophical,	because	they
have	come	to	see	that	whenever	a	man	becomes	too	head-oriented	he	becomes
incapable	of	love	--	and	love	is	going	to	be	the	bridge.	A	man	who	becomes	too
head-oriented	goes	farther	away	from	the	heart,	and	the	heart	is	the	center	which
responds	to	the	call	of	love.
A	head-oriented	man	is	cut	off	from	the	universe.	He	lives	 in	 the	universe,	but
lives	as	if	in	a	deep	stupor.	He	lives	in	the	universe,	but	lives	as	a	tree	that	has
lost	its	roots.	He	lives	only	for	name's	sake:	the	sap	of	life	is	no	more	flowing.
He	has	lost	contact;	he's	unconnected.	That's	what	alienation	is.
The	modern	man	feels	too	alienated,	feels	too	much	an	outsider,	does	not	feel	at
home,	at	ease	with	life,	existence,	 the	world.	He	feels	almost	as	 if	he	has	been
thrown	into	it,	and	it	is	a	curse	rather	than	a	blessing.
Why	has	this	happened?	--	too	much	head	orientation,	too	much	training	of	the
head	 has	 cut	 all	 the	 roots	 from	 the	 heart.	 There	 are	 many	 people	 --	 I	 have
observed	thousands	of	people	--	who	don't	know	what	the	heart	is;	they	bypass.
The	 heart	 is	 throbbing	 but	 the	 energy	 no	 longer	moves	 via	 it.	 They	 bypass	 it;
they	go	directly	to	the	head.	Even	when	they	love,	they	THINK	that	they	love.
Even	when	they	feel,	they	THINK	that	they	feel.
Even	feeling	is	via	thinking.	Of	course,	it	has	to	be	false.
Thinking	is	the	great	falsifier,	because	thinking	is	man's	effort	to	understand	the
universe,	and	love	is	God's	effort	to	understand	man.	Let	me	repeat	it:	when	you
try	to	understand	God,	or	existence,	or	truth,	it	is	your	effort	--	a	part,	a	very	tiny
part	 trying	 to	 grasp	 the	 whole,	 the	 infinite	 whole.	 The	 effort	 is	 bound	 to	 be
doomed.	It's	impossible.	It	cannot	happen	in	the	nature	of	things.	Love	is	when
God	has	found	you.	Love	is	when	God's	hand	is	searching	for	you,	groping	for
you.	Love	is	when	you	are	allowing	God	to	find	you.	Hence,	you	cannot	manage
love.	You	 can	manage	 logic;	 you	 can	 be	 very	 very	 efficient	 as	 far	 as	 logic	 is
concerned.	 The	 moment	 love	 arises,	 you	 become	 absolutely	 inefficient.	 Then
you	don't	know	where	you	are,	 then	you	don't	know	what	you	are	doing,	 then
you	don't	know	where	you	are	moving,	then	you	don't	know	any	control.	Logic
is	 controlled;	 love	 is	 uncontrolled.	 Logic	 is	manipulated;	 love	 is	 a	 happening.
Logic	gives	you	a	feeling	that	you	are	somebody;	love	gives	you	a	feeling	that
you	are	nobody.
Love	arises	 in	you	when	you	allow	God	 to	enter	you.	When	you	are	 trying	on
your	own,	then	the	whole	effort	is	absurd.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	sidled	up	to	a	guest	at	one	of	his	daughter's	social	evenings.	He
had	heard	him	addressed	as	doctor,	and	now	he	said,	diffidently,	"Doctor,	may	I
ask	a	question?"
"Certainly,"	he	said.
"Lately,"	said	Mulla	Nasrudin,	"I	have	been	having	a	funny	pain	right	here	under
the	heart..."
The	 guest	 interrupted	 uncomfortably	 and	 said,	 "I	 am	 terribly	 sorry,	Mulla,	 but
the	truth	is	I	am	a	Doctor	of	Philosophy."
"Oh,"	 said	 Nasrudin,	 "I'm	 sorry."	 He	 turned	 away,	 but	 then,	 overcome	 with
curiosity,	he	turned	back.	"Just	one	more	question,	doctor.	Tell	me,	what	kind	of
disease	is	philosophy?"
Yes,	philosophy	is	a	kind	of	disease	--	and	not	just	an	ordinary	kind	of	disease;	it
is	more	cancerous	than	cancer,	more	dangerous	than	all	the	diseases	put	together.
A	disease	can	cut	only	one	root.	Even	all	the	diseases	put	together	cannot	cut	you
completely	from	existence.	Philosophy	cuts	you,	uproots	you	utterly.
What	 is	 disease?	 When	 one	 connection	 is	 loose	 with	 existence,	 you	 feel	 ill.
When	 the	 head	 is	 unconnected,	 then	 there	 is	 headache.	When	 the	 stomach	 is
unconnected,	 then	 there	 is	 stomachache.	 Somewhere,	 you	 have	 become
autonomous;	you	are	no	more	in	the	ocean	of	the	interdependence	of	existence.
There	exists	disease.	Disease	has	a	certain	autonomy,	independence.	When	you
have	a	cancerous	growth	inside	you,	that	growth	becomes	a	universe	unto	itself.
It	is	unconnected	with	existence.
An	ill	person	is	one	who	is	unconnected	in	many	ways.	When	a	certain	disease
becomes	 chronic,	 it	 simply	means	 that	 that	 root	 is	 completely	 destroyed;	 even
the	possibility	to	replant	it	in	the	earth	no	longer	exists.	You	will	have	to	remain
alive	only	partially;	 a	 part	 of	 you	will	 remain	dead.	Somebody	 is	 paralyzed	 --
what	does	it	mean?	The	body	has	lost	contact	with	the	universal	energy.	Now	it
is	almost	a	dead	thing	--	hanging,	unconnected.
The	sap	of	life	no	longer	flows	in	it.
If	this	is	what	disease	is,	then	philosophy	IS	really	the	greatest	disease	there	can
be	--
because	 it	 disconnects	 you	 utterly;	 and	 not	 only	 that,	 it	 disconnects	 you	with
such	logic	that	you	never	become	aware	that	you	are	ill.	It	disconnects	you	with
such	justifications	and	rationalizations	that	you	never	become	aware	that	you	are
missing.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 self-justificatory	 illness;	 it	 goes	 on	 supporting	 itself.
Philosophy	means	 that	 a	man	has	 become	 completely	 head-oriented.	He	 looks
towards	existence	through	the	eyes	of	logic	and	not	through	the	eyes	of	love.
When	you	look	through	the	eyes	of	logic,	you	will	know	a	few	things,	but	those
few	things	will	not	give	you	the	vision	of	reality.	They	will	be	only	abstractions.
When	you	look	through	love,	then	you	know	the	reality	as	it	is.	Love	is	falling
with	 the	 universe,	 together;	 falling	 in	 a	 togetherness.	 It	 is	 orgasmic:	 you	 are
streaming,	 and	 the	 existence	 has	 always	 been	 streaming,	 and	 both	 streamings
meet	and	mingle	and	are	infused	in	each	other.	A	higher	synthesis	arises:	the	part
is	meeting	 in	 the	whole	 and	 the	whole	 is	meeting	 in	 the	part.	Then	 something
arises	which	is	more	than	the	part	and	the	whole	together	--	that's	what	love	is.
'Love'	is	one	of	the	most	significant	words	in	human	languages,	because	love	is
existential	language.
But	 somehow,	 from	 the	very	childhood,	we	are	being	crippled.	Our	 roots	with
the	 heart	 are	 cut.	We	 are	 forced	 towards	 the	 head	 and	we	 are	 not	 allowed	 to
move	 towards	 the	 heart.	 It	 is	 something	 humanity	 has	 suffered	 for	 long,	 a
calamity	--	that	man	has	not	yet	become	capable	of	living	with	love.
There	are	reasons.
Love	is	risky.	To	love	is	to	move	into	danger	--	because	you	cannot	control	it,	it
is	 not	 safe.	 It	 is	 not	within	 your	 hands.	 It	 is	 unpredictable:	where	 it	will	 lead
nobody	knows.
Whether	it	will	lead	anywhere,	that	too	nobody	knows.	One	is	moving	into	utter
darkness	but	roots	grow	only	in	darkness.	If	the	roots	of	a	tree	become	afraid	of
darkness	and	don't	move	underground,	the	tree	will	die.	They	have	to	move	into
darkness.	 They	 have	 to	 find	 their	way	 towards	 the	 deepest	 layers	 of	 the	 earth
where	they	can	find	sources	of	water,	nourishment.
The	heart	is	the	darkest	part	of	your	being.	It	is	like	a	dark	night.	It	is	your	very
womb,	it	is	your	earth.	So	people	are	afraid	to	move	into	darkness;	they	would
like	to	remain	in	light.	At	least	you	can	see	where	you	are	and	what	is	going	to
happen.	You	are	safe,	secure.	When	you	move	in	love,	you	cannot	calculate	the
possibilities,	you	cannot	calculate	the	results.	You	cannot	be	result-oriented.	For
love,	future	does	not	exist,	only	the	present	exists.	You	can	be	in	this	moment	but
you	 cannot	 think	 anything	 about	 the	 next	moment.	No	 planning	 is	 possible	 in
love.
The	 society,	 civilization,	 culture,	 church,	 all	 force	 a	 small	 child	 to	 be	 more
logical.	They	try	to	focus	his	energies	in	the	head.	Once	the	energies	are	focused
in	the	head,	it	becomes	very	difficult	to	fall	towards	the	heart.	In	fact,	every	child
is	born	with	great	love	energy.	The	child	is	born	out	of	love	energy.	The	child	is
full	 of	 love,	 trust.	 Have	 you	 looked	 into	 the	 eyes	 of	 a	 small	 child?	 --	 how
trusting.	The	child	can	trust	anything:	the	child	can	play	with	a	snake,	the	child
can	go	with	anybody.	The	child	can	move	so	close	to	a	fire	that	 it	can	become
dangerous	 --	 because	 the	 child	has	not	yet	 learned	how	 to	doubt.	So	we	 teach
doubt,	 we	 teach	 scepticism,	 we	 teach	 logic.	 These	 seem	 to	 be	 measures	 for
survival.	 We	 teach	 fear,	 we	 teach	 caution,	 we	 teach	 prudence,	 and	 all	 these
together	kill	the	possibility	of	love.
I	have	heard....
Doctor	Abrams	was	called	to	Mulla	Nasrudin's	shop	where	the	Mulla	was	Iying
unconscious.	Doctor	Abrams	worked	on	him	for	a	long	time	and	finally	revived
him.
"How	did	you	happen	to	drink	that	stuff,	Nasrudin?"	he	asked	the	Mulla.	"Didn't
you	see	the	label	on	the	bottle?	It	said	'poison'."
Nasrudin	said,	"Yes	Doctor,	but	I	didn't	believe	it."
Doctor	Abrams	asked,	"Why	not?"
Nasrudin	said,	"Because	whenever	I	believe	someone,	I	am	deceived."
By	 and	 by	 people	 learn	 how	 not	 to	 believe,	 how	 not	 to	 trust,	 how	 to	 become
chronic	doubters.	And	this	happens	so	slowly,	 in	such	small	doses	that	you	are
never	alert	 to	what	 is	happening	 to	you.	By	 the	 time	 it	has	happened,	 it	 is	 too
late.	This	 is	what	people	call	 experience.	They	call	 a	person	experienced	 if	he
has	 lost	his	contact	with	his	heart:	 they	say	 that	he	 is	a	very	experienced	man,
very	clever,	very	cunning;	nobody	can	deceive	him.
Maybe	nobody	can	deceive	him,	but	he	has	deceived	himself.	He	has	lost	all	that
was	worthy;	he	has	lost	all.	And	what	is	he	saying?
Then	a	very	peculiar	phenomenon	happens:	people	cannot	love	persons	because
persons	can	be	deceptive;	they	start	loving	things.	Because	there	is	a	great	need
to	 love,	 they	 go	 on	 finding	 substitutes:	 somebody	 loves	 his	 house,	 somebody
loves	his	car,	somebody	loves	his	clothes,	somebody	loves	money.	Of	course,	the
house	cannot	deceive	you,	the	love	is	not	risky.	You	can	love	the	car	--	a	car	is
more	 reliable	 than	 a	 real	 person.	You	 can	 love	money	 --	money	 is	 dead;	 it	 is
always	 under	 your	 control.	 Why	 do	 so	 many	 people	 love	 things	 rather	 than
persons?.	 --	 and	 even	 if	 they	 sometimes	 love	 a	 person,	 they	 try	 to	 reduce	 the
person	to	being	a	thing.
If	 you	 love	 a	woman,	 you	 are	 immediately	 ready	 to	 reduce	 her	 to	 being	 your
wife,	 that	 is,	you	are	ready	to	reduce	her	to	a	certain	role:	 the	role	of	a	wife	--
which	is	more	predictable	 than	the	reality	of	a	beloved.	If	you	love	a	man	you
are	ready	to	possess	him	like	a	 thing.	You	would	like	him	to	be	your	husband,
because	a	lover	is	more	liquid;	one	never	knows....	A	husband	seems	to	be	more
solid.	At	 least	 the	 law	 is	 there,	 the	 court	 is	 there,	 the	 police	 is	 there,	 the	 state
government	is	there	to	give	a	certain	solidity	to	the	husband.	A	lover	seems	to	be
like	a	dream:	not	so	substantial.	Immediately	people	fall	in	love,	they	are	ready
to	get	married	--	such	fear	of	love!	And	whomsoever	we	love,	we	start	trying	to
control.	That's	 the	 conflict	 that	 goes	on	between	wives	 and	husbands,	mothers
and	 sons,	 brothers	 and	 sisters,	 friends	 --	who	 is	 going	 to	 possess	whom?	That
means:	who	is	going	to	define	whom,	who	is	going	to	reduce-whom	to	a	thing?
Who	will	be	the	master	and	who	will	be	the	slave?
Mulla	Nasrudin	sat	moodily	over	his	drink	and	his	friend	said,	"You	look	pretty
down	in	the	mouth,	Mulla.	What	is	the	matter?"
Nasrudin	said,	"My	psychiatrist	says	I	am	in	love	with	my	umbrella,	and	that	is
the	source	of	my	troubles."
"In	love	with	your	umbrella?"
"Yes,	 is	 not	 that	 ridiculous?	Ah,	 I	 like	 and	 respect	my	umbrella,	 and	 enjoy	 its
company,	but	love?"
But	what	else	 is	 love?	 If	you	enjoy	 the	company	of	your	umbrella,	 and	 if	you
respect	and	 like	your	umbrella,	what	else	 is	 love?	Love	 is	 respect,	 tremendous
respect;	love	is	a	deep	liking;	and	love	is	sheer	joy	in	the	presence	of	the	one	you
love.	 What	 else	 is	 love?	 But	 people	 love	 things	 --	 a	 deep	 need	 is	 somehow
fulfilled	by	substitutes.
Remember,	 the	 first	 calamity	 is	 that	 one	 becomes	 head-oriented.	 The	 second
calamity	is	that	one	starts	substituting	love	needs	with	things.	Then	you	are	lost,
lost	 in	 the	desert	 land.	Then	you	will	never	 reach	 to	 the	ocean.	Then	you	will
simply	dissipate	and	evaporate.	Then	your	whole	life	will	be	a	sheer	wastage.
The	moment	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 this	 is	 what	 is	 happening,	 turn	 the	 tide:
make	all	efforts	to	again	contact	the	heart.	That's	what	Bauls	call	love	--	to	make
contact	with	 the	 heart	 again	 to	 undo	 that	 which	 has	 been	 done	 to	 you	 by	 the
society.	 Undoing	 that	 which	 has	 been	 done	 by	 the	 society	 is	 true	 religion,
undoing	 all	 nonsense	 that	 has	 been	 done	 by	 your	 well-wishers.	 They	may	 be
thinking	 that	 they	are	helping	you,	and	 they	may	not	be	knowingly	destroying
you;	 they	may	themselves	be	victims	of	 their	parents	and	 their	society.	 I'm	not
saying	anything	against	them.	Great	compassion	is	needed	for	them.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	to	his	disciples	that	a	man	only	becomes	religious	when	he
is	able	to	forgive	his	parents.
Forgive?	 Yes,	 that's	 how	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult.	 The	 moment	 you	 become
aware,	it	is	very	difficult,	almost	impossible	to	forgive	your	parents	because	they
have	 done	 so	 many	 things	 to	 you	 --	 unknowingly	 of	 course,	 behaving
unconsciously	of	course,	but	still	they	have	done.	They	have	destroyed	your	love
and	they	have	handed	you	dead	logic.	They	have	destroyed	your	intelligence	and
they	have	given	you,	as	a	substitute,	intellect.	They	have	destroyed	your	life	and
aliveness,	and	they	have	given	you	a	fixed	pattern	to	live,	a	plan	to	live	by.	They
have	destroyed	your	direction	and	have	given	you	a	destination.
They	have	destroyed	your	celebration	and	they	have	made	you	commodities	in
the	marketplace.	It	 is	very	difficult	 to	forgive	them,	hence	all	 the	old	traditions
say:	respect	your	parents.
It	is	difficult	to	forgive	them;	it	is	very	very	difficult	to	respect	them.	But	if	you
understand,	you	will	 forgive	 them.	You	will	 say	 the	 same	as	 Jesus	 said	on	 the
cross:
"Father,	 forgive	 them,	for	 they	know	not	what	 they	do."	Yes,	exactly	 those	are
the	words.
And	everybody	is	on	the	cross	--	and	the	cross	is	not	prepared	by	your	enemies,
but	by	your	parents,	by	your	society...and	everybody	is	crucified.
The	head	has	become	so	dominant	that	it	does	not	allow	any	spontaneity.	It	has
become	dictatorial.	It	does	not	allow	the	heart	even	to	utter	a	single	word;	it	has
forced	the	heart	to	be	completely	quiet.	You	will	have	to	listen	again	to	the	heart.
You	will	have	to	start	dropping	logic	a	little.	You	will	have	to	take	a	few	risks.
You	will	have	to	live	dangerously.	You	will	have	to	move	towards	the	unknown,
and	you	will	have	to	love	persons	and	not	things.	You	will	have	to	be	ready	not
to	 possess	 anybody,	 because	 the	moment	 you	 possess	 the	 person	 is	 not	 there.
Only	a	thing	can	be	possessed.
Try	 to	 understand	 it	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible:	 the	 moment	 you	 fall	 in	 love	 with
somebody,	 immediately	 your	 whole	 conditioning	 starts	 trying	 to	 possess	 him.
Resist	 that	 temptation;	 the	devil	 is	 tempting	you	--	 the	devil	of	 the	society,	 the
devil	of	civilization	and	the	church.	The	devil	stands	in	a	very	religious	garb,	and
the	devil	goes	on	quoting	scriptures.
Beware!
Whenever	you	start	possessing	you	are	killing	 love.	So	either	you	can	possess
the	person	or	you	can	love	the	person;	both	together	are	not	possible.	So	this	is
the	 alternative:	 a	 man	 who	 wants	 to	 become	 a	 Baul,	 a	 lover,	 has	 to	 drop	 all
possessiveness.	Resist	all	temptation	to	being	possessive	because	that	temptation
comes	from	the	ego.
Once	Mulla	Nasrudin	said	 to	me,	 "It	 is	 remarkable,,sir,	how	congenial	we	are.
After	all,	we	have	practically	nothing	in	common."
"Oh	yes	we	have."	I	 replied,	"We	have	one	very	important	 thing	in	common:	I
think	you	are	wonderful	and	you	agree	with	me."
The	ego	goes	on	agreeing	for	wrong	things,	because	the	ego	can	exist	only	with
the	wrong.	It	feeds	on	the	wrong.	So	whenever	you	feel	that	your	ego	is	fulfilled,
beware!	--
you	 have	 eaten	 something	 wrong,	 you	 have	 swallowed	 something	 wrong.
Whenever	 you	 feel	 egoless,	 relax	 --	 now	 you	 have	 eaten	 the	 right,	 something
which	is	in	tune	with	your	nature.
Ego	arises	out	of	disturbance,	but	ego	has	its	own	logic.	It	goes	on	saying	that
you	are	 important,	 that	you	are	 the	most	 important	man	 in	 the	world,	 and	you
have	to	prove	it.
And	we	are	all	trying	to	do	this	one	way	or	the	other	--	somebody	by	possessing
more	 money,	 somebody	 by	 possessing	 a	 beautiful	 woman,	 somebody	 by
possessing	 prestige,	 power,	 somebody	 by	 becoming	 a	 president	 or	 a	 premier,
somebody	by	becoming	an	artist,	a	poet,	somebody	by	becoming	a	MAHATMA
--	but	we	are	all	trying	in	some	way	or	other	to	prove	our	innermost	fantasy,	that
we	are	the	most	important	person	in	the	world.
Then	you	cannot	be	a	lover.
Ambition	 is	 poison	 for	 love.	 A	 lover	 is	 not	 in	 any	 need	 to	 prove.	 In	 fact,	 he
knows	that	he	is	loved,	and	that's	enough.
Try	to	diagnose	it	very	carefully.	When	you	are	not	loved	--	and	how	can	you	be
loved	if	you	don't	love?	--	when	you	are	not	loved	and	you	don't	love,	suddenly	a
great	 need	 arises	 to	perform,	 to	do	 something,	 to	 show	 the	world	 that	 you	 are
important,	 that	 you	 are	 needed.	 There	 is	 a	 great	 need	 to	 be	 needed.	 You	 feel
futile,	impotent,	useless,	if	you	are	not	needed.	The	need	in	itself	is	not	wrong;	it
is	a	love	need	to	be	needed.	If	a	woman	loves	you,	you	are	fulfilled	--	somebody
needs	you,	you	are	significant.	Then	you	don't	bother	about	the	crowd.	You	don't
go	into	the	marketplace	and	shout,	"I	am	important!"
Then	 you	 are	 not	 ambitious;	 you	 don't	 collect	 money	 like	 an	 obsession.	 If
somebody	 loves	you,	 in	 that	 love	you	are	dignified,	 in	 that	 love	you	become	a
sovereign.	Love	makes	you	an	emperor,	a	sovereign.	Love	fulfills	you	so	deeply
and	so	greatly;	then	there	is	no	need	to	perform	or	do	anything.	Ego	simply	does
not	exist	with	 love.	But	 if	 that	need	is	unfulfilled,	 then	you	will	 try	 to	fulfill	 it
somehow:	you	would	like	 to	become	a	very	famous	man	so	many	people	need
you.
But	remember,	to	be	loved	by	one	and	to	be	needed	by	millions	is	not	the	same.
Even	a	single	person's	love,	even	a	single	glance	of	love	is	enough;	and	you	can
collect	millions	of	people	and	they	can	all	look	towards	you,	but	that	will	not	be
satisfying.	That's	what	politics	is,	and	what	the	politician	is	trying	to	do.
I	 have	never	 come	across	 a	 politician	whose	heart	 is	 functioning.	The	heart	 is
totally	dead
--	but	the	need	is	there	to	be	loved,	to	be	needed,	somebody	to	look	to.	Where	to
fulfill	it?
--	he	gathers	 crowds.	Through	 the	 crowds	he	 tries	 somehow	 to	 fulfill	 the	 love
need.	But	that	crowd	does	not	love	him,	that	crowd	is	not	bothered	by	him;	that
crowd	 is	after	 its	own	needs.	Because	he's	 in	power	he	seems	 to	be	 important.
They	 pay	 their	 respects	 to	 the	 chair,	 and	 the	 chairman	 is	 deceived.	 Once	 the
chairman	is	not	in	the	chair,	they	don't	bother	about	him.
Have	 you	 ever	 observed	 that	 once	 a	 politician	 is	 out	 of	 power	 he	 is	 simply
forgotten?
Nobody	remembers	him.	He	may	live	for	thirty	or	forty	years;	nobody	will	know
about	him.	By	and	by,	he	will	 recede	 into	darkness.	Only	once,	when	he	dies,
will	 there	 be	 a	 small	 notice	 in	 the	 newspapers	 --	 that	 the	 ex-president	 or	 ex-
premier	is	dead.
The	man	who	 ruled	 over	 Russia	 before	 Lenin,	 Kerensky,	 lived	 for	 fifty	 years
after	it	like	a	small	New	York	grocer,	and	nobody	knew	about	him.	He	was	the
Prime	Minister	 of	Russia,	 the	most	 important	man	 --	 the	 revolution	 happened
and	he	was	thrown	out	of	power.	He	escaped.	For	fifty	years	he	lived.	Only	when
he	died	did	people	become	aware	that	Kerensky	had	been	alive	for	all	those	fifty
years.
Power	cannot	fulfill	a	love	need.	You	can	possess	great	kingdoms	--	that	will	not
fulfill	 your	 love	 need.	But	 if	 you	possess	 one	 heart	which	 throbs	 in	 tune	with
you,	then	you	are	fulfilled.
The	Bauls	sing,
O	my	heart,
let	us	go	then	on	a	promenade
to	the	grove	of	Krishna's	love.
The	breeze	of	joy
will	calm	your	life.
In	that	woodland	eternally	bloom
five	scented	flowers	--
their	fragrance	will	enchant
your	life	and	soul,
giving	them	sovereign	dignity.
Enter	the	temple	of	love,	and	you	always	enter	it	as	a	sovereign.	Enter	into	the
world,	the	world	of	things,	and	you	always	enter	as	a	beggar.	The	world	reduces
everybody	 to	 a	 beggar;	 love	 raises	 everybody	 to	 an	 emperor.	 Love	 is	 an
alchemical	 phenomenon.	 Even	 if	 one	 heart	 has	 flowed	 towards	 you,	 God	 has
reached	 through	 that	 heart.	 Somebody	 looked	 towards	 you	 with	 love;	 in	 that
moment	God	looked	at	you.	Watch	the	eye	full	of	love,	the	hand	full	of	love,	and
you	will	find	God	throbbing	there	--	because	it	is	always	God	who	loves.	To	love
is	to	become	God,	to	allow-love	to	happen	is	to	become	God.
Whenever	you	fall	from	the	peak	of	love,	then	it	is	something	else:	you	become
possessive;	you	become	a	husband	and	a	wife.	Then	you	are	no	more	in	the	grip
of	God.
But	whenever	you	reach	to	the	peak	--	maybe	for	a	single	moment	sometimes	it
happens:	when	 two	persons	are	 in	absolute	harmony,	no	barrier,	no	fence	even
exists	 between	 them;	 they	 are	 not	 throbbing	 as	 two	 centers,	 they	 become	 one
center	--	in	that	moment,	God	happens.	When	love	happens,	God	happens.	When
God	descends	on	earth,	His	name	is	love.
Each	fruit	is	open	to	two	frontiers
and	born	on	a	pair	of	trees.
Listen	carefully...
Each	fruit	is	open	to	two	frontiers
and	born	on	a	pair	of	trees.
Have	you	ever	seen	one	fruit	born	on	a	pair	of	 trees?	One	fruit	 is	born	on	one
tree;	 two	trees	are	not	needed	for	one	fruit.	Love	is	 that	fruit	which	is	born	on
two	trees,	never	on	one	tree.
Each	fruit	is	open	to	two	frontiers
and	born	on	a	pair	of	trees.
Deep	meditation	reveals	the	knowledge
beyond	any	doubt.
When	you	love	somebody	and	somebody	loves	you,	then	there	comes	a	moment
when	these	two	trees	are	not	two	trees;	then	it	becomes	one	tree.	That	tree	is	the
tree	of	love,	and	on	that	tree	of	love	is	fulfillment,	is	fruition,	is	flowering.
The	two	who	are	wholly	present
can	bring	forth	a	fruit
to	offer	the	Master;
they	are	conscious	and	fruitful.
Let	me	repeat:
The	two	who	are	wholly	present...
In	 love,	 two	 persons	 are	 simply	 present	 to	 each	 other,	 doing	 nothing.	 Love
knows	 nothing	 of	 doing.	When	 two	 persons	 are	 deep	 in	 love,	 they	 are	 simply
present	 to	 each	 other.	 They	 face	 each	 other,	 just	 present,	 as	 if	 two	 lamps	 are
burning,	illuminating	each	other,	or	two	mirrors	are	facing	each	other,	reflecting
each	 other	 in	 millionfold	 ways.	 Two	 lovers	 are	 just	 in	 each	 other's	 presence,
saturated	by	 the	other,	penetrated	by	 the	other.	 In	 that	state	a	moment	arises	 --
the	climax,	 the	peak	moment	--	when	the	fruit	 is	born:	when	they	are	no	more
two,	 when	 all	 distinction	 is	 lost,	 when	 the	 egos	 don't	 exist,	 when	 they	 have
become	pure	presences.	Then,	the	fruit	is	born.
The	two	who	are	wholly	present
can	bring	forth	a	fruit
to	offer	the	Master;
...	and	that	is	the	fruit	to	be	offered	to	the	Master,	to	God.
...	they	are	conscious	and	fruitful.
In	 that	peak	of	 love,	 they	are	 totally	conscious	and	fruitful.	Remember,	 love	 is
not	 something	 like	 unconsciousness.	 Ordinarily,	 when	 you	 are	 in	 love,	 you
become	 more	 unconscious.	 Then	 it	 is	 lust.	 Then	 it	 is	 the	 very	 lowest
denominator.	Then	it	is	the	lowest	rung	of	the	ladder.	Of	course	it	belongs	to	the
ladder,	 but	 it	 is	 the	 lowest	 rung.	 At	 the	 highest	 rung	 there	 is	 tremendous
consciousness	 --	and	 if	you	cannot	be	conscious	 in	 the	presence	of	your	 lover,
where	else	are	you	going	 to	be	conscious?	 If	 the	presence	of	your	 lover	 is	not
worth	 being	 conscious,	 then	 where	 else	 will	 you	 find	 the	 treasure	 to	 be
conscious?	 If	 you	 love	 the	 person,	 if	 you	 really	 love,	 a	 peak	of	 consciousness
arises.	You	would	 just	 like	 to	observe,	 to	 see	your	beloved	or	your	 lover;	 you
would	like	to	be	with	a	pure	presence.	And	they	help	each	other	to	be	more	and
more	 conscious	 --	 because	 when	 the	 one	 becomes	 more	 conscious,	 it	 is
immediately	 reflected	 in	 the	 other.	 The	 other	 becomes	more	 conscious,	 and	 it
works	like	a	chain	reaction.	Higher	and	higher	they	go,	and	then	there	comes	a
moment	when	the	fruit	is	born;	that	fruit	is	called	love.	That	love	you	can	offer
to	the	Master	of	the	world.	No	other	fruit	will	do.
They	are	conscious	and	fruitful....
And	 in	 that	 peak	 of	 consciousness	 they	 are	 fruitful.	 Otherwise,	 people	 live	 a
fruitless	life.
People	live	an	unfruitful	life,	people	live	without	fruition.	Nothing	is	born	out	of
them;	they	simply	live	and	die.	There	is	no	meaning	and	no	significance	in	their
lives.	 The	 significance	 arises	 only	when	 two	 trees	 have	 become	 one	 tree,	 and
when	on	that	one	tree	the	fruit	of	love	is	born.
....conscious	and	fruitful.
The	well	never	sinks
into	the	water.
The	Bauls	say,	"You	see?	Go	and	see	a	well	full	of	water	--	but	it	never	sinks	into
the	 water.''	 This	 is	 very	 mysterious.	 When	 you	 are	 absolutely	 drowned	 in
oneness,	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	are.	You	never	 sink	 into	 it.	You	are	merged,	all
boundaries	 lost,	 but	 then	 happens	 a	 paradox:	 the	 paradox	 of	 being	 lost
completely	 and	 yet	 being,	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 yourself.	 When	 you	 are	 lost
completely,	you	are,	for	the	first	time,	your	reality.	You	are	full,	surrounded	by
tremendous	force,	but	you	are	not	sunk	in	it.	You	are	one	with	it,	but	for	the	first
time	your	flame	burns.	Without	any	ego,	your	being	is	revealed.
Bauls	sing,
Let	ripeness	appear	in	its	own	time
for	the	full	flavor	of	the	fruit.
A	green	jackfruit
can	be	softened	by	blows
but	not	made	sweet.
And	they	say,	this	love	you	cannot	force.	There	is	no	way	to	manipulate	it.	There
is	nothing	that	you	can	do	about	it.	All	that	you	can	do	is	to	allow.
Let	ripeness	appear	in	its	own	time...
It	will	come	in	its	own	time.	What	do	you	do	when	you	watch	a	tree,	an	apple
tree?	What	do	you	do?	You	don't	pull	the	fruits,	you	don't	force,	you	just	watch.
You	 take	 care,	 every	 care	 that	 is	 needed	 --	 you	protect	 the	 tree,	 you	water	 the
tree,	you	provide	fertilizers	and	manure.	Everything	that	you	can	do,	you	do;	but
what	can	you	do	to	force?	That	is	just	helping	the	tree	to	ripen	in	its	own	time.
Then	the	fruit	comes;	then	you	watch.	One	day	it	is	ripe,	sweet.
Let	ripeness	appear	in	its	own	time..
...	so	Bauls	are	not	for	any	sort	of	Yoga.	They	are	against	Yoga.	That's	why	I	told
you	 in	 the	 beginning	 that	 they	 belong	 to	 the	 tradition	 of	 Tantra,	 not	 to	 the
tradition	of	Veda,	Yoga	--	no.	In	fact,	the	Bauls'	tradition	is	more	ancient	than	the
tradition	of	Veda	and	Yoga.
Historians	say	that	Tantra	is	pre-Aryan.	When	the	Aryans	came	to	India,	Tantra
was	in	existence	here,	and	Shiva	was	their	God.	When	the	Aryans	came	to	India
they	overran	India,	they	defeated	the	people	who	were	living	here.	Their	religion
was	 crushed,	 their	 scriptures	 destroyed,	 and	 by	 and	 by	 even	 their	 Gods	 were
absorbed	into	the	pantheon	of	the	Aryans.	Shiva	was	their	God.	It	took	very	long
for	him	to	be	absorbed.	He	was	alien,	but	he	had	to	be	absorbed	because	he	was
very	influential.	And	when	all	his	followers	were	absorbed	into	the	world	of	the
Aryans,	they	brought	their	Gods	also.
Tantra	 belongs	 to	 Shiva,	 and	 the	 Baul	 is	 an	 offshoot	 of	 the	 same	 tree.	 Tantra
says,
"Everything	happens	in	its	own	right	time,	you	need	not	force	it.	Your	force	will
not	help.
It	will	be	a	disturbance.	It	may	destroy,	but	it	can	never	be	creative.	One	has	to
be	very	effortless,	spontaneous.	One	has	to	be	in	a	let-go."
Let	ripeness	appear
in	its	own	time
for	the	full	flavor	of	the	fruit.
A	green	jackfruit
can	be	softened	by	blows
but	not	made	sweet.
The	Bauls	say,	"We	are	not	searching	for	liberation."	A	lover,	a	seeker	of	love,
never	talks	in	terms	of	liberation.	He	says,	"It	is	tremendously	beautiful.	All	that
is,	is	already	beautiful.	There	is	no	need	to	be	liberated	from	it.	All	that	is	needed
is	how	to	be	in	it,	totally	absorbed."	The	world	is	not	a	bondage	for	the	Baul,	and
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 struggle	 against	 it.	 In	 fact,	 the	 Baul	 says,	 "We	 love	 the
bondage	of	the	world	because	these	fetters	are	also	created	by	you,	my	Lord.
The	heart,	a	lotus,
continue	flowering;
age	after	age,	you	are	bound	to	it
and	so	am	I...
The	Baul	says	to	his	God,
You	are	bound	to	it
and	so	am	I	--
and	with	no	escape.
The	lotus	blossoms,
blossoms,
blossoms;
there	is	no	end	to	it,
but	all	these	lotuses
have	one	type	of	honey
with	one	particular	taste.
The	bee	is	avid	and	unable	to	leave,
so	you	are	bound	and	I	am	bound.
Where	is	freedom	then?
It	is	a	great	play	of	hide	and	seek	between	the	energy	that	God	is	and	the	energy
that	 you	 are.	 It	 is	 the	 same	energy	 in	 a	great	 hide	 and	 seek.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 play.
There	is	no	need	to	end	it.	Let	lotuses	flower	and	blossom	forever	and	ever.	The
world	 is	beautiful:	 that	 is	 the	basic	Tantra	attitude.	Yoga	says:	one	needs	 to	be
liberated.	Tantra	says:	for	what,	from	whom?	The	bondage	is	beautiful	because	it
is	God's.	Yoga	will	say:	drop,	by	and	by,	all	your	attachments;	and	finally,	one
has	to	go	beyond	love.	The	Bauls	say:	all	attachments	are	beautiful.	Go	deeper
into	them	so	you	don't	remain	with	the	periphery	but	you	reach	to	the	center.	On
the	periphery	is	attachment,	at	the	center	is	love.
The	bee	is	avid	and	unable	to	leave,
so	you	are	bound	and	I	am	bound.
Where	is	freedom	then?
For	the	Baul,	life	is	not	a	serious	thing.	It	is	fun,	it	is	laughter,	it	is	joy.	So	you
cannot	find	anything	like	the	seriousness	of	a	church-goer,	or	 the	long	faces	of
so-called	 religious	 people	 in	 the	world	 of	 the	Bauls.	 They	 love	 laughter,	 they
love	fun.	They	enjoy	small	things	with	tremendous	respect.	Ordinarily,	religions
are	very	 long-faced,	very	 sombre,	 serious,	because	 they	have	 to	be	 --	 they	are
against	life.
I	have	heard....
One	friend	of	Mulla	Nasrudin	was	amazed	to	see	that	the	Mulla	had	hitched	his
prize-winning	possession,	his	prize-winning	bull,	to	the	plough,	and	was	guiding
it	across	his	fields.
He	said,	"Mulla,	have	you	gone	crazy?	That	bull	is	worth	twenty-five	thousand
rupees!
Why	are	you	letting	him	pull	a	plough?"
"That	bull,"	said	the	Mulla	grimly,'	has	got	to	learn	that	life	is	not	all	play."
There	are	people	who	become	disturbed	the	moment	you	laugh;	they	would	like
to	teach	you	that	life	is	not	all	play.	These	people	are	themselves	ill.	They	have
missed	life	and	they	would	not	like	anybody	else	to	enjoy	it.	The	priests	are	ill
people;	they	would	not	like	you	to	enjoy.	They	have	missed;	they	are	jealous	of
you.	And	they	have	staked	too	much:	their	egos	are	fulfilled	only	because	they
have	been	against	life.	They	have	chosen	ego	against	life.	If	you	choose	life	they
will	be	against	you.	They	will	go	on	curbing	you,	 they	will	go	on	condemning
you,	 they	 will	 go	 on	 creating	 guilt	 in	 you.	 No	 greater	 calamity,	 not	 a	 bigger
calamity	 can	 happen	 to	 humanity	 as	 has	 happened	 through	 religions.	 The
calamity	 is	 that	 they	 have	 created	 a	 guilty	 conscience.	 So	 whenever	 you	 are
enjoying,	 deep	 down	 somewhere	 you	 start	 feeling	 guilty,	 as	 if	 you	 are	 doing
something	 wrong.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 healthy,	 you	 start	 feeling	 something	 is
wrong.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 dancing,	 you	 start	 feeling	 something	 is	 wrong.
Whenever	you	laugh,	you	can	never	laugh	totally	because	deep	down	something
goes	 on	 pulling	 you	 back:	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?"	 From	 the	 very	 childhood,
whenever	you	were	happy	 there	was	somebody	 to	 teach	you	 that	 life	 is	not	all
play:	"Stop	laughing!	Be	serious!	When	will	you	be	mature?
Be	 grown	 up!	 Enough	 is	 enough!	 Drop	 all	 this	 nonsense	 of	 childhood."
Somebody	was	always	round	the	corner	to	teach	you.
They	have	lost:	they	could	not	enjoy	so	they	cannot	allow	others	to	enjoy.	This	is
how,	from	generation	to	generation,	diseases	are	being	transferred.
Take	hold	of	your	own	 life.	See	 that	 the	whole	existence	 is	 celebrating.	These
trees	are	not	serious,	 these	birds	are	not	serious.	The	rivers	and	 the	oceans	are
wild,	 and	 everywhere	 there	 is	 fun,	 everywhere	 there	 is	 joy	 and	delight.	Watch
existence,	listen	to	the	existence	and	become	part	of	it.	Then	you	become	a	Baul,
then	you	become	a	lover	--
because	love	can	exist	only	with	a	deep	respect	for	fun,	with	a	deep	respect	for
delight.
Love	cannot	exist	with	a	serious	mind.	With	a	serious	mind,	logic	is	in	tune.	be
non-serious.	 I'm	 not	 saying	 not	 to	 be	 sincere.	 Be	 sincere,	 but	 be	 non-serious.
Sincerity	 is	 something	 else;	 seriousness	 is	 totally	 different.	 Be	 sincere	 with
existence,	 then	you	will	be	 true;	you	will	become	part	of	 this	cosmic	LEELA,
this	cosmic	play.
The	Bauls	sing,
How	can	you	walk
the	ways	of	love
carrying	stolen	loot	with	impunity?
In	the	forest	of	Brinda
loving	is	worshipping.
The	forest	of	Brinda,	where	Krishna	played	with	his	lovers,	friends,	girlfriends;
where	he	danced,	where	the	RAAS	happened....
This	word	RAAS	 is	very	beautiful:	 it	means	 the	divine	 celebration,	 the	divine
dance.
How	can	you	walk
the	ways	of	love
carrying	stolen	loot	with	impunity?
In	the	forest	of	Brinda,
loving	is	worshipping.
As	the	essence	of	purity
in	the	brilliance	of	the	sky
love	transcends	lust
evolving	ecstasy.
The	bellows	breathe
into	the	fire	of	life
and	stabilize	mercury.
Beautiful;	the	saying	is	very	beautiful.
The	bellows	breathe
into	the	fire	of	life
and	stabilize	mercury.
Even	mercury	 becomes	 stabilized.	 So	 what	 about	 lust?	 Don't	 be	 worried.	 Let
there	be	a	goal	to	your	love,	a	center	to	your	love,	a	target	for	your	arrow,	and
love	transcends	lust.
Yoga	will	say:	transcend	lust,	fight	with	lust.	It	is	a	negative	approach.	The	Bauls
say:	love,	and	love	transcends	lust.	It	is	a	positive	approach.
Tell	me,	my	silent	Master,
O	my	Lord,
what	worship	may	open	me
to	my	beloved's	lotus	bloom?
The	stars	and	the	moon
eternally	move
with	no	sound	at	all.
Each	cycle	of	the	universe
in	silence	prays,
welling	up	with	the	essence	of	love.
It	 is	 what	 physicists	 call	 electricity,	 gravitation,	 energy	 field.	 What	 religious
people	call	God,	Bauls	call	love.
Each	cycle	of	the	universe
in	silence	prays,
welling	up	with	the	essence	of	love.
Trees	are	in	love	with	the	earth;	the	earth	is	in	love	with	the	trees.	The	birds	are
in	 love	with	 the	 trees;	 the	 trees	are	 in	 love	with	 the	birds.	The	earth	 is	 in	 love
with	 the	sky;	 the	sky	 is	 in	 love	with	 the	earth.	The	whole	existence	exists	 in	a
great	ocean	of	love.	Let	love	be	your	worship,	let	love	be	your	prayer.
The	 song	 for	 today	 is	 very	 small,	 but	 a	 diamond	 --	 very	 precious.	And	Bauls
know	how	to	be	precise.	Just	the	other	night	I	was	reading	Digale's	life,	and	he
had	a	motto	on	his	table.	I	loved	it;	Bauls	would	also	appreciate	it.	The	motto	is:
Concision	in	style,	precision	in	thought,	decision	in	life.
WHAT	DEALINGS
CAN	YOU	EVER	CONCLUDE
WITH	SOMEONE	WHO	IS	UNAWARE
OF	THE	FEELINGS	IN	LOVING?
THE	OWL	STARES	AT	THE	SKY,
SITTING	BLIND
TO	THE	RAYS	OF	THE	SUN.
The	Bauls	say	it	is	impossible	to	communicate....
WHAT	DEALINGS
CAN	YOU	EVER	CONCLUDE
WITH	SOMEONE	WHO	IS	UNAWARE
OF	THE	FEELINGS	IN	LOVING?
It	 is	 impossible	 to	commune	with	someone	who	has	not	known	love.	How	can
we	talk	about	God?	How	can	we	talk	meaningfully	about	prayer?	How	can	we
say	 anything	 about	 the	 truth?	 --	 because	 he's	 completely	 unaware	 of	 his	 own
heart.	He	does	not	know	the	language;	he	has	lived	in	the	head.	He's	like	the	owl:
stares	at	the	sky,	sitting	blind	to	the	rays	of	the	sun.
In	 Indian	mythology	 the	owl	 is	 a	 symbol	of	knowledge,	 learning,	 learnedness.
People	who	are	too	learned,	too	much	in	their	heads,	accumulating	information
and	data,	are	like	owls.	They	cannot	see	that	the	sun	has	risen.	They	can	go	on
looking	and	staring	at	the	sun,	and	still	they	remain	oblivious	to	the	rays	of	the
light.
The	Bauls	say:	a	man	who	lives	in	the	head	--	a	PUNDIT,	a	scholar	--	a	man	who
thinks	only	 in	 terms	of	concepts,	abstract	 theories,	doctrines,	dogmas,	who	has
memorized	 the	 Vedas,	 the	 Koran,	 the	 Bible,	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 understand
anything	about	love.	Even	if	you	say,	he	will	immediately	misunderstand.	If	you
talk	about	love	he	will	make	a	theory	out	of	it,	and	love	cannot	be	managed	in	a
theory.	 If	you	say	something	about	prayer	he	will	 try	 to	make	 that	prayer	 look
like	a	hypothesis,	and	prayer	is	not	a	hypothesis.	A	man	of	logic	always	reduces
everything	to	his	logic.
I	have	heard....
A	 devout	 clergyman	 making	 a	 tour	 of	 the	 Holy	 Land	 arrived	 at	 the	 Sea	 of
Galilee.	His	heart	thrilled:	"Perhaps	one	of	these	very	wavelets	had	touched	the
feet	of	the	Master	Himself..."	A	boatman	approached.	The	clergyman	addressed
him	in	choicest	Arabic,	a	pocket	dictionary	of	Arabic	terms	in	his	hand.
"What	is	the	matter?"	complained	the	ferryman.	"Can't	you	talk	United	States?"
He	was	an	American	making	his	living	boating	tourists.
"So,"	 exclaimed	 the	 clergyman,	 "this	 is	 the	 Sea	 of	 Galilee	 where	 our	 Savior
walked	upon	the	waters."
"It	is."
"How	much	will	you	charge	me	to	take	me	to	the	exact	spot?"
"Well,	seeing	as	you	look	like	a	clergyman,	I	won't	charge	you	anything."
After	reaching	the	place,	 the	clergyman	glanced	around	with	great	satisfaction,
consulted	his	texts	and	commentaries,	and	at	last	signalled	that	he	was	ready	to
return	to	shore.
"Cost	you	twenty	dollars	to	take	you	back."
"But	you	said	you	would	charge	nothing!"
"That	was	to	bring	you	here."
"And	you	charge	everybody	twenty	dollars	to	take	them	back?"
"That,	or	more."
"Well	then,"	said	the	devout	one,	reaching	for	his	pocketbook,	"	no	wonder	our
Savior	got	out	and	walked."
Everybody	 goes	 on	 interpreting	 everything	 according	 to	 his	 own	 way.	 Our
interpretations	are	our	interpretations.
It	 happened	 one	 day:	 Mulla	 Nasrudin	 hailed	 a	 taxi	 just	 outside	 the	 Ashram.
"Take	me	to	the	Ashram,	driver,"	he	demanded,	hopping	into	the	cab.
The	disgusted	hackie	got	out,	opened	the	door	and	snapped,	"You	are	in	front	of
the	Ashram,	fellow!"
"Okay,"	grumbled	the	Mulla	as	he	got	out,	"but	next	time,	don't	drive	so	fast."
If	 you	 are	 drunk,	 then	 you	 are	 going	 to	 interpret	 everything	 through	 your
drunkenness.	If	you	are	drunk	with	logic,	love	cannot	penetrate	your	skull.	Then
you	have	a	very	thick	head,	dense	--	it	is	impossible	for	love	to	penetrate.	Then
you	are	like	the	owl.
The	 Bauls	 say	 communication	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 there	 exists	 a	 common
language.	 So	 if	 you	 want	 to	 understand	 the	 Bauls,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 love	 --
because	 there	 is	 no	 other	way	 to	 understand	 love	 than	 to	 love.	 If	 you	want	 to
understand	the	man	of	prayer,	pray.
Move	into	prayer,	have	a	taste	of	it.	Put	aside	all	your	logic.	Don't	try	first	to	be
logically	convinced,	then	you	will	pray;	then	nobody	has	ever	prayed	--	because
the	 first	 thing	 is	 that	 it	 is	 impossible,	 it	 cannot	be	done.	Nobody	can	 logically
convince	 you	 that	 prayer	 is	 meaningful.	 The	 very	 logical	 framework	 of	 your
mind	prohibits	it.	So	you	are	asking	the	impossible.	If	you	say,	"First	it	has	to	be
proved	that	 love	is	God,	 then	I	will	 love,"	 then	you	will	have	to	wait,	and	you
will	have	to	wait	for	eternity	--	it	is	not	going	to	happen.
The	day	it	happens,	it	will	happen	in	the	only	way	it	can	happen,	and	the	way	for
it	to	happen	is	to	put	aside	your	logic.	Logic	is	irrelevant.	You	just	love;	have	a
taste	of	it.
Move	into	the	world	of	the	lover.	Let	his	singing	surround	you.	Have	a	feel,	and
that	will	become	the	proof,	and	that	will	become	the	conviction.	Then	you	can
bring	your	logic	in	and	your	logic	will	start	proving	it,	but	not	before.	First,	the
taste,	the	experience;	then	the	logic.	Logic	is	a	good	servant	but	a	bad	master.
WHAT	DEALINGS
CAN	YOU	EVER	CONCLUDE
WITH	SOMEONE	WHO	IS	UNAWARE
OF	THE	FEELINGS	IN	LOVING?
THE	OWL	STARES	AT	THE	SKY,
SITTING	BLIND
TO	THE	RAYS	OF	THE	SUN
Love	is	a	radical	change	in	your	innermost	core	of	being.	The	head	is	just	on	the
periphery.	The	head	is	just	like	waves	on	the	ocean;	love	is	like	the	depth.	In	the
depth	there	are	no	waves,	and	in	the	waves	there	is	no	depth.	Thoughts	are	like
waves	just	on	the	surface.	There	is	no	way	for	a	wave	to	know	the	depth	while
remaining	the	wave.	The	wave	can	know	the	depth,	but	then	it	has	to	disappear
in	the	depth.	It	will	no	more	be	a	wave,	but	then	it	can	come	back	to	the	surface.
But	 then	 that	wave	will	 itself	 become	 a	Baul;	 no	 other	wave	will	 listen	 to	 it.
Other	 waves	will	 call	 that	 wave	mad	 because	 she	will	 talk	 about	 depths,	 and
waves	only	know	shallowness,	they	don't	know	depths.
Love	is	an	experience	--	existential,	like	taste.	If	you	have	not	tasted	salt,	there	is
no	way	to	explain	it	to	you.	If	you	have	tasted	it,	there	is	no	way	to	forget	it.	If
you	have	tasted	it,	then	too	there	is	no	way	to	explain	it	to	somebody	else	who
has	 not	 tasted	 it.	 How	 to	 explain	 to	 somebody	 else	 who	 has	 never	 known
anything	salty?	What	to	say?	It	is	not	that	you	don't	know;	you	know,	it	is	just	on
the	 tip	 of	 your	 tongue.	 You	 know	 what	 saltiness	 is,	 but	 how	 to	 say	 it	 to
somebody	else?	The	only	thing	is	to	offer	him	a	little	salt.	But	if	he	says,	"First
let	me	be	convinced	that	there	exists	something	like	salt,	then	only	will	I	take";	if
he	 is	 that	 cautious	 it	 is	 impossible.	 Then	 he	 will	 have	 to	 remain	 without	 any
experience	of	salt.
And	 to	 remain	without	 experiencing	 love	 is	 to	 remain	 dead	 --	 because	 only	 a
lover	 goes	 on	 dropping	 his	 dead	 selves,	 because	 only	 a	 lover	moves,	 because
only	a	lover	is	dynamic.	Logic	is	dead;	love	is	alive.
I	am	reminded	of	a	saying	of	Browning.	He	used	to	say,	"The	life	process	is	to
rise	on	the	stepping-stones	of	our	dead	selves	to	higher	things."
...	 the	life	process	is	to	rise	on	the	stepping-stones	of	our	dead	selves	to	higher
things....
Logic	belongs	to	the	past;	love	belongs	to	the	future.	Logic	is	just	moving	in	the
old	 circle	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.	 Love	 moves	 into	 new	 territory.	 Being
yourself	is	never	static,	being	in	love	is	also	never	static.	It	is	always	ecstatic	--
not	static	but	ecstatic:	out	of	stasis,	out	of	standing	still.
Be	moving.	One	never	arrives,	though	one	is	always	arriving.
The	Beloved,	Vol	1
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Truth	is	neither	I	nor	you
30	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606300
ShortTitle:
BELOV110
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
87
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
WHO	HAS	ORIGINATED	BAULS?	PLEASE	EXPLAIN.
PEOPLE	LIKE	BAULS	ARE	NEVER	ORIGINATED.	Religions	 like	 the	Baul
religion	are	more	like	happenings.	Who	originated	the	roses?	Who	originated	the
songs	 that	 the	 birds	 go	 on	 singing	 every	 morning?	 No,	 we	 never	 ask	 that
question.	It	has	always	been	there.
Philosophies	are	originated;	you	can	 find	 the	originator.	 'Isms',	dogmas,	creeds
are	originated.	The	Baul	 is	not	a	creed,	 it	 is	a	spontaneous	way	of	 life.	People
have	always	lived	that	way.	People	who	have	ever	lived	have	always	lived	that
way.	People	who	have	ever	been	alive	have	been	alive	in	no	other	way.	Whether
they	were	known	as	Bauls	or	not	is	immaterial.	The	name	may	have	some	origin
somewhere;	I'm	not	concerned	with	it.
The	word	simply	means	 'the	madman':	madly	 in	 love	with	existence,	madly	 in
love	with	 life	 --	but	 this	madness	has	always	been	 there.	And	 it	 is	good	 that	a
few	people	have	always	been	so	mad	that	we	have	not	lost	contact	with	the	roots
of	existence.	 It	 is	because	of	 them	that	we	haven't.	They	could	sing	and	dance
and	live	and	love	--	real	people,	authentic	to	the	very	core.
So,	 I	 don't	 know	 when	 they	 started.	 They	 must	 have	 started	 from	 the	 very
beginning,	if	there	was	any	beginning.	They	must	have	started	with	the	first	man,
because	their	whole	teaching	is	about	the	essential	man.	In	fact,	by	and	by,	they
have	disappeared.	They	must	have	been	more	in	the	beginning.	By	and	by	they
have	 lessened;	 their	 numbers	 have	 become	 less	 and	 less	 and	 less	 every	 day.
Because	 the	 world	 has	 become	 too	 worldly,	 and	 the	 world	 has	 become	 too
cunning	 and	 clever,	 it	 does	 not	 allow	 the	 simplicity	 of	 the	 heart	 to	 exist.	 The
world	has	become	too	competitive	and	too	ambitious.	It	has	forgotten	all	that	is
beautiful,	it	has	forgotten	all	that	cannot	be	manufactured,	it	has	forgotten	how	to
surrender,	to	allow	the	eternal	to	happen	in	time.	It	has	forgotten	the	language	of
ecstasy.
The	 more	 we	 move	 back,	 the	 more	 and	 more	 Bauls	 you	 will	 find.	 In	 the
beginning	the	whole	humanity	must	have	been	like	the	Bauls.	Even	now	you	can
watch	it:	every	child	is	born	a	Baul,	then	later	on	he	is	corrupted.	Every	child	is
again	born	as	madly	 in	 love	with	 life,	but	we	cultivate	him,	we	prune	him,	we
don't	allow	him	spontaneity	of	being.	We	condition	him,	we	give	him	a	certain
character.
The	 Bauls	 have	 no	 character.	 They	 are	 men	 of	 consciousness,	 but	 not	 of
character.	 In	 fact,	a	man	of	consciousness	never	has	a	character.	Character	 is	a
fixity,	character	is	an	obsession,	character	is	an	armor.	You	have	to	do	only	that
which	your	character	allows.
Character	can	never	be	spontaneous.	Character	is	always	imposed	by	the	past	on
the	 present.	You	 are	 not	 free	 to	 be,	 you	 are	 not	 free	 to	 respond;	 you	 can	only
react.
The	Baul	believes	 in	 the	SAHAJA	MANUSH,	 the	spontaneous	man.	The	Baul
says	the	spontaneous	man	is	the	way	to	the	essential	man.	To	be	spontaneous	is
to	be	on	the	way	towards	being	essential.	Every	child	is	a	Baul.
So	 as	 I	 see	 it,	 in	 the	 beginning	 --	 if	 there	 was,	 any	 beginning	 --	 the	 whole
humanity	must	have	been	like	Bauls:	true,	authentic,	sincere,	mad,	deep	in	love,
rejoicing	--	rejoicing	the	opportunity	that	God	has	given,	rejoicing	the	gift.
We	don't	have	any	claim	on	life.	Have	you	ever	noticed	it,	that	we	don't	have	any
claim?
If	we	had	not	been,	there	would	be	no	way	to	be	and	there	would	be	no	way	to
appeal	it.
There	would	be	no	way	to	complain	against	it.	If	you	are	not,	you	are	not.	The
next	moment	you	can	disappear.	Life	is	fragile,	and	without	any	claim.	We	have
not	earned	it!
That	is	the	meaning	when	we	say	it	is	a	gift.	A	gift	is	something	that	you	have
not	earned;	you	don't	have	any	claim	over	it.	You	cannot	say	that	you	have	some
right	to	get	it.	A	gift	is	something	that	is	given	to	you.
Life	 is	 a	 gift.	 It	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 You	 cannot	 have
earned	it,	because	how	can	you	earn	it	if	you	were	not?	Life	is	a	gift,	but	we	go
on	 forgetting	 it,	 we	 are	 not	 even	 thankful.	 We	 don't	 have	 any	 gratitude.	 We
certainly	 complain	 for	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	which	we	may	 think	we	 are
missing	in	life,	but	we	never	feel	grateful	for	life	itself.
You	may	 complain	 that	 your	 house	 is	 not	 good:	 the	 rains	 have	 come	 and	 it	 is
leaking.
You	may	complain	 that	your	salary	 is	not	enough;	you	may	complain	 that	you
don't	 have	 a	 beautiful	 body.	You	may	 complain	 that	 this	 is	 not	 happening	 and
that	is	not	happening	-
-	a	thousand	and	one	complaints	--	but	have	you	ever	seen	that	the	whole	life,	the
very	 possibility	 that	 you	 can	 be,	 breathe,	 look,	 see,	 hear,	 touch,	 love	 and	 be
loved,	is	a	gift?	It	has	been	given	to	you	because	God	has	so	much	to	give,	not
because	you	have	earned	it.
The	Baul	lives	in	tremendous	gratitude.	He	sings	and	dances	--	that	is	his	prayer.
He	cries.	He	simply	wonders	why,	for	what	has	life	been	given	to	him,	for	what
has	he	been	allowed	to	see	the	rainbows	in	the	sky,	for	what	has	he	been	allowed
to	see	flowers,	butterflies,	people,	rivers	and	rocks?	For	what?	Because	life	is	so
obvious	you	tend	to	forget	the	tremendous	gift	hidden	in	it.
In	the	beginning,	everybody	must	have	been	a	Baul,	because	civilization	was	not
there	to	corrupt,	society	was	not	there	to	destroy.	Priests	and	churches	were	not
there	to	give	you	a	character,	to	give	you	a	narrow	passage.	In	the	beginning,	life
must	have	been	overflowing.	Everybody	must	have	lived	out	of	their	own	beings
--	 not	 because	 of	 any	 commandments,	 not	 because	 of	 scripture.	There	was	 no
scripture	 and	 there	 was	 no	 commandment.	 Moses	 had	 not	 appeared	 yet.
Everybody	must	have	been	a	Baul	in	the	beginning;	and	every	child,	when	he	is
born,	 is	a	Baul.	Watch	a	child	 to	understand	what	 this	phenomenon	of	being	a
Baul	 is.	 See	 children	 delighting	 for	 nothing	 --	 just	 shouting	 out	 of	 joy,	 just
running	here	and	there	out	of	overflowing	energy.	When	you	become	a	Baul	you
again	become	a	child.
To	become	a	Baul	is	to	become	a	primitive.	To	become	a	Baul	is	to	reclaim	one's
primitiveness,	one's	primalness.	One	is	reborn;	it	is	a	rebirth	--	the	child	happens
again.
Your	body	may	be	old,	your	mind	may	be	old,	but	your	consciousness	is	released
from	 the	bondage	of	 the	body	and	 the	mind.	You	have	a	past,	 you	have	many
experiences,	but	they	no	longer	burden	you.	You	put	them	aside.	You	use	them
when	 needed;	 otherwise,	 you	 don't	 carry	 them	 continuously	 on	 your	 head	 for
twenty-four	 hours.	 This	 is	 what	 liberation	 is:	 it	 does	 not	 liberate	 you	 from
existence	or	from	life	or	from	flowers	and	love,	it	simply	liberates	you	from	your
past.	In	fact,	the	more	you	are	liberated,	the	more	you	fall	in	love	with	God.	The
more	you	are	liberated,	the	more	you	become	capable	of	rejoicing	and	loving.
So	don't	 ask	me	who	originated	Bauls.	Nobody	has	ever	originated	 things	 like
that.	 The	 whole	 emphasis	 is	 on	 spontaneity.	 Of	 course,	 to	 have	 a	 theory	 like
Einstein's	Theory	of	Relativity,	an	Einstein	is	needed.	Without	him	it	cannot	be
originated;	without	him	it	would	not	be	in	existence.	A	very	complicated	mind	is
needed	to	discover	the	complicated	Theory	of	Relativity.
Bauls	don't	give	any	 theories.	They	simply	say,	"All	 that	you	need	be,	you	are
already."	It	 is	not	a	question	of	being	very	clever,	 it	 is	a	question	of	 just	being
simple.	No	talent	is	needed	to	become	a	Baul.	That's	the	beauty	of	it:	no	genius
is	needed.	What	genius	is	needed	to	be	a	child?	Every	child	is	born	as	a	child.
The	 sages	 and	 the	 fools	 --	 all	 are	 born	 as	 children.	 No	 talent	 is	 needed.
Childhood	is	simply	everybody's	nature.
To	 be	 a	 Baul	 nothing	 is	 needed.	 In	 fact,	 the	 moment	 you	 need	 nothing,	 you
become	 a	 Baul.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 unburdened	 and	 you	 don't	 possess
anything,	any	past,	you	are	a	Baul.
No,	 things	 like	 that	 are	 never	 originated.	 Nobody	 creates	 them;	 they	 happen.
They	are	part	of	nature.
The	second	question:
Question	2
SO	MANY	TIMES	I	CAN'T	UNDERSTAND	YOUR	WORDS	BECAUSE	THE
SOUND	OF	YOUR	WORDS	SHOWERS	ON	ME,	YOUR	SOUND	STRIKES
ME
WITH	ENERGY,	FILLING	ME,	AND	AS	A	SHOCK,	I	FEEL	IN	MY	SPINAL
CORD
THRILLS,	 WAVES	 AND	 VIBRATIONS.	 SHOULD	 I	 BE	 CAREFULLY
AWARE	FOR
THE	MEANING	OF	YOUR	WORDS?
Then	there	is	no	need	to	be	careful	about	the	meaning	of	the	words;	that	will	be	a
disturbance.	If	you	feel	 in	 tune	with	my	sound,	THERE	is	 the	meaning.	If	you
feel	you	are	being	showered	with	a	new	energy,	if	you	feel	thrilled,	pulsating	in	a
new	way	you	never	knew	before,	if	you	feel	a	sort	of	new	dimension	arising	in
your	being	because	of	 the	 sound	of	my	words,	 then	 forget	 all	 about	me.	Then
there	 is	 no	 need;	 you	 have	 got	 the	 meaning	 already.	 That	 showering	 is	 the
meaning,	that	thrill	in	the	spine	is	the	meaning,	that	vibration	that	cleanses	you	is
the	meaning.	Then	there	is	no	need	to	worry	about	the	ordinary	meaning	of	the
words.	Then	you	are	getting	a	higher	meaning,	 then	you	are	 reaching	a	higher
altitude	 of	 meaning.	 Then	 you	 are	 really	 getting	 the	 content	 and	 not	 the
container.	The	meaning	of	my	words	is	just	the	container.
If	this	is	happening	to	you,	then	my	words	are	no	longer	words	to	you;	they	have
become	existential.	Then	they	are	alive,	then	they	have	become	a	transfer.	Then
something	 is	 transpiring	 between	 my	 energy	 and	 your	 energy.	 Then	 there	 is
happening	something	like	what	Bauls	call	love.
Allow	 it.	 Forget	 all	 about	 the	 words	 and	 their	 meaning.	 Leave	 it	 for	 foolish
people	who	only	 collect	words	 and	 are	 never	 in	 contact	with	 the	 content.	The
words	are	just	like	shells:	hidden	behind	them,	I	am	sending	you	great	messages.
Those	messages	cannot	be	understood	by	the	intellect,	those	messages	have	to	be
decoded	 by	 your	 total	 being.	 That	 is	 what	 is	 happening	 --	 the	 vibration,	 the
pulsation,	 the	 thrill,	 the	 showering	 of	 a	 new	 energy	 --	 your	 total	 being	 is
decoding.	This	is	real	listening.	This	is	really	to	be	in	contact	with	me,	to	be	in
my	presence.
Once	 I	 stayed	with	 a	 friend.	He	 had	 a	 big	 cage	 in	 his	 garden	 and	 he	 had	 one
eagle	 in	 that	cage.	He	 took	me	 to	 the	cage	and	he	said,	 "See,	what	a	beautiful
eagle."	The	eagle	was	beautiful,	but	I	felt	sorry	for	her.
I	told	the	friend	that	this	was	not	an	eagle.
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?	This	is	an	eagle.	Don't	you	know	eagles?"
I	said,	"I	know	them,	but	I	have	known	them	only	against	the	wind	in	the	sky,	in
the	high	heavens,	free,	almost	not	of	this	world	and	not	in	this	world,	weighing
themselves	floating	on	the	winds,	in	deep	love	with	the	free	sky.	I	have	known
them	as	freedom.	This	eagle	is	no	eagle.	Because	an	eagle	in	a	cage	without	the
openness,	 the	 wideness	 of	 sky,	 without	 those	 high	 heavens,	 without	 weighing
herself	 in	 freedom	 on	 the	 winds,	 is	 no	 eagle.	 Where	 is	 the	 background?	 --
because	 this	 is	 only	 the	 figure.	 In	 a	 cage,	 the	 real	 eagle	 has	 disappeared.	You
cannot	 find	a	 real	eagle	 in	a	cage	because	a	 real	eagle	 is	 tremendous	 freedom.
Where	is	the	freedom?	The	soul	has	disappeared.	The	essential	has	disappeared;
only	the	non-essential	is	here.	This	is	just	a	dead	eagle,	more	dead	than	any	dead
eagle.	Release	it	from	the	cage;	let	it	become	real."
When	I	talk	to	you	my	words	are	like	caged	eagles;	my	words	are	in	a	prison.	If
you	 really	 listen	 to	me,	you	will	 drop	 the	cage	and	you	will	 release	 the	 eagle.
That	 is	 what	 is	 happening...the	 thrill.	 Then	 the	 freedom	 is	 released;	 then	 you
become	 the	 eagle	 --	 and	 higher	 and	 higher	 you	 rise.	The	 earth	 is	 left	 very	 far
behind.	You	can	forget	all	about	it.
The	ordinary	 is	 left	very	 far	behind.	The	shell	 is	 left,	 the	container	 is	 left,	 and
you	have	the	whole	sky	open	to	you;	you,	your	wings,	and	the	sky,	and	there	is
no	end	to	it.	The	eternal	pilgrimage	has	started.
Forget	 all	 about	 words	 and	 their	 meanings,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 more
concerned	with	the	cage	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	release	the	eagle	within	you.
The	third	question:
Question	3
EVERY	TIME	I	HAVE	LOVED	SOMEONE	AND	AFTERWARDS	DUG	INTO
IT,	 I	 HAVE	 FOUND	 THAT	 IT	 WAS	 NO	 LOVE	 AT	 ALL.	 IT	 WAS
SOMETHING	ELSE	IN
THE	NAME	OF	LOVE.	THUS	I	NOW	HAVE	NO	FAITH	IN	LOVE.	I	JUST
CANNOT
BELIEVE	THAT	WE	CAN	LOVE	AS	WE	ARE.
The	questioner	 says,	 and	 rightly	 so,	 that	whenever	he	has	been	 in	 love	he	has
found	something	else	masquerading	as	love,	so	he	has	lost	faith	in	love.
The	first	part	is	absolutely.	right:	if	you	observe	deeply,	you	will	find	something
else	 always	hiding	behind	 love,	 something	 counterfeit.	But	 the	 counterfeit	 can
exist	 only	 because	 real	 coins	 exist.	 If	 there	 were	 no	 real	 coin,	 how	 could	 a
counterfeit	exist?
Sometimes	 it	 is	 possessiveness	which	hides	 itself	 behind	 love,	 sometimes	 it	 is
lust,	sometimes	something	else,	jealousy.
But	why	do	they	hide	behind	love?	--	because	they	feel	love	is	a	real	coin,	and
you	can	pretend	and	hide	behind	it.	You	can	be	safe	behind	love.	Whenever	you
hide	 yourself	 somewhere,	 it	 simply	 shows	 that	 somewhere	 that	 place	 is
protective;	 it	 can	 become	 an	 armor	 around	 you.	Why	 does	 everything	 seek	 to
hide	 behind	 love?	 --	 because	 love	 is	 the	 greatest	 protection	 in	 the	 world,	 the
greatest	reality	in	the	world,	the	only	energy.
Everything	else	is	false;	love	is	true.	All	that	is	not	love	is	false,	and	whatsoever
you	are	doing	which	is	not	love	is	a	sheer	wastage.	All	that	is	love	is	true,	and
whatsoever	 you	 do	 on	 the	 path	 of	 love	 increases	 your	 being,	 gives	 you	more
truth,	makes	you	more	true.
Knowing	 this,	 everything	 hides	 behind	 love	 because	 love	 can	 give	 protection.
Love	is	so	beautiful	 that	even	ugly	 things	can	hide	behind	it	and	pretend	to	be
beautiful.
I	 was	 reading	 Shepard's	 book,	 BEYOND	 SEX	 THERAPY.	 He	 relates	 one
incident.
He	was	in	love	with	a	woman,	a	young	woman.	A	few	friends	had	come	to	see
him,	but	the	whole	time	he	remained	with	the	woman,	talking	to	her,	as	if	he	was
not	interested	in	the	friends.	They	felt	a	little	offended,	and	they	told	the	woman,
"We	know	Shepard	better	than	you.	He	has	been	in	love	with	many	women,	and
this	 comes	 and	 goes.	 So	 remember	 it:	 sooner	 or	 later	 he	will	 get	 interested	 in
some	other	woman.	What	are	you	going	to	do	then?"
The	woman	said,	"I	will	 feel	 jealous,	but	 that	 is	my	problem.	But	I	would	like
my	man	to	know	every	sort	of	love,	to	know	all	that	is	possible	before	he	dies.	I
will	feel	jealous,	but	that	is	my	problem.	That	I	have	to	tackle,	and	I	have	to	get
over	 it.	That	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	him.	As	 far	 as	 he's	 concerned,	 this	 is	my
desire:	 that	 he	 should	know	all	 that	 he	wants	 to	know	before	he	dies,	 because
once	gone,	one	is	gone	forever.	I	would	like	him	to	live	as	richly	as	possible.	If
problems	arise,	like	jealousy,	then	they	are	my	problems."
This	is	what	love	is.	It	knows	the	distinction	between	jealousy	and	love.	It	is	not
confused	 about	 it.	 The	 jealousy	 cannot	 hide	 behind	 it;	 it	 cannot	 pretend	 to	 be
love.
So	the	first	thing	is	right,	the	questioner	is	absolutely	right:	"Every	time	I	have
loved	someone	and	afterwards	dug	into	it,	I	have	found	that	it	was	no	love	at	all.
It	was	something	else..."	perfectly	true	"...	in	the	name	of	love.	Thus	I	now	have
no	faith..."	That	is	wrong	--	because	you	have	not	known	love	yet.	How	can	you
lose	faith	in	love,	which	you	have	not	known	yet?	You	can	lose	faith	in	jealousy,
you	can	 lose	 faith	 in	possessiveness,	you	can	 lose	 faith	 in	 anger,	 you	can	 lose
faith	in	lust,	but	you	have	not	come	across	love	at	all	so	how	can	you	lose	faith
in	it?	To	lose	faith	or	to	have	faith,	at	least	some	experience	of	love	is	essential	--
and	you	have	not	come	across	it.
Dig	a	little	more	and	you	will	be	able	to	sort	it	out	now.	What	is	jealousy?	--	you
know;	what	is	possessiveness?	--	you	know.	This	is	good;	you	are	evolving.	This
is	how	everybody	has	 to	evolve.	 In	 the	beginning,	everything	 is	mixed	 --	as	 if
mud	is	mixed	in	gold.	Then	one	has	to	put	the	gold	into	fire:	all	that	is	not	gold	is
burned,	drops	out	of	it.
Only	 pure	 gold	 comes	 out	 of	 the	 fire.	Awareness	 is	 the	 fire;	 love	 is	 the	 gold;
jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 hatred,	 anger,	 lust,	 are	 the	 impurities.	 You	 are
becoming	more	aware.
Now	you	see	what	jealousy	is,	and	you	can	see	it	is	not	love.	Half	the	battle	is
won;	 fifty	percent	 of	 the	battle	 is	 over	 --	 you	 can	 recognize	 jealousy.	But	you
have	not	yet	known	what	 love	is.	You	are	on	the	right	 track.	But	don't	become
hopeless,	don't	lose	courage,	don't	lose	faith,	because	sooner	or	later	you	will	be
able	to	know	what	love	is.	You	are	coming	closer	to	home.
Don't	be	in	such	a	hurry.	Truth	tends	to	reveal	itself.	Truth	is	revelatory,	truth	is
revelation.	 You	 just	 go	 on	 seeking,	 searching,	 finding.	 There	 may	 be	 many
errors,	but	there	is	no	other	way	to	grow.	Trial	and	error	is	the	only	way.	By	and
by,	you	go	on	eliminating	the	errors.	Less	and	less	errors	happen,	and	more	and
more	purity	becomes	available.	Don't	stop	in	the	middle.
I	have	heard....
Mulla	Nasrudin	 got	 a	 job	 in	 a	 bank.	 The	 cashier	 tossed	 him	 a	 packet	 of	 one-
rupee	notes	and	said,	"Check	them	to	make	sure	there	are	one	hundred."
The	Mulla	started	counting.	Finally	he	got	up	to	fifty-six,	fifty-seven,	fifty-eight,
then	he	threw	the	packet	in	the	drawer.
"If	it	is	right	this	far,"	remarked	Nasrudin	to	the	man	next	to	him,	"it	is	probably
right	all	the	way."
Don't	be	in	such	a	hurry.	If	it	has	been	wrong	so	far,	don't	think	it	will	be	wrong
all	the	way.	At	a	hundred	degrees,	suddenly	it	turns	right.	One	has	to	penetrate
all	the	impurities.
But	you	are	on	the	right	track,	so	be	happy.
And	it	is	because	of	a	deep	desire	for	love	that	you	have	been	able	to	recognize
what	is	not	love.	Otherwise,	how	would	you	recognize?	You	can	recognize	that
this	is	not	gold	because	gold	exists.	Otherwise,	what	is	the	criterion	to	know	that
this	is	not	love?	You	have	some	tacit	understanding;	it	is	not	conscious	yet,	it	is
tacit,	deep	down.	That	is	the	meaning	of	understanding,	understood.	You	have	a
tacit	 understanding,	 some	deep	undercurrent	which	knows	what	 love	 is.	That's
why	you	can	find	'this	is	not	love',	 'that	is	not	love'.	Good,	you	are	on	the	right
track.	Go	on	to	the	very	end,	all	the	way.
It	is	because	of	the	possibility	of	love	that	you	have	become	aware	of	jealousy,
of	possessiveness,	of	anger,	of	lust,	of	greed,	of	indulgence,	of	gratification,	and
a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things.	 But	 the	 central	 core	 is	 dependent	 on	 a	 tacit
understanding	of	love.
Truth	tends	to	reveal	itself.
Let	me	tell	you	a	few	anecdotes.
The	 funeral	 cortege	was	being	 set	 up	 for	 the	wife	 of	Mulla	Nasrudin.	He	was
dressed	sombrely	in	the	appropriate	black.	The	funeral	director	said	to	the	Mulla
in	 a	 respectful	 whisper,	 "And	 you	 will	 be	 sitting	 in	 the	 head	 car	 with	 your
mother-in-law."
Nasrudin	frowned,	"With	my	mother-in-law?"
"Yes,	of	course."
"Is	it	necessary?"
"It	is	essential	--	the	bereaved	husband	and	the	bereaved	mother,	the	two	closest
survivors,	together."
Mulla	Nasrudin	turned	to	look	at	the	large	and	sobbing	figure	of	his	mother-in-
law	and	 said,	 "Well,	 all	 right	 then.	But	 I	 tell	 you	 right	 now	 that	 it	 is	 going	 to
spoil	the	pleasure	of	the	occasion."
Your	 black	 dress	 cannot	 hide	 the	 truth,	 your	 tears	 cannot	 hide	 the	 truth.	Deep
down	 he	 was	 feeling	 happy	 that	 now	 he	 was	 free,	 now	 he	 was	 no	 more	 in
bondage	with	this	woman.	Just	on	the	surface	he	was	showing	his	bereavement.
Truth	has	a	 tendency	 to	 reveal	 itself.	 If	you	 just	become	a	 little	alert,	you	will
always	know	what	is	true.	Truth	need	not	be	learnt;	one	needs	just	to	be	a	little
alert,	and	then	the	truth	reveals	itself.	Revelation	is	intrinsic	to	truth.	And	when
truth	is	revealed,	a	thousand	and	one	lies	are	also	revealed	simultaneously,	all	the
lies	that	were	pretending	to	be	truth	when	the	truth	was	not	known.
It	 happened:	 Abdul	 Rehman	 was	 very	 sick,	 a	 friend	 of	 Mulla	 Nasrudin.
Everybody	was	worried	about	 the	 sick	man.	He	was	very	 sick	 indeed,	 and	his
friends	took	turns	visiting	him	to	keep	up	his	spirits.
The	night	Mulla	Nasrudin	went	he	was	warned	in	advance	that	Abdul	Rehman
was	 very	 low	 and	 he	must	 be	 extremely	 careful	 to	 say	 nothing	 discouraging.
Nasrudin	 was	 doing	 beautifully,	 and	 actually	 had	 Rehman	 chuckling	 over	 a
number	of	funny	stories.	But	suddenly	however,	the	Mulla	stopped	and	began	to
shake	his	head.
"What	is	that?	What	is	the	matter,	Mulla?"	said	Rehman	anxiously.
"I	was	just	thinking,"	said	Nasrudin,	"how	in	the	name	of	the	Holy	Prophet	are
they	going	to	get	a	coffin	down	the	crooked	stairs	in	this	house?"
Now	on	the	surface	he	was	trying	to	encourage	the	man,	but	deep	down	he	knew
that	he	was	going	to	die,	and	deep	down	an	undercurrent:	how	are	they	going	to
get	the	coffin	down?	--	the	staircase	is	so	crooked.
Truth	 has	 a	 tendency	 to	 reveal	 itself.	 Just	 be	 a	 little	 alert	 and	 your	 heart	 will
show	you	 the	path.	And	 then	nothing	will	be	able	 to	hide	behind	 love.	Things
can	hide	behind	love	because	you	are	unconscious.	It	is	not	a	fault	of	love,	it	is
your	 unconsciousness.	 So	 don't	 distrust	 love,	 distrust	 unconsciousness.	 Don't
lose	faith	in	love	--	love	has	not	done	anything	to	you.	Nothing	wrong	has	love
done	to	you.	In	fact,	in	spite	of	you,	it	is	love	that	is	keeping	you	alive.	I	repeat:
in	spite	of	you	it	is	love	that	is	keeping	you	alive.	Lose	faith	in	unconsciousness.
If	you	are	conscious,	then	nothing	can	hide	behind	love.	Then	no	counterfeit	can
deceive	you.
"It	was	something	else,	always	in	the	name	of	love.	Thus	I	now	have	no	faith	in
love."
That	is	absurd.	The	logic	is	incorrect.	You	have	not	come	across	love;	how	can
you	lose	faith	in	love?	Dig	a	little	more,	go	to	the	very	end	of	it:	you	will	always
find	purer	gold,	the	deeper	you	go	into	yourself.
It	 is	 just	 like	digging	a	well:	 first	you	dig	a	well	 --	you	 just	get	 stones,	 rocks,
rubbish;	 after	 that	 layer,	 more	 pure	 soil;	 after	 that	 layer,	 wet	 soil;	 after	 that,
muddy	water;	after	that,	purer	water.	The	deeper	you	go,	purer	springs	become
available.	And	this	is	so	inside	your	heart	also.	On	the	surface	there	is	just	dirt,
dust,	 rocks,	 then	 dry	 earth,	 then	 wet	 earth,	 then	 muddy	 water.	 But	 don't	 lose
faith;	you	are	coming	closer	to	home	--	then,	pure	water.
"I	just	cannot	believe	that	we	can	love	as	we	are."	That's	true	--	you	cannot	love
the	way	you	are.	But	there	is	no	need	to	choose	to	remain	the	way	you	are.	You
can	change.	There	is	no	need	to	cling	to	your	structure.	You	can	destructure	it.
That's	 what	 I'm	 doing	 here;	 that's	 all	 that	 we	 are	 trying	 to	 do	 together:	 to
destructure	you	so	that	you	can	be	realigned,	so	that	you	can	be	rearranged,	so
that	the	old	disappears	and	the	new	is	born.
This	 is	 true	 --	 that	 the	way	you	are	you	cannot	 love.	But	 there	 is	no	 reason	 to
lose	faith	in	love.	Lose	faith	in	yourself,	lose	faith	in	your	ego.	If	it	is	you	who	is
preventing	 you	 from	 loving,	 then	 drop	 this	 you	 --	 because	 love	 is	 worth	 it.
Millions	 of	 you's	 are	 not	 as	 valuable	 as	 a	 single	 moment	 of	 love.	 Drop	 this
structure.	Choose	the	sky,	don't	choose	the	cage.
The	 you	you	 are	 feeling	 you	 are	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 cage	 given	 by	 the	 society.
Choose	the	sky	drop	the	cage.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
TWO	MORNINGS	AGO	I	SLEPT	THROUGH	THE	LECTURE	AND	WOKE
UP	AT
THE	END	WITH	THE	WORD	'SINGLE-MINDEDNESS'	ON	MY	MIND.	SO
WHAT
TO	DO?
Be	single-minded.	The	message	is	so	clear;	what	is	there	to	ask?	Your	being	has
given	you	a	great	message.
Sometimes	it	happens	after	deep	sleep	that	you	have	messages	from	your	deepest
core	of	being.	Start	listening	to	your	first	thoughts	in	the	morning;	out	of	sleep
you	are	very	close	to	your	being.	There	is	more	possibility,	within	two	or	three
seconds	 of	 waking,	 to	 have	 some	 glimpses	 of	 your	 deepest	 being,	 some
messages.	After	two,	three	seconds,	the	contact	will	be	lost.	You	will	again	be	in
the	world,	 thrown	into	 the	world.	But	sometimes	it	happens,	as	 it	happens	to	a
few	people:	listening	to	me	they	fall	asleep.	There	are	different	types	of	people.
For	example,	just	now	Sheela	is	fast	asleep,	but	her	sleep	is	really	beautiful:	it	is
a	sort	of	trance,	not	sleep.	She	is	not	just	asleep;	her	sleep	is	luminous.	She	has
simply	relaxed.
Listening	to	me	deeply,	she	could	not	remain	tense.	All	 tension	is	gone,	so	she
simply	relaxed,	relaxed	into	a	deeper	layer	of	her	own	being.	To	all	people	from
the	outside	she	will	look	fast	asleep.	When	she	is	back,	even	she	may	not	be	able
to	understand	what	has	happened	because	to	her	also	it	may	look	like	sleep.	It	is
not	sleep;	it	is	a	certain	stage:	in	yoga	we	call	it	TANDRA.	It	is	a	midway	point
between	waking	and	sleep,	and	without	dreams.
So	 there	are	 two	midway	stages	between	deep	sleep	and	waking.	The	ordinary
stage	 is	 dreaming:	 if	 you	 are	 just	 in	 between,	 then	 you	 dream.	Either	 you	 are
awake,	or	you	are	fast	asleep,	or	you	are	dreaming.	And	dreaming	is	just	in	the
middle	of	waking	and	sleeping;	it	is	the	middle	passage.	This	is	ordinarily	so.
But	if	your	meditation	goes	deeper,	or,	if	your	love	goes	deeper,	the	first	change
that	happens	in	consciousness	is	a	change	in	the	middle	stage	--	dreaming	stops.
Now	it	is	very	difficult	to	say	what	it	is.	You	can	think	about	it	as	sleep,	or	you
can	think	about	it	as	waking;	it	is	both	together	--	just	a	balance	between	the	two,
a	very	balanced	stage.
TANDRA	is	the	first	glimpse,	the	beginning	of	SATORI.	Dreams	disappear	first.
Then	 in	 the	 next	 step,	 sleep	 disappears;	 and	 in	 the	 third	 step,	 what	 you	 call
waking,	that	disappears.	And	when	all	three	have	disappeared,	then	arises	what
we	call	REAL	waking.
Then	 one	 becomes	 enlightened.	 TANDRA	 is	 the	 first	 step;	 dreams	 are
disappearing.
So	 sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 people	 fall	 asleep	 here	 --	 they	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of
trance.
TANDRA	can	be	translated	as	trance.	For	all	practical	purposes,	they	are	asleep.
They	will	not	be	able	to	remember	my	words,	but	after	they	are	back	they	will
remember	that	something	very	deep	and	silent	has	happened.	Something	in	their
energy	has	changed.
It	is	a	deep	relaxation.	In	this	relaxation	if	some	message	arises,	listen	to	it	very
carefully.
"Two	mornings	ago	I	slept	through	the	lecture	and	woke	up	at	the	end	with	the
word
'single-mindedness'	 on	 my	 mind."	 That	 morning	 I	 had	 been	 talking	 about
singlemindedness.
The	question	is	old.	The	question	is	concerned	with	the	series	of	Zen	stories.
I	was	 talking	 that	morning	about	 single-mindedness.	You	may	not	have	heard;
you	were	 in	TANDRA,	 in	 trance	 to	what	 I	was	 saying.	But	what	 I	wanted	 to
deliver	to	you	has	been	delivered.	Your	being	listened,	your	body	listened,	your
totality	drank	out	of	me,	absorbed	what	I	was	saying,	what	I	was	being	here.	And
when	you	came	back,	as	a	condensed	message,	a	gift	from	your	deepest	core	to
your	 periphery,	 from	 your	 center	 to	 your	 circumference,	 the	 word	 'single-
mindedness'	arose	in	your	consciousness.	Now	you	ask	what	to	do?.	--	be	single-
minded!
And	what	do	 I	mean	when	 I	 say	 'be	 single-minded'?	 In	 fact,	 to	 say	 'be	 single-
minded'	 is	 almost	 to	 say	 'be	without	mind'	 --	 because	 the	mind	 exists	 only	 in
conflict.	Mind	exists	only	as	many.	When	the	manyness	has	disappeared	and	the
crowd	 is	no	more	 there,	we	call	 it	 single-minded	 --	or	you	can	call	 it	no-mind
because	the	mind	has	disappeared.
Mind	is	many;	single	mind	is	no-mind.	When	you	are	one,	together	--	no	conflict
inside,	 no	 division,	 all	 demons	 gone,	 you	 have	 become	 indivisible,,everything
joined	together	in	a	deep	coherence	and	harmony,	a	single	orchestra	--	then	there
is	no-mind.
Single-mindedness	is	a	term	from	Yoga	tradition.	No-mind	means	the	same,	but
the	term	belongs	to	another	tradition,	Zen.	But	they	both	mean	the	same:	don't	be
a	crowd,	don't	be	poly-psychic.	Become	uni-psychic,	become	one.
The	fifth	question:
Question	5
HOW	CAN	I	DISTINGUISH	BETWEEN	ENLIGHTENED	SELF-LOVE	AND
EGOMANIA?
The	distinction	is	subtle	but	very	clear,	not	difficult;	subtle,	but	not	difficult.	If
you	have	 egomania,	 it	will	 create	more	 and	more	misery	 for	 you.	Misery	will
indicate	that	you	are	ill.	Egomania	is	a	disease,	a	cancer	of	the	soul.	Egomania
will	make	you	more	and	more	tense,	will	make	you	more	and	more	up-tight,	will
not	allow	you	to	relax	at	all.	It	will	drive	you	towards	insanity.
Self-love	is	just	the	opposite	of	egomania.	In	self-love	there	is	no	self,	only	love.
In	egomania	there	is	no	love,	only	self.	In	self-love	you	will	start	becoming	more
and	 more	 relaxed.	 A	 person	 who	 loves	 himself	 is	 totally	 relaxed.	 To	 love
somebody	else	may	create	a	little	tension,	because	the	other	need	not	be	always
in	 tune	 with	 you.	 The	 other	 may	 have	 his	 or	 her	 own	 ideas.	 The	 other	 is	 a
different	 world;	 there	 is	 every	 possibility	 of	 collision,	 clash.	 There	 is	 every
possibility	of	storm	and	thunder	because	the	other	is	a	different	world.	There	is
always	a	subtle	struggle	going	on.	But	when	you	love	yourself,	there	is	nobody
else.	There	is	no	conflict	--	it	is	pure	silence,	it	is	tremendous	delight.
You	are	alone;	nobody	disturbs	you.	The	other	is	not	needed	at	all.	And	to	me,	a
person	 who	 has	 become	 capable	 of	 such	 deep	 love	 towards	 himself	 becomes
capable	of	loving	others.	If	you	cannot	love	yourself,	how	can	you	love	others?
It	must	first	happen	at	close	quarters,	it	must	first	happen	within	you,	to	spread
towards	others.
People	 try	 to	 love	others,	not	being	at	all	aware	 that	 they	have	not	even	 loved
themselves.
How	can	you	love	others?	That	which	you	don't	have	you	cannot	share.	You	can
give	to	others	only	that	which	you	have	already	with	you.
So	the	first	and	the	most	basic	step	towards	love	is	love	of	oneself;	but	it	has	no
self	in	it.
Let	me	explain	it	to	you.
The	 'I'	arises	only	as	a	contrast	 to	 the	 'thou'.	 'I'	and	 'thou'	exist	 together.	The	 'I'
can	exist	 in	 two	dimensions.	One	dimension	 is	 'I-it':	you	 --	your	house,	you	 --
your	car,	you	--	your	money;	'I-it'.	When	there	is	this	'I',	this	'I'	of	'I-it',	your	'I'	is
almost	 like	 a	 thing.	 It	 is	 not	 consciousness;	 it	 is	 fast	 asleep,	 snoring.	 Your
consciousness	is	not	there.	You	are	just	like	things,	a	thing	amidst	things:	part	of
your	house,	part	of	your	furniture,	part	of	your	money.
Have	you	watched	it?	A	man	who	is	 too	greedy	about	money,	by	and	by	starts
having	the	qualities	of	money.	He	becomes	just	money.	He	loses	spirituality,	he
is	no	more	a	spirit.
He	is	reduced	to	a	thing.	If	you	love	money,	you	will	become	like	money.	If	you
love	your	house,	by	and	by	you	will	become	material.	Whatsoever	you	love,	you
become.
Love	is	alchemical.	Never	love	the	wrong	thing,	because	it	will	 transform	you.
Nothing	is	so	transforming	as	love.	Love	something	which	can	raise	you	higher,
to	higher	altitudes.
Love	something	beyond	you.
That	 is	 the	whole	effect	of	 religion:	 to	give	you	a	 love-object	 like	God	so	 that
there	is	no	way	to	fall	down.	One	has	to	rise.
One	sort	of	'I'	exists	as	'I-it';	another	sort	of	'I'	exists	as	'I-thou'.	When	you	love	a
person,	another	type	of	'I'	arises	in	you:	'I	thou'.	You	love	a	person,	you	become	a
person.
But	what	about	self-love?.	--	 there	is	no	 'it'	and	there	is	no	 'thou'.	 'I'	disappears
because	'I'
can	 exist	 only	 in	 two	 contexts:	 'it'	 and	 'thou'.	 'I'	 is	 the	 figure,	 'it'	 and	 'thou'
function	as	the	field.	When	the	field	disappears	the	'I'	disappears.	When	you	are
left	alone,	you	are,	but	you	don't	have	an	'I',	you	don't	feel	any	'I'.	You	are	simply
a	deep	AMNESS.	Ordinarily	we	say	 'I	am'.	In	that	state,	when	you	are	deep	in
love	 with	 yourself,	 'I'	 disappears.	 Only	 amness,	 pure	 existence,	 pure	 being
remains.	It	will	fill	you	with	tremendous	bliss.	It	will	make	you	a	celebration,	a
rejoicing.	There	will	be	no	problem	in	distinguishing	between	them.
If	you	are	getting	more	and	more	miserable,	then	you	are	on	the	trip	of	being	an
egomaniac.	If	you	are	becoming	more	and	more	tranquil,	silent,	happy,	together,
then	you	are	on	another	trip	--	the	trip	of	self-love.	If	you	are	on	the	trip	of	ego
you	 will	 become	 destructive	 to	 others	 --	 because	 the	 ego	 tries	 to	 destroy	 the
'thou'.	If	you	are	moving	towards	self-love,	the	ego	will	disappear.	And	when	the
ego	 disappears,	 you	 allow	 the	 other	 to	 be	 himself	 or	 herself;	 you	 give	 total
freedom.	If	you	don't	have	any	ego	you	cannot	create	an	 imprisonment	 for	 the
other	you	love;	you	cannot	create	a	cage.	You	allow	the	other	to	be	an	eagle	in
the	 high	 heavens.	You	 allow	 the	 other	 to	 be	 himself	 or	 herself;	 you	 give	 total
freedom.	 Love	 gives	 total	 freedom.	 Love	 IS	 freedom	 --	 freedom	 for	 you	 and
freedom	 for	 the	 object	 of	 your	 love.	 Ego	 is	 bondage	 --	 bondage	 for	 you	 and
bondage	for	your	victim.
But	ego	can	play	very	deep	tricks	with	you.	It	is	very	cunning,	and	subtle	are	its
ways:	it	can	pretend	to	be	self-love.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
Mulla	Nasrudin's	face	lit	up	as	he	recognized	the	man	who	was	walking	ahead	of
him	down	the	subway	stairs.	He	slapped	the	man	so	heartily	on	the	back	that	the
man	nearly	collapsed,	and	cried,	"Goldberg,	I	hardly	recognized	you!	Why,	you
have	 gained	 thirty	 pounds	 since	 I	 saw	 you	 last.	And	 you	 have	 had	 your	 nose
fixed,	and	I	swear	you	are	about	two	feet	taller."
The	man	looked	at	him	angrily.	"I	beg	your	pardon,"	he	said	in	icy	tones,	"but	I
do	not	happen	to	be	Goldberg."
"Aha!"	said	Mulla	Nasrudin,	"so	you	have	even	changed	your	name?"
The	ego	is	very	cunning	and	very	self-justifying,	very	self-rationalizing.	If	you
are	not	very	alert	it	can	start	hiding	itself	behind	self-love.	The	very	word	'self'
will	 become	 a	 protection	 for	 it.	 It	 can	 say,	 "I	 am	your	 self."	 It	 can	 change	 its
weight,	it	can	change	its	height,	it	can	change	its	name.	And	because	it	is	just	an
idea,	there	is	no	problem	about	it:	it	can	become	small,	it	can	become	big.	It	is
just	your	fantasy.
Be	 very	 careful.	 If	 you	 really	want	 to	 grow	 in	 love,	much	 carefulness	will	 be
needed.
Each	step	has	 to	be	 taken	in	deep	alertness	so	ego	cannot	find	any	loophole	 to
hide	behind.
Your	real	self	is	neither	I	nor	thou;	it	is	neither	you	nor	the	other.	Your	real	self	is
altogether	transcendental.	What	you	call	'I'	is	not	your	real	self.	'I'	is	imposed	on
reality.
When	you	call	somebody	'you',	you	are	not	addressing	the	real	self	of	the	other.
Again	you	have	 imposed	a	 label	on	 it.	When	all	 the	 labels	are	 taken	away,	 the
real	self	remains	-
-	and	the	real	self	is	as	much	yours	as	it	is	others.	The	real	self	is	one.
That's	why	we	go	on	 saying	 that	we	participate	 in	 each	other's	 beings,	we	 are
members	of	each	other.	Our	real	reality	is	God.	We	may	be	like	icebergs	floating
in	 the	ocean	--	 they	appear	 to	be	separate	--	but	once	we	melt,	nothing	will	be
left.	Definition	will	disappear,	limitation	will	disappear,	and	the	iceberg	will	not
be	there.	It	will	become	part	of	the	ocean.
The	 ego	 is	 an	 iceberg.	Melt	 it.	Melt	 it	 in	 deep	 love,	 so	 it	 disappears	 and	 you
become	part	of	the	ocean.
I	have	heard....
The	Judge	looked	very	severe.	"Mulla,"	he	said,	"your	wife	says	you	hit	her	over
the	head	with	a	baseball	bat	and	threw	her	down	a	flight	of	stairs.	What	have	you
got	to	say	for	yourself?"
Mulla	Nasrudin	rubbed	the	side	of	his	nose	with	his	hand,	and	meditated.	Finally
he	said,
"Your	Honor,	I	guess	there	are	three	sides	to	this	case:	my	wife's	story,	my	story,
and	the	truth."
Yes,	he	is	perfectly	right.
"You	have	heard	about	two	sides	of	a	truth,"	he	said,	"but	there	are	three	sides"	--
and	he	is	exactly	right.	There	is	your	story,	my	story,	and	the	truth;	I	and	you	and
the	truth.
The	truth	is	neither	I	nor	you.	I	and	you	is	an	imposition	on	the	vastness	of	the
truth.	'I'	is	false,	'you'	is	false;	utilitarian,	useful	in	the	world.	It	will	be	difficult
to	manage	 the	world	without	 'I'	 and	 'you'.	Good	 --	 use	 them,	but	 they	 are	 just
devices	of	the	world.	In	reality,	there	is	neither	'you'	nor	'I'.	Something,	someone,
some	energy	exists	with	no	limitations,	with	no	boundaries.	Out	of	it	we	come,
and	into	it	we	disappear	again.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
EVEN	 IF	 SOMETIMES	 LOVE-LIKE	 FEELINGS	 ARISE	 IN	 MY	 HEART,
IMMEDIATELY	 THE	NEXT	MOMENT	 I	 START	 FEELING	 'THIS	 IS	 NOT
LOVE,	THIS	IS	NOT	LOVE	AT	ALL:	 IT	IS	ALL	MY	HIDDEN	CRAVINGS
FOR	SEX	AND
ALL	THAT'.
So	what	is	wrong	in	it?	Love	has	to	arise	out	of	lust.	If	you	avoid	lust,	you	will
be	avoiding	the	whole	possibility	of	love	itself.	Love	is	not	lust,	true;	but	love	is
not	 without	 lust	 --	 that	 too	 is	 true.	 Love	 is	 higher	 than	 lust,	 yes,	 but	 if	 you
destroy	lust	completely,	you	destroy	the	very	possibility	of	the	flower	arising	out
of	the	mud.	Love	is	the	lotus,	lust	is	the	mud	the	lotus	arises	out	of.	Remember
it;	otherwise	you	will	never	attain	to	love.	At	the	most,	you	can	pretend	that	you
have	transcended	lust.	Because	without	love,	nobody	can	transcend	lust;	you	can
repress	 it.	 Repressed,	 it	 becomes	 more	 poisonous.	 It	 spreads	 into	 your	 whole
system,	it	becomes	toxic,	it	destroys	you.	Lust	transformed	into	love	gives	you	a
glow,	 a	 radiance.	 You	 start	 feeling	 light,	 as	 if	 you	 can	 fly.	 You	 start	 gaining
wings.	With	lust	repressed	you	become	heavy,	as	if	you	are	carrying	a	weight,	as
if	 a	 big	 rock	 is	 hanging	 around	 your	 neck.	 With	 lust	 repressed,	 you	 lose	 all
opportunities	to	fly	in	the	sky.	With	lust	transformed	into	love,	you	have	passed
the	test	of	existence.
You	have	been	given	a	raw	material	to	work,	to	be	creative.	Lust	is	raw	material.
I	have	heard....
Berkowitz	 and	Michaelson,	who	were	 not	 only	 business	 partners	 but	 life-long
friends,	made	a	pact:	that	whichever	one	died	first	would	come	back	and	tell	the
other	what	it	was	like	in	heaven.
Six	months	later,	Berkowitz	died.	He	was	a	very	moral	man,	almost	saint-like,	a
puritan	who	had	never	done	anything	wrong,	who	had	always	remained	afraid	of
lust	and	sex.
And	Michaelson	waited	for	his	dear	departed	holy	friend	to	show	some	sign	that
he	had	returned	to	earth.	Michaelson	passed	the	time	impatiently	hoping	for	and
eagerly	awaiting	a	message	from	Berkowitz.
Then	one	year	after	the	day	of	his	death,	Berkowitz	spoke	to	Michaelson.	It	was
late	at	night;	Michaelson	was	in	bed.
"Michaelson,	Michaelson,"	echoed	the	voice.
"Is	that	you,	Berkowitz?"
"Yes."
"What	is	it	like	where	you	are?"
"We	 have	 breakfast	 and	 then	we	make	 love,	 then	we	 eat	 lunch	 and	we	make
love,	we	have	dinner	and	then	we	make	love."
"Is	that	what	heaven	is	like?"	asked	Michaelson.
"Who	said	anything	about	heaven?"	said	Berkowitz.	"I	am	in	Wisconsin,	and	I
am	a	bull."
Remember,	 this	 happens	 to	 people	 who	 repress	 sex.	 Nothing	 else	 can	 happen
because	 that	whole	energy	 repressed	becomes	a	 load	and	pulls	you	down.	You
move	 towards	 lower	 stages	of	being.	 If	 love	arises	out	of	 lust,	you	 start	 rising
towards	higher	being.
So	remember,	what	you	want	to	become	--	a	Buddha	or	a	bull	--	depends	on	you.
If	you	want	to	become	a	Buddha,	then	don't	be	afraid	of	sex.	Move	into	it,	know
it	 well,	 become	 more	 and	 more	 alert	 about	 it.	 Be	 careful;	 it	 is	 tremendously
valuable	energy.	Make	it	a	meditation	and	transform	it,	by	and	by,	into	love.	It	is
raw	material,	like	a	raw	diamond:	you	have	to	cut	it,	polish	it;	then	it	becomes	of
tremendous	 value.	 If	 somebody	gives	 you	 an	 unpolished,	 raw,	 uncut	 diamond,
you	may	not	even	recognize	that	it	is	a	diamond.
Even	the	Kohinoor	in	its	raw	state	is	worthless.
Lust	is	a	Kohinoor:	it	has	to	be	polished,	it	has	to	be	understood.
The	questioner	seems	to	be	afraid	and	antagonistic:	"It	is	all	my	hidden	cravings
for	sex	and	all	that."	There	is	a	condemnation	in	it.	Nothing	is	wrong;	man	is	a
sexual	animal.
That's	how	we	are.	That's	the	way	life	means	us	to	be.	That's	how	we	have	found
ourselves	here.	Go	into	it.	Without	going,	you	will	never	be	able	to	transform	it.
I'm	 not	 speaking	 for	 mere	 indulgence.	 I'm	 saying	 move	 into	 it	 with	 deep
meditative	energy	 to	understand	what	 it	 is.	 It	must	be	something	 tremendously
valuable	because	you	have	come	out	of	it,	because	the	whole	existence	enjoys	it,
because	the	whole	existence	is	sexual.	Sex	is	 the	way	God	has	chosen	to	be	in
the	world,	notwithstanding	what	Christians	go	on	saying	--	that	Jesus	was	born
out	of	a	virgin	woman	--	all	foolishness.
They	pretend	that	sex	was	not	involved	in	Jesus'	birth.	They	are	so	afraid	of	sex
that	they	create	foolish	stories	like	this:	that	Jesus	is	born	out	of	a	virgin	Mary.
Mary	 must	 have	 been	 very	 pure,	 that's	 true;	 she	 must	 have	 been	 spiritually
virgin,	that	is	true	--	but	there	is	no	way	to	enter	into	life	without	passing	through
the	energy	that	sex	is.	The	body	knows	no	other	law.	And	nature	is	all-inclusive:
it	believes	in	no	exceptions,	it	allows	no	exceptions.	You	are	born	out	of	sex,	you
are	full	of	sex	energy.	But	this	is	not	the	end;	this	may	be	the	beginning.	Sex	is
the	beginning	but	not	the	end.
There	are	three	types	of	people.	One	thinks	that	sex	is	the	end	also.	They	are	the
people	who	live	a	life	of	indulgence.	They	miss,	because	sex	is	the	beginning	but
not	the	end.
Then	 there	 are	 people	 who	 are	 against	 indulgence.	 They	 take	 the	 other,	 the
opposite	 extreme:	 they	 don't	 want	 sex	 even	 to	 be	 the	 beginning,	 so	 they	 start
cutting	it.	Cutting	it,	they	cut	themselves.	Destroying	it,	they	destroy	themselves,
they	wither	away.	Both	are	foolish	attitudes.
There	is	 the	third	possibility:	 the	possibility	of	 the	wise	man	who	looks	at	 life,
who	has	no	theories	to	enforce	on	life,	who	just	tries	to	understand.	He	comes	to
see	that	sex	is	the	beginning	but	not	the	end.	Sex	is	just	an	opportunity	to	grow
beyond	it,	but	one	has	to	pass	through	it.
The	last	question:
Question	7
OSHO,	I	USED	TO	THINK	I	KNEW	WHAT	SUBMISSION	WAS.	NOW	I	SEE
IT	--
IT	 WAS	 A	 POLITICAL	 MIND-TRIP	 TO	 BUY	 RELATIONS.	 NOW	 THAT
THERE	IS
NO	 PLACE	 TO	 STAND	 BUT	 WHERE	 I	 AM,	 BLISS	 HAS	 ENTERED.
THANK	YOU
FOR	TURNING	ME	ON	MYSELF.
It	is	from	Anup.
It	 is	 significant	 to	 have	 come	 to	 an	 understanding	 of	 what	 surrender	 or
submission	is.	It	is	one	of	the	keys,	but	people	are	very	afraid	to	use	it	--	because
if	you	surrender,	submit,	you	are	lost.	It	is	death-like.	It	is	as	if	one	is	committing
suicide.	 So	 people	 go	 on	 doing	 other	 things	 and	 they	 call	 it	 submission,
surrender.
To	have	this	understanding,	 this	glimpse	that	all	 that	you	have	up	to	now	been
thinking	 of	 as	 surrender,	 as	 submission	 is	 not	 the	 real	 thing,	 is	 a	 great	 step
towards	transformation.
Once	 you	 understand	 the	 false	 as	 the	 false,	 you	 are	 becoming	 capable	 of
knowing	the	real	as	the	real.	To	understand	the	false	as	the	false	is	the	beginning
of	understanding	the	real	as	the	real.	The	lies	have	to	be	exposed.	Once	lies	are
exposed,	truth	stands	nude,	naked,	revealed.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Direction	a	non-ending	process
