
Osho
The	Hidden	Splendor
Talks	given	from	12/03/87	pm	to	26/03/87	am
English	Discourse	series
27	Chapters
Year	published:	1987
1
Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence
2
2
Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
13
3
Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
23
4
Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
37
5
This	moment	is	more	than	enough
49
6
Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
61
7
Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
70
8
The	taste	of	your	being
80
9
Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
89
10	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
99
11	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
109
12	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
121
13	Truth	is	not	divisible
130
14	No	time	left	for	any	device
141
15	This	is	the	last	dance
151
16	Love	is	always	an	emperor
160
17	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
170
18	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
181
19	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
189
20	Your	longing	is	the	seed
199
21	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
207
22	What	more	do	you	want?
219
23	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being
229
24	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
239
25	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
248
26	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
257
27	Harmony	is	your	reality
268
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	1
Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence
12	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	CIRCLE	SEEMS	TO	BE	COMPLETE.	I	FEEL	MYSELF	ARRIVING	AT	A
PLACE	 I	 HAD	 LEFT	 IN	 MY	 CHILDHOOD,	 LIVING	 AN	 INNOCENT,
POETIC,	ECSTATIC	LIFE.
THE	 WHOLE	 UNIVERSE	 WAS	 MY	 FAMILY.	 THEN	 --	 FIRST	 OUT	 OF
TRUST,	THEN
OUT	OF	FEAR	--	I	ALLOWED	SOCIETY	TO	TAKE	OVER.	NOW	ALL	HAS
PEELED
OFF.	I	HAVE	WALKED	THROUGH	THE	PAIN,	THE	FEAR	IS	GONE,	THE
AMBITION
IS	 GONE.	 KNOWING	 ABOUT	 THIS	 WHOLE	 JOURNEY	 WITH	 OPEN
EYES	I	AM
SITTING	UNDER	THE	SKY
DRINKING	THE	SWEET	SPLENDOR;	DAY	AND	NIGHT.	OSHO,	THERE
SEEMS
TO	BE	NO	DARKNESS,	NO	END,	SOMETIMES	NOT	EVEN	ME.
Deva	 Pratito,	 it	 rarely	 happens	 that	 one	 attains	 his	 childhood	 again.	 It	 should
happen	more.
It	should	happen	to	everybody	because	without	its	happening,	your	life	remains
incomplete.
You	go	on	missing	 something	 --	 something	 that	 you	had	known	but	 you	have
forgotten	--	a	faded	memory,	a	lost	remembrance.	And	the	gap	is	not	only	a	gap,
it	is	a	wound.	It	hurts,	because	you	had	brought	something	with	your	birth	into
the	world	and	you	have	lost	it	somewhere.	And	it	seems	impossible	to	find	it	in
this	 crowded	 universe.	 But	 unless	 it	 happens,	 your	 life	 has	 been	 in	 vain,	 a
misery,	a	suffering,	a	futile	longing,	a	meaningless	desire,	a	thirst	that	you	know
cannot	be	quenched.
Deva	 Pratito,	 you	 are	 blessed.	And	 remember	 always	 to	 pray	 to	 the	 existence
that	everybody	should	be	blessed	in	the	same	way.
You	are	 saying,	 "A	circle	 seems	 to	be	 complete."	 It	 is	 complete	 --	 don't	 say	 it
seems	 to	 be	 complete.	 "I	 feel	 myself	 arriving	 at	 a	 place	 I	 had	 left	 in	 my
childhood,	 living	an	innocent,	poetic,	ecstatic	 life.	The	whole	universe	was	my
family.	Then	--	first	out	of	trust	and	then	out	of	fear	--	I	allowed	society	to	take
over."
This	 is	 the	 greatest	 crime	 that	 society	 commits	 against	 every	 child.	 No	 other
crime	can	be	greater	 than	 this.	To	spoil	a	child's	 trust	 is	 to	spoil	his	whole	 life
because	 trust	 is	so	valuable	 that	 the	moment	you	 lose	 trust,	you	also	 lose	your
contact	with	your	own	being.
Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence.	Trust	is	the	purest	form	of	love,
and	once	trust	is	lost,	love	also	becomes	impossible.
But	 every	 child's	 trust	 is	 being	 exploited.	 He	 naturally	 trusts	 his	 parents	 and
because	 of	 his	 trust,	 they	 go	 on	 giving	 him	 beliefs	 which	 are	 poisonous,	 a
personality	 which	 is	 false,	 an	 ego	 which	 will	 deprive	 him	 of	 his	 own	 soul;
beliefs,	 thoughts,	 scriptures,	which	 are	 going	 to	 hinder	 his	 intelligence,	which
are	going	 to	prevent	his	 search	 for	 truth,	which	are	going	 to	make	him	part	of
some	stupid,	organized	religion.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
2
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	I	call	every	organized
religion	 stupid,	 because	 true	 religion	 can	 never	 be	 organized.	 True	 religion	 is
always	individual,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	crowd.	A	Jesus	can	be	religious
but	 not	 the	 Christians.	 The	 Christians	 are	 only	 carbon	 copies.	 They	 have
forgotten	their	own	originality,	their	own	individuality.
Jesus	was	not	 following	anybody.	He	was	not	 imitating	anybody.	That	was	his
fault,	that	he	did	not	allow	the	society	to	exploit	his	trust.	He	did	not	allow	the
crowd	to	reduce	him	into	a	false	personality.	He	remained	an	individual.
He	risked	his	life	but	he	did	not	compromise	with	the	society.	It	was	better	to	die
on	 the	 cross	 than	 to	 live	 as	 a	 hypocrite.	 At	 least	 on	 the	 cross	 he	 was	 true,
authentic	--	himself.
In	the	crowd,	he	would	have	lived,	but	not	his	own	life.	He	would	have	been	a
cog	in	the	machine	--	without	any	individuality,	without	any	intelligence	of	his
own,	 without	 any	 realization	 of	 truth,	 significance,	 beauty	 and	 the	 immense
grace	of	existence.
He	could	have	saved	his	 life	but	 in	 fact,	 that	would	have	been	crucifixion.	He
accepted	 being	 crucified	 --	 that	 was	 saving	 his	 life	 --	 fearlessly,	 trusting	 in
existence,	without	any	anger	against	the	crowd.	Even	at	the	last	moment	on	the
cross,	he	was	praying	for	the	crowd:
"Father,	forgive	them.	They	know	not	what	they	are	doing.	They	are	unconscious
people.	One	cannot	expect	from	unconscious	people	anything	more."
He	was	only	thirty-three;	a	long	life	was	ahead	of	him.	But	this	is	the	beauty	of
the	man,	 that	 he	 sacrificed	 that	 long	 life	which	would	have	been	meaningless,
false,	 pseudo,	 for	 something	 authentic,	 real	 --	 without	 any	 complaint,	 without
any	grudge	against	anybody.
First,	the	parents	exploit	the	child	because	he	cannot	even	conceive	that	they	will
be	deceiving	him	--	and	it	is	not	that	the	parents	deceive	the	child	intentionally.
They	are	unconscious.	They	have	also	been	deceived	by	their	parents.
Every	generation	has	 been	 corrupting	 every	new	generation.	The	parents	 don't
know	whether	 God	 exists	 or	 not,	 but	 they	 pretend	 before	 the	 child	 as	 if	 God
exists;	they	take	him	to	the	church,	or	to	the	synagogue,	or	to	the	temple.	Neither
they	know	nor	their	rabbis	and	their	bishops	and	their	priests	know.
It	is	a	very	mad	world.	Blind	people	are	leading	other	blind	people.	And	nobody
raises	the	question:	where	are	we	going	and	why?
From	the	very	beginning	I	refused	to	believe	in	anything	unless	I	was	convinced.
Everybody	was	 irritated	with	me	--	and	I	was	not	doing	any	harm	to	anybody.
They	 wanted	 me	 to	 go	 to	 the	 temple.	 They	 wanted	 me	 to	 touch	 the	 feet	 of
somebody	they	thought	was	a	saint.
I	said,	"I	don't	have	any	objection.	I	can	touch	his	feet.	I	can	even	touch	his	head,
but	at	least	I	must	know	why	I	am	doing	it.	What	qualities	has	this	man	got?"
And	the	replies	I	got	were	so	ridiculous...	"Because	this	man	has	renounced	the
world."
So	I	said,	"That	simply	proves	this	man	is	a	coward.	He's	an	escapist.	And	if	he
has	renounced	the	world	then	what	is	he	doing	here?	This	too	is	the	world!
"He	may	have	left	his	house	but	now	he's	staying	in	somebody	else's	house.	He
has	simply	renounced	his	responsibilities.	He	has	left	his	wife	and	his	children.
The	children	will	become	beggars,	the	wife	will	become	a	prostitute,	and	who	is
responsible	for	it?	And	this	man	has	become	a	parasite,	because	he	is	not	doing
anything.	His	whole	job	is	to	let	people	touch	his	feet."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
3
Chapter	 1	 -	 Trust	 is	 the	 bridge	 between	 you	 and	 existence	My	 father	 stopped
taking	me.	But	 I	would	 follow	him	 and	 he	would	 say,	 "Listen,	 you	 are	 not	 to
come	with	me."
I	said,	"I	am	not	coming	with	you.	And	this	road	does	not	belong	to	you.	I	don't
know	where	you	are	going	and	I	don't	even	want	to	know.	Neither	do	you	need
to	be	worried	about	me.	It	is	just	coincidence	that	you	happen	to	be	ahead	of	me
and	I	happen	to	be	behind	you."
He	would	stop.	 I	would	stop.	He	said,	 "This	 is	not	good,	creating	unnecessary
fuss	in	the	marketplace."
I	 said,	 "you	 are	 creating,	 I	 was	 walking	 silently.	 I	 have	 not	 raised	 a	 single
question.	Why	have	you	stopped?	And	if	you	can	stop	without	my	permission,
why	can't	I	stop	without	your	permission?	It	is	a	government	road."
And	finally	I	would	reach	wherever	he	was	going,	and	as	we	were	coming	near
the	 temple,	 or	 near	 the	 place	 where	 some	 saint	 was	 staying,	 he	 would	 start
persuading	me,	"Okay,	you	have	come	but	keep	quiet."
I	said,	"If	I	see	something	stupid,	I	cannot	keep	quiet.	I	need	honest	answers."
He	said,	"It	seems	I	will	have	to	stop	going	to	the	temple,	going	to	the	saints	--
just	because	of	you!"
I	said,	"It	does	not	matter,	I	can	go	without	you.	And	I	will	create	more	trouble
because	these	people	you	are	worshiping	are	the	ugliest	people	I	have	seen."
The	Hindu	saints	have	such	big	bellies	that	one	has	to	decide	whether	the	man
has	 the	 belly	 or	 the	 belly	 has	 the	 man.	 And	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 have
renounced	the	world!	So	I	used	to	ask:	"What	is	the	matter	with	his	belly,	is	he
pregnant?"
The	simple	fact	is,	the	people	who	renounce	sex	start	eating	more	and	more,	as	a
substitute.	Food	becomes	their	obsession.	These	big	bellies	of	Hindu	saints	are
nothing	but	symbolic	of	repressed	sex.
And	you	are	worshiping	these	psychologically	sick	people.	I	don't	see	any	light
in	their	eyes,	I	don't	see	any	grace	in	their	faces.	I	don't	see	any	authority	in	their
words.	They	quote	scriptures.	Their	whole	"being"	is	within	inverted	commas	--
they	don't	know	anything	on	their	own.
Gautam	Buddha	may	have	known,	but	 to	 repeat	his	words	does	not	mean	 that
you	 are	 also	 a	 knower.	Those	words	 can	be	 repeated	by	 a	 parrot,	 too.	But	 the
parrot	cannot	become	a	buddha.
I	 would	 go	 with	 my	 grandfather	 to	 the	 temples,	 and	 I	 would	 see	 people
worshiping	dead,	stone	statues	--	what	kind	of	humanity	have	we	created	--	just
because	somebody	has	said	that
"This	statue	is	the	statue	of	God."
Nobody	 has	 seen	 God.	 No	 photographer	 has	 even	 taken	 a	 single	 photograph.
How	have	these	sculptors	managed	to	make	these	statues?	Just	pure	imagination.
Gautam	Buddha	 died	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago,	 and	 his	 first	 statue	was	made
after	his	death,	five	hundred	years	later.	There	was	not	even	an	eye-witness	alive.
And	you	will	be	surprised	 to	know	that	 it	was	at	 the	 time	when	Alexander	 the
Great	came	to	India,	and	all	Gautam	Buddha's	statues	have	the	face	of	Alexander
the	Great!
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
4
Chapter	 1	 -	 Trust	 is	 the	 bridge	 between	 you	 and	 existence	 Alexander	 was	 a
beautiful	man,	young	and	powerful.	He	attracted	the	painters,	the	sculptors,	and
he	became	the	prototype	for	Gautam	Buddha,	for	Mahavira,	for	the	twenty-four
teerthankaras	of	the	Jainas.	None	of	them	have	the	Indian	face;	the	face	is	Greek.
But	my	grandfather	would	say,	"Don't	talk	such	things.	If	somebody	hears,	they
will	think	that	I	have	brought	you	basically	to	create	trouble."
I	said,	"You	are	wrong.	You	have	not	brought	me,	you	have	come	with	me.	I	was
coming	myself.	From	where	have	you	got	 the	 idea	 that	you	have	brought	me?
And	 unless	 somebody	 proves	 to	 me	 that	 these	 statues	 are	 of	 Buddha,	 or
Mahavira,	why	 should	 I	 be	 expected	 to	worship	 them?	 In	 fact,	 they	 should	be
removed!	They	are	statues	of	Alexander	the	Great,	one	of	the	maddest	men	the
world	has	known	--	who	had	the	ambition	to	conquer	the	whole	world.
"And	these	people	--	Buddha	and	Mahavira	and	others	--	were	against	ambition,
against	desire.	They	renounced	their	kingdoms,	and	what	a	strange	fate:	instead
of	their	own	statues,	statues	of	Alexander	are	being	worshiped	in	all	the	temples
of	India."
But	 naturally	 parents	 are	 powerful,	 more	 knowledgeable,	 and	 children	 are
helpless,	innocent.	You	can	go	on	stuffing	into	their	heads	any	nonsense.	And	by
the	 time	they	mature,	 that	nonsense	will	have	become	so	deep-rooted	 that	 they
will	be	ready	to	fight	for	it,	they	will	be	ready	to	kill	for	it	or	be	killed	for	it.
What	are	religious	wars?	People	are	fighting	about	such	fictions	--	"God."	None
of	them	has	known	God,	neither	the	Christians	nor	the	Mohammedans,	but	they
are	fighting	that	their	god	is	right	and	your	god	is	wrong.
Simplified,	 they	are	saying,	"We	are	right.	You	are	wrong."	And	that	would	be
far	 more	 clear,	 that	 it	 is	 a	 fight	 of	 egos,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 religious	 war.	 It	 is	 not	 a
crusade.	Everybody	wants	 to	prove	his	ego	 to	be	right,	and	 that	can	be	proved
only	 if	 he	 proves	 that	 everybody	 else's	 ego	 is	 wrong.	 Then	 he	 attains	 to	 a
superiority,	he	becomes	higher,	holier.
So	 first,	 it	 is	 the	 simple	 trust	 of	 the	 child.	 And	 second...	 your	 observation,
Pratito,	is	absolutely	correct.	Second,	it	is	fear.
The	parents	can	punish	you;	they	can	deprive	you.	Teachers	can	punish	you.	You
have	to	accept	whatever	is	being	said	by	those	who	have	power	of	some	kind.	In
this	way,	everybody	has	been	distracted,	derailed	from	his	natural	path.	And	he
has	moved	in	a	direction	which	was	not	meant	for	him.
That's	why	there	is	always	anxiety,	anguish	and	a	deep	sadness.	This	sadness	is
existential:	 unless	 you	 can	 be	 your	 natural	 self,	 the	 spring	will	 never	 come	 to
you,	the	flowers	will	never	blossom	in	your	being,	love	will	never	grow.
You	will	never	know	the	glory	of	life	and	the	splendor	of	consciousness.
You	 are	 saying,	 "Now	all	 has	 peeled	off."	This	 is	my	whole	work	here	 --	 just
peeling	 the	 onions.	 Peeling	 to	 the	 point	 where	 nothing	 remains	 --	 just
spaciousness	and	silence.
Because	an	onion	is	nothing	but	layers	and	layers	and	layers,	and	when	the	final
layer	is	taken	off,	your	hands	are	empty.
In	those	empty	hands	descends	the	whole	glory,	the	whole	kingdom	of	God.
You	have	not	to	be	standing	in	the	way,	you	have	to	give	way	so	that	God	can
enter	in.
You	have	to	open	the	windows	and	doors	so	that	fresh	winds	can	come	in	and	the
life-giving	sun	rays	can	dance	inside	and	the	room	becomes	alive.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
5
Chapter	 1	 -	 Trust	 is	 the	 bridge	 between	 you	 and	 existence	Your	 beliefs,	 your
traditions,	your	 scriptures,	your	 religions	 --	 all	 are	 closing	your	being	 from	all
sides.	No	fresh	air,	no	sun	rays,	no	fragrance	coming	with	the	air,	no	life	dancing
inside	you	with	the	sunrays	--	how	can	you	be	happy?	How	can	you	be	blissful?
You	 have	 carved	 a	 grave	 for	 yourself.	 Alive,	 you	 are	 living	 inside	 the	 grave.
Anybody	who	 is	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	Hindu	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 or	 a	 Buddhist,	 is
living	in	a	grave.	He	is	no	more	alive.
It	is	good	that	you	were	courageous	enough	to	drop	all	the	layers	of	the	onion.
"I	 have	walked	 through	 the	 pain."	Yes,	 there	 is	 pain	 because	 all	 those	 beliefs,
thoughts,	philosophies,	have	become	so	much	part	of	you	that	it	is	not	like	taking
your	clothes	off	--	it	is	something	like	taking	your	skin	off.	It	is	painful.
But	this	pain	is	worth	it.	It	is	almost	the	pain	of	a	surgery,	to	remove	the	cancer
from	your	soul.	And	once	you	have	passed	through	the	pain,	the	fear	is	gone,	the
ambition	is	gone.
Pratito,	 your	 observation	 is	 immensely	 significant	 for	 everybody,	 because	 all
ambition	 is	 out	 of	 fear.	All	 ambition	 is	 out	 of	 an	 inferiority	 complex,	 because
you	are	afraid	to	be	yourself.
You	want	to	be	somebody	else	--	a	president	of	a	country,	a	prime	minister	of	a
country,	 the	 richest	 man...	 and	 people	 find	 different	 ways	 because	 so	 many
people	 cannot	 be	 the	 president,	 cannot	 be	 the	 richest,	 cannot	 be	 the	 prime
ministers.	Then	they	create	a	Rotary	Club.
Man's	stupidity	knows	no	limits.	In	a	Rotary	Club,	the	presidents	go	in	rotation.
Everybody	 becomes	 the	 president,	 everybody's	 ambition	 is	 fulfilled.	 But	 the
Rotary	Club	chooses	only	the	topmost	people	from	every	profession.	What	about
others?	They	create	a	Lions	Club!	And	there	are	many	other	clubs.	Their	whole
function	 is	 to	 give	 you	 some	 solace,	 that	 you	 are	 a	 president,	 that	 you	 are	 a
secretary,	that	you	are	not	just	nobody.
The	 Hindu	 shankaracharyas,	 who	 are	 equal	 to	 the	 Christian	 popes,	 call
themselves	"world	teachers"	--	jagat	guru.	I	used	to	live	in	a	place	--	Raipur.	And
I	 was	 surprised	 that	 a	 man	 in	 that	 city	 called	 himself	 Jagat	 Guru,	 the	 "world
teacher."	And	he	was	not	a	shankaracharya.
Even	the	shankaracharyas	are	not	jagat	guru,	because	the	whole	world	does	not
recognize	 them	 as	 masters.	 Even	 the	 pope,	 who	 has	 the	 greatest	 number	 of
followers	in	the	world	--
seven	 hundred	million	 people	 --	 cannot	 call	 himself	 a	world	 teacher.	And	 this
man	was	living	just	close	by	my	house.	So	one	day,	I	went	there.
He	was	having	a	massage	session;	one	of	his	disciples	was	massaging	him.	So	I
asked	him,
"I	heard	so	much	about	you;	 just	one	problem	has	been	puzzling	me.	How	did
you	become	the	world	teacher,	Jagat	Guru?"
He	said,	"It	is	a	long	story."
I	said,	"Howsoever	long	it	is,	you	tell	it."
And	it	turned	out	to	be	the	shortest	story	I	have	heard!	The	whole	story	was	that
the	 man	 who	 was	 massaging	 him,	 was	 named	 Jagat.	 And	 this	 was	 his	 only
teacher,	and	he	was	his	only	disciple,	so	somebody	suggested,	"Why	don't	you
call	 yourself	 Jagat	Guru?"	And	 the	 idea	was	 really	 very	 fulfilling!	He	 started
calling	himself	Jagat	Guru.
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 absolutely	 logical.	 In	 fact,	 the	 shankaracharyas	 are	 not	 Jagat
Guru,	you	are.
But	 you	were	 saying	 the	 story	 is	 very	 long	 --	 the	 story	 is	 so	 short,	 only	 two
persons!"
Man	is	in	search	of	being	somebody.
He	cannot	allow	himself	just	to	be	himself.
Just	to	be	himself	means	nobody.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
6
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	I	was	a	professor	in	a
university,	and	just	near	my	quarter	lived	the	head	of	the	economics	department.
And	I	was	wondering:	he	was	an	Indian	but	his	name	was	Doctor	Gilbert	Shaw.
This	is	a	strange	name	because	in	India...Gilbert	Shaw?
Finally,	I	introduced	myself	to	him.	And	I	asked	him,	"Just	one	enquiry	I	have,
that's	why	I	have	come	to	you.	How	come	you	have	got	such	a	strange	name,	Dr.
Gilbert	Shaw?"
He	became	serious.	But	I	said,	"You	will	have	to	tell	me.	Otherwise,	I	am	going
to	come	every	day	and	I	will	make	it	known	to	everybody	else	in	the	university:
'Ask	how	this	man	has	become	Gilbert	Shaw.'	So	you	simply	tell	me."
He	became	afraid	--	he	said,	"You	don't	 tell	anybody	because	I	have	been	here
for	 two	 years	 and	 nobody	 has	 enquired.	 The	 reality	 is,	 my	 name	 used	 to	 be
Gither	 Sahai.	But	when	 I	went	 to	London	 for	my	Ph.D.,	 I	 changed	 to	Gilbert
Shaw.	And	when	I	came	back...	it	looks	more	prestigious.	Just	the	name	seems	to
be	impressive	to	people	--	Gilbert	Shaw.	Gither	Sahai...	there	are	so	many	Gither
Sahais."	Gither	is	one	of	the	names	of	Krishna,	and	Sahai	is	his	caste.
Seeing	 thousands	 of	 people,	 I	 have	 come	 to	 know	 such	 sick	 minds.	 Even
changing	the	name,	giving	it	some	color	so	that	it	looks	Western	--	as	if	he	is	the
son	of	George	Bernard	Shaw,	or	at	least	some	faraway	relative.
People	want	to	be	somebody.	But	it	is	out	of	fear.	The	fear	is	that	nobody	knows
you;	whether	 you	 exist	 or	 not	makes	no	difference	 to	 the	world.	Whether	 you
have	been	here	or	not,	nobody	will	remember.
People	are	not	interested	in	living	but	being	remembered.
What	use	is	it	to	be	remembered	when	you	are	dead?
"...	Knowing	about	this	whole	journey	with	open	eyes	I	am	sitting	under	the	sky
drinking	the	sweet	splendor	day	and	night.	Osho,	there	seems	to	be	no	darkness,
no	end,	sometimes	not	even	me."
There	is	no	darkness.
Darkness	is	only	less	light.
Our	eyes	are	not	capable,	but	there	are	animals,	owls,	who	can	see	in	the	night	--
it	 is	 their	 day.	 In	 the	 morning	 comes	 their	 night,	 because	 their	 eyes	 are	 so
delicate	 that	 they	cannot	open	 their	eyes	 in	 the	hot	sun	rays.	So	 the	whole	day
long,	they	are	in	darkness	and	the	whole	night	they	are	in	light.	The	difference
between	darkness	and	light	is	only	of	degree.
It	 is	 the	 same	 as	 the	 difference	 between	 coldness	 and	 hotness:	 the	 same
thermometer	can	show	you	how	much	is	the	temperature.	Is	it	cold	or	is	it	hot?	--
the	difference	is	only	of	degrees.	Wherever	you	see	opposite	things,	remember:
the	 difference	 is	 only	 of	 degree.	 There	 is	 no	 opposition	 anywhere.	 There	 is
nothing	contradictory.
And	 certainly	 there	 is	 no	 end,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 beginning.	 Existence	 has
always	been	there,	is	there,	will	be	there,	and	we	are	part	of	it.	Forms	may	have
changed,	but	the	essential	reality	remains	the	same.
And	you	say,	"Sometimes	not	even	me."	What	is	happening	sometimes	will	soon
become	a	permanent	recognition	that	you	are	not.	Only	existence	is.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
7
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	But	the	first	glimpses
have	started	coming	to	you.	You	are	right,	the	circle	is	complete.
You	are	again	becoming	innocent,	full	of	wonder.	This	is	the	rebirth	Jesus	used
to	tell	of	--
"unless	you	are	born	again,	in	this	very	life,	you	will	not	attain	the	kingdom	of
God."
Before	death	comes,	 everybody	has	 to	become	a	child	again.	Then	 there	 is	no
death;	 then	 you	 die	 consciously,	 knowing	 perfectly	 well	 that	 only	 the	 body
which	 has	 become	 old	 and	 useless,	 is	 being	 renewed.	 You	 are	 moving	 your
house.
The	only	problem	in	attaining	to	your	childhood	again	is	 that	what,	because	of
trust	and	because	of	fear,	you	have	accepted	from	the	family,	from	the	society,
from	the	church,	from	the	school	--	all	that	has	to	be	dropped.
It	needs	courage.
But	what	 you	 drop	 is	meaningless,	 and	what	 you	 gain	 is	 so	 tremendous	 in	 its
truth,	in	its	beauty,	in	its	joy,	that	it	is	worth	it	to	drop	everything	and	become	an
innocent	child	again.
My	definition	of	sannyas	is:	the	struggle	to	become	a	child	again.	Of	course,	the
second	 childhood	 has	 a	 great	 difference	 from	 the	 first	 childhood:	 the	 first
childhood	was	ignorant,	and	the	second	childhood	is	innocent.	The	demarcation
point	is	very	difficult.	But	once	understood,	it	is	simple.
The	 ignorant	child	 looks	 innocent	but	he	will	 lose	his	 ignorance	soon.	He	will
have	to	become	knowledgeable.	As	he	grows,	he	will	have	to	attain	all	kinds	of
knowledge	just	to	survive	in	the	society.
But	 the	 second	 childhood	 comes	 after	 you	have	known	everything	 and	known
the	 futility	 of	 it	 and	 have	 dropped	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 ignorance	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 totally
different	kind	of	consciousness.
It	is	awareness.
You	 will	 not	 fall	 again	 into	 the	 trap	 of	 knowledgeability.	 The	 first	 was	 only
negative;	the	second	is	something	positive.
Ignorance	means	absence	of	knowledge.
And	innocence	means	presence	of	wonder.
A	young	woman	is	going	to	marry	a	Greek	man.	The	night	before	the	wedding,
her	mother	takes	her	aside.	"Now	look,"	the	mother	tells	her	daughter,	"Greeks
are	a	little	strange.	If	he	ever	tells	you	to	turn	over,	I	want	you	to	get	out	of	bed,
pack	your	clothes	and	come	back	home	to	me."
So	the	couple	get	married	and	everything	is	fine	for	the	first	two	years.
Then	 one	 night,	 while	 they	 were	 in	 bed,	 the	 man	 says	 to	 the	 woman,
"Sweetheart,	roll	over	now."
She	gets	very	upset,	gets	out	of	bed,	puts	her	clothes	on	and	starts	packing	her
suitcase.	As	she's	ready	to	leave,	the	confused	man	says,	"Darling,	wait	a	minute.
What	is	the	matter?"
Holding	her	 tears	back,	she	says:	"My	mother	 told	me	that	you	Greek	men	are
strange,	and	that	if	you	ever	told	me	to	roll	over	I	was	to	get	my	clothes	on,	leave
you	and	go	home	to	her."
"But	honey,"	says	the	man,	"don't	you	want	children?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
8
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
AGAIN,	YOU	INVITE	US	TO	KILL	THE	BUDDHA	WHEN	WE	MEET	HIM
ON	THE
PATH.	YOU	SAID	THAT	THE	MASTER	IS	THE	LAST	ATTACHMENT	AND
YOU
WANT	ME	TO	DROP	THIS	TOO,	IN	ORDER	TO	BE	TOTALLY	FREE.	OH
MY
BELOVED,	 THE	 PROBLEM	 IS	 NOT	 THAT	 I	 LOVE	YOU	 TOO	MUCH:	 I
CAN	KILL
YOU	OUT	OF	LOVE,	WITH	NO	PAIN	AT	ALL.	BUT	THE	REAL	PROBLEM
IS,	THAT	 I	LIKE	YOU	TOO	MUCH!	 I	 LIKE	YOUR	EYES,	 I	 LIKE	YOUR
HANDS,	I	LIKE	YOUR
BEARD,	 I	 LIKE	 YOUR	 FACE,	 YOUR	 PROFILE.	 AND	 I	 LIKE	 THE	WAY
YOU	 WALK,	 THE	 WAY	 YOU	 TALK,	 THE	 WAY	 YOU	 LAUGH.	 I	 LIKE
EVERYTHING	 ABOUT	 YOU,	 OSHO	 --	 EXCEPT	 FOR	 YOUR	WATCHES,
OF	COURSE.	FOR	ALL	MY	LIFE	I'VE	BEEN
IN	 SEARCH	 OF	 BEAUTY:	 I	 HAVE	 PHOTOGRAPHED	 THE	 MOST
BEAUTIFUL
WOMEN	 AND	 THE	 MOST	 BEAUTIFUL	 MEN	 IN	 THE	 WORLD,	 BUT
NEVER,	NEVER
HAVE	I	COME	ACROSS	A	BEING	WHO	CONTAINS	BOTH:	THE	FRAGILE
BEAUTY
OF	A	WOMAN	AND	THE	AUSTERE	GRACE	OF	A	MAN.	HOW	COULD	I
POSSIBLY
KILL	YOU,	 IF	 I	LIKE	YOU	MORE	THAN	ANY	SUNSET,	ANY	TEMPLE,
ANY
PAINTING,	ANY	POEM,	ANY	WOMAN,	ANY	RIVER,	ANY	SCULPTURE;
MORE
THAN	ANYTHING	 I	 HAVE	 EVER	 SEEN?	AND	YOU	MUST	KNOW	MY
HIDDEN
SECRET	TOO:	FOR	 I	KEEP	COMING	BACK	 IN	THE	BODY	TO	PLEASE
MY	EYES
ONLY.	HOW	IN	HEAVEN	COULD	I	DEPRIVE	MY	EYES	OF	THE	VISION
OF	YOU,	OF
THE	ULTIMATE	GRACE	OF	FORM,	IN	THIS	UNAESTHETIC	WORLD?
Sarjano,	 your	 question	 is	 not	 a	 question.	 It	 is	 a	 statement.	 The	 only	 thing
questionable	in	it	is	about	my	watches.	So	I	can	say	to	you,	if	I	meet	you	on	the
way,	take	away	my	watch.
That	will	 be	 enough.	Moreover,	 they	 are	 not	mine,	 they	 belong	 to	 sannyasins
who	want	me	to	use	them	while	they	are	here.	And	then	they	can	take	them	back,
and	they	become	something	precious	to	them.	I	don't	own	anything	--	even	my
dresses	are	not	my	own.	They	are	also	made	by	sannyasins.
And	I	agree	with	you,	I	don't	like	these	cheap	watches	myself.	But	where	to	find
richer	people	than	sannyasins?	If	you	have	some	idea,	either	you	can	inform	me
or	if	you	can	manage,	you	can	bring	the	right	watch,	one	that	you	like.
You	are	an	Italian	Sarjano,	so	especially	for	you	I	have	a	joke	here.
An	 Italian	 ship	has	been	out	 at	 sea	 for	months	and	all	 the	crew	 is	missing	 the
delight	 of	 female	 company.	 Everyone	 is	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 irritable.
Everyone,	except	the	captain.
The	crew	begin	to	notice	that	the	captain	does	not	seem	to	suffer	from	the	same
frustrations	 that	 they	do.	So	 they	decide	 to	spy	on	him	and	find	out	his	secret.
That	night,	they	creep	down	to	his	cabin	and	look	through	the	keyhole.	They	see
him	enjoying	himself	with	a	beautiful	and	very	lifelike	inflatable	doll.
So	when	the	captain	is	not	in	his	cabin,	they	all	take	turns	to	go	down	and	enjoy
the	favors	of	this	magnificent	piece	of	modern	engineering.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
9
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	When	the	ship	docks
in	Amsterdam,	the	captain	goes	back	to	the	shop	in	the	red-light	district	where
he	 bought	 the	 doll.	 "Good	 morning,	 captain,"	 says	 the	 attendant.	 "Are	 you
satisfied	with	our	product?"
"Ah,	yes,"	replies	the	captain,	"She	is	magnificent!	And	she	is	so	lifelike	that	I
even	got	gonorrhea	from	her."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 IN	 THE
QUALITY	OF
SILENCE	 BETWEEN	 MELTING	 WITH	 YOU,	 MELTING	 WITH	 MY
BELOVED	AND
MELTING	ALONE?
Anand	 Michael,	 melting	 with	 your	 beloved	 is	 the	 easiest	 because	 it	 is	 very
superficial	 and	 very	 momentary.	 It	 is	 mostly	 physical.	 Your	 mind	 remains
chattering	 inside	 and	 your	 being	 remains	 uninvolved	 in	 it.	 Just	 a	 peripheral
melting,	you	can	call	it.
Melting	with	 your	master	 is	more	 difficult.	Because	 it	 is	 not	melting	 between
two	peripheries	but	between	two	centers.	It	is	melting	of	two	consciousnesses.	It
is	 melting	 of	 two	 souls	 in	 one	 organic	 whole.	 The	 ego	 has	 to	 be	 completely
dropped.	The	mind	has	to	be	utterly	silent.	And	it	is	not	something	momentary.
Once	 you	 have	melted	with	 your	master,	 you	 have	melted.	 There	 is	 no	 going
back.
And	the	 third	 is,	melting	alone.	That	 is	 the	most	difficult	 --	almost	 impossible.
Because	melting	alone,	you	don't	even	have	an	excuse.
Melting	with	your	beloved,	there	is	an	excuse	--	you	love	her.	And	melting	needs
the	other.	Melting	with	the	master	is	difficult	but	not	impossible;	the	other	is	still
there,	and	you	are	melting	with	the	consciousness	of	the	other.
But	alone,	what	will	you	be	melting	in?	I	am	saying	it	is	the	most	difficult	--	or
perhaps	impossible.	There	is	only	one	possibility	and	that	is,	if	you	know	how	to
melt	 with	 the	 master,	 you	 and	 your	 master's	 consciousness	 will	 become	 one.
Then	you	are	alone.	Then	you	cannot	say,	"We	are	two."	There	is	no	"I",	there	is
no	"thou".
If	 you	 mean	 by	 "alone"	 this	 state	 of	 oneness,	 then	 melting	 is	 possible.	 Then
melting	will	be	with	existence	itself.
But	one	should	start	learning	melting	with	the	beloved.	One	should	always	learn
from	 the	 easiest.	 If	 you	 are	 going	 to	 learn	 swimming,	 swim	 in	 shallow	water.
Don't	immediately	jump	into	the	ocean.
When	you	are	capable	of	melting	with	your	beloved	in	love,	then	it	 is	possible
for	you	to	melt	with	the	master	in	trust.	Trust	is	the	higher	quality	of	love.
And	if	you	become	capable	of	melting	with	the	master,	then	the	master	becomes
a	door	to	the	whole	existence.	Then	you	can	try	to	melt	alone.
Then,	too,	you	are	not	melting	alone;	it	only	appears	to	you	that	you	are	melting
alone.
You	are	melting	into	the	universe	itself.	Because	the	existence	is	not	present	as
the	other	--	as	your	beloved	or	the	master	--	it	seems	you	are	alone.	But	you	are
never	alone.	The	existence	is	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
10
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	surrounding	you	from
everywhere.	You	are	almost	like	a	fish	in	the	ocean.	The	ocean	is	invisible,	but
you	can	try	to	understand	it:	you	are	breathing	every	moment,	existence,	in	and
out.	 Every	 cell	 of	 your	 body	 is	 breathing	 existence	 in	 and	 out.	 Every	 pore	 of
your	body	is	inhaling,	exhaling.
You	are	eating	food,	which	is	your	nourishment,	without	which	you	are	going	to
die.	In	the	food,	you	are	eating	the	sun	rays,	the	moon	rays,	the	faraway	stars	and
their	effects,	the	earth.
In	 all	 that	 is	 coming	 in	 fruits,	 in	 anything	 that	 you	 are	 eating,	 you	 are	 eating
existence.	You	are	breathing	existence.
You	are	not	alone.	Because	all	this	is	not	visible,	you	can	think	you	are	alone.
And	 once	 you	 have	 experienced	 the	 joy	 of	 melting	 into	 the	 master,	 heart-to-
heart,	center-to-center,	then	this	third	step	is	also	possible,	even	though	I	call	it
impossible.
The	 impossible	also	can	become	possible	 if	you	go	 in	 the	right	way	--	step	by
step.
Hence	I	am	not	against	love	between	a	man	and	a	woman.	I	want	it	to	be	as	deep
and	 as	 total	 as	 possible	 because	 that	will	 prepare	 you	 for	 the	 second	 step,	 the
melting	with	the	master.
One	who	has	never	been	able	to	melt	in	love	with	a	woman	or	with	a	man,	will
be	incapable	of	melting	with	the	master.	He	does	not	know	even	the	language	of
melting.	He	does	not	know	even	 the	most	 superficial	experience	of	 it.	So	start
from	the	simplest.
The	master	is	almost	in	the	middle	between	you	and	existence.	If	you	can	melt
with	 the	 master	 in	 total	 trust,	 in	 absolute	 surrender,	 you	 will	 find	 inside	 the
master	 there	 is	 no	 one,	 but	 pure	 nothingness,	 a	 golden	 absence.	 A	 soundless
music.	A	silence	which	is	not	of	the	graveyard	but	of	a	garden.
This	 will	 prepare	 you.	 The	 master	 and	 the	 merging	 in	 him	 is	 the	 greatest
discipline	 in	 the	world.	 It	will	prepare	you	 to	melt	with	existence	 itself.	 It	will
give	you	encouragement	and	it	will	give	you	a	small	taste...	because	the	master
appears	from	the	outside	as	an	individual	but	as	you	melt	in	him,	you	find	that
there	is	nobody.	He	was	just	a	window	into	existence.	Now	the	impossible	can
become	possible.
You	can	melt	alone.	You	can	simply	close	your	eyes	and	melt	with	existence	--
with	the	sun,	with	the	rain,	with	the	wind,	with	the	trees,	with	the	birds.	You	can
simply	spread	yourself	all	over	the	existence.
There	 is	 a	 difference	 of	 quality	 in	 all	 these	 three	 silences.	 There	 is	 also	 some
similarity.
Two	 lovers	 melting	 have	 a	 faraway	 echo	 of	 the	 ultimate	 melting	 with	 the
universe.	Melting	with	the	master,	you	have	come	very	close;	the	distant	sound
is	no	longer	distant.	And	as	you	melt	in	existence,	you	are	melting	in	that	distant
music	itself.
So	 there	 is	 a	 similarity	 and	 there	 is	 a	 difference,	 but	 the	 difference	 is	 not	 of
quality.	The	difference	is	only	of	degree.
All	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 have	 been	 telling	 humanity	 that	 there	 is	 a
difference	of	quality,	that	when	you	love	a	woman	and	when	you	love	a	master
and	when	you	love	God,	there	are	differences	of	quality.	I	reject	the	whole	idea,
categorically.	There	is	only	a	difference	of	degree.
Because	the	old	religions	believed	in	a	qualitative	difference,	they	wanted	you	to
renounce	the	wife,	the	husband,	because	unless	you	renounce,	you	cannot	attain
to	a	different	quality	of	silence.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
11
Chapter	1	-	Trust	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	existence	I	don't	say	to	you	to
renounce	 anything.	 I	 simply	 say	 that	 these	 are	 three	 steps	 to	 the	 same	 temple.
Even	the	lowest	step	belongs	to	the	same	temple,	and	is	as	absolutely	necessary
as	 the	second	step,	as	 the	 third	step.	With	 the	 third	step,	you	have	entered	into
the	temple.
Nothing	has	to	be	renounced.
Everything	has	to	be	deepened.
Everything	has	to	be	experienced	as	totally	and	as	intensely	as	possible.
A	 Hollywood	 movie	 queen	 who	 had	 been	 married	 many	 times	 was	 to	 get
married	once	again	and	went	to	her	doctor	to	ask	for	a	face	lift.	The	doctor	was
not	keen	on	doing	it.
"I	am	sorry	madam,	you	have	had	it	done	so	many	times	that	I	do	not	think	you
should	have	it	done	again."
"Ah,	please	doctor,	I	am	getting	married	again	and	he	is	much	younger	than	me.
I	must	look	my	best	at	the	wedding."
"Alright,	I	will	do	it	but	it	is	definitely	the	last	time!
After	the	operation	she	looked	in	the	mirror,	"That's	funny,	doctor.	I	never	had	a
dimple	before."
"That	is	not	a	dimple	madam,	that	is	your	navel.	If	I	was	to	lift	your	face	again,
you	would	have	to	shave."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
12
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
2
Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
13	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
OVER	THE	PAST	TWELVE	YEARS	SINCE	I	MET	YOU,	AS	FLOWERS	OF
JOY
AND	 MEDITATION	 HAVE	 OPENED	 IN	 MY	 HEART,	 I'VE	 ALSO	 BEEN
AWARE	 OF	 A	 DARK	 SHADOW	 WAITING	 BY	 THE	 SIDE,	 READY	 TO
STRANGLE	 MY	 GROWTH,	 AND	 IMPRISON	 ME	 IN	 IT'S	 COLD	 GRIP.
SOMETIMES	IT	HAS	BEEN	ONLY
HALF-SEEN,	 SOMETIMES	 ALMOST	 ABSENT.	 NOW,	 IN	 THE	 LAST
MONTH,	IT	HAS
LEAPED	 WITH	 COLOSSAL	 FORCE	 TO	 THE	 FRONT	 OF	 MY
CONSCIOUSNESS	AND
REVEALED	 ITSELF	 AS	MY	 JEALOUSY	 AND	 RESENTMENT.	 I	 AM	 SO
JEALOUS
AND	 RESENTFUL	 OF	 THE	 PEOPLE	 AROUND	 ME	 WHOM	 I	 SEE	 AS
CLOSE	TO	YOU
AND	MORE	 PRIVILEGED	THAN	ME.	 I	 FEEL	 LIKE	 I'M	DROWNING	 IN
THIS
DARKNESS.	 IF	 I	CAN	KEEP	 IT	BACK	 IN	THE	DAY,	 IT	COMES	 IN	THE
NIGHT.
PLEASE,	OSHO,	KICK	ME	OUT	OF	THIS	SPACE.	MY	OWN	LIGHT	FEELS
SO	SMALL
AND	HELPLESS.
Prem	 Christo,	 the	 shadow	 is	 your	 old	 personality.	 It	 happens	 to	 almost	 all
meditators:	 a	point	 comes	when	you	have	 to	depart	 from	your	personality	 and
recover	your	individuality,	your	authentic	being.
But	 associations	 are	 very	 old.	The	 personality	may	 have	 been	 there	 for	many,
many	lives.
And	to	have	a	divorce	from	the	personality...	the	personality	feels	hurt,	and	for	a
time	it	follows	you	in	the	hope	that	you	will	again	get	identified	with	it.
But	it	is	only	a	shadow.	It	cannot	strangle	you;	it	can	only	give	you	threats.	So
don't	be	taken	in	by	its	threats	--	tell	it	to	strangle	you!
Neither	can	 it	drown	you,	but	 it	 is	making	a	 last	effort	before	 it	will	disappear
completely.
Up	to	now	it	was	trying	mildly;	now	it	is	becoming	more	and	more	terrible.	It	is
coming	in	front	of	you	and	giving	some	meaning	to	itself.	It	is	creating	feelings
of	jealousy	and	resentment,	which	are	absolutely	absurd.
Here,	nobody	is	closer	to	me	than	anybody	else.	There	is	no	question	of	jealousy,
resentment	--	against	who?
I	will	read	your	question:	"Over	the	past	twelve	years	since	I	met	you,	as	flowers
of	joy	and	meditation	have	opened	in	my	heart..."
This	 shadow	 comes	 only	when	 there	 is	 a	 fear	 of	 its	 being	 dropped.	 The	 non-
meditator	never	feels	it.	The	non-meditator	is	totally	identified	with	it;	he	thinks
he	is	it.	It	is	only	because	meditation	has	opened	your	heart	and	flowers	of	joy
have	blossomed	in	your	being,	that	the	personality	is	feeling	immensely	afraid.
The	 time	 of	 its	 death	 is	 very	 close,	 and	 it	 will	 struggle	 for	 survival.	 Even
shadows	try	to	survive.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
13
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
And	it	has	been	with	you	for	so	long	that	it	makes	you	feel	guilty:	now	that	you
are	being	happy	and	joyous	and	meditative,	you	are	leaving	her!	And	when	you
were	 in	misery,	 in	anguish,	 in	anxiety,	you	used	her	 --	naturally	 there	 is	anger,
resentment,	jealousy.
Those	are	the	old	strategies	of	the	ego.	They	used	to	work	in	the	past,	but	now
that	 flowers	 of	 meditation	 have	 blossomed	 in	 your	 heart,	 those	 old	 strategies
cannot	work.
"I	 have	 also	 been	 aware	 of	 a	 dark	 shadow	waiting	 by	 the	 side..."	 It	 is	 no	 one
other	 than	 your	 discarded	 falseness,	 your	 discarded	 hypocrisy,	 your	 discarded
past	identity.	"...	ready	to	strangle	my	growth	and	imprison	me	in	its	cold	grip.
Sometimes	it	has	been	only	half-seen,	sometimes	almost	absent.	Now	in	the	last
month	 it	 has	 leaped	with	 colossal	 force	 to	 the	 front	 of	my	 consciousness	 and
revealed	 itself	as	my	jealousy	and	resentment.	 I	am	so	 jealous	and	resentful	of
the	people	around	me	whom	I	see	as	close	to	You	and	more	privileged	than	me."
The	 shadow	 is	 impressing	 you.	 There	 is	 nobody	 who	 is	 closer	 to	 me	 than
anybody	 else,	 and	 there	 is	 nobody	 who	 is	 more	 privileged.	 You	 have	 just	 to
understand	 a	 simple	 thing:	 one	 thousand	 people	 cannot	 sleep	 in	 my	 room;
otherwise	I	will	have	to	get	out!
And	not	 to	 give	 anybody	 the	 idea	 that	 somebody	 is	more	 close	 to	me,	 I	 sleep
alone.
Nobody	 sleeps	 in	my	 room.	 Naturally,	 a	 few	 people	 who	 bring	my	 food	will
appear	to	you	as	closer	to	me,	but	it	is	only	appearance.	Those	who	love	me	are
equally	close	 to	me	and	equally	privileged.	And	 it	 is	 just	 functional	 that	a	 few
people	will	be	doing	 things	 --	 somebody	will	be	cleaning	my	 room.	Now,	one
thousand	 people	 cleaning	my	 room	will	 make	 it	 more	 dirty.	 Too	many	 cooks
cannot	be	allowed	in	the	kitchen;	otherwise	they	will	kill	me.
So	you	have	to	be	a	little	more	rational	and	see	that	your	old	identity	is	putting
wrong	 ideas	 in	your	head.	 If	you	get	 impressed	by	 those	 ideas,	 then	 there	 is	 a
possibility	that	the	old	shadow	will	take	back	its	place.
You	have	to	drop	jealousy	and	resentment.	Just	being	my	sannyasin,	you	are	so
privileged	that	the	whole	world	can	be	jealous	of	you.	Just	being	in	meditation,
you	can	create	jealousy	in	others.
That's	 what	 happened	 in	 the	 commune	 in	 Oregon,	 in	 America.	 Five	 thousand
people	being	so	happy,	so	blissful,	continuously	singing	and	dancing	--	it	made
the	 whole	 gang	 of	 American	 politicians	 antagonistic,	 because	 people	 started
asking	them:	"These	people	have	nothing	but	a	desert,	a	vast	desert,	one	hundred
twenty-six	square	miles.	In	that	desert,	for	forty	years	nobody	had	even	tried	to
grow	something..."
It	 was	 for	 sale	 for	 forty	 years,	 for	 three	 generations,	 and	 nobody	 had	 even
bothered	 to	purchase	 it,	 at	 any	price.	What	you	are	going	 to	do	with	a	desert?
And	even	when	our	sannyasins	purchased	it,	the	topmost	real	estate	agent	wrote
a	letter	to	me,	saying	that
"Perhaps	your	people	are	not	aware	that	a	desert	cannot	support	you.	You	cannot
become	self-sufficient.	There	is	still	time	--	stop	them	from	purchasing	it."
And	he	wrote	in	the	letter,	"This	is	for	the	first	 time...	I	am	a	real	estate	agent.
My	work	 is	 to	 persuade	 people	 to	 purchase	 things,	 but	 I	 can	 see	 that	 you	 are
getting	 into	 great	 trouble.	 The	 fight	 with	 the	 desert	 will	 be	 ongoing,
neverending."
But	 we	made	 even	 the	 desert	 an	 oasis.	 The	 first	 day	 I	 entered	 the	 commune,
there	was	not	even	a	single	bird	anywhere,	not	a	single	deer.	And	that	whole	part
of	Oregon	is	full	of	deer	--
but	what	will	they	do	in	the	desert?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
14
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
But	 as	 our	 people	 started	 working	 and	 creating	 reservoirs	 for	 water,	 planting
trees,	cultivating	--	within	five	years	so	many	birds	started	coming	on	their	own,
and	the	population	of	deer	became	so	thick...	and	they	understood	perfectly	well
that	these	people	were	nonviolent.
In	America,	ten	days	every	year	are	allowed	for	shooting	deer.	In	those	ten	days
all	 the	deer	 surrounding	 the	desert	would	enter	 the	commune.	That	was	a	 safe
place,	because	we	did	not	allow	any	hunter	to	enter	the	commune.
And	 once	 a	 deer	 had	 come	 in	 and	 found	 people	 who	 were	 nonviolent,	 they
became	so	friendly	 that	sometimes	 they	started	creating	 trouble.	You	would	be
driving	and	they	would	stand	just	in	front	of	your	car.	You	could	go	on	honking
your	horn	and	they	would	behave	just	 like	your	wife	--	 they	were	not	going	to
move.	They	knew	that	you	would	not	hurt	them,	even	by	hitting	them	with	the
car.	You	had	to	get	out	and	push	them	to	the	side.
But	the	politicians	of	Oregon	became	very	much	disturbed,	because	people	who
had	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 land	 had	 lived	 for	 centuries	 in	 poverty.	 They	 could	 not
believe	what	kind	of	miracle	had	happened	that	we	were	working	so	hard,	and
still	we	had	energy	enough	in	the	night	to	dance	and	sing	and	enjoy.
My	attorney	in	America,	Niren,	is	here.	Just	the	other	day	he	told	me	that	now
the	 politicians	 who	 destroyed	 the	 commune	 illegally,	 without	 any	 reason,	 are
repenting.	 They	 are	 repenting	 because...	 the	 attorney	 general	 of	 Oregon,
Frohnmeyer,	was	the	number	one	enemy	of	the	commune.	He	was	supported	by
the	whole	state	of	Oregon	just	because	he	was	opposing	us,	and	the	stupid	fellow
could	not	understand	 that	once	we	were	gone	his	 support	would	also	be	gone.
Now	he	has	been	defeated.
The	governor	of	Oregon,	Atiyeh,	was	also	getting	support	from	people	because
he	 was	 against	 us.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 will	 say	 they	 were	 amateur
politicians.	They	did	not	understand	a	small	 thing:	 they	should	have	continued
harassing	us,	but	not	destroyed	the	commune.	The	whole	of	Oregon's	population
would	have	been	behind	them.
Now	Atiyeh	 is	gone.	These	 two	men	destroyed	 the	commune,	and	 the	day	 the
commune	was	destroyed	and	closed,	I	told	people:	"These	politicians	will	repent
because	they	are	in	power	because	of	us.	Once	we	are	gone,	their	power	will	be
gone	too."
Frohnmeyer,	the	attorney	general,	was	hoping	to	become	governor;	there	was	so
much	 support.	 Now	 he	 is	 not	 even	 the	 attorney	 general.	 Somebody	 else	 has
defeated	 him.	 And	 when	 we	 were	 there	 a	 very	 competent	 man	 --	 far	 more
educated	in	law,	has	many	degrees,	Ph.D.'s	and	D.Litt.'s	in	law	--	was	defeated
by	Frohnmeyer	only	on	one	point:	because	that	man	was	not	against	us.	He	made
a	 political	 mistake	 by	making	 a	 statement	 that	 "I	 don't	 see	 why	 these	 people
should	be	harassed.	They	are	not	doing	any	harm	to	anybody."	And	that	became
the	cause	of	his	defeat.	Against	that	man,	Frohnmeyer	was	nowhere	close	--	the
man	was	 an	 authority	 on	 law.	But	 Frohnmeyer	was	 victorious	 in	 the	 election.
And	now	they	are	all	gone.	It	is	a	very	strange	world.
In	 Oregon	 there	 is	 a	 law	 that	 if	 somebody	 lives	 there	 for	 twenty	 days,	 he
becomes	able	to	participate	in	the	voting.	They	were	afraid	of	us,	so	they	were
changing	the	law,	which	for	more	than	a	hundred	years	they	had	never	thought	of
changing.	For	that,	seventy-five	percent	of	the	peoples'	signatures	were	needed.
When	we	were	there,	they	had	collected	almost	fifty	thousand	signatures.	But	as
the	commune	disappeared,	nobody	was	interested	in	giving	them	signatures.	The
campaign	had	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
15
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
been	going	very	well.	But	it	was	going	well	because	of	us	--	that,	they	could	not
understand.
Once	we	were	not	there,	people	said,	"What	is	the	need?	The	law	has	been	there
for	years	 and	 there	has	been	no	 trouble	 and	 the	people	you	were	 afraid	of	 are
gone."
They	were	so	much	afraid	--	as	if	we	were	going	to	take	over	Oregon!	Because
just	jokingly	I	had	said,	"We	are	going	to	take	the	whole	universe.	What	about
Oregon?	--	I	am	not	interested	in	small	things."
Now	 those	politicians	who	had	become	great	 leaders	have	 fallen	back	 into	 the
nobodies.
Now	they	must	be	repenting,	and	remembering...
Niren	was	saying	that	 there	is	a	possibility:	"If	you	want	 to	come	back	we	can
get	 the	 commune	 again,	 because	 the	 defeated	 politicians	will	 support	 us.	And
now	everybody	understands	that	our	presence	is	necessary	for	people	who	are	in
power	to	remain	in	power."
But	I	said,	"Now,	to	start	again	in	that	desert	from	ABC	--	I	am	not	interested."
I	 feel	 compassion	 for	 Frohnmeyer,	 and	 for	 Governor	 Atiyeh	 --	 poor	 fellows.
They	proved	 to	be	retarded,	not	understanding	 the	ways	of	politics.	 I	am	not	a
politician	but	I	can	see	it	clearly:	in	politics	you	should	not	destroy	your	enemy
completely.	You	should	go	on	threatening	him	--	that's	enough	--	because	by	his
presence,	there	is	immense	support	to	you,	from	all	those	people	who	are	afraid.
Prem	Christo,	it	is	just	a	political	strategy	of	your	personality,	of	your	old	mind	-
-	which	you	are	discarding,	and	getting	into	a	new	space,	a	new	consciousness.
The	old	mind	will	try	in	every	way	to	imprison	you.	This	is	its	strategy,	to	create
resentment,	jealousy.	Once	you	get	caught	in	jealousy	and	resentment,	soon	you
will	be	back	in	the	old	prison.
And	this	 is	 the	last	effort.	Your	old	mind	is	putting	everything	at	stake,	so	you
have	to	be	very	alert.
Nobody	is	closer	to	me	than	anybody	else.	And	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	feel
resentment	against	those	people,	who	functionally	have	to	be	in	my	house.	Or	if
you	want	me	 to	start	cleaning	 the	house	and	 the	bathrooms,	 taking	care	of	 the
library,	 taking	care	of	 the	garden,	 I	 can	do	 that.	But	 then	 I	will	 not	be	 able	 to
come	in	the	morning	to	meet	you,	or	in	the	evening	to	meet	you.
In	these	mornings	and	evenings,	if	your	heart	rejoices	with	me,	you	are	as	close
as	anyone	can	be.
And	 you	 all	 can	 be	 as	 close	 as	 existence	 allows.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 feel
resentful	 about	 anybody.	 It	 only	 hurts	 you,	 not	 the	 person	 to	 whom	 you	 are
resentful.
Don't	hurt	yourself.	And	this	shadow	is	going	to	disappear,	you	just	have	to	be	a
little	courageous,	intelligent,	alert.
You	are	lucky	to	be	here.	In	the	whole	world	there	are	five	billion	people.	Out	of
five	 billion	 people,	 a	 few	 people	 are	 fortunate	 to	 be	 again	 in	 the	 golden
atmosphere	of	a	living	master,	of	a	Gautam	Buddha.
I	will	tell	you	a	small	joke.
Marty	was	walking	down	 the	street	when	he	saw	his	 friend	and	yelled	 to	him,
"John,	how	are	you?"	John	replied,	"Don't	call	me	John.	Call	me	Lucky."
"Why	should	I	call	you	lucky?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
16
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
John	proceeded	to	tell	him	that	he	had	been	standing	on	the	corner	of	52nd	Street
and	Third	Avenue,	when	he	stepped	off	the	curb	just	as	a	two-ton	safe	fell	from
the	twentieth	floor.	It	landed	right	where	he	had	been	standing	an	instant	earlier.
Marty	said,	"My	God,	you	certainly	are	lucky!	That	will	be	your	name	from	now
on."
A	few	weeks	later	they	bumped	into	each	other	again,	and	Marty	said,	"Lucky,
how	are	you?"
To	which	came	the	reply,	"Don't	call	me	Lucky.	Call	me	Lucky	Lucky."
Marty	said,	"Tell	me	now,	why	I	should	call	you	Lucky	Lucky?"	and	he	was	told
that	Lucky	had	been	bumped	from	a	flight	 to	Miami	 that	was	 later	hijacked	 to
Cuba.
Marty	agreed,	"You	certainly	are	Lucky,	Lucky."
The	next	time	they	met,	Marty	shouted,	"Lucky	Lucky,	how	are	you?"	to	which
he	replied,
"Don't	call	me	Lucky	Lucky.	Call	me	Lucky	Lucky	Lucky."
Marty	said,	"Why?"
Lucky	Lucky	Lucky	said,	"Just	last	week	I	took	my	girlfriend	to	a	hotel	room	for
a	martini,	and	we	made	such	a	commotion	that	the	chandelier	over	the	bed	came
down	and	landed	right	in	her	lap."
Marty	said,	"But	what's	so	lucky	about	that?"
To	which	came	the	reply,	"Ten	seconds	earlier,	it	would	have	cut	off	my	head!"
Prem	Christo,	you	are	 lucky,	 lucky,	 lucky,	 lucky	--	four	 times	lucky.	Don't	 feel
jealous,	don't	feel	resentful.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
MY	MIND,	THE	MONSTER,	DISTRACTS	ME	EVEN	WHEN	I'M	SITTING
IN
DISCOURSE.	 IT	 SIMPLY	 TAKES	 OVER	 AND	 THINKS	 ALL	 SORTS	 OF
SILLY
THOUGHTS	 AND	 BY	 THE	 TIME	 DISCOURSE	 IS	 OVER	 I	 GET	 THE
FEELING	 I	MISSED	ANOTHER	GOLDEN	OPPORTUNITY	 TO	 BE	WITH
YOU,	DRINK	FROM
YOU,	TUNE	IN	WITH	YOU.	THIS	LEAVES	ME	VERY,	VERY	SAD.	WHAT
CAN	I	DO?
Nishigandha,	everybody	has	cultivated	his	mind	for	so	long,	for	centuries,	that	it
has	got	deep	roots	in	you.	You	cannot	destroy	it	 in	one	day,	 it	will	 take	a	little
time.
And	if	you	become	depressed	that	you	are	losing	the	opportunity	then	it	will	take
even	longer.	What	is	missed	is	missed.
Never	 look	 backwards.	Nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 it.	 If	 you	miss	 a	 train,	 the
second	 train	 will	 be	 coming.	 There	 is	 no	 point	 in	 crying	 and	 weeping	 and
making	a	fuss	because	you	have	missed	the	train.	One	understands	that	what	has
happened,	has	happened:	now	be	more	 alert	 so	 that	you	don't	miss	 the	 second
train.	And	also	be	alert	that	you	don't	catch	the	wrong	train.
I	have	heard...	three	professors	were	standing	on	the	platform	and	got	involved
in	a	deep	philosophical	discussion,	and	then	they	suddenly	realized	the	train	had
left.	So	they	ran	--	two	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
17
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
of	them	managed	to	enter	the	last	compartment.	Only	one	was	left	behind,	who
was	standing	there	with	tears	in	his	eyes.
A	porter	was	watching	 all	 this.	He	 came	 to	 the	 third	man	 and	he	 said,	 "Many
times	people	miss	--	I	work	here	--	but	there	is	no	need	to	cry.	Within	just	half	an
hour	another	train	will	be	coming.	You	can	catch	that	train."
He	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	situation.	Those	two	fellows	had	come	to	see
me	off!
In	a	hurry	they	got	into	the	train	--	and	they	have	taken	my	luggage	too!	What
am	I	going	to	do	with	the	train	that	is	coming?	First	I	have	to	get	the	luggage...
"And	those	two	must	be	crying	inside	the	train.	They	were	not	going	anywhere;
they	had	 just	 come	 to	 see	me	off.	But	 it	was	 all	 such	 a	 hurry,	 so	 sudden,	 that
everybody	forgot	who	had	come	to	send	off	and	who	was	going...	we	all	belong
to	the	university's	philosophy	department."
It	happens	almost	to	everybody,	so	take	it	naturally.
You	say,	"My	mind,	the	monster..."	Don't	call	it	"monster,"	because	that	creates	a
hate	relationship.
Just	 as	 there	are	 love	 relationships,	 there	are	hate	 relationships.	People	are	not
aware	about	their	hate	relationships.
I	 am	 reminded:	 In	 the	 freedom	 struggle	 of	 India,	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 and
Muhammad	 Ali	 Jinnah	 were	 arch	 enemies.	 Jinnah	 was	 asking	 for	 a	 separate
country	for	Mohammedans,	Pakistan,	and	Gandhi	was	insistent	that	the	country
should	 remain	one:	 "Mohammedans	and	Hindus	and	Christians	and	Jains	have
always	 lived	 together	--	 there	 is	no	need	for	Mohammedans	 to	have	a	separate
country.	And	why	cut	the	country	into	parts?"
But	Jinnah	was	very	stubborn	and	he	said,	"Unless	you	agree	to	the	separation,
India	 will	 never	 become	 free,	 because	 Mohammedans	 will	 not	 agree	 to	 that
freedom."
And	finally,	in	1947	Gandhi	had	to	agree,	seeing	that	either	you	remain	a	slave
forever	or	you	divide	the	country:	"It	is	better	to	divide	the	country;	at	least	both
countries	will	be	independent."	The	country	was	divided	and	in	1948	Mahatma
Gandhi	was	shot,	assassinated
--	of	course	by	a	man	from	Poona.	Poona	is	a	fertile	land	for	murderers.
I	am	 telling	 this	because	Jinnah	was	sitting	 in	his	garden	 in	Karachi,	Pakistan,
talking	 to	 his	 secretary	 about	 some	 official	 work	 and	 suddenly	 a	 friend	 came
running	in	and	told	Jinnah	what	had	happened:	"Gandhi	has	been	assassinated!"
Nobody	had	 seen	 tears	 in	 the	 eyes	of	 Jinnah	 in	 his	whole	 life.	He	was	 a	 very
strong,	stubborn,	very	logical,	very	rational	man.	The	shock...	his	friend	and	his
secretary	could	not	believe	it.	He	should	be	happy;	his	arch-enemy	is	dead	--	but
there	were	tears.
He	stood	up,	went	inside	the	house,	and	told	the	friend,	"Now	I	will	not	be	living
much	longer	either.	Only	today	I	realized	how	much	I	was	related	with	Mahatma
Gandhi.	 Without	 him,	 the	 whole	 world	 seems	 to	 be	 empty.	 We	 have	 been
fighting	 our	 whole	 lives,	 and	 I	 never	 recognized	 that	 this	 fighting	 has	 also
created	a	deep	relationship.	Without	him	I	am	almost	half	dead.	All	my	joy	for
living	is	finished."
Up	 to	 that	 day	 Jinnah	 never	 used	 to	 have	 bodyguards,	 because	 he	 could	 not
believe	that	Mohammedans,	for	whom	he	had	been	fighting	his	whole	life,	could
make	an	attempt	on	his	life.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
18
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
The	 next	 day,	 Karachi	 was	 surprised:	 he	 had	 four	 people	 with	 loaded	 guns
around	 him	 wherever	 he	 went.	 And	 somebody	 asked	 him	 what	 happened,
because	he	used	to	go	alone	even	in	the	market.	There	was	no	need	even	for	a
single	bodyguard.	He	said,	"If	Hindus	can	kill	Mahatma	Gandhi,	who	has	been
fighting	for	them	his	whole	life,	what	is	the	difficulty?
Mohammedans	can	kill	me.
"I	 am	 already	 half	 dead,	 and	 now	 I	 cannot	 trust	Mohammedans.	Gandhi,	who
was	 loved	 and	 worshiped	 as	 a	 great	 soul,	 as	 a	 mahatma,	 has	 been	 killed	 by
Hindus	 themselves.	 I	 was	 never	 loved	 as	 a	 great	 soul,	 as	 a	 mahatma.	 In	 fact
Mohammedans	have	never	 thought	 that	I	am	a	proper	Mohammedan,"	because
he	never	used	to	do	the	five	prayers	every	Mohammedan	is	supposed	to	do.	He
never	used	to	go	to	the	mosque.	He	was	a	very	ultra-modern	man.
He	was	never	in	any	way	a	man	who	can	be	considered	a	Mohammedan.	He	was
educated	in	the	West.	He	was	not	interested	in	the	holy	KORAN	--	he	was	just
born	into	a	Mohammedan	family,	that	was	all.	And	strangely	enough,	just	within
one	year,	he	died.
He	 started	 dying	 the	 same	 day	 Gandhi	 was	 assassinated.	 Hate	 is	 also	 a
relationship,	just	as	love	is	a	relationship.
And	psychology	is	now	absolutely	certain	that	the	energy	of	love	and	hate	is	not
different.
It	is	the	same	energy:	standing	upside	down	it	becomes	hate,	standing	right	side
up	it	becomes	love	--	it	is	the	same	energy.	That's	why	it	is	not	very	difficult	--	a
friend	turning	into	an	enemy,	an	enemy	turning	into	a	friend.
Psychology	has	become	aware	of	one	more	very	significant	thing:	that	you	hate
the	 same	 person	 you	 love.	 So	 there	 is	 a	 constant	 change:	 in	 the	morning	 you
love,	in	the	afternoon	you	hate,	in	the	evening	you	love,	in	the	night	you	hate	--
just	 like	 a	pendulum	of	 a	 clock,	your	mind	goes	on	moving	between	 love	and
hate.
Don't	call	your	mind	the	"monster"	because	you	are	creating	a	hate	relationship.
And	relationship	is	relationship,	whether	it	is	love	or	hate.
Just	be	a	silent	watcher.
"The	mind	distracts	me	even	when	I	am	sitting	in	discourse."
So	let	him	distract;	you	simply	watch.	You	don't	interfere.	You	don't	try	to	stop,
because	any	kind	of	action	on	your	part	is	going	to	give	energy	to	the	mind.	So
whenever	 you	 can	manage,	 you	 listen,	 and	whenever	mind	wanders	 and	 takes
you	away,	go	easily	with	the	mind.
There	is	no	harm.
It	 will	 look	 strange	 to	 you	 that	 I	 am	 saying	 go	 with	 the	mind	 easily.	 Just	 be
watchful	--
without	condemning	the	mind,	without	abusing	the	mind	--	just	be	watchful	that
the	mind	is	going	somewhere	else.	And	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise.
It	will	 take	a	 little	 time,	but	slowly,	slowly	the	mind	will	not	wander	so	much.
You	will	have	a	 few	gaps	 to	 listen	 to	me;	 then	 those	gaps	will	become	bigger.
And	because	you	are	not	 creating	any	 relationship	with	 the	mind	 --	of	 love	or
hate	--	you	are	becoming	indifferent	to	mind.
Gautam	Buddha	has	made	it	a	meditation.	He	called	it	upeksha	--	 indifference.
Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind,	and	it	won't	be	a	disturbance	for	long.
And	it	 is	worthwhile	to	wait	and	not	be	in	a	hurry,	because	the	very	hurry	will
make	your	mind	more	stubborn.	If	you	want	to	push	it	away,	it	will	come	back
with	force.	You	just	let	it	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
19
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
do	whatever	it	wants	to	do.	It	is	none	of	your	concern,	this	way	or	that.	Suddenly
a	watchfulness	arises.	It	takes	a	little	time.
It	depends	on	you,	how	much	indifference	you	can	create	towards	the	mind,	how
much	you	can	be	watchful.	The	mind	will	become	slowly,	slowly	rejected.	It	will
stop	doing	its	things,	because	now	nobody	is	interested.	For	whom	to	do	all	the
circus?
Just	a	few	days	before...	my	sister	is	here;	her	son	had	come.	Now	he	is	married
and	has	children.	The	moment	I	saw	him	I	remembered.	It	must	be	twenty	years
ago...	they	used	to	live	in	Kanva.
The	chief	minister	of	Madhya	Pradesh	was	also	from	Kanva.	He	wanted	to	meet
me	and	he	invited	me	to	have	dinner	with	him,	so	my	brother-in-law	took	me	in
his	car.	And	this	boy	was	very	small,	he	may	have	been	five	years	old.	He	also
went	with	us.	He	was	sitting	on	the	front	seat	by	the	side	of	his	father;	I	was	in
the	back	seat.	My	brother-in-law	got	out	of	the	car	and	told	me,	"I	will	go	and
look,	and	make	arrangements,	and	inform	him	that	you	are	here,	so	he	can	come
out	and	welcome	you."
It	 took	 a	 long	 time.	 The	 minister	 was	 phoning	 somebody	 in	 the	 capital	 of
Bhopal.	The	little	boy	fell	asleep	and	struck	his	head	on	the	steering	wheel.	I	saw
it,	I	heard	it,	but	I	started	looking	out	of	the	window.	He	looked	at	me.	I	did	not
give	any	attention	to	what	had	happened.	He	tried	two	or	three	times	to	look	at
me:	 whenever	 he	 would	 look	 at	 me,	 I	 would	 look	 out	 of	 the	 window,	 so	 he
thought:	"It	is	useless."
When	we	went	back	home,	after	 two	hours,	as	he	got	out	of	 the	car	he	started
crying.	I	said,	"What	has	happened?	Why	are	you	crying?"
He	said,	"It	happened	two	hours	before!	I	had	hit	my	head	on	the	steering	wheel.
But	you	are	 strange:	whenever	 I	would	 look	at	 you	 for	 some	consolation,	you
would	not	look	at	me.	So	I	thought,	what	is	the	point	of	crying?	This	man	will
not	even	say	anything,	and	even	if	I	cry	or	weep,	my	father	is	out.	Now	we	are
back	and	my	mother	is	here.	Now	I	can	cry."
"But,"	I	said,	"two	hours	ago?"
But	I	could	see	his	argument,	it	was	right.	If	there	is	nobody	to	pay	attention	to
you,	what	is	the	point	in	crying?	At	home	everybody	is	going	to	pay	attention.
Then	to	make	a	fuss	and	cry...	although	now	he	is	not	hurting;	it	had	happened
two	hours	before.
And	just	a	few	days	ago	he	was	here,	and	I	remembered.	Now	he	has	a	child	of
the	same	age.
Mind	is	nourished	by	your	attention,	for	or	against.
You	just	be	indifferent;	look	out	of	the	window.
"It	 simply	 takes	 over	 and	 thinks	 all	 sorts	 of	 silly	 thoughts	 and	 by	 the	 time
discourse	is	over	I	get	the	feeling	I	missed	another	golden	opportunity	to	be	with
You."	Don't	call	them	"silly"
thoughts.	These	adjectives	are	dangerous:	"monster"	mind,	"silly"	thoughts.	You
are	taking	great	interest	in	it.	Maybe	you	are	against	it,	but	the	interest	is	there.
Be	utterly	indifferent.	It	is	a	golden	key.	And	slowly,	slowly	the	mind	will	start
remaining	silent.
And	 afterwards	 you	 repent	 that	 "I	 have	 missed	 another	 opportunity."	 Never
repent	about	the	past	because	that	is	again	wasting	the	present.	First	you	wasted
the	past;	now	you	are	wasting	the	present.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
20
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
If	you	have	wasted	 the	golden	opportunity	 to	be	with	me,	now	don't	waste	 the
golden	opportunity	to	be	with	the	sun,	to	be	with	the	moon,	to	be	with	the	trees.
It	is	the	same	opportunity.
The	 whole	 thing	 boils	 down	 to	 one	 single	 point:	 be	 silent.	 And	 everything
becomes	a	golden	opportunity.
But	you	are	 taking	attitudes.	You	are	 saying,	 "This	makes	me	very,	very	 sad."
You	are	in	a	vicious	circle.	First	the	mind	takes	you	away;	it	is	a	"monster,"	all
its	thoughts	are	"silly."	And	when	you	are	leaving	here,	you	become	sad,	and	you
start	condemning	your	mind.
There	is	no	need	to	be	sad:	it	is	mind's	nature,	and	what	has	gone	is	gone.	What
is	available	herenow,	don't	make	it	sad	for	that	which	is	dead.	On	the	contrary,
make	it	so	joyful	that	you	can	take	revenge	for	the	past	too.	Dance	and	sing	so
that	what	has	been	lost	in	the	past	moments	is	gained	in	the	present.	By	sadness
you	cannot	gain	it,	but	by	being	joyous	you	can	gain	it.
And	a	 few	days	or	 a	 few	months	 are	nothing	much.	 In	 the	 long,	 long	 eternity
they	are	just	like	small	seconds.
Nishigandha,	a	Frenchman	staying	at	an	English	country	house	for	the	weekend
was	attracted	 to	a	debutante,	and	without	much	difficulty,	seduced	her.	Several
months	later	they	met	by	chance	at	a	very	select	society	ball.	He	stepped	forward
with	 outstretched	 hand,	 but	 she	 walked	 straight	 past	 him	 without
acknowledgement.	As	soon	as	he	could,	 the	Frenchman	cornered	her	and	said,
"Surely	you	remember	me?"
"Of	course	 I	do	young	man,	but	you	are	not	 to	assume	 that	 in	England	a	one-
night	frolic	constitutes	an	introduction."
In	 a	 way	 she	 is	 right.	 Just	 a	 one-night	 frolic	 cannot	 be	 an	 introduction.	 The
reality	is	that	you	may	be	living	with	your	wife	for	thirty	or	forty	years	--	even
then	you	are	strangers,	you	are	not	introduced	to	each	other	yet.
You	have	lived	with	the	mind	for	centuries,	for	many,	many	lives,	yet	you	are	not
introduced	to	it.	You	don't	know	its	workings,	you	don't	know	its	strategies.	The
repentance	afterwards	 is	 also	part	of	your	mind;	 the	 sadness	afterwards	 is	 also
part	 of	 your	 mind.	 So	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 a	 vicious	 circle:	 first	 you	 miss	 the
opportunity,	then	you	abuse	the	mind,	call	the	mind	names:	it	is	a	"monster,"	the
thoughts	are	"silly,"	then	you	become	sad.	And	this	whole	game	is	of	the	mind.
You	have	to	detach	yourself	and	be	a	witness.	Let	the	mind	do	whatsoever	it	is
doing,	but	don't	get	identified	with	it.	It	is	not	you.	You	are	pure	awareness.
You	are	just	awareness.
If	 you	 can	 remember	 only	 this	 much...	 Gautam	 Buddha	 has	 used	 the	 words
samma	sati	--
right	remembrance	--	and	the	mind	will	disappear	with	all	its	silliness,	sadness,
monstrosity.	A	single	thing	you	have	to	keep:	a	remembering	that	"I	am	not	the
mind."	You	are	not	to	say	to	yourself,	"I	am	not	the	mind."	The	moment	you	say
it,	it	becomes	part	of	the	mind,	because	language	belongs	to	the	mind.	You	have
to	remember	it	without	any	language,	just	a	feel:	I	am	not	the	mind.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
21
Chapter	2	-	Just	be	indifferent	to	the	mind
I	am	using	words	because	I	have	to	tell	you,	but	you	are	not	to	use	words.	You
have	just	to	be	aware	and	remember	without	using	language.
The	mind	will	go.	It	has	always	happened.	You	cannot	be	an	exception.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
22
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
3
Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
13	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	TOOK	MY	HEART	AND	NOW	IT	IS	TOO	LATE;	I	AM	ENJOYING
ALONENESS	 AND	 LAZINESS	 SO	 MUCH	 THAT	 SOMETIMES	 I	 THINK
THERE	MUST
BE	SOMETHING	WRONG	WITH	ME.	I	FEEL	I	AM	AT	THE	BEGINNING
OF	A	NEW
JOURNEY,	AND	THERE	IS	A	QUESTION	THAT	KEEPS	ON	COMING	UP:
WHAT	IS
THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	BEING	A	WATCHER,	AND	THE	FEELING
OF	"I	AM
NOT	THAT"?
Prem	Anugraho,	it	is	not	true	that	I	have	taken	your	heart.	You	have	given	it	to
me.	If	I	had	taken	it,	it	would	not	be	too	late;	because	you	have	given	it	to	me,	it
is	certainly	too	late!
The	 master	 takes	 nothing	 from	 the	 disciple.	 The	 disciple	 gives	 everything,
including	himself.	The	master	gives	an	opportunity	for	you	to	give.	And	it	 is	a
joy	and	a	bliss	to	give	your	heart.	Nothing	can	be	more	precious	a	present,	and
there	is	no	other	way	to	show	your	gratitude.
But	in	any	case,	your	heart	is	gone!
And	 you	 are	 saying,	 "I	 am	 enjoying	 aloneness	 and	 laziness	 so	 much	 that
sometimes	I	think	there	must	be	something	wrong	with	me."	There	is.
Enjoying	aloneness	is	perfectly	right,	but	enjoying	laziness	is	not	right.	Laziness
is	 a	 negative	 state.	One	 should	 be	 overflowing	with	 energy.	One	 should	 be	 at
ease,	but	not	lazy.
One	should	be	relaxed,	but	not	lazy.
Laziness	and	easiness	look	so	alike	that	it	is	very	easy	to	misunderstand	which	is
which.	If	you	are	enjoying	your	aloneness,	it	cannot	be	laziness	because	laziness
always	feels	a	certain	guilt,	a	certain	 feeling	 that	"I	am	doing	something	 that	 I
should	not	be	doing,"	that	"I	am	not	participating	in	existence."	Laziness	means
you	have	dropped	out	of	the	creativity	of	the	universe	--	you	are	standing	aside
while	the	universe	goes	on	creating	day	in,	day	out.
You	are	misunderstanding	laziness	for	easiness.
My	 whole	 teaching	 is:	 take	 everything	 with	 absolute	 relaxation,	 with	 ease.
Whether	 you	 are	 doing	 something	 or	 not,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 You	 must	 be
overflowing	with	energy	even	when	you	are	not	doing	anything.	These	trees	are
not	 doing	 anything,	 but	 they	 are	overflowing	with	 energy.	You	 can	 see	 that	 in
their	flowers,	in	their	colors,	in	their	greenery,	in	their	freshness,	in	their	absolute
naked	beauty	in	the	sunlight,	in	the	dark	night	under	the	stars.
Life	is	not	a	tension	anywhere	except	in	the	minds	of	humanity.	To	take	life	with
ease,	 without	 any	 tension,	 without	 any	 hurry	 --	 that	 is	 not	 laziness,	 that	 is
easiness.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
23
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 one	 of	 the	 very	 learned	 scholars	 of	 Bengal.	 His	 name	was
Ishwar	Chandra	Vidyasagar.	He	was	going	to	be	awarded	the	highest	prize	that
the	British	Empire	had	in	India,	for	his	scholarship.
But	he	used	to	live	in	a	very	simple	way,	and	his	friends	forced	him	--	"It	won't
look	 right	 standing	 before	 the	 viceroy	 in	 the	 Parliament	House,	 before	 all	 the
members	of	the	parliament	and	all	the	other	dignitaries.	We	will	make	a	beautiful
dress	 for	you,	we	will	bring	you	good	shoes."	He	was	reluctant,	but	 they	were
insistent,	so	finally	he	agreed.
But	there	was	uneasiness	in	his	mind;	in	his	heart,	there	was	not	total	acceptance.
To	change	your	style	of	life	just	because	you	are	going	to	receive	an	award	from
the	 hands	 of	 the	 viceroy	 looked	 to	 him	 like	 a	 compromise.	 It	was	 against	 his
pride.
Tomorrow	it	was	going	to	happen,	and	he	was	walking	on	the	sea	beach	with	a
disturbed	mind:	whether	to	follow	the	advice	of	his	friends	or	just	to	go	the	way
he	always	lives?
At	 that	very	moment	he	 saw	a	man	come	 running.	And	 just	 in	 front	of	him,	a
very	 rich	Mohammedan	was	 also	walking	on	 the	beach	 --	 the	man	 said	 to	 the
rich	man...	which	Vidyasagar	heard;	he	was	just	four	feet	behind	him.	The	man
said,	"What	are	you	doing	here?
Your	palace	is	on	fire!"
The	rich	man	said,	"Okay,"	and	he	continued	to	walk	with	the	same	ease,	as	 if
nothing	had	happened.
The	man	who	had	brought	the	news	said,	"Have	you	heard	it	or	not?	Your	palace
is	on	fire,	everything	is	burning,	and	there	seems	to	be	no	way	to	save	anything."
He	said,	"I	have	heard;	now	you	go	and	do	whatsoever	you	can.	First	I	will	have
to	finish	my	evening	walk,	and	then	I	will	be	coming."
Vidyasagar	could	not	believe	it.	His	whole	house	was	on	fire	--	and	he	had	the
most	beautiful	palace,	rich,	with	many	antiques.	He	was	a	lover	of	paintings	and
statues,	and	his	palace	was	almost	like	a	museum.	People	used	to	come	to	see	it,
to	visit	 it.	And	 just	 to	go	around	his	palace	 inside	used	 to	 take	hours,	because
there	were	so	many	art	treasures	to	be	seen.	Everything	is	on	fire,	and	the	man
says	that	he	will	first	finish	his	evening	walk!
And	he	continued	at	 the	same	pace.	There	was	no	hurry,	 there	was	no	 tension.
Vidyasagar	could	not	believe	his	own	eyes,	and	the	thought	arose	in	him:	Here	is
a	man	who	knows	how	to	 live	 in	utter	ease.	Whatever	happens	 in	 the	world	 is
not	going	to	change	him	even	a	little	bit.	And	here	I	am	--	just	for	an	award	from
the	viceroy,	I	am	going	to	change	my	whole	lifestyle.	They	are	going	to	cut	my
hair,	put	it	in	shape,	cut	my	beard	and	put	it	in	shape,	and	I	have	agreed!	No,	I
am	going	to	be	just	as	I	am."
And	he	thanked	the	rich	man.	"You	have	saved	me."	The	rich	man	said,	"I	don't
understand	--	how	have	I	saved	you?"
Vidyasagar	explained.	"I	was	going	to	change	my	whole	dress,	shave	my	beard
and	cut	my	hair...	and	just	to	be	respectable,	to	look	rich,	just	to	take	an	award.
And	 your	 house	 --	 I	 have	 been	many	 times	 in	 your	 palace.	 Your	whole	 life's
collection	 of	 great	 paintings	 and	 other	 art	 pieces	 are	 on	 fire,	 and	 you	 are	 not
disturbed	at	all.
"That's	why	I	say	you	have	saved	me:	I	am	going	tomorrow	just	the	way	I	am.
You	have	taught	me	the	greatest	lesson	of	my	life:	that	one	can	take	everything
easily,	 one	 just	 needs	 a	 certain	 acceptance	 that	 whatever	 is	 happening	 is
happening,	and	whatever	people	can	do	they	are	doing.	What	more	can	I	do?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
24
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
The	man	completed	his	evening	walk,	and	then	he	went	towards	his	home,	but
with	 the	 same	 pace.	 Vidyasagar	 followed	 him	 just	 to	 see	 what	 else	 would
happen.	There	was	a	big	crowd;	almost	everything	was	burning.	All	their	efforts
had	failed.
The	rich	man	also	stood	in	the	crowd,	just	as	others	were	standing.	Others	were
very	tense,	in	great	anxiety,	in	a	great	hurry	--	what	to	do?	how	to	save?	--	and	he
was	 standing	 there,	 just	 a	 witness,	 as	 if	 it	 were	 somebody	 else's	 house	 and
somebody	else's	art	collection	that	was	burning.
This	 is	 not	 laziness.	 This	 is	 a	 tremendous	 centering	 of	 being,	 such	 a
groundedness	that	you	can	take	everything	at	ease.
There	 is	no	need	 to	 think	 that	 "there	must	be	 something	wrong	with	me."	 Just
change	that	word	"laziness"	and	everything	is	right	with	you.
Words	mean	much.	Just	a	few	days	ago,	I	was	informed	that	in	the	Soviet	Union
there	 are	 many	 Mohammedan	 countries...	 and	 religion	 is	 banned	 by	 the
communist	party	of	the	Soviet	Union.	Each	child	is	taught	atheism	from	the	very
beginning.	So	the	Mohammedans	have	been	in	trouble	--	what	to	do?
The	month	of	ramadan	comes,	when	for	thirty	days	they	fast	in	the	day	and	eat
in	the	night.
To	do	it	will	be	a	sure	indication	that	you	are	acting	against	 the	government	--
you	are	still	following	a	religion.	They	have	simply	changed	the	name;	they	call
it	"the	month	of	dieting,"
and	now	there	is	no	problem.	Dieting	is	not	prohibited.	Fasting	is	prohibited.
A	Mohammedan	 is	 expected	 by	his	 religion	 to	 pray	 five	 times	 a	 day.	And	his
prayer	is	such	that	it	looks	like	an	exercise:	he	bows	down,	gets	up,	bows	down,
touches	the	earth,	gets	up	again,	and	inside	he	is	reciting	his	mantra.	Now	they
are	still	doing	it;	now	they	call	it
"exercise."	It	keeps	your	body	and	mind	fit	--	the	soul	you	cannot	talk	about;	just
the	mind	and	body.	In	the	Soviet	Union	the	soul	does	not	exist,	it	is	against	the
policy	 of	 the	 government,	 but	 nobody	 can	 prevent	 you	 from	 doing	 exercises.
Even	 if	 you	 do	 them	 five	 times	 a	 day,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 criminal	 act,	 and	 it	 is	 not
religious.	And	it	is	good	for	the	body	and	for	the	mind.
Just	 changing	 words...	 And	 you	 will	 see	 that	 every	 word	 has	 a	 certain
connotation	with	it.
Laziness	has	a	very	negative,	condemnatory	connotation.	But	to	be	at	ease	is	a
beautiful	 phenomenon	 --	 relaxed,	 at	 home,	 centered,	 without	 any	 tension	 and
without	any	anguish.	Just	because	of	 that	word	"laziness"	 the	 idea	 is	arising	 in
you:	"there	must	be	something	wrong	with	me."	Nothing	is	wrong	with	you.
"I	feel	 that	I	am	at	 the	beginning	of	a	new	journey	and	there	is	a	question	that
keeps	 on	 coming	 up:	What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 being	 a	watcher	 and	 the
feeling,	'I	am	not	that'?"
The	difference	is	great,	but	very	subtle.	When	you	say,	"I	am	not	that,"	you	are
not	 a	watcher	 in	 that	moment.	These	 are	 the	 two	 alternatives:	 "I	 am	 that"	 --	 a
thought	passes	in	your	mind	and	you	say,	"I	am	that."	This	is	a	thought.	Or	you
say,	"I	am	not	that."	That	too	is	a	thought.	Just	because	it	is	negative	makes	no
difference.
But	 there	 is	 a	 watcher	 beyond	 both:	 "I	 am	 that"...	 "I	 am	 not	 that"...	 both	 are
watched	by	a	consciousness	which	is	beyond.
The	watcher	is	simply	a	mirror.
It	does	not	say	anything,	it	simply	reflects.
The	watcher	knows	no	language,	knows	no	concepts.	It	is	pure	awareness,	it	is
just	seeing.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
25
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
Just	 think	 of	 a	 newly	 born	 baby:	 He	 will	 also	 see	 the	 light	 in	 the	 room,	 the
beautiful	colors	on	the	walls.	He	will	also	see	the	doctor,	the	nurses,	the	father,
but	he	cannot	say,	"This	is	light,	this	is	a	beautiful	color;	this	is	red,	this	is	green,
this	 is	 the	doctor,	 this	 is	 the	nurse,	 this	 is	my	dad."	But	he	 is	 seeing	all.	He	 is
purely	a	watcher.
But	 he	 cannot	 name	 anything,	 he	 cannot	 verbalize	 anything.	How	 can	 he	 say,
"This	 is	 red"?	because	he	has	never	known	it	before,	and	nobody	has	 told	him
that	 this	 is	 red.	How	can	he	 think	 that	 this	 is	 light?	because	he	knows	nothing
about	light	or	darkness.	And	how	can	he	make	a	difference	between	the	doctor
and	the	father,	and	how	can	he	make	any	difference	between	men	and	women?
These	differences	have	to	be	learned.
But	his	eyes	are	open,	and	he	has	the	freshest	eyes	that	he	will	ever	have	in	his
life,	 the	best	clarity.	They	are	 just	mirrors,	reflecting	everything	that	 is	around.
There	is	no	word,	no	explanation,	no	language,	no	mind.
The	same	is	the	situation	of	the	watcher.	You	again	become	a	newly	born	child.
At	the	innermost	core	of	your	being	you	are	always	a	watcher.
So	you	can	say,	"I	am	not	that"	--	the	watcher	is	lost.	You	have	come	back	to	the
mind.
Only	mind	speaks	in	you.	Except	mind,	nothing	speaks	in	you.
Your	 heart	 does	 not	 speak,	 your	 being	 does	 not	 speak.	Only	 the	mind	 speaks.
Your	heart	feels,	your	being	knows,	but	there	is	nothing	to	be	said.
But	Anugraho,	questions	will	go	on	coming.	In	the	mind,	questions	arise	just	as
new	leaves	come	out	of	trees.	One	question	disappears,	another	question	comes
up.	Mind	is	a	factory	for	producing	questions.
If	no	question	arises,	then	the	question	will	be:	"What	is	happening?	No	question
is	arising,	something	must	be	wrong."
You	have	to	be	aware	that	mind	is	the	question.	What	form	it	takes	is	immaterial.
And	 if	 you	 follow	 behind	 the	 question	 you	 will	 be	 moving	 on	 the	 path	 of
philosophy.	 You	 will	 find	 answers,	 and	 each	 answer	 will	 bring	 ten	 more
questions.	And	this	will	go	on	spreading.	The	philosophical	mind	never	comes	to
any	conclusion.	His	whole	life	he	thinks	--	question	after	question	--	and	every
time	 he	 finds	 some	 answer.	But	 the	moment	 the	 answer	 arises,	 it	 brings	more
questions	with	it.	There	is	no	end	to	questioning.
This	is	the	place	where	philosophy	and	authentic	mysticism	take	separate	paths.
Philosophy	 goes	 after	 questions,	 answers,	 and	 never	 reaches	 any	 conclusion.
Mysticism	simply	drops	the	mind,	because	it	 is	nothing	but	a	question-creating
mechanism,	and	moves	into	silence.	And	the	most	amazing	thing	in	 life	 is	 that
then,	when	there	is	no	question,	you	have	found	the	answer.
There	 may	 be	 thousands	 of	 questions,	 but	 there	 is	 only	 one	 answer,	 and	 that
answer	is	your	awareness.	It	is	not	in	the	form	of	an	answer,	it	is	in	the	form	of
an	experience:	suddenly	a	great	silence	descends	upon	you.	Everything	becomes
calm	 and	 quiet.	 And	 without	 any	 words,	 without	 any	 knowledge,	 there	 is
knowing.	Knowing	that	you	have	arrived	home,	that	now	there	is	nowhere	to	go.
If	 you	 look	 at	 the	 history	 of	 man...	 from	 the	 very	 primitive	 man,	 the	 same
questions	have	been	asked.	Answers	have	become	more	and	more	sophisticated,
but	no	answer	destroys	 the	question.	The	question	has	an	 immense	capacity	 to
survive	all	answers:	it	comes	back	again	in	a	new	form.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
26
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
You	 ask	who	 created	 the	world.	Your	 organized	 religions	 say	God	 created	 the
world,	 and	 the	 mind	 immediately	 asks	 who	 created	 God	 --	 the	 answer	 is
nullified.
And	if	somebody	says,	"Number	one	god	created	the	universe;	number	two	god
created	number	one	god;	number	three	god	created	number	two	god...	 that	will
be	 ludicrous,	 because	 finally	 the	 last	 god	 will	 have	 the	 same	 question:	 who
created	him?	The	question	has	an	immense	capacity	to	survive	all	your	answers,
howsoever	sophisticated.
The	path	of	the	mystic	is	totally	different	from	the	path	of	the	philosopher.	The
mystic	does	not	try	to	find	answers	for	the	questions.	He	simply	understands	one
thing:	 that	 until	 he	goes	beyond	mind,	 questions	will	 continue;	 no	 answer	 can
help.	But	the	moment	you	are	beyond	the	mind,	all	questions	disappear,	and	in
that	 disappearance	 you	 have	 found	 the	 answer	 --	 without	 words,	 without
language,	 you	 have	 become	 a	 knower.	 You	 have	 become	 knowing	 itself,	 not
knowledge.	This	state	is	the	state	of	the	watcher.
So	don't	say,	"I	am	not	that."	There	are	schools	which	teach	that	--	when	you	see
something	in	the	mind	go	on	saying,	"I	am	not	that.	I	am	not	the	body,	I	am	not
the	mind,	 I	 am	not	 the	heart;	 I	 am	not	 this,	 I	 am	not	 that."	But	 the	watcher	 is
beyond	all	your	negations,	just	as	he	is	beyond	your	positive	assertions.
Remain	silent;	don't	say	anything.	If	some	thought	floats	in	the	mind,	let	it	float.
The	way	you	allow	a	cloud	to	float	in	the	sky	--	you	don't	start	shouting,	"I	am
not	that."	Your	mind	is	also	a	sky,	a	screen.	Things	pass.	You	simply	watch.
As	Adam	wandered	 about	 the	Garden	 of	Eden	 he	 noticed	 two	 birds	 up	 in	 the
tree.	 They	were	 snuggled	 up	 together,	 billing	 and	 cooing.	Adam	 called	 to	 the
Lord,	 "What	 are	 the	 two	 birds	 doing	 in	 the	 trees?"	 The	 Lord	 said,	 "They	 are
making	love,	Adam."
A	little	while	later	he	wandered	into	the	fields	and	saw	a	bull	and	cow	going	at	it.
He	called	to	the	Lord,	"Lord,	what	is	going	on	with	that	bull	and	cow?"
And	the	Lord	said,	"They	are	making	love,	Adam."
And	Adam	said,	"How	come	I	don't	have	anyone	to	make	love	with?"
So	 the	 Lord	 said,	 "We	will	 change	 that.	When	 you	 awake	 tomorrow	morning
things	will	be	different."
So	Adam	lay	down	beneath	the	olive	tree	and	fell	asleep.	When	he	awoke,	there
was	Eve	next	to	him.	Adam	jumped	up,	grabbed	her	hand,	and	said,	"Come	with
me.	Let's	go	into	the	bushes."	And	so	they	went.	But	a	few	moments	later	Adam
stumbled	 out,	 looking	 very	 dejected,	 and	 called	 to	 the	 Lord,	 "Lord,	what	 is	 a
headache?"
You	cannot	end	questions.	Something	or	other	is	going	to	be	there	--	if	nothing
else,	 then	a	headache.	Since	Adam	asked	 this	 --	 "What	 is	a	headache?"	 --	The
Lord	has	disappeared,	saying,	"This	idiot	is	not	going	to	allow	me	even	to	rest.
He	will	be	coming	again	and	again	--
'Lord,	what	 is	 this?	Lord,	what	 is	 that?'"	Since	 then,	nobody	has	known	where
the	Lord	is!
Don't	 create	 an	 unnecessary	 headache	 for	 yourself.	 Just	 be	 a	 silent,	 relaxed
watcher.	 The	 headache	will	 disappear	 --	 and	 the	 head	 too!	And	 you	will	 find
such	 a	 freedom	 and	 such	 a	 spaciousness,	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 sky	 has	 become
available	to	you.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
27
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMEONE	ONCE	TOLD	ME	THE	SAYING:	"ALL	THAT	YOU	PUT	INTO
THE
LIVES	 OF	 OTHERS	 COMES	 BACK	 INTO	 YOUR	 OWN.	 "IT	 HAS	 BEEN
WITH	ME
EVER	 SINCE,	 AND	 I	 FEEL	 IT	 TO	 BE	 TRUE.	 CAN	YOU	 PLEASE	 TALK
ABOUT	THIS?
IT	KEEPS	COMING	UP	A	LOT	FOR	ME.
Prem	Kendra,	the	saying	is	true.	All	that	you	put	into	the	lives	of	others	comes
back	into	your	own,	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	other	is	not	so	"other"	as	you
think.	No	man	is	an	island;	we	are	all	joined	together.
On	 the	 surface	both	my	hands	 seem	 to	be	 separate.	But	 if	 I	 hit	my	 right	hand
with	the	left	hand,	do	you	think	the	pain	is	going	to	be	just	confined	to	the	right
hand?	The	left	hand	is	not	separate.	If	the	right	hand	suffers,	sooner	or	later	the
left	 hand	 is	 going	 to	 suffer	 too.	 It	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 hurt	 someone	 and	 remain
unhurt,	because	the	other	is	not	so	other	as	he	appears.
Deep	down	in	the	roots	we	are	one.	So	when	you	slap	somebody's	face,	you	are
slapping	your	own	face.
People	like	Jesus,	when	they	say,	"Love	your	enemy	just	as	you	love	yourself,"
are	 not	 just	 teaching	 ordinary	 morality.	 They	 are	 stating	 a	 very	 fundamental
truth:	 the	 enemy	 is	 also	 part	 of	 you,	 as	 you	 are	 part	 of	 the	 enemy.	 Love	 the
enemy	as	you	love	yourself.
Gautam	Buddha	used	 to	 say	 to	his	disciples,	 "After	each	meditation	when	you
are	 feeling	blissful,	 full	of	 joy,	peace,	 silence...	 shower	and	share	your	silence,
your	 peace,	 your	 blissfulness	 with	 the	 whole	 of	 existence	 --	 with	 men,	 with
women,	with	trees,	with	animals,	with	birds	--	with	all	that	is,	share	it.
"It	is	not	a	question	whether	someone	deserves	it	or	not.	The	more	you	share	it,
the	more	you	will	 get	 it.	The	 farther	your	blessings	 reach,	 the	more	 and	more
blessings	will	 shower	 on	 you	 from	 all	 directions.	 Existence	 always	 gives	 you
back	more	than	you	have	given	to	it."
One	man	who	was	a	very	great	admirer	of	Gautam	Buddha	raised	his	hand	and
said,
"There	 is	 one	 question.	 I	 can	 share	 my	 blessings,	 my	 joy,	 with	 the	 whole
existence.	Please	just	allow	me	one	exception:	I	cannot	share	with	my	neighbor.
He	is	so	disgusting	--	the	very	idea	of	sharing	my	joy	with	him	makes	me	sick."
And	he	said,	"Just	one	exception	I	am	asking.	 I	am	ready	 to	share	with	all	 the
animals,	all	the	insects,	all	the	birds,	all	the	trees,	everything	--
just	that	one	neighbor	who	is	so	nasty.	You	don't	know	about	it;	otherwise	you
yourself	would	have	said,	'You	can	have	a	few	exceptions.'"
Buddha	said	to	the	man,	"You	don't	understand	what	I	am	saying.	First	you	have
to	share	your	 joy	with	your	neighbor;	only	 then	you	will	be	able	 to	share	your
joy	with	 the	whole	existence.	 If	even	your	neighbor	 is	not	your	neighbor,	 then
how	can	 the	birds	 and	 the	 animals	 and	 the	 trees	 can	be	your	 friends	 and	your
neighbors?	So	you	first	practice	just	that	exception
--	forget	about	the	whole	universe.	If	you	can	succeed	in	sharing	your	joy	with
your	neighbor,	there	is	no	problem.	You	are	already	ready	to	share	your	joy	with
everybody	else.
Perhaps	 in	 the	 same	 situation,	 Jesus	may	 also	 have	 said,	 "Love	 your	 neighbor
just	 as	 you	 love	 yourself."	 It	 looks	 very	 strange	 that	 he	 makes	 these	 two
statements:	"Love	your	enemy	just	as	yourself,"	and	"Love	your	neighbor	just	as
yourself."	George	Bernard	Shaw	joked	about	it	and	said,	"It	is	because	they	are
not	 two	 persons;	 they	 are	 the	 same	 person,	 the	 enemy	 Osho	 -	 The	 Hidden
Splendor
28
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
and	the	neighbor.	There	is	no	need	to	make	two	statements.	One	statement	will
do,	because	they	are	not	separate	persons."
Kendra,	this	is	the	essential	of	all	religiousness:	that	we	should	be	able	to	share
unconditionally	all	that	grows	in	our	being,	all	the	flowers	and	all	the	fragrance.
To	be	miserly	about	it	is	dangerous.	In	the	ordinary	world,	the	economics	is	that
if	you	give	something	to	someone,	that	much	less	will	be	with	you.	And	if	you
share	 everything	 with	 everybody,	 you	 will	 be	 a	 beggar.	 But	 in	 the	 higher
economics	of	life,	just	the	opposite	law	functions:	if	you	hold	things	to	yourself,
you	will	destroy	them.	They	are	delicate.	They	need	freedom.	They	need	wings
and	they	need	to	be	allowed	to	go	into	the	sky.
The	more	 you	give	 your	 love,	 your	 compassion,	 your	 blessing,	 your	 joy,	 your
ecstasy,	the	more	you	will	find	that	the	whole	existence	has	become	so	generous
to	you	that	streams	of	love	and	joy	are	running	towards	you	from	all	directions.
And	once	you	have	known	the	secret
--	that	by	giving	you	don't	lose,	but	you	get	more,	a	thousandfold	more	--	your
whole	life	structure	goes	through	a	transformation.
But	 even	 in	 our	 so-called	 religious	 and	 spiritual	 life,	 people	 are	 as	miserly	 as
they	are	in	the	ordinary	life.	They	don't	know	that	the	laws	of	ordinary	life	are
not	applicable	to	the	higher	dimensions	of	being.
A	famous	story	about	a	Zen	nun	is:	She	had	a	beautiful	golden	Buddha,	a	very
artistic,	aesthetic	statue	of	Buddha,	made	of	pure	gold.	And	the	nun	used	to	carry
the	Buddha	wherever	 she	would	 go.	Buddhist	monks	 and	 nuns	 have	 to	 go	 on
moving	for	eight	months	in	the	year,	except	the	four	months	of	rain.	So	from	one
temple,	from	one	monastery	to	another...
She	 was	 staying	 in	 one	 of	 the	 temples	 of	 China	 --	 she	 had	 gone	 to	 travel	 to
Chinese	 temples	 and	monasteries	 and	 that	 temple	 has	 ten	 thousand	 statues	 of
Buddha.	It	is	a	unique	temple	in	the	whole	world.	Ten	thousand	statues...	almost
the	whole	mountain	has	been	cut	into	statues	and	made	into	a	temple;	perhaps	it
has	taken	centuries	to	build	it.	She	was	staying	there.
And	 this	 had	 been	her	 constant	worry:	Every	morning	when	 she	worships	 her
golden	Buddha,	she	puts	flowers,	sweets,	burns	incense	--	but	you	cannot	depend
upon	the	wind,	upon	the	breeze.	The	fragrance	arising	out	of	the	burning	incense
may	not	reach	the	golden	Buddha's	nose,	it	may	move	in	any	direction.
In	 that	 temple	 there	were	 ten	 thousand	 other	 Buddhas,	 and	 the	 fragrance	was
going	to	other	Buddhas'	noses.	And	this	was	intolerable;	this	was	too	much.	She
was	feeling	very	hurt,	that	her	own	poor	Buddha	is	not	getting	any	incense,	and
all	these	vagabonds...	"And	my	Buddha	is	golden	and	they	are	just	stones.	And
after	all	my	Buddha	is	MY	Buddha."
This	is	how	the	mind	functions:	it	is	so	possessive,	it	cannot	even	see	that	they
are	 all	 statues	 of	 the	 same	 man.	 Which	 nose	 is	 getting	 the	 incense	 does	 not
matter	--	it	is	reaching	the	Buddha.	But	"MY	Buddha"	--	the	old	possessive	mind
continues.
So	she	devised	a	 small	method:	 she	brought	a	bamboo,	a	hollow	bamboo,	and
cut	it	into	a	small	piece.	She	will	burn	the	incense,	and	put	the	bamboo	on	top	of
it.	One	side	will	take	the	incense	smoke	in,	and	the	other	side	she	will	put	on	the
nose	of	her	golden	Buddha	--	almost	like	making	him	smoke!	But	that	created	a
problem:	her	Buddha's	nose	became	black.	That	disturbed	her	even	more.
She	asked	the	high	priest	of	the	temple,	"What	should	I	do?	My	poor	Buddha's
nose	has	become	black."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
29
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
He	said,	"But	how	did	it	happen?"
She	 said,	 "I	 feel	 very	 embarrassed	 to	 say,	 it	 is	my	 own	 doing."	And	 then	 she
explained	the	whole	thing.
The	 priest	 laughed.	 He	 said,	 "All	 these	 are	 Buddhas	 here.	 One	 Buddha,	 ten
thousand	Buddhas	--	to	whom	it	reaches	does	not	matter.	You	should	not	be	so
miserly,	so	possessive.
Buddha	 cannot	 be	 yours	 and	 cannot	 be	 mine.	 The	 nose	 of	 the	 Buddha	 has
become	black	because	of	your	possessiveness."
And	the	priest	said	 to	her,	"We	are	making	each	other's	 faces	black	because	of
our	possessiveness.	If	we	could	give	without	even	thinking	to	whom	it	reaches...
Because	to	whomever	it	reaches,	is	part	of	the	same	existence	as	we	are	part	of	--
it	reaches	to	us."
Kendra,	don't	go	on	thinking	about	it	as	a	proverb	that	is	true.	You	are	saying,	"It
keeps	 coming	 up	 a	 lot	 for	 me."	 It	 is	 not	 something	 to	 contemplate;	 it	 is
something	to	do	and	to	experience.
Just	make	somebody	joyful	and	see	--	your	heart	immediately	becomes	light.	Let
somebody	laugh,	and	something	of	 the	 laughter	enters	 in	you,	becomes	part	of
you.	Let	somebody	be	blissful...	help	somebody	 to	enjoy	 life	more	 totally,	and
immediate	is	the	reward.
Existence	 is	 always	 cash.	 It	 does	 not	 depend	 on	 checks,	 drafts	 --	 it	 is	 always
cash.	 Here,	 you	 do	 something	 and	 immediately	 comes	 the	 reward	 or	 the
punishment.
Rather	 than	 thinking	 about	 it,	whether	 it	 is	 true	 or	 not,	 try	 it.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the
truest	axioms	for	transforming	your	life.
In	giving	 small	 things,	people	 think	of	 a	 thousand	 things.	You	 just	 look	at	 the
beggars.	 If	you	are	alone,	moving	on	 the	road,	 the	beggar	will	not	ask	you	for
anything,	because	he	knows	you	are	alone;	your	respectability	is	not	at	risk.	He
will	 catch	 hold	 of	 you	 in	 the	 marketplace,	 where	 you	 cannot	 refuse.	 If	 you
refuse,	everybody	will	say,	"Don't	be	so	unkind,	don't	be	so	cruel."
Even	the	beggar	knows	the	psychology:	if	the	man	is	alone,	he	will	give	you	a
lesson,	rather	than	giving	you	something:	"You	seem	to	be	young,	you	seem	to
be	healthy.	You	should	be	working	--	not	begging."
The	same	man	in	the	society	will	immediately	give,	and	give	more.	He	will	feel
resentful,	 but	 he	 wants	 to	 impress	 the	 people	 around	 him	 that	 he	 is	 a	 very
generous	 man,	 and	 the	 beggar	 knows.	 The	 beggar	 also	 knows	 that	 he	 has
befooled	you:	 you	have	not	 given	 to	him	or	 to	his	 poverty,	 you	have	given	 to
your	respectability,	to	your	generosity.
People	say	"We	will	give	only	to	worthy	people,	to	deserving	people."	These	are
strategies	for	not	giving.	Otherwise	who	is	unworthy?	If	existence	accepts	him,
and	the	sun	does	not	deny	him	light,	and	the	moon	does	not	deny	him	its	beauty,
and	the	roses	do	not	deny	him	their	fragrance...	if	the	existence	accepts	him,	who
are	you	to	think	whether	he	is	worthy	or	unworthy?
His	being	alive	is	enough	proof	that	existence	accepts	him	as	he	is.
Any	 conditional	 giving	 is	 not	 a	 giving	 at	 all.	 Every	 giving	 has	 to	 be
unconditional.	And	every	giving	has	not	 to	ask	even	gratitude	 in	 response.	On
the	 contrary,	 the	 giver	 should	 feel	 grateful	 that	 his	 gift	 has	 not	 been	 refused.
Then	giving	becomes	a	tremendous	ecstasy.	This	is	how	your	heart	grows,	how
your	 consciousness	 expands,	 how	 your	 darkness	 disappears,	 how	 you	 become
more	and	more	light,	more	and	more	close	to	the	divine.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
30
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
Anything	 that	 appeals	 to	 you,	 don't	 let	 it	 remain	 in	 the	mind;	 let	 it	 come	 into
your	actions.
Only	the	action	will	give	you	the	proof	whether	it	is	right	or	wrong.	Arguments
can	prove	what	is	wrong	as	right,	what	is	right	as	wrong.
In	 Greece,	 before	 Socrates,	 there	 used	 to	 be	 a	 great	 school	 of	 thinkers	 called
sophists.	 They	 were	 strange	 people.	 Their	 ideology	 was	 that	 there	 is	 nothing
true,	 nothing	 untrue,	 nothing	 good,	 nothing	 bad	 --	 it	 all	 depends	 how	 sharp	 is
your	argument.	Sophistry	was	the	art	of	argumentation.
These	sophists	used	to	move	from	town	to	town	in	Greece	to	teach	people	the	art
of	argumentation.	And	they	were	so	certain,	 that	they	used	to	take	half	of	their
fee	 before,	 in	 advance,	 and	 half	 they	 would	 take	 when	 you	 won	 your	 first
argument	with	someone.
Zeno,	one	the	very	sharpest	minds	the	world	has	known,	went	to	be	a	disciple	in
the	school	of	sophists.	He	deposited	half	of	 the	 fee	and	said,	"The	other	half	 I
will	never	give."
The	master	 said,	 "You	will	have	 to	give	 the	other	half	 --	because	how	are	you
going	to	find	out	whether	you	have	become	really	argumentative	or	not?"
He	said,	"I	am	not	going	to	argue	with	anybody.	But	that	is	not	a	question	right
now.	First	you	teach	me."
Two	 years	 of	 teaching	 and	 the	 master	 could	 see	 that	 Zeno	 was	 a	 genius,	 far
ahead	 of	 the	master	 himself.	His	 teaching	was	 complete,	 and	 the	master	 said,
"Now	you	can	go	and	argue	with	someone.	Challenge	anybody,	and	your	victory
is	sure."
But	Zeno	said,	"I	am	not	going	to	argue	with	anybody.	Even	if	somebody	says	in
the	 day	 that	 it	 is	 night,	 I	 will	 say,	 'Yes,	 it	 is	 night.'	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 argue,
because	if	I	win	in	any	argument,	then	I	have	to	pay	half	the	fee	to	you.	That	I
am	not	going	to	do."
Almost	a	year	passed	and	he	did	not	argue	with	anyone.	The	master	even	sent
many	people	to	provoke	him	to	argumentation,	but	he	would	always	be	willing
to	accept	whatever	you	said.
You	say,	 "God	exists"	and	he	says,	 "Yes,	God	exists."	You	say,	 "God	does	not
exist."	He	will	 say,	"God	does	not	exist,	 I	am	in	absolute	agreement	with	you.
The	question	of	argument	does	not	arise."
Finally	 the	master,	 who	 himself	 was	 a	 great	 arguer,	 thought	 of	 a	 strategy:	 he
should	bring	him	to	the	court,	sue	him,	because	he	has	not	paid	his	half	fee.	His
idea	was,	"If	I	win,	he	will	have	to	pay	the	fee.	If	he	wins,	then	outside	the	court
I	will	say,	'Now	give	me	my	fee;	you	have	won	your	first	argument.'"
But	Zeno	was	also	his	disciple.	He	thought,	"If	he	wins,	I	will	tell	the	court	that
this	was	 the	 agreement,	 that	when	 I	won	my	 first	 argument,	 then	 I	would	pay
him.	Now	I	have	lost	my	first	argument:	according	to	our	agreement	he	has	won
the	case,	but	I	cannot	give	him	the	fee.
"And	if	by	chance	I	win,	I	know	that	outside	the	court	he	will	ask,	'Give	me	the
fee.'	And	I	will	say,	'Come	inside	the	court,	because	I	cannot	go	against	the	law
of	 the	 country.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 contempt	 of	 the	 court;	 the	 court	 has	 given	 me
victory.'"
And	 the	 very	 thing	 happened.	Zeno	 argued	 very	well.	And	 the	master	wanted
him	to	win,	so	he	argued	in	such	a	way	that	Zeno	would	win.	The	court	decided
that	Zeno	was	victorious.
Outside	the	court	the	master	said,	"Now	give	me	my	fee."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
31
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
Zeno	said,	"Then	come	inside	the	court:	I	will	give	you	the	fee	if	the	judge	says
that	I	have	failed	in	arguing.	And	I	cannot	go	against	the	court	--	that	will	be	a
criminal	act,	a	contempt	of	the	court."	Zeno	never	paid	the	half	fee.
Zeno	himself	became	a	great	teacher	in	his	own	right,	but	he	used	to	take	the	full
fee	 in	 advance!	 He	 said,	 "I	 cannot	 commit	 the	 same	 mistake	 my	 master
committed."
Don't	make	life	a	question	of	argumentation,	or	truth	a	question	of	arguments,	or
love	a	question	of	arguments,	or	joy	a	question	of	arguments.	Live,	experience,
because	that	is	the	only	way	to	know.	Argument	is	not	the	way	to	know.
Knowing	is	only	through	experiencing.
A	nun	dies	and	goes	 to	heaven.	St.	Peter	 says	 to	her,	 "I'm	sure	you	have	 led	a
virtuous	life,	Sister,	but	before	I	can	let	you	into	heaven,	you	must	answer	one
question.	The	question	is:	what	were	Eve's	first	words	to	Adam?"
"Boy,"	says	the	nun,	"that's	a	hard	one."
"That's	right!"	says	St.	Peter.
Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game.	Make	it	more	authentic,	and	anything
that	 feels	 right	 to	 you,	 try	 to	 experiment	with	 it.	 There	 are	millions	 of	 people
who	know	what	is	right,	millions	of	people	who	know	what	is	good,	millions	of
people	who	know	what	has	to	be	done.
But	 they	 just	know,	 they	never	 try	 to	 transform	their	knowing	 into	action,	 into
actuality.
And	 unless	 your	 knowledge	 becomes	 your	 actual	 experience,	 it	 is	 simply	 a
burden	 and	 not	 a	 freedom.	 It	 keeps	 you	 loaded	with	 good	 thoughts,	 but	 good
thoughts	are	useless.	Unless	they	grow	within	you,	they	have	roots	in	your	heart,
they	are	part	of	your	being,	they	are	simply	wasting	your	time	and	your	life.
Don't	be	like	the	crowd	that	exists	on	the	earth.	They	all	have	beautiful	theories,
beautiful	 dogmas,	 great	 philosophies,	 magnificent	 theologies,	 but	 all	 in	 their
heads.	They	have	not	tasted	anything,	and	they	will	die	without	actually	knowing
anything.	Their	whole	 lives	will	be	simply	a	 long	desert	where	nothing	grows,
where	nothing	happens,	where	nothing	is	realized.
And	I	say	unto	you:	Unless	God	is	realized,	your	life	has	been	a	wastage.	And
that	 is	 your	 capacity,	 your	 potential	 --	 the	 realization	 of	 the	 divineness	 of
existence.	Just	a	 little	 taste	and	your	whole	 life	will	become	full	of	such	glory,
such	ecstasy,	such	splendor	that	you	cannot	even	dream	about	it.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 NATURE,	 SPRING	 COMES,	 SUMMER	 FOLLOWS,	 AND	 THEN
AUTUMN	AND
WINTER.	EACH	TIME	THEY	ARE	DIFFERENT,	NEVER	THE	SAME;	BUT
THE
PHENOMENON	OF	THE	SPRING,	SUMMER,	AUTUMN	AND	WINTER	IS
ALWAYS
COMING	REGULARLY.	THE	SUN	ALWAYS	RISES	 IN	THE	MORNING...
BELOVED
OSHO,	 ARE	 THERE	 ALSO	 BASIC	 PHENOMENA	 IN	 THE	 WORLD	 OF
TRUTH	WHICH
OCCUR	REGULARLY?	IF	SO,	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	TALK	ABOUT	THEM?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
32
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
Shantidharma,	it	is	true	about	nature:	"Spring	comes,	summer	follows,	and	then
autumn	 and	 winter.	 Each	 time	 they	 are	 different,	 never	 the	 same;	 but	 the
phenomenon	 of	 the	 spring,	 summer,	 autumn	 and	 winter	 is	 always	 coming
regularly.	The	sun	always	rises	in	the	morning...
"Are	 there	also	basic	phenomena	in	 the	world	of	 truth	which	occur	regularly?"
No.	Nature	is	autonomous,	more	mechanical	than	the	world	of	consciousness.	In
nature	there	is	no	freedom,	no	choice.	The	sun	cannot	say,	"I	am	going	for	a	few
days'	holiday."	Everything	has	to	move	absolutely	mechanically.	That's	why	the
sun	goes	on	 rising	 from	 the	east.	Otherwise,	 in	millions	of	years,	 it	must	have
become	tired	and	bored.	It	may	have	thought	sometimes	to	rise	from	the	west,	or
from	the	south,	or	from	the	north	--	or	not	to	rise	at	all.
Nature	is	following	a	fixed	routine.	Consciousness	is,	intrinsically,	freedom.	So
in	the	world	of	consciousness	there	is	no	regularity.
Sometimes	it	happens	at	one	point	of	history	that	there	are	a	dozen	enlightened
people.	For	example,	it	happened	at	the	time	of	Gautam	Buddha.	Just	at	the	same
time	 there	was	 Lao	Tzu	 in	China,	 and	Chuang	Tzu	 and	Lieh	 Tzu;	 in	Greece,
there	 were	 Socrates,	 Pythagoras,	 Heraclitus,	 Plotinus;	 in	 India,	 Mahavira	 and
eight	other	teachers	of	the	same	status.	And	perhaps	in	other	countries...	in	Iran
there	was	Zarathustra.
That	was	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago.	Suddenly	 a	 tremendous	 spring	 came	 --	 so
many	 enlightened	 people,	 such	 a	 cool	 breeze,	 such	 calmness,	 such
consciousness.	The	 earth	was	 so	 fragrant	 that	 in	 India	we	 called	 that	 age	 "the
golden	 age."	 Never	 before	 or	 after	 has	 man	 reached	 to	 such	 a	 peak	 of
consciousness.	And	then	for	centuries	it	was	just	a	dark	night.
Then	 in	 the	 middle	 ages,	 again	 there	 was	 an	 explosion:	 Kabir,	 Dadu,	 Nanak,
Farid,	Mansoor,	 Jalaluddin	Rumi,	 and	many	 others	 in	China	 and	 Japan	 of	 the
same	quality	of	enlightenment.	And	 then	again	 the	spring	did	not	come.	There
seems	to	be	no	regularity.
On	 the	 contrary,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 one	 thing:	 that	 whenever	 there	 is	 one
enlightened	person,	then	many	people's	consciousness	is	triggered.	One	person's
enlightenment	 becomes	 an	 evidence	 and	 a	 proof	 of	 your	 hidden	 splendor,	 of
which	you	were	not	aware.	But	that	man's	splendor	makes	you	confident	about
yourself	--	because	you	are	also	a	human	being,	belonging	to	the	same	state	of
consciousness.	He	has	discovered	himself,	while	you	have	remained	asleep.	He
has	become	awakened,	while	you	have	not	been	alert	that	it	is	dawn	and	time	to
wake	up.
One	 thing	 is	 certain:	 that	whenever	 one	 person	 is	 there,	 then	 in	many	 places,
many	people
--	perhaps	in	faraway	places;	it	does	not	matter	whether	those	people	are	close	to
that	person	--
wherever	 there	 are	boundary	cases,	people	who	are	 just	 lightly	 asleep,	 a	 small
shaking	 and	 they	will	wake	 up.	 So	whenever	 there	 is	 one	 enlightened	 person,
many	 people	 around	 the	 world	 start	 waking	 up.	 He	 triggers	 a	 process	 in	 the
whole	universe.
But	 there	 is	no	 regularity.	 It	 is	not	 that	 in	every	century	 there	will	be	so	many
people	 enlightened,	 or	 every	 year	 there	 will	 come	 a	 season	when	 people	 will
become	enlightened.
There	 is	 no	 season,	 no	 spring	 for	 enlightenment.	One	 can	become	enlightened
any	time.
But	if	somebody	is	already	enlightened,	your	enlightenment	becomes	very	easy.
He	has	already	broken	the	ice,	he	has	already	made	a	footpath.	All	that	you	need
is	a	little	courage	to	go	alone,	leaving	the	crowd	behind.
The	 crowd	 is	 fast	 asleep,	 and	 I	 think	 it	 will	 remain	 asleep	 forever.	 Sleep	 is
comfortable,	 dreams	 are	 beautiful	 --	 why	 bother	 to	 be	 awake?	 Because	 with
awakening	comes	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
33
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
responsibility,	with	 awakening	comes	 freedom.	With	 awakening,	 suddenly	you
find	yourself	alone	with	the	whole	world	condemning	you.
It	 happened	 in	 the	 beginning	 of	 this	 century,	 an	 actual	 case:	 In	Mexico,	 in	 a
faraway	part	of	the	mountains,	there	lived	a	small	tribe	of	three	hundred	people
who	were	all	blind.	It	was	very	strange.	Not	a	single	person	had	eyes;	all	were
blind.
One	young	scientist	heard	about	the	tribe	and	went	there	to	find	out	the	reason.
And	then	he	was	even	more	surprised,	because	every	child	was	born	with	eyes	--
not	blind	--	but	within	three	or	four	months'	time,	he	would	become	blind.
The	young	scientist	discovered	that	there	was	a	fly	in	that	forest,	and	its	bite	was
making	 young	 children	 blind.	 And	 that	 fly	 was	 so	 common	 a	 fly,	 that	 it	 was
almost	impossible	to	keep	your	eyesight.	But	the	poison	of	that	fly	was	able	to
make	 a	 person	blind	only	 before	 he	was	 six	months	 of	 age.	After	 that	 he	was
strong	enough,	and	the	fly	could	not	affect	his	eyes,	but	six	months	were	enough.
So,	for	six	months	some	babies	remained	with	eyes	--	a	few	for	five	months,	a
few	for	one	month,	a	few	for	a	few	days	--	but	by	the	sixth	month,	almost	all	the
babies	went	blind.	The	scientist	had	discovered	the	fly,	he	had	found	the	poison,
and	while	he	was	discovering	all	this,	he	was	trying	to	make	people	understand
that	they	were	blind.	And	they	all	laughed	--
because	he	was	such	a	minority,	one	man,	and	they	were	three	hundred,	and	they
all	said,
"You	are	hallucinating,	you	are	dreaming.	Eyes	don't	exist."
While	he	was	working	with	the	tribe,	he	fell	in	love	with	a	blind	girl.	She	was	so
beautiful,	but	neither	she	was	aware	of	her	beauty,	nor	anybody	else	was	aware
of	her	beauty.	Although	she	was	blind,	still	the	young	man	fell	in	love	with	her,
and	he	proposed	to	be	married	to	her.
But	the	society	refused.
The	society	said,	"We	can	allow	our	daughter	to	be	married	to	you	if	you	become
blind,	just	as	we	are	blind.	We	will	have	to	take	your	eyes	out.	So	you	can	think
it	over,	and	tomorrow	you	can	tell	us	your	decision."
The	young	man	was	very	much	in	love	with	the	girl,	but	still	he	thought,	"This	is
a	strange	bargain,	to	become	blind	--	because	these	eyes	are	what	has	made	me
aware	of	her	beauty.
Losing	these	eyes,	it	does	not	matter	whether	she	is	beautiful	or	not.	And	I	have
come	here	 to	convince	 these	people	 that	 their	 eyes	can	be	cured,	because	 they
were	born	with	seeing.	Just	a	certain	poison	has	destroyed	their	vision;	perhaps
we	can	find	some	antidote	and	they	can	be	able	to	see	again."
Rather	 than	being	ready	for	 that...	 they	were	not	ready	to	go	to	 the	city,	out	of
their	mountains.	They	were	asking	that	the	young	man	should	become	blind.	In
the	night,	he	escaped.
The	crowd	is	blind.	And	to	have	eyes	in	this	crowd	is	to	be	condemned,	is	to	be
crucified.
The	greatest	crime	in	the	eyes	of	the	crowd	is	somebody	becoming	enlightened.
That	man	disturbs	your	peaceful	sleep;	he	starts	trying	to	wake	you	up.	He	starts
destroying	your	 superstitions;	 he	 starts	 fighting	 against	 your	 ideologies,	which
are	 keeping	 you	 asleep;	 against	 your	 beliefs	 which	 are	 covering	 your	 eyes;
against	all	kinds	of	your	religious,	social,	and	political	dogmas,	which	want	you
to	remain	as	you	are	because	it	is	in	their	favor	to	exploit	you,	to	enslave	you.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
34
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
Enlightenment	is	possible	for	everybody,	but	the	crowd	prevents	it.	Only	a	few
daring	 people,	 courageous	 of	 spirit,	 follow	 the	 path	 alone	 into	 the	 unknown.
They	need	somebody	--
at	 least	 the	 footprints	of	 somebody,	 that	 somebody	has	gone	ahead	of	 them;	at
least	 somebody	calling	 from	 the	peaks	of	consciousness:	charaiveti,	charaiveti.
That	was	Buddha's	word	--
keep	on	coming,	keep	on	coming.	Don't	stop.
So	once	in	a	while...
But	the	phenomenon	is	not	regular,	and	cannot	be	regular.	About	consciousness,
nothing	can	be	mechanical.	Everything	is	spontaneous.
Man's	 sleep	 is	 such	 that	 sometimes	 it	 is	 unbelievable.	 His	 unconsciousness	 is
such	that	one	wonders	how	he	can	go	on	being	so	unconscious.	Because	of	this
unconsciousness	 he	 suffers	 all	 kinds	 of	 misery,	 anxiety,	 fear,	 slavery,
exploitation.	He	loses	all	his	dignity,	all	his	humanity.	He	misses	all	the	joys	of
life,	all	the	songs	and	all	the	dances.
And	he	goes	on	doing	things	which	he	knows	are	not	right,	but	he	seems	to	be
almost	incapable	of	getting	out	of	the	routine.	You	know	anger	is	not	right,	you
know	it	is	simply	torturing	yourself	for	somebody	else's	fault.	There	is	no	logic
in	it,	and	you	have	suffered	so	much	--	but	again	you	will	do	it.
Unconsciousness	is	very	deep.	And	consciousness	is	a	very	small	part,	so	unless
you	have	great	courage	to	use	that	small	part	of	consciousness	to	transform	the
whole	 of	 your	 unconsciousness,	 it	 seems	 almost	 impossible	 to	 become
enlightened.	But	seeing	one	man	becoming	enlightened	creates	a	longing	in	you,
a	thirst	in	you,	a	trust	in	you	that	it	is	possible
--	a	challenge	to	your	sleeping	humanity,	that	"you	have	slept	long	enough	and	it
is	 time	 to	 know	 what	 awakening	 is."	 What	 Gautam	 Buddha	 experienced	 or
Socrates	experienced,	is	your	birthright	too.
Eunice	and	Frank	were	marooned	on	a	small	island	in	the	middle	of	the	ocean,
the	only	two	survivors	of	a	shipwreck.	Eunice	was	a	virgin	and	a	strict	Catholic,
but	after	a	couple	of	months,	Frank	convinced	her	that	they	were	never	going	to
be	rescued.	Eunice	finally	relented	and	gave	up	her	virginity.
After	 two	 years,	 Eunice	 became	 so	 ashamed	 of	 what	 she	 was	 doing	 that	 she
killed	herself.
A	couple	of	years	after	she	died,	Frank	became	so	ashamed	of	what	he	was	doing
that	he	buried	her.
How	you	are	going	to	respond	to	a	situation	is	unpredictable.	In	a	way	that	is	a
privilege,	 a	prerogative	of	human	beings,	 that	 they	 are	unpredictable.	But	 in	 a
way	it	is	a	very	dangerous	privilege.
Still,	 it	 is	 good	 that	man	 does	 not	 become	mechanically	 enlightened,	 because
then	enlightenment	will	not	be	your	glory	but	 just	a	season.	The	season	comes
and	people	become	enlightened;	next	year,	again,	when	the	season	comes,	people
will	become	enlightened.	But	it	is	not	your	glory.
Your	glory	 is	 in	your	 effort	 to	 attain	 the	ultimate	 truth.	Your	glory	 is	 to	know
your	being	on	your	own.
The	 only	 thing	 in	 life	 that	 is	 unpredictable	 is	 enlightenment.	 Everything	 is
predictable:	when	you	are	young	you	will	fall	in	love,	when	you	are	old,	you	will
die.	 Almost	 everything	 that	 happens	 to	 everybody	 will	 happen	 to	 you.
Enlightenment	is	the	one	thing	that	does	not	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
35
Chapter	3	-	Don't	make	life	a	question-answer	game
happen	to	everybody,	although	everybody	is	capable	--	but	very	few	people	use
the	opportunity.
Blessed	 are	 those	 who	 use	 the	 golden	 opportunity	 of	 becoming	 enlightened,
because	 they	 prove	 everybody's	 birthright	 and	 everybody's	 ultimate	 growth,
ultimate	flowering.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
36
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
4
Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
14	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
OF	 MY	 MANY	 FEARS,	 THE	 ONE	 OF	 WHICH	 I	 AM	 MOST	 AWARE	 IS
THAT	OF
INTIMACY.	 I	 AM	 LIKE	 A	 HIT	 AND	 RUN	 DRIVER	 IN	 MY
RELATIONSHIPS	WITH
PEOPLE.	COULD	YOU	SPEAK	TO	ME	OF	MY	FEAR	OF	INTIMACY?
Ramaprem,	everybody	is	afraid	of	intimacy.	It	is	another	thing	whether	you	are
aware	of	it	or	not.	Intimacy	means	exposing	yourself	before	a	stranger.	We	are
all	 strangers	 --	 nobody	 knows	 anybody.	 We	 are	 even	 strangers	 to	 ourselves,
because	we	don't	know	who	we	are.
Intimacy	brings	you	close	to	a	stranger.	You	have	to	drop	all	your	defenses;	only
then,	intimacy	is	possible.	And	the	fear	is	that	if	you	drop	all	your	defenses,	all
your	masks,	who	knows	what	the	stranger	is	going	to	do	with	you?
We	 are	 all	 hiding	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 --	 not	 only	 from	others	 but	 from
ourselves	--
because	 we	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 by	 a	 sick	 humanity	 with	 all	 kinds	 of
repressions,	 inhibitions,	 taboos.	 And	 the	 fear	 is	 that	 with	 somebody	who	 is	 a
stranger	--	and	it	does	not	matter,	you	may	have	lived	with	the	person	for	thirty
years,	forty	years;	the	strangeness	never	disappears	--
it	feels	safer	to	keep	a	little	defense,	a	little	distance,	because	somebody	can	take
advantage	of	your	weaknesses,	of	your	frailties,	of	your	vulnerability.
Everybody	is	afraid	of	intimacy.
The	 problem	 becomes	 more	 complicated	 because	 everybody	 wants	 intimacy.
Everybody	wants	 intimacy	because	otherwise	you	are	 alone	 in	 this	universe	 --
without	 a	 friend,	 without	 a	 lover,	 without	 anybody	 you	 can	 trust,	 without
anybody	to	whom	you	can	open	all	your	wounds.	And	the	wounds	cannot	heal
unless	they	are	open.	The	more	you	hide	them,	the	more	dangerous	they	become.
They	can	become	cancerous.
Intimacy	is	an	essential	need	on	the	one	hand,	so	everybody	longs	for	it.	But	he
wants	the	other	person	to	be	intimate,	so	that	the	other	person	drops	his	defenses,
becomes	 vulnerable,	 opens	 all	 his	 wounds,	 drops	 all	 his	 masks	 and	 false
personality,	stands	naked	as	he	is.	And	on	the	other	hand,	everybody	is	afraid	of
intimacy	 --	 with	 the	 other	 person	 you	 want	 to	 be	 intimate	 with,	 you	 are	 not
dropping	your	defenses.
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 conflicts	 between	 friends,	 between	 lovers:	 nobody	wants	 to
drop	his	defenses	and	nobody	wants	to	come	in	utter	nudity	and	sincerity,	open	-
-	and	both	need	intimacy.
Unless	you	drop	all	your	 repressions,	 inhibitions	--	which	are	 the	gifts	of	your
religions,	your	cultures,	your	societies,	your	parents,	your	education	--	you	will
never	be	able	to	be	intimate	with	someone.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
37
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
And	you	will	have	to	take	the	initiative.
But	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 repressions,	 any	 inhibitions,	 you	 don't	 have	 any
wounds	either.	 If	you	have	 lived	a	simple,	natural	 life,	 there	will	be	no	fear	of
intimacy,	but	tremendous	joy	--
of	 two	 flames	 coming	 so	 close	 that	 they	 become	 almost	 one	 flame.	 And	 the
meeting	 is	 tremendously	 gratifying,	 satisfying,	 fulfilling.	 But	 before	 you	 can
attempt	intimacy,	you	have	to	clean	your	house	completely.
Only	a	man	of	meditation	can	allow	intimacy	to	happen.
He	has	nothing	to	hide.
All	 that	 was	 making	 him	 afraid	 that	 somebody	 may	 know,	 he	 himself	 has
dropped.	He	has	only	a	silence	and	a	loving	heart.
You	have	 to	accept	yourself	 in	your	 totality	--	 if	you	cannot	accept	yourself	 in
your	totality,	how	can	you	expect	somebody	else	to	accept	you?	And	you	have
been	 condemned	 by	 everybody,	 and	 you	 have	 learned	 only	 one	 thing:	 self-
condemnation.
You	go	on	hiding	it.	 It	 is	not	something	beautiful	 to	show	to	others,	you	know
ugly	things	are	hidden	in	you;	you	know	evil	things	are	hidden	in	you;	you	know
animality	 is	 hidden	 in	 you.	 Unless	 you	 transform	 your	 attitude	 and	 accept
yourself	 as	one	of	 the	animals	 in	existence...	The	word	"animal"	 is	not	bad.	 It
simply	means	alive;	it	comes	from	anima.
Whoever	is	alive,	is	an	animal.
But	man	has	been	taught,	"You	are	not	animals,	animals	are	far	below	you.	You
are	 human	 beings."	 You	 have	 been	 given	 a	 false	 superiority.	 The	 truth	 is,
existence	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 the	 superior	 and	 the	 inferior.	 To	 existence,
everything	 is	 equal	 --	 the	 trees,	 the	 birds,	 the	 animals,	 the	 human	 beings.	 In
existence,	everything	is	absolutely	accepted	as	it	is;	there	is	no	condemnation.
If	you	accept	your	sexuality	without	any	conditions,	if	you	accept	that	man	and
every	being	 in	 the	world	 is	 fragile...	 life	 is	a	very	 thin	 thread	which	can	break
down	any	moment.	Once	 this	 is	 accepted,	 and	you	drop	 false	egos	 --	of	being
Alexander	the	Great,	Mohammed	Ali	the	thrice	great	--	if	you	simply	understand
that	 everybody	 is	 beautiful	 in	 his	 ordinariness	 and	 everyone	 has	weaknesses...
They	are	part	of	human	nature	because	you	are	not	made	of	steel.
You	are	made	of	a	very	 fragile	body.	The	span	of	your	 life	 is	between	ninety-
eight	 degrees	 temperature	 and	 one	 hundred	 and	 ten	 degrees	 temperature:	 just
twelve	degrees	of	temperature	is	your	whole	span	of	life.	Fall	below	it,	and	you
are	dead;	go	beyond	it	and	you	are	dead.	And	the	same	applies	to	a	thousand	and
one	things	in	you.
One	of	your	most	basic	needs	is	to	be	needed.	But	nobody	wants	to	accept	it,	that
"It	is	my	basic	need	to	be	needed,	to	be	loved,	to	be	accepted."	We	are	living	in
such	pretensions,	such	hypocrisies	--	that	is	the	reason	why	intimacy	creates	fear.
You	are	not	what	you	appear	to	be.	Your	appearance	is	false.	You	may	appear	to
be	a	saint	but	deep	down,	you	are	still	a	weak	human	being	with	all	the	desires
and	all	the	longings.
The	first	step	is	to	accept	yourself	in	your	totality,	in	spite	of	all	your	traditions,
which	 have	 driven	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 insane.	 Once	 you	 have	 accepted
yourself	as	you	are,	the	fear	of	intimacy	will	disappear.	You	cannot	lose	respect,
you	cannot	lose	your	greatness,	you	cannot	lose	your	ego.	You	cannot	lose	your
piousness,	you	cannot	lose	your	saintliness	--	you	have	dropped	all	that	yourself.
You	 are	 just	 like	 a	 small	 child,	 utterly	 innocent.	 You	 can	 open	 Osho	 -	 The
Hidden	Splendor
38
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
yourself	 because	 inside,	 you	 are	 not	 filled	 with	 ugly	 repressions	 which	 have
become	perversions.
You	can	say	everything	that	you	feel	authentically	and	sincerely.	And	if	you	are
ready	 to	 be	 intimate,	 you	will	 encourage	 the	 other	 person	 also	 to	 be	 intimate.
Your	 openness	 will	 help	 the	 other	 person	 also	 to	 be	 open	 to	 you.	 Your
unpretentious	simplicity	will	allow	the	other	also	to	enjoy	simplicity,	innocence,
trust,	love,	openness.
You	 are	 encaged	 with	 stupid	 concepts,	 and	 the	 fear	 is,	 if	 you	 become	 very
intimate	with	somebody,	he	will	become	aware	of	it.
But	we	are	fragile	beings	--	the	most	fragile	in	the	whole	existence.	The	human
child	 is	 the	most	fragile	child	of	all	 the	animals.	The	children	of	other	animals
can	 survive	 without	 the	 mother,	 without	 the	 father,	 without	 a	 family.	 But	 the
human	 child	 will	 die	 immediately.	 So	 this	 frailty	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be
condemned	--	it	is	the	highest	expression	of	consciousness.
A	roseflower	is	going	to	be	fragile;	it	is	not	a	stone.	And	there	is	no	need	to	feel
bad	about	it,	that	you	are	a	roseflower	and	not	a	stone.
Only	when	two	persons	become	intimate	are	they	no	longer	strangers.	And	it	is	a
beautiful	 experience	 to	 find	 that	 not	 only	 you	 are	 full	 of	 weaknesses	 but	 the
other,	too...	perhaps	everybody	is	full	of	weaknesses.
The	higher	expression	of	anything	becomes	weaker.	The	 roots	are	very	strong,
but	the	flower	cannot	be	so	strong.	Its	beauty	is	because	of	its	not	being	strong.
In	the	morning	it	opens	its	petals	to	welcome	the	sun,	dances	the	whole	day	in
the	wind,	in	the	rain,	in	the	sun,	and	by	the	evening	its	petals	have	started	falling.
It	is	gone.	Everything	that	is	beautiful,	precious,	is	going	to	be	very	momentary.
But	you	want	everything	to	be	permanent.	You	love	someone	and	you	promise
that	 "I	 will	 love	 you	 my	 whole	 life."	 And	 you	 know	 perfectly	 well	 that	 you
cannot	be	even	certain	of	 tomorrow	--	you	are	giving	a	 false	promise.	All	 that
you	can	say	is,	"I	am	in	love	with	you	this	moment	and	I	will	give	my	totality	to
you.	About	the	next	moment,	I	know	nothing.	How	can	I	promise?	You	have	to
forgive	me."
But	 lovers	 are	 promising	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 which	 they	 cannot	 fulfill.	 Then
frustration	 comes	 in,	 then	 the	 distance	 grows	 bigger,	 then	 fight,	 conflict,
struggle,	and	a	life	that	was	meant	to	become	happier	becomes	just	a	long,	drawn
out	misery.
Ramaprem,	 it	 is	 good	 that	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 your	 greatest	 fear,	 that	 it	 is	 of
intimacy.	It	can	become	a	great	revelation	to	you,	and	a	revolution,	if	you	look
inwards	and	start	dropping	everything	of	which	you	 feel	ashamed.	And	accept
your	nature	as	it	is,	not	as	it	should	be.	I	do	not	teach	any	"should."	All	shoulds
make	human	mind	sick.
People	should	be	taught	the	beauty	of	isness,	the	tremendous	splendor	of	nature.
These	 trees	don't	know	any	ten	commandments,	 the	birds	don't	know	any	holy
scriptures.	It	is	only	man	who	has	created	a	problem	for	himself.
Condemning	your	own	nature,	you	become	split,	you	become	schizophrenic	 --
and	 not	 just	 ordinary	 people,	 but	 people	 of	 the	 status	 of	 Sigmund	Freud,	who
contributed	 greatly	 to	 humanity,	 about	mind.	 His	method	was	 psychoanalysis,
that	you	should	be	made	aware	of	all	 that	 is	unconscious	 in	you.	And	this	 is	a
secret,	 that	 once	 something	 unconscious	 is	 brought	 to	 the	 conscious	 mind,	 it
evaporates.	 You	 become	 cleaner,	 lighter.	 As	 more	 and	 more	 unconscious	 is
unburdened,	your	consciousness	goes	on	becoming	bigger.	And	as	the	area	of	the
unconscious	 shrinks,	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 consciousness	 expands.	 That	 is	 an
immense	truth.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
39
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
The	East	has	known	it	 for	 thousands	of	years,	but	 to	 the	West,	Sigmund	Freud
introduced	it	--	not	knowing	anything	of	the	East	and	its	psychology;	it	was	his
individual	contribution.
But	you	will	be	surprised:	he	was	never	ready	to	be	psychoanalyzed	himself.	The
founder	of	psychoanalysis	was	never	psychoanalyzed.
His	colleagues	insisted	again	and	again:	"The	method	that	you	have	given	to	us	-
-	and	we	all	have	been	psychoanalyzed	--	why	are	you	insisting	that	you	should
not	be	psychoanalyzed?"
He	said,	 "Forget	about	 it."	He	was	afraid	 to	expose	himself.	He	had	become	a
great	genius	and	exposing	himself	would	bring	him	down	to	ordinary	humanity.
He	had	the	same	fears,	the	same	desires,	the	same	repressions.
He	never	talked	about	his	dreams;	he	only	listened	to	other	people's	dreams.	And
his	 colleagues	were	 very	much	 surprised	 --	 "It	will	 be	 a	 great	 contribution	 to
know	 about	 your	 dreams"	 --	 but	 he	 never	 agreed	 to	 lie	 down	 on	 the
psychoanalyst's	 couch	 and	 talk	 about	 his	 dreams.	Because	 his	 dreams	were	 as
ordinary	as	anybody	else's	--	that	was	the	fear.
A	Gautam	Buddha	would	 not	 have	 feared	 to	 go	 into	meditation.	That	was	 his
contribution
--	 a	 special	 kind	 of	 meditation.	 And	 he	 would	 not	 have	 been	 afraid	 of	 any
psychoanalysis,	 because	 for	 the	man	who	meditates,	 by	 and	 by	 all	 his	 dreams
disappear.	 In	 the	 day	 he	 remains	 silent	 in	 his	mind,	 not	 the	 ordinary	 traffic	 of
thoughts.	 And	 in	 the	 night	 he	 sleeps	 deeply,	 because	 dreams	 are	 nothing	 but
unlived	thoughts,	unlived	desires,	unlived	longings	in	the	day.
They	are	trying	to	complete	themselves,	at	least	in	dreams.
It	will	be	very	difficult	 for	you	to	find	a	man	who	dreams	about	his	wife,	or	a
woman	who	dreams	about	her	husband.	But	 it	will	be	absolutely	common	 that
they	dream	about	their	neighbors'	wives	and	their	neighbors'	husbands.	The	wife
is	available,	he	is	not	suppressing	anything	as	far	as	his	wife	is	concerned.	But
the	neighbor's	wife	 is	 always	more	beautiful;	 the	grass	 is	greener	on	 the	other
side	 of	 the	 fence.	 And	 that	 which	 is	 unapproachable	 creates	 a	 deep	 desire	 to
acquire	it,	to	possess	it.	In	the	day	you	cannot	do	it,	but	in	dreams	at	least,	you
are	free.	Freedom	of	dreaming	has	not	yet	been	taken	away	by	the	governments.
It	won't	be	 long	 --	 soon	 they	will	 take	 it	away,	because	methods	are	available,
already	available,	so	that	they	can	watch	when	you	are	dreaming	and	when	you
are	not	dreaming.	And	there	is	a	possibility	some	day	to	find	a	scientific	device
so	that	your	dream	can	be	projected	on	a	screen.	Just	some	electrodes	will	have
to	be	inserted	in	your	head.	You	will	be	fast	asleep,	dreaming	joyously,	making
love	to	your	neighbor's	wife	and	a	whole	movie	hall	will	be	watching	it	--	and
they	used	to	think	that	this	man	is	a	saint!
This	much	you	can	even	see;	whenever	a	person	is	asleep,	watch:	if	his	eyelids
are	not	showing	any	movement	of	his	eyes	inside,	then	he	is	not	dreaming.	If	he
is	dreaming	then	you	can	see	that	his	eyes	are	moving.
It	 is	 possible	 to	 project	 your	 dream	 on	 a	 screen.	 It	 is	 also	 possible	 to	 enforce
certain	dreaming	in	you.	But	at	least	up	to	now,	no	constitution	even	talks	about
it,	that	"People	are	free	to	dream,	it	is	their	birthright."
A	Gautam	Buddha	does	not	dream.	Meditation	is	a	way	to	go	beyond	mind.	He
lives	 in	 utter	 silence	 twenty-four	 hours	 --	 no	 ripples	 on	 the	 lake	 of	 his
consciousness,	no	thoughts,	no	dreams.
But	Sigmund	Freud	is	afraid	because	he	knows	what	he	is	dreaming.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
40
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
I	have	heard	about	one	actual	incident.	Three	great	Russian	novelists	--	Chekhov,
Gorky	and	Tolstoy	--	were	just	sitting	on	a	bench	in	a	park	and	gossiping...	and
they	 were	 great	 friends.	 All	 were	 geniuses;	 all	 created	 such	 great	 novels	 that
even	today,	if	you	want	to	count	ten	great	novels	of	the	world,	at	least	five	will
be	from	the	Russian	novelists	--	before	the	revolution.	After	the	revolution,	they
have	not	created	a	single	novel	which	has	the	quality	of	genius.	Now,	it	is	under
government	 instruction.	The	government	 is	 the	only	publisher;	 the	government
scrutinizes,	 and	 the	 people	 who	 scrutinize	 know	 nothing	 of	 art.	 They	 are
bureaucrats.
The	police	commissioner	of	Poona	was	 just	asking	 that	before	my	 lectures	are
published,	 he	 should	 scrutinize	 them	 --	 and	what	 does	 a	 police	 commissioner
have	to	do	with	meditation?
--	 but	 that	 is	 happening	 in	Russia,	 and	 because	 of	 that,	 in	 seventy	 years'	 time
after	the	revolution,	they	have	not	been	able	to	produce	a	single	great	novel.	But
before	the	revolution,	Russia	was	at	the	top	in	creativity.	These	three	people	are
still	to	be	counted	as	great	novelists.
Chekhov	was	 telling	about	 the	women	 in	his	 life.	Gorky	 joined;	he	also	said	a
few	things.
But	Tolstoy	 remained	 silent.	Tolstoy	was	a	very	orthodox	 religious	Christian...
you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	Mahatma	Gandhi	in	India	has	accepted	three
persons	as	his	masters,	and	one	was	Tolstoy.
And	he	must	have	been	repressing	so	much...	he	was	one	of	the	richest	men	in
Russia	 --	 he	 belonged	 to	 the	 royal	 family	 --	 but	 he	 lived	 like	 a	 poor	 beggar,
because	"blessed	are	the	poor	and	they	shall	inherit	the	kingdom	of	God,"	and	he
was	not	willing	to	give	up	the	kingdom	of	God.	It	is	not	simplicity,	and	it	is	not
desirelessness	 --	 it	 is	 too	 much	 desire.	 It	 is	 too	 much	 greed,	 it	 is	 too	 much
instinct	 for	 power.	He	 is	 sacrificing	 this	 life	 and	 its	 joys	 because	 it	 is	 a	 small
life...	and	then	for	eternity	he	will	enjoy	paradise	and	the	kingdom	of	God.	It	is	a
good	bargain,	almost	like	a	lottery,	and	certain.
He	was	living	a	very	celibate	life,	eating	only	vegetarian	food...	he	was	almost	a
saint.
Naturally,	 his	 dreams	must	 have	 been	 very	 ugly,	 his	 thoughts	must	 have	 been
very	 ugly,	 and	 when	 Chekhov	 and	 Gorky	 asked	 him,	 "Tolstoy,	 why	 are	 you
silent?	Say	something!"	he	said,
"I	cannot	say	anything	about	women.	I	will	say	something	only	when	one	foot	is
in	the	grave.	I	will	say	it,	and	jump	into	the	grave."
You	 can	 understand	why	 he	was	 so	much	 afraid	 of	 saying	 anything	 --	 it	 was
boiling	within	him.	Now,	you	cannot	be	very	intimate	with	a	man	like	Tolstoy.
Intimacy	 simply	means	 that	 the	 doors	 of	 the	 heart	 are	 open	 for	 you,	 you	 are
welcome	to	come	in	and	be	a	guest.	But	that	is	possible	only	if	you	have	a	heart
which	is	not	stinking	with	repressed	sexuality,	which	is	not	boiling	with	all	kinds
of	 perversions,	which	 is	 natural	 --	 as	 natural	 as	 trees,	 as	 innocent	 as	 children.
Then	there	is	no	fear	of	intimacy.
That's	what	I	am	trying	to	do:	to	help	you	unburden	your	unconscious,	unburden
your	mind,	to	become	ordinary.	There	is	nothing	more	beautiful	than	to	be	just
simple	and	ordinary.
Then	you	can	have	as	many	intimate	friends,	as	many	intimate	relationships	as
possible,	because	you	are	not	afraid	of	anything.	You	become	an	open	book	--
anybody	can	read.	There	is	nothing	to	hide.
Every	year,	a	hunting	club	went	up	 into	 the	Montana	hills.	The	members	drew
straws	 to	 decide	 who	 would	 handle	 the	 cooking	 and	 also	 agreed	 that	 anyone
complaining	about	the	food	would	automatically	replace	the	unlucky	cook.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
41
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
Realizing	after	a	few	days	that	no	one	was	likely	to	risk	speaking	up,	Sanderson
decided	on	a	desperate	plan.
He	found	some	moose	droppings	and	added	two	handfuls	to	the	stew	that	night.
There	 were	 grimaces	 around	 the	 campfire	 after	 the	 first	 few	 mouthfuls,	 but
nobody	said	anything.
Then	one	member	suddenly	broke	the	silence.	"Hey,"	he	exclaimed,	"This	stuff
tastes	 like	 moose	 shit	 --	 but	 good!"	 He	 is	 not	 complaining.	 In	 fact,	 he	 is
appreciating!
You	 have	 so	 many	 faces.	 Inside,	 you	 think	 one	 thing;	 outside,	 you	 express
something	else.
You	are	not	one,	organic	whole.
Relax	and	destroy	the	split	that	society	has	created	in	you.	Say	only	that	which
you	mean.
Act	according	to	your	own	spontaneity,	never	bothering	about	consequences.	It
is	a	small	life	and	it	should	not	be	spoiled	in	thinking	about	consequences	here
and	hereafter.
One	should	live	totally,	intensely,	joyously	and	just	like	an	open	book,	available
for	anybody	to	read	it.	Of	course	you	will	not	make	a	name	in	the	history	books.
But	what	is	the	point	in	making	a	name	in	the	history	books?
Live,	rather	than	think	of	being	remembered.	You	will	be	dead.
Millions	of	people	have	lived	on	the	earth	and	we	don't	know	even	their	names.
Accept	that	simple	fact:	that	you	are	here	for	only	a	few	days	and	then	you	will
be	gone.	These	few	days	are	not	to	be	wasted	in	hypocrisy,	in	fear.	These	days
have	to	be	rejoiced.
Nobody	knows	anything	about	 the	 future.	Your	heaven	and	your	hell	and	your
God	are	most	probably	all	hypotheses,	unproved.	The	only	thing	that	is	in	your
hands	is	your	life	--
make	it	as	rich	as	possible.
By	intimacy,	by	love,	by	opening	yourself	 to	many	people,	you	become	richer.
And	if	you	can	live	in	deep	love,	in	deep	friendship,	in	deep	intimacy,	with	many
people,	 you	 have	 lived	 rightly,	 and	 wherever	 you	 happen	 to	 be...	 you	 have
learned	the	art;	you	will	be	living	there,	too,	happily.
I	am	reminded	of	one	English	philosopher,	Edmund	Burke.	He	was	very	friendly
with	the	archbishop	of	England.	Whenever	Edmund	Burke	used	to	deliver	a	talk
in	 the	university,	 the	 archbishop	used	 to	 come	and	 listen	 to	him.	 It	was	worth
listening	 --	 each	 of	 his	 statements	was	 coming	with	 his	wholeness,	with	 great
authority.
But	 he	 never	 went	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 archbishop	 on	 Sunday	 in	 the	 church.	 The
archbishop	said,	"At	least	you	should	come	one	time.	I	always	come	to	listen	to
you."
Edmund	Burke	said,	"You	come	to	 listen	to	me	because	whatever	you	know	is
not	your	knowledge	--	it	is	all	borrowed,	and	you	are	not	certain	of	it.	Whatever	I
say	is	my	experience,	and	I	give	every	evidence	and	proof	and	argument	for	it.	I
can	stake	my	life	for	my	statements.
You	are	just	a	parrot.	But	because	you	have	asked,	I	will	come	next	Sunday."
So	 the	 archbishop	 prepared	 a	 really	 beautiful	 sermon,	 thinking	 that	 Edmund
Burke	will	be	present,	so	the	sermon	has	to	be	as	great	as	he	can	make	it.	But	he
was	 surprised.	 Edmund	 Burke	 was	 sitting	 in	 the	 first	 row	 but	 there	 was	 no
emotion	on	his	face.	He	could	not	judge	whether	he	liked	it,	disliked	it,	agreed
with	it,	or	disagreed	with	it.	He	was	very	much	puzzled.
As	the	sermon	ended,	Edmund	Burke	stood	up	and	he	said,	"I	have	a	question	to
ask,	a	very	simple	question.	Your	whole	sermon	was,	in	a	condensed	form,	that
the	 people	 who	 live	 a	 virtuous	 life	 according	 to	 your	 Christian	 ideology,	 and
believe	in	Jesus	Christ,	will	go	to	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
42
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
heaven	after	this	life.	Those	who	do	not	believe	in	Jesus	Christ	and	live	the	life
of	a	sinner,	will	fall	into	eternal	hell	after	this	life.
"My	question	is,"	said	Edmund	Burke,	"that	if	a	person	is	virtuous	but	does	not
believe	 in	 Jesus	Christ,	what	will	 happen?	He	 is	 good.	His	 life	 is	 a	 life	 to	 be
praised	but	he	does	not	believe	in	Jesus	Christ	--	where	is	he	going	to	be?	Or,	a
man	who	believes	in	Jesus	Christ	but	is	a	great	sinner	--	where	is	he	going	to	be?
You	missed	mentioning	two	very	important	points;	your	sermon	was	half.	And	I
was	waiting	to	see	whether	you	were	aware	of	these	two	possibilities	or	not."
The	archbishop	thought	for	a	moment	--	the	question	was	really	dangerous.	If	he
says	the	good	people	are	going	to	heaven	whether	they	believe	in	Jesus	Christ	or
not,	 then	Jesus	Christ	and	 the	belief	 in	him	become	superfluous,	non-essential.
And	if	he	says	those	who	believe	in	Jesus	Christ	--	even	if	they	are	sinners	--	will
go	to	heaven,	then	sin	is	being	approved	by	the	church	itself.
He	was	 in	a	very	muddled	situation.	He	said,	 "Your	question	needs	some	 time
for	me	to	think	it	over.	Just	give	me	seven	days.	Next	Sunday,	I	will	answer	it."
For	seven	days,	he	tried	all	the	scriptures,	tried	this	way	and	that	way,	but...	the
question	was	simple...	and	he	was	caught	in	a	dilemma.	He	could	not	sleep	those
seven	 days,	 because	 how	 is	 he	 going	 to	 face	 Edmund	 Burke	 and	 his
congregation?	And	whatever	he	says	seems	 to	be	wrong:	either	 it	goes	against
Jesus	Christ	or	 it	goes	against	a	virtuous	 life.	He	 repented	 that	he	ever	 invited
that	fellow	to	come	to	the	church!
He	went	early	 in	 the	morning	 to	 the	church,	before	 the	congregation	came.	He
still	did	not	have	any	answer.	He	thought,	"In	the	early	morning,	when	there	is
nobody	in	the	church,	I	will	pray	to	Christ	himself	to	just	show	me	the	light,	give
me	the	answer.	Because	not	only	my	prestige	 is	at	stake,	his	prestige	 is	also	at
stake."
Seven	days,	continuously	worrying,	not	sleeping...	he	was	bowing	down	before
the	statue	of	Jesus	Christ.	He	fell	asleep,	and	he	saw	a	dream.	Naturally,	because
for	 seven	 days	 only	 one	 thing	 had	 been	 in	 his	 mind,	 the	 dream	 was	 also
connected	with	it.
He	 saw	 himself	 sitting	 in	 a	 train,	 and	 he	 asked,	 "Where	 are	 we	 going?"
Somebody	said,
"This	 train	 is	going	 to	heaven."	He	had	a	great	 relaxation,	and	he	said,	"That's
perfectly	good.
Perhaps	this	is	Jesus	Christ's	doing,	so	that	you	can	see	for	yourself	who	goes	to
paradise	and	who	does	not	go."
As	he	reached	the	station	of	paradise,	he	could	not	believe	--	it	looked	so	rotten.
He	entered	inside	paradise.	The	people	he	met	were	almost	corpses,	walking.	He
recognized	a	few	saints	and	he	asked	them,	"I	want	to	ask	one	question:	where	is
Gautam	Buddha?	because	 he	 never	 believed	 in	 Jesus	Christ	 or	 in	God,	 but	 he
was	one	of	the	most	moral	men	you	can	conceive	of."
The	saint	said,	"He	is	not	here."
"Socrates?	He	was	also	not	a	believer	in	any	god,	but	was	a	man	of	great	virtue."
"He	is	also	not	here."
And	he	said,	 "Why	does	 this	whole	paradise	 look	 like	a	 ruin?	And	saints	 look
like	the	dead;	there	seems	to	be	no	joy.	I	used	to	think	that	angels	go	on	singing
with	their	harps.	I	don't	see	any	angels,	any	harps,	any	song,	any	dance	--	just	a
few	dull	and	dead	saints	are	sitting	under	the	trees."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
43
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
And	whoever	he	asked,	said:	"Don't	bother	us.	We	are	tired."
Just	an	idea	came	into	his	mind	at	that	moment	that	perhaps	there	is	a	train	going
to	hell,	also.	So	he	rushed	back	to	the	station,	and	the	train	was	standing	at	the
platform,	 ready	 to	 leave	 for	 hell.	 He	 entered	 the	 train,	 and	 as	 the	 hell	 started
coming	closer,	he	was	even	more	puzzled.	The	wind	was	fragrant	with	flowers.
There	was	so	much	greenery,	lush	green.	The	station	was	so	beautiful	--	he	had
never	thought	that	a	station	could	be	so	beautiful.	And	people	looked	so	happy,
so	joyous.	He	said,	"My	god,	is	there	something	wrong	or	what?"
He	enquired,	"Is	this	really	hell?"
They	said,	"It	used	to	be.	Before	Gautam	Buddha,	Socrates,	Epicurus,	Mahavira,
Lao	 Tzu,	 people	 like	 these	 came	 here,	 it	 used	 to	 be	 hell.	 But	 now	 they	 have
transformed	the	whole	place."
He	entered	hell	and	he	could	not	believe	--	it	was	sheer	joy!	The	very	air	was	full
of	 blissfulness.	 And	 there	 was	 dancing	 and	 there	 was	 singing,	 and	 he	 asked
somebody,	"Where	is	Gautam	Buddha?"
They	said,	"Do	you	see	in	the	garden,	he	is	watering	the	roses."
"And	where	is	Socrates?"
And	they	said,	"Socrates	is	working	in	the	field."
"Where	is	Epicurus?"
They	said,	"He	just	passed	by	you.	The	man	who	was	dancing	and	playing	on	the
guitar	was	Epicurus."
At	that	very	moment,	the	shock	was	too	much	--	he	woke	up.	He	said,	"My	god!
What	a	dream!"
And	people	had	started	arriving	--	particularly,	Edmund	Burke	who	was	sitting	in
the	front	seat	already,	waiting	for	the	answer.
The	poor	archbishop	said,	"I	have	not	been	able	to	find	the	answer.	But	I	have
seen	 a	 dream	which	 I	will	 describe	 to	 you,	 and	 you	 can	 conclude	 the	 answer
from	the	dream."
He	 described	 the	 dream.	 Edmund	 Burke	 said,	 "Now	 you	 conclude	 also!	 The
conclusion	is	clear:	that	wherever	good	people	are,	there	is	paradise.	It	is	not	that
good	people	go	to	paradise
--	wherever	good	people	are,	 it	becomes	paradise.	And	wherever	stupid	people
and	idiots	are
--	they	may	be	great	believers	in	God	and	Jesus	Christ	and	the	HOLY	BIBLE,	it
does	not	matter	--	even	paradise	becomes	a	ruin.	It	becomes	a	hell."
I	have	loved	this	incident	very	much	because	this	is	my	approach,	too.	If	you	are
simple,	 loving,	 open,	 intimate,	 you	 create	 a	 paradise	 around	 you.	 If	 you	 are
closed,	constantly	on	the	defensive,	always	worried	that	somebody	may	come	to
know	your	thoughts,	your	dreams,	your	perversions	--	you	are	living	in	hell.
Hell	is	within	you	and	so	is	paradise.
They	are	not	geographical	places.
They	are	your	spiritual	spaces.	Ramaprem,	cleanse	yourself.	And	meditation	 is
nothing	but	a	cleaning	of	all	 the	rubbish	that	has	gathered	in	your	mind.	When
the	mind	is	silent	and	the	heart	is	singing...	just	listen	to	these	birds.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
44
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
You	 will	 be	 ready,	 without	 any	 fear	 but	 with	 great	 joy,	 to	 be	 intimate.	 And
without	intimacy,	you	are	alone	here	amongst	strangers.	With	intimacy	you	are
surrounded	by	friends,	by	people	who	love	you.	Intimacy	is	a	great	experience.
One	should	not	miss	it.
But	before	you	can	become	unafraid	of	intimacy,	you	have	to	be	totally	clean	of
all	 the	 garbage	 that	 religions	 have	 been	pouring	 into	 you,	 all	 the	 crap	 that	 for
centuries	has	been	handed	over	to	you.	Be	finished	with	it	all,	and	live	a	life	of
peace,	silence,	joy,	song	and	dance.	And	you	will	transform...	wherever	you	are,
the	place	will	become	paradise.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVERYBODY	 AROUND	 IS	 BLISSING	 OUT	 AND	 THIS	 IS	 THE	 FIRST
TIME	IT	IS
NOT	 HAPPENING	 TO	 ME.	 I	 WANT	 TO	 FEEL	 YOU	 AGAIN	 AND	 GET
LOST.	RIGHT
NOW,	THE	CONNECTION	IS	LIKE	A	FRAGILE,	THIN	THREAD	FELT	IN
SOME	RARE
SILENT	 MOMENTS	 OR	 SHOWN	 BY	 MY	 TEARS.	 I'M	 STILL	 FULL	 OF
FEAR	AND
ALSO	GETTING	OLDER.	YOU	GAVE	ME	THE	NAME	PRAVIRA	 --	DO	 I
STILL	HAVE
A	CHANCE	THIS	LIFETIME?
The	chance	 to	be	 transformed	remains	with	you	to	 the	very	 last	breath	of	your
life.	But	 the	 problem	with	 you	 is	 that	 you	 are	more	 concerned	 that	 others	 are
being	so	blissful,	that	so	much	is	happening	to	them,	and	you	are	comparing.
Comparison	 always	 brings	 misery,	 and	misery	 becomes	 a	 great	 hindrance	 for
anything	to	happen	to	you.	So	the	first	thing	is:	if	it	is	happening	to	many	people,
drop	 the	old	habit	of	 comparing	and	being	 jealous.	On	 the	 contrary,	make	 it	 a
point	that	"If	it	is	happening	to	so	many	people,	it	is	going	to	happen	to	me	also.
Because	they	are	just	like	me."
We	are	all	human	beings.	Nobody	is	superior	and	nobody	is	inferior.	If	it	is	not
happening	 to	you,	you	must	be	creating	barriers	 so	 it	 cannot	happen.	The	 first
barrier	is	comparison.
The	second	barrier	 is...	you	say,	"I	want	 to	 feel	you	again..."	The	moment	you
start	desiring	something,	desperately	 longing	for	something,	your	very	desiring
and	longing	becomes	a	barrier.
It	is	something	to	be	understood	by	everybody:	when	people	come	to	me	for	the
first	 time,	 they	don't	have	any	expectations,	and	 things	are	very	easy.	Miracles
are	triggered	in	their	being.	But	the	next	time	they	come	to	me,	they	come	with
expectations.	Now	 the	whole	 psychological	 set-up	 has	 changed:	 first	 they	 had
come	 without	 any	 expectations,	 just	 available,	 just	 to	 see	 whether	 something
happens	or	not.	Now	they	come	with	a	determined	desire	that	it	should	happen.
It	has	happened	before,	why	is	it	not	happening	now?
It	has	happened	before	because	you	were	in	a	totally	different	space.	You	were
not	desiring	it;	it	happened	in	your	innocence.	Now	you	are	no	longer	innocent	--
you	 are	 full	 of	 desire,	 full	 of	 wanting.	 And	 with	 desire	 and	 wanting	 there	 is
comparison	 on	 the	 side,	 that	 "It	 is	 happening	 to	 others."	 So	 you	 are	 creating
misery	around	yourself.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 compare,	 for	 one	 thing.	 You	 should	 rejoice	 that	 it	 is
happening	to	so	many	people.	They	are	also	part	of	us.	If	it	is	happening	to	them,
you	should	join	the	dance.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
45
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
Rather	than	being	in	competition	and	hiding	in	a	corner	with	tears	because	it	is
happening	to	everybody;	everybody	is	dancing...	who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the
dance!
And	if	you	want	to	cry,	let	the	tears	be	of	joy	that	so	many	people	are	happy	--
even	 if	you	are	not	happy,	 then	 too,	 it	 is	 something	 to	be	 rejoiced.	Rejoice	 for
others.
And	drop	the	idea	that	it	should	happen	to	you	again.	The	moment	you	drop	the
idea,	it	will	start	happening	because	you	are	again	innocent.
It	 is	 something	 that	perhaps	almost	 everybody	must	have	 felt:	There	are	 times
when	you	remember	somebody's	name	but	you	cannot	say	it.	You	say,	"It	is	just
on	the	tip	of	my	tongue!
I	know	him,	I	know	his	name.	I	know	that	I	know..."	But	what	is	the	problem?
Then	why	don't	you	say	it?	You	say	it	is	just	on	the	tip	of	the	tongue	--	just	push
it	out	a	 little!	But	 the	more	you	 try,	 the	more	 it	becomes	difficult.	 It	can	drive
you	crazy	because	you	know...	you	know	that	you	know,	 it	 is	on	 the	 tip	of	 the
tongue	and	my	god,	what	has	happened?
But	 tired	with	 the	 effort,	 you	go	 into	 the	garden,	 start	watering	 the	plants	 and
suddenly	it	is	there.	When	you	were	trying,	it	was	not	there.	When	you	forget	all
about	 it	 and	 start	 doing	 something	 else,	 suddenly	 it	 is	 there.	 There	 is	 a	 deep
psychological	 fact	 in	 it:	 When	 you	 are	 tense	 and	 trying	 hard	 to	 remember
something,	your	consciousness	becomes	very	narrow.	And	in	that	narrow	space,
the	name	that	you	want	to	remember...	you	feel	it	is	there	but	it	is	being	hindered
by	many	other	things,	other	memories.	And	the	passage	has	become	so	narrow
that	it	cannot	get	out	of	that	passage.
You	forget	about	it;	you	start	doing	something	else.	Your	consciousness	relaxes.
It	becomes	wider,	 the	narrowness	 is	gone.	And	with	a	wide	consciousness,	 the
name	can	find	a	way	out.	With	a	narrow	consciousness,	it	is	very	difficult	--	so
many	other	memories,	so	many	other	names	are	hindering	the	way.
The	same	happens	with	blissfulness,	silence,	peace,	joy.	You	have	known	it,	and
because	you	have	known	 it,	 you	want	 to	know	 it	 again.	Now	 it	 has	become	a
desire,	and	you	are	tense	that	it	is	not	happening	and	everybody	else	is	enjoying.
So	you	are	full	of	tears,	you	think	something	has	gone	wrong.
Nothing	has	gone	wrong;	you	 just	have	 to	understand.	Drop	 the	desire,	so	 that
you	are	again	back	in	the	same	space	in	which	it	happened	before	--	there	was	no
desire	--	and	join	the	dance,	join	the	song.
Blissfulness	is	very	contagious.
If	you	join	the	people	who	are	joyous,	you	will	suddenly	feel	that	your	own	joy,
which	was	asleep,	has	awakened.	And	then	tears	are	not	wrong	--	you	can	dance,
you	can	sing,	and	you	can	have	tears	of	joy.
But	tears	of	misery...	and	particularly	in	this	place	--	you	can	go	to	any	church.
Whenever	you	want	 to	be	miserable,	 the	churches	are	basically	meant	for	 that.
Entering	 a	 church	 you	 suddenly	 become	 sad.	You	 cannot	 laugh	 in	 the	 church,
you	cannot	dance.
And	 look	 at	 poor	 Jesus,	 hanging	 on	 the	 cross.	 Just	 seeing	 him	 and	 his	 long,
British	face...	I	have	always	wondered	why	he	was	born	in	Judea.	England	was
the	right	place!	I	don't	think	that	he	ever	laughed	in	his	life,	he	was	so	serious...
And	naturally,	you	cannot	expect	a	man	to	laugh	when	you	are	crucifying	him.
Even	the	sculptors	and	the	painters	cannot	paint	him	laughing,	otherwise	it	will
look	so	absurd	--	"Is	it	a	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
46
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
joke?	Is	it	a	real	cross?"	So	he	is,	poor	fellow,	keeping	his	face	very	serious	--	in
tune	with	the	cross.	The	whole	atmosphere	in	the	church	is	created	by	Jesus	and
his	crucifixion.
So	 whenever	 you	 want	 to	 be	 miserable...	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 one	 enjoys	 being
miserable,	 it	 feels	 good.	Go	 to	 some	Catholic	 church.	Weep	 and	 cry	 --	 that	 is
allowed.	Just	don't	laugh	in	between.	Don't	even	smile.
Because	 the	 American	 government	 is	 pressuring	 the	 Indian	 government	 that
sannyasins	from	other	countries	should	not	reach	me,	I	have	told	my	sannyasins,
"Use	all	 the	colors.	It	was	only	a	device;	it	has	worked.	In	five	years	we	made
the	movement	international.	Now	there	is	no	need."
But	whenever	you	apply	for	a	visa,	be	very	serious.	Be	Catholic!	You	can	even
have	Jesus	Christ	on	the	cross	hanging	around	your	neck	--	they	will	not	suspect
that	you	could	be	my	sannyasin.	But	if	you	look	joyous,	smiling,	happy,	blissful
--	feeling	great	that	you	are	going	back	to	your	master	--	they	will	prevent	you.
Just	pretend	a	little	bit.
You	are	saying,	Pravira,	"I	am	still	full	of	fear,	and	also	getting	older."	In	getting
older,	there	is	no	problem	--	everybody	gets	older.	Since	the	day	you	were	born,
you	have	been	getting	older.	It	is	not	a	new	problem.
Just	understand	one	thing:	getting	older	is	a	natural	phenomenon.	Let	it	happen	-
-	you	cannot	prevent	it.	Grow	up.	That	is	not	natural;	that	needs	your	conscious
effort	 to	be	silent,	 to	be	peaceful,	 to	be	joyful.	Then	getting	older	 is	one	thing,
and	growing	up	is	a	different	thing.
Getting	older	is	horizontal	and	growing	up	is	vertical.
And	 I	 have	 given	 you	 the	 name	 "Pravira".	 Pravira	 means	 one	 who	 is	 very
courageous.	And	the	greatest	courage	in	life	is	to	live	totally,	in	spite	of	all	the
priests	and	all	the	people	who	want	you	not	to	be	joyous,	not	to	be	living	totally.
And	as	far	as	you	are	asking,	"Do	I	still	have	a	chance	this	 lifetime?"	I	cannot
say	anything	about	this	lifetime	but	I	can	say	you	have	the	chance	just	now.	Why
postpone	it	for	the	lifetime?	Because	the	older	you	get,	the	less	is	the	possibility
of	being	dead.	Have	you	ever	 thought	about	 it?	At	 the	age	of	ninety,	very	 few
people	die.	At	the	age	of	a	hundred,	even	less	people	die.	At	the	age	of	a	hundred
and	twenty,	nobody	dies.	So	getting	older	is	not	a	problem.	People	die	at	seventy,
seventy-five,	and	then	the	number	starts	getting	less	and	less.
By	the	time	they	have	made	the	century,	then	they	don't	die.
So	don't	be	worried	about	getting	older.	Just	be	concerned	with	this	moment,	and
this	space	that	is	being	made	available	to	you.
And	I	still	 say	you	are	courageous	enough	 to	 take	 the	 jump.	Drop	your	desire,
drop	your	competition.	Start	singing	and	dancing,	and	suddenly	you	will	find	the
climate	has	changed.
The	spring	has	come	to	you.
But	it	always	comes	when	you	are	not	asking	for	it.
Existence	gives	you	everything;	just	don't	ask.
It	gives	only	to	the	emperors,	not	to	the	beggars.
There	are	three	big	game	hunters	in	the	jungle	in	Africa:	an	American,	an	Italian
and	 a	Polishman.	Suddenly	 they	 are	 captured	by	 cannibals	 and	brought	 before
the	chief.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
47
Chapter	4	-	Who	is	preventing	you?	Join	the	dance!
The	 chief	 tells	 them,	 "By	 tribal	 custom,	 I	 am	 required	 to	 allow	 each	 of	 you	 a
chance	to	escape.	And	I	have	to	give	you	any	weapon	of	your	choice.	However,	I
must	warn	you:	If	we	catch	you,	we	are	going	to	skin	you	and	make	a	canoe	out
of	you."
Before	 they	 even	 get	 a	 chance	 to	 get	 their	 breath,	 the	 chief	 points	 to	 the
American	and	asks,	"You	are	first.	What	do	you	want?"
The	American	says,	"I	want	a	gun."
The	 chief	 hands	 him	 a	 gun	 and	 the	American	 takes	 off	 into	 the	 jungle.	Well,
pretty	 soon	 the	 gun	 runs	 out	 of	 bullets	 and	 the	 natives	 catch	 up	 to	 him.	They
shoot	him	with	poison	darts	and	within	five	minutes	they	skin	him	and	make	a
canoe	out	of	him.
The	chief	points	to	the	Italian.	"You	are	next.	What	do	you	want?"
The	Italian	says,	"I	want	a	horse."
The	chief	looks	at	him	and	says,	"Well,	that's	not	really	a	weapon	but	if	you	want
a	 horse,	 I	 will	 give	 you	 a	 horse."	 So	 the	 Italian	 rides	 off	 into	 the	 jungle.
However,	he	is	very	quickly	surrounded	by	a	thousand	natives	on	all	sides.	The
natives	shoot	him	with	poison	darts,	skin	him	and	make	a	canoe	out	of	him.
Finally,	the	chief	looks	at	the	Polish	guy.	"What	do	you	want?"
The	Polish	guy	says,	"I	want	a	fork."
"A	fork?"	asks	the	chief.	"What	do	you	want	a	fork	for?"
"Look,"	said	the	Polish	guy,	"you	said	I	could	have	anything	I	wanted.	Now	give
me	a	fork,	alright?"
"Okay,	okay,"	says	the	chief,	"here	is	a	fork."
Immediately	the	Polish	guy	takes	the	fork	and	starts	stabbing	himself	all	over.
The	chief	stares	at	him	and	exclaims,	"What	are	you	doing?"
The	Polish	guy	laughs	at	him	and	says,	"You	are	not	going	to	make	a	canoe	out
of	me!"
Just	 a	 little	 intelligence...	 and	 that	 much	 intelligence	 you	 can	 find	 even	 in	 a
Polack.	And	I	certainly	believe	that	you	are	not	a	Polack.	You	must	have	more
intelligence.
Don't	destroy	yourself	unnecessarily	because	others	are	happy,	because	so	much
is	happening	to	them	and	you	are	tense	because	something	has	happened	to	you
before	and	you	want	it	to	happen	again.
Something	much	more	beautiful	will	happen	to	you	if	you	can	drop	this	tension
and	this	desire	and	this	competition.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
48
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
5
This	moment	is	more	than	enough
14	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 THAT	 FOR	 SOME,	 MELTING	 WITH	 THE	 MASTER
COMES	FIRST,	AND	ALL	ELSE	FOLLOWS?	OR	ARE	YOU	AFTER	ALL
MY	BELOVED	AS	WELL	AS
MY	MASTER	--	EVEN	THOUGH	I	AM	NOT	SLEEPING	IN	YOUR	ROOM!?
JUST	WITH
A	 MOVE	 OF	 YOUR	 ARMS,	 FIRE	 SPREADS	 FROM	 DEEP	 WITHIN	 MY
BODY	AND
GIGGLES	 OF	 PURE	 DELIGHT,	 LIGHTNESS	 AND	 JOY	 FOLLOW	 LIKE
RIPPLES	IN	ITS
WAKE.	SOMETIMES	A	MOMENT	OF	YOUR	SILENCE,	OR	THE	IMPACT
OF	 JUST	 A	 FEW	 OF	 YOUR	 WORDS,	 CARRIES	 ME	 STRAIGHT	 INTO
INFINITE	 SPACE.	 OSHO,	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 ANY	 MELTING	 THAT	 I	 HAVE
KNOWN	SO	FAR	IS	OUT	OF	MY
MELTING	 IN	 YOUR	 LOVE	 --	 AND	 THAT	 MELTING	 WITH	 YOU	 IS
EASIER	FOR	ME
AND	MORE	POSSIBLE	THAN	MELTING	WITH	ANY	OTHER	MAN	HAS
BEEN.	 I	HAVE	NEVER	MELTED	 IN	A	TOTAL	ORGASM	WITH	A	MAN,
HOWEVER
BELOVED.	 YET	 YOU	 SAY	 THIS	 HAS	 TO	 COME	 FIRST,	 BEFORE	 ANY
MELTING
WITH	YOU.	BELOVED	MASTER,	I	AM	SCARED	TO	EXPOSE	ALL	THIS,
BUT	TELL
ME:	HAVE	I	NOT	KNOWN	ANY	MELTING	AT	ALL?
Prem	Arup,	the	physical	world	has	definite	laws	without	any	exception.	But	the
spiritual	world	has	no	laws	as	such,	because	there	are	always	exceptions.	That	is
part	of	the	freedom	of	the	spiritual	area	of	our	being.	So	whatever	I	say	about	the
spiritual	growth,	always	remember:	there	are	exceptions,	because	it	is	a	freedom
of	consciousness.
It	 is	freedom	from	laws,	too.	When	I	use	the	word	law	in	the	spiritual	realm,	I
simply	mean	that	generally,	 it	happens	that	way.	But	that	does	not	mean	that	 it
only	happens	that	way.	What	is	the	first	step	to	one	person	may	not	be	the	first
step	 to	 another	 person.	What	 is	 the	 second	 step	 to	 one	 person	may	not	 be	 the
second	 step	 to	 another	 person.	 Spirituality	 recognizes	 your	 individuality	 and
your	uniqueness.	In	the	physical	world,	there	are	no	exceptions	because	there	is
no	consciousness	and	there	is	no	freedom.	Trees	are	not	struggling	for	freedom,
the	stars	are	not	struggling	for	freedom	--	they	are	not	even	conscious	about	the
phenomenon.	Not	 even	 the	whole	 of	 humanity	 is	 striving	 for	 spiritual	 growth.
Millions	of	people	are	not	even	aware	that	there	is	much	more	to	life	than	they
can	 ever	 imagine	or	 can	 ever	dream.	They	go	on	 living	 as	 if	 they	 are	under	 a
physical,	mechanical	law.
My	whole	effort	here	is	 to	break	the	ice	for	you,	to	make	a	space	available	for
you	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see:	 you	 have	 every	 possibility	 to	 go	 beyond	 laws,	 rules,
regularities.	 And	 no	 two	 persons'	 spiritual	 growth	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 same,
because	 no	 two	 persons	 are	 in	 any	 way	 the	 same.	 They	 are	 all	 unique
individuals.	 And	 as	 you	 become	 more	 and	 more	 alert,	 you	 will	 also	 become
more	and	more	unique.	At	the	highest	peak	of	consciousness,	you	are	absolutely
like	yourself	alone.	There	has	never	been	anybody	like	you	before,	nor	will	there
be	anybody	afterwards.	Existence	does	not	repeat.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
49
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
Many	 people	 have	 wondered	 why,	 after	 twenty-five	 centuries,	 millions	 of
Buddhist	monks
--	 who	 have	 been	 striving	 hard,	 sincerely,	 honestly	 --	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to
produce	a	single	Gautam	Buddha.	And	it	is	not	only	true	about	Gautam	Buddha;
the	 same	 is	 true	about	Socrates,	 the	 same	 is	 true	about	Kabir,	 the	 same	 is	 true
about	Jesus,	the	same	is	true	about	Nanak.
You	can,	at	the	most,	imitate.	You	can	act	the	role	in	the	drama	of	life	--	but	it
will	 not	 be	 an	 authentic	 and	 existential	 growth	 in	 you,	 but	 only	 a	 parrot-like
repetition.	 The	 reason	 why	 there	 has	 never	 been	 another	 Socrates,	 another
Buddha,	another	Chuang	Tzu,	another	Kabir,	is	not	that	people	have	not	strived.
People	have	strived;	millions	of	people	have	strived	hard.	And	I	want	to	say	to
you:	it	is	because	of	their	striving	that	they	missed	being	themselves.	They	never
became	Buddhas,	 they	 never	 became	Meeras.	 They	 never	 became	Kabir,	 they
never	 became	 Nanak.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 because	 they	 were	 trying	 to	 become
somebody,	they	missed	becoming	what	they	were	destined	to	be.
This	whole	world	would	have	been	tremendously	beautiful	if	we	had	accepted	a
simple	 phenomenon	 --	 that	 each	 individual	 is	 unique.	 Hence,	 there	 can	 be	 no
organized	religions.
Religion	 is	 of	 the	 individual,	 absolutely	 private,	 absolutely	 personal.	 It	 is	 a
dialogue	between	the	individual	and	existence,	without	any	mediator.
You	cannot	become	anybody	else	but	yourself.	And	there	is	no	need.	If	you	grow
and	 bring	 your	 whole	 potential	 to	 become	 actual,	 you	 will	 produce	 flowers
which	have	never	been	known	before.	You	will	produce	a	fragrance	for	the	first
and	last	time,	a	fragrance	of	its	own	kind.	You	will	be	a	historical	phenomenon.
Each	individual	has	that	capacity,	but	because	all	cultures	and	all	 teachings	are
driving	 people	 to	 become	 somebody	 else,	 they	 are	 destroying	 humanity.	 This
whole	 humanity	 lives	 in	 such	 misery	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 nobody	 is
allowed	 to	 be	 himself.	 Nobody	 is	 accepted	 just	 as	 himself	 and	 respected.
Everybody	is	being	humiliated.
You	may	 not	 have	 thought	 of	 it	 this	way:	 to	 tell	 you	 to	 become	 a	 Jesus	 is	 to
humiliate	you.
It	is	insulting.	To	tell	you	to	become	a	Gautam	Buddha	is	to	destroy	your	dignity,
is	to	take	away	your	pride	of	being	a	human	being.	You	are	being	forced	to	be
carbon	copies.
When	you	have	the	right	and	the	potential	to	be	the	original,	why	should	you	be
a	carbon	copy?	But	all	 the	organized	 religions	and	your	so-called	 leaders	have
been	misleading	you.
And	because	you	cannot	become	yourself,	life	becomes	nothing	but	misery	and
anguish.
Just	think	of	a	rose	bush:	If	the	roses	are	condemned	and	the	rose	bush	is	asked
to	produce	lotuses,	you	will	create	 insanity	 in	 the	rose	bush!	It	cannot	produce
lotuses,	it	is	not	in	its	potential.	It	is	not	in	its	seed,	it	is	not	meant	to	be.
But	 fortunately,	 there	 are	 no	 priests	 corrupting	 the	 rose	 bushes,	 no	 political
leaders,	no	educationists	trying	to	impose	ideals	on	the	rose	bushes.	That's	why
rose	bushes	are	still	happy,	still	have	a	dance,	still	bring	beautiful	flowers,	great
fragrance.	 And	 the	 rose	 bush	 is	 not	 jealous	 at	 all	 of	 any	 lotus.	 There	 is	 no
question	of	any	jealousy.	A	lotus	is	a	lotus.	A	marigold	is	a	marigold,	and	they
are	all	needed.
Existence	would	be	very	poor	 if	everybody	were	a	Gautam	Buddha.	Just	 think
for	a	moment:	everybody	has	become	a	Jesus	Christ,	carrying	his	own	cross	on
his	shoulders.	Then	everything	else	will	stop!	You	have	just	to	carry	your	cross
all	your	life.	In	fact,	it	will	be	difficult	to	find	a	Judas	because	he	himself	will	be
carrying	his	own	cross.	It	will	be	difficult	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
50
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
to	find	the	priest	to	crucify	you;	you	will	have	to	manage	it	yourself.	There	will
not	even	be	a	crowd	to	see	it,	because	they	have	to	do	their	work.	They	have	to
dig	 the	ground,	put	 their	cross	up,	and	crucify	 themselves.	Perhaps	people	will
make	 contracts	 with	 each	 other:	 "You	 crucify	 me,	 help	 me	 to	 arrange	 my
crucifixion,	 and	 I	will	 help	you	with	your	 crucifixion."	Or	 there	may	be	 some
agencies	who	do	the	work.
But	it	will	be	a	very	poor	world	where	everybody	is	alike.	The	variety	makes	it
rich,	and	the	variety	should	be	respected.
Prem	Arup,	you	need	not	be	worried.	If	things	are	happening	differently	to	you,
it	 is	perfectly	 right.	All	 I	want	 is	 that	 things	 should	be	happening.	Which	 step
comes	first	and	which	comes	last	in	your	journey	does	not	matter.
All	that	matters	is	that	we	all	reach	our	home,	that	our	wandering	stops,	that	our
anguish	and	anxiety,	our	tensions	disappear.	All	that	matters	is	that	we	come	to
the	 center	 of	 our	being	where	we	can	be	utterly	 relaxed	 --	 in	 joy,	 in	peace,	 in
blissfulness	and	in	great	gratitude	towards	existence.	I	know	no	other	prayer.
All	your	prayers	are	false	--	there	is	only	one	prayer	which	is	authentic,	and	that
prayer	 is	 when	 you	 have	 arrived	 home	 and	 you	 feel	 tremendous	 gratitude
towards	 existence	 that	 it	 not	 only	 gave	you	 life,	 it	 gave	you	 love,	 it	 gave	you
meditation.	 It	 gave	 you	 fellow	 travellers,	 it	 gave	 you	 masters,	 it	 gave	 you
directions,	 dimensions	 to	 move	 in,	 and	 it	 gave	 you	 the	 courage	 and	 the
intelligence.	Only	gratitude	is	the	right	prayer.	If	you	are	asking	something,	you
are	complaining.	It	is	not	prayer.
Prem	Arup,	you	are	asking,	"Is	it	possible	that	for	some,	melting	with	the	master
comes	first	--	and	all	else	follows?"	Yes,	it	is	absolutely	possible.
You	are	saying,	"I	 feel	 that	any	melting	 that	 I	have	known	so	 far	 is	out	of	my
melting	 in	Your	 love."	The	question	 is	not	 in	whose	 love	 the	melting	happens;
the	important	thing	is	that	the	melting	happens,	so	that	the	ego	dissolves	and	you
are	 left	 alone	with	 your	 unique	 consciousness.	 In	melting,	 your	 truth	 does	 not
melt	 --	 only	 the	 false.	 So	who	 becomes	 the	 excuse	 is	 absolutely	 non-essential
and	unimportant.	What	is	important	is	that	your	ego	dissolves.	You	are,	and	there
is	no	sense	of	I-ness.
So	 if	 it	 is	 happening,	 you	 need	 not	 be	 worried,	 need	 not	 be	 concerned	 that
perhaps	something	is	growing	wrong	because	you	are	not	following	the	steps	in
the	sequence	I	talked	about.	In	the	world	of	consciousness,	the	deeper	you	will
enter,	the	more	you	will	be	an	exception.
The	problem	comes	 from	 the	mind,	which	has	been	conditioned	and	 is	always
waiting	to	raise	questions	to	disturb	your	peace,	to	disturb	your	silence.	And	man
has	lived	in	such	insanity	--	and	goes	on	living	in	the	same	insanity...
Just	the	other	day,	I	was	telling	you	a	joke	which	I	knew	was	crude...	but	man	is
far	 more	 crude.	 The	 joke	 was	 about	 a	 Catholic	 nun	 and	 a	 man	 who	 find
themselves	on	an	island,	shipwrecked.	They	are	the	only	survivors.
For	two	years,	they	wait	for	someone	to	rescue	them,	but	nobody	comes.	Then
finally,	the	man	pursues	the	nun,	saying:	"Forget	all	about	the	world.	Forget	all
about	your	vows	of	celibacy	and	this	and	that.	Let	us	start	living,	because	there
is	nobody	coming	to	rescue	us."
So	they	started	making	love.	A	bit	reluctantly,	the	nun	finally	agreed.	After	all,	a
nun	is	also	a	woman.	His	idea	finally	entered	the	heart	of	the	woman,	because	all
your	religion	is	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
51
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
only	in	the	head;	it	never	reaches	to	your	heart.	It	never	reaches	to	your	body,	it
never	reaches	to	your	biology.
They	were	making	love	for	two	months	and	then	the	woman	started	feeling	very
guilty,	because	her	conditioning	was	such	that	she	has	betrayed	Jesus	Christ,	she
has	betrayed	her	religion.	A	nun	is	a	bride	of	Jesus	Christ,	and	this	ugly	fellow...
but	 she	 is	 stuck	 with	 him	 on	 this	 island.	 She	 felt	 so	 bad	 about	 it	 that	 she
committed	suicide.
Two	months	after	her	death,	the	man	started	feeling	that	what	he	was	doing	was
very	bad.
He	was	making	love	to	the	dead	woman.	He	felt	so	bad...	but	a	man	is	after	all	a
man,	and	he	was	not	a	religious	man.	He	buried	the	woman.	Out	of	feeling	bad,
he	buried	the	woman.
One	of	my	friends	informed	me	that	it	was	a	very	crude	joke.	And	just	today,	I
received	a	press	clipping:	In	Pakistan,	a	man	has	been	caught	red-handed	--	he
has	pulled	out	a	dead	woman	from	the	grave	and	he	was	making	love	to	her.
Now	what	do	you	say?	And	that	man	is	not	an	exception.	It	is	a	fact	recorded	by
history	 that	 Cleopatra	 --	 perhaps	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 women,	 at	 least
mythologically;	but	she	was	a	historical	person	--	was	raped	after	she	died.	And
she	was	raped	not	by	one	man	but	by	many	men.	According	to	custom,	for	three
days,	 the	 body	 had	 to	 remain	 outside	 the	 grave.	 In	 those	 three	 days,	 she	was
attacked	again	and	again	in	the	night	by	a	group	of	people	and	raped.
She	was	dead.
My	joke	may	seem	crude	to	you	but	in	fact,	I	am	trying	to	tell	you	actual	facts
about	 your	 inhumanity	 to	 other	 human	 beings,	 your	 barbarousness,	 your
ugliness.	In	a	joke,	you	think,	"It	is	just	a	joke."	I	am	trying	my	best	to	make	it	as
little	crude	as	possible.	But	it	is	a	strange	world...
Holland	has	denied	me	entry	on	one	ground:	 that	I	have	been	speaking	against
homosexuals,	and	that	hurts	the	feelings	of	homosexuals.	My	entry	is	refused	by
the	 parliament	 of	Holland	 and	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 I	 have	 been	 speaking	 against
homosexuals.	One	cannot	even	speak	against	perversions!
Just	now,	a	few	governments	have	informed	how	many	people	are	suffering	from
AIDS.
Not	all	the	governments	of	the	world	--	for	example,	the	governments	of	the	East
are	 completely	 silent,	 because	 before	 you	 can	 declare	 it,	 you	will	 have	 to	 test
millions	of	people.
India	has	a	population	now	of	nine	hundred	million	people	who	would	have	to
be	tested.
But	from	those	few	governments	who	have	given	the	numbers	of	people	who	are
suffering	from	AIDS,	the	total	is	ten	million.	And	their	doctors	have	said	that	by
the	end	of	this	century,	there	will	be	one	hundred	million	people	suffering	from
AIDS.	If	 ten	million	people	are	suffering	from	AIDS,	 then	what	do	you	think?
How	many	people	will	be	involved	in	homosexuality?
And	when	I	had	said	for	the	first	time	that	two	thirds	of	humanity	will	die	from
AIDS,	 all	 the	 journalists	 laughed	 about	 it.	Now	 the	 doctors	 are	 saying	 that	 at
least	seventy	percent	of	people	in	some	areas	of	the	world	could	die	from	AIDS.
That	 is	a	bigger	percentage	 than	 I	had	predicted.	My	prediction	was	only	 two-
thirds;	that	was	sixty-six	percent.	They	are	talking	now	of	seventy	percent.	But
everybody	 is	 taking	 a	 very	 hopeful	 and	 optimistic	 attitude	 --	 and	 there	 are
hundreds	 of	 other	 countries	 which	 are	 not	 exposing	 themselves,	 not	 reporting
how	 many	 homosexuals	 they	 have	 and	 how	 many	 people	 are	 suffering	 from
AIDS.
There	may	be	no	need	of	a	nuclear	war.	AIDS	may	finish	the	whole	humanity.
But	 I	 was	 prevented	 from	 entering	 Holland	 because	 I	 have	 spoken	 against
homosexuality	--	as	if	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
52
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
homosexuality	 is	 also	 a	 religion.	Now,	 religious	 feelings	 are	 hurt;	 I	 have	been
sued	 again	 and	 again	 in	 courts	 because	 I	 have	 been	 hurting	 people's	 religious
feelings.	Soon,	I	think	homosexuals	will	be	suing	me	through	the	courts.	People
who	are	 suffering	 from	AIDS	will	be	suing	me	 through	 the	courts,	 saying	 that
"This	man	is	hurting	our	feelings."	So	rather	than	saying	simple	facts	and	data,	I
try	to	indicate	through	my	jokes,	the	reality.	Don't	take	my	jokes	non-seriously!
You	 can	 take	 everything	 else	 that	 I	 say	 non-seriously,	 but	 not	my	 jokes.	They
contain	something	which	cannot	be	said	directly.	It	will	hurt	you.
Just	the	other	day,	American	Catholic	priests	have	come	up	with	an	idea.	I	was
telling	you	that	Mohammedans	in	Russia	are	calling	their	fast	"dieting"	because
fasting	is	against	the	communist	government.	And	fasting	is	a	religious	thing	so
they	have	changed	it	to	"dieting."
They	are	calling	their	prayers,	"physical	exercises."
But	this	is	nothing	compared	to	what	the	American	Catholic	priests	have	come
up	 with:	 they	 have	 declared	 that	 "Celibacy	 does	 not	 prevent	 us	 from
homosexuality	 --	celibacy	 includes	 the	 idea	 that	we	should	remain	unmarried."
That	is	the	meaning	of	celibacy	according	to	their	spokesman:	"Celibacy	means
that	we	will	 remain	unmarried.	At	 the	most,	celibacy	means	we	will	not	make
sexual	contacts	with	women,	but	 there	 is	no	 idea	 that	celibacy	prevents	monks
and	priests	from	homosexuality."
These	 are	 your	 religious	 leaders!	 And	 on	 these	 religious	 leaders	 you	 have
depended	for	centuries,	to	guide	you	to	spirituality.
Everywhere	 Catholic	 priests	 have	 been	 caught	 abusing	 small	 children.
Homosexuality	 is	 rampant.	 In	 one	monastery	 in	Europe,	 half	 the	monastery	 is
homosexual,	so	they	have	divided	the	monastery	in	two	parts.	They	have	raised	a
wall:	 the	 homosexuals	 are	 separate,	 and	 those	 who	 are	 backward	 and	 don't
understand	human	freedom...	homosexuality	is	part	of	human	freedom.
A	few	of	my	sannyasins	have	come	to	me.	They	belonged,	before	they	came	to
me,	 to	 the	 women's	 liberation	 movement	 and	 they	 told	 me,	 "The	 women's
liberation	 movement	 is	 very	 much	 against	 you	 because	 you	 have	 been
condemning	 lesbianism,	 and	 you	 are	 converting	 many	 liberation	 women	 into
sannyasins."	And	 their	 liberation	 consists	 in	 hating	men!	Rather	 than	 being	 in
love	 with	 a	 man,	 they	 will	 be	 in	 love	 with	 women	 only.	 The	 man	 has	 to	 be
boycotted.	And	if	you	say	anything,	it	hurts	their	feelings.	They	are	angry.
It	seems	almost	impossible	to	say	anything	significant.	That's	why	I	find	jokes	an
indirect	way	of	 telling	you	 things,	because	nobody	can	sue	me	in	 the	court	 for
telling	a	joke.	A	joke	is	after	all,	a	joke.
A	man	decides	that	he	wants	to	become	a	monk.	So	he	goes	to	the	monastery	and
is	informed	that	before	he	can	become	a	monk,	he	must	pass	two	tests:	"First,"
says	 the	head	monk,	 "We	will	put	you	 in	a	cell	 for	 six	months.	You	will	have
nothing	to	eat	or	drink	but	bread	and	water.	And	each	entire	day	must	be	spent
reading	THE	BIBLE.
"Then,"	he	continues,	"should	you	pass	 the	 first	 test,	you	will	be	 ready	for	 the
second	test.
For	this,	we	put	you	in	a	room	and	take	off	all	your	clothes.	We	then	tie	a	little
bell	 to	 your	 male	 member	 and	 then	 we	 walk	 a	 nude	 nun	 through	 the	 room.
Should	 that	 little	 bell	make	 any	 sound	 at	 all,	 I	 am	 afraid	 you	will	 be	 deemed
unfit	to	join	the	monastery."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
53
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
So	they	put	him	in	a	cell	with	nothing	but	bread	and	water	and	he	does	nothing
but	read	THE	BIBLE	for	six	months.	At	 the	end	of	 this	 time,	he	 is	once	again
brought	before	the	head	monk.
"Are	you	ready	for	the	second	test?"	asks	the	head	monk.
"I	am,"	says	the	man.
He	is	taken	into	a	room	and	stripped	down.	They	put	the	little	bell	on	him,	then
they	walk	a	nude	nun	through	the	room.
Well,	right	away	his	bell	starts	ringing.
The	monk	says	to	him,	"I'm	sorry,	but	I'm	afraid	you	must	leave."
"Wait	a	minute,"	says	the	man.	"Are	you	going	to	tell	me	that	every	priest	in	this
monastery	has	passed	this	test?"
"Every	one,"	says	the	chief	monk.
"Before	I	will	agree	to	leave,"	says	the	man	in	defiance,	"I	demand	proof.	I	want
to	see	ten	monks	pass	this	test."
"All	right,"	says	the	head	monk.	They	get	ten	monks	in	the	room,	undress	them,
line	them	up,	and	put	bells	on	them.
The	nude	nun	then	walks	through	and	there	is	nothing	but	dead	silence.	Except
of	course	for	the	first	man's	bell,	which	is	ringing	like	crazy.	As	a	matter	of	fact,
it	rings	so	hard	that	 it	falls	off.	When	the	man	bends	over	to	pick	it	up,	all	 the
other	ten	bells	ring.
Now	there	are	governments	who	are	making	laws	against	homosexuality	but	no
government	 is	 daring	 to	 make	 celibacy	 a	 crime	 --	 which	 is	 the	 root	 cause.
Homosexuality	 is	 only	 a	 symptom.	 Make	 celibacy	 a	 crime	 and	 then
homosexuality	will	disappear	on	its	own	accord.
But	rather	than	making	celibacy	a	crime,	celibacy	is	still	thought	to	be	holy	and
spiritual.
Homosexuality	has	 to	be	condemned	as	a	crime,	because	of	 the	 fear	of	AIDS.
But	by	declaring	anything	criminal,	have	you	ever	been	able	to	stop	it?
Your	jails	go	on	becoming	bigger,	their	number	goes	on	increasing.	Your	crimes
go	 on	 increasing.	 As	 your	 laws	 increase,	 more	 than	 your	 laws,	 your	 crimes
increase.	And	it	has	been	the	idea	in	the	past	that	if	you	punish	a	criminal,	then
other	 people	will	 be	 prevented	 from	 committing	 the	 same	 crime	 --	which	 has
been	found	to	be	psychologically	nonsense,	because	nobody	is	prevented.
In	England,	 in	 the	middle	 ages,	 they	used	 to	beat	 thieves	 in	 the	middle	of	 the
town,	naked
--	a	hundred	lashes,	two	hundred	lashes,	until	they	would	fall	unconscious.	Their
whole	body	covered	in	blood...	and	thousands	of	people	would	come	to	see	it;	it
was	free	entertainment.
But	 England's	 parliament	 finally	 decided	 to	 stop	 it.	 And	 the	 reason	why	 they
stopped	it	was:	they	were	punishing	a	thief	and	because	the	crowd	was	so	much
involved	and	so	much	concentrated	on	looking	at	the	man	being	beaten	--	naked,
blood	 flowing	 out	 from	 all	 over	 his	 body	 --	 and	 there	 were	 at	 least	 a	 dozen
people	who	were	 cutting	 their	 pockets!	So	 the	whole	 idea,	 that	beating	 a	 thief
will	prevent	other	people	 from	stealing,	was	absolutely	nonsense.	 In	 fact,	 they
were	using	the	opportunity	to	cut	people's	pockets.
And	 you	 send	 people	 to	 jails.	When	 they	 enter,	 they	 are	 amateur;	 when	 they
come	out	they	have	graduated	from	the	university.	All	 that	your	laws	and	your
jails	teach	the	criminals	is	one	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
54
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
thing:	that	committing	a	crime	is	not	a	crime,	but	being	caught	is	a	crime.	So	just
be	more	alert,	more	artful,	more	articulate	so	that	you	are	not	caught.	And	jails
are	perfect	universities,	where	there	are	very	experienced	and	seasoned	criminals
who	will	train	you,	who	have	been	there	for	their	whole	life,	coming	and	going.
When	I	was	put	in	the	first	jail	in	America,	in	that	area	there	were	six	small	cells,
each	cell	for	two	persons.	And	the	man	who	was	the	sheriff	of	the	jail	had	read
me,	 and	was	 very	 careful:	 he	 took	 every	 care	 that	 was	within	 his	 capacity	 to
make	my	 three	days	 in	his	 jail	 as	 comfortable	as	possible.	He	 removed	all	 the
people	 from	 the	cells	who	were	 smokers.	He	brought	 into	all	 the	cells,	people
chosen	 from	 six	 hundred	 inmates	 in	 the	 jail	 --	 the	 best	 people,	 the	 most
understanding	ones,	intelligent,	educated.	He	cleaned	all	those	six	cells,	because
he	knew	that	I	am	allergic	to	smell.
I	 enquired	of	 those	 inmates	 --	 "You	 seem	 to	be	very	 at	 ease	here."	Somebody
was	very	old,	sixty	years;	somebody	was	fifty...	nobody	was	below	thirty.	They
all	said	"Outside	life	is	difficult,	a	constant	struggle.	And	because	people	know
we	are	criminals,	employment	is	difficult.	Even	our	families	don't	want	us	back
because	they	lose	respectability	because	of	us.
So	whenever	we	are	released,	we	commit	a	small	crime	in	such	a	way	that	we
can	be	caught	immediately.	So	back	we	are	in	the	jail!	And	the	jail	is	the	perfect
place	--	no	worry	about	employment,	food	is	supplied	on	time,	medical	care	 is
available,	clothes	are	available.
Everything	 that	 is	needed	is	given	and	all	our	friends	are	here.	outside	we	feel
alone.
"Our	society	is	totally	different,	and	here	we	have	such	experienced	criminals,	so
wise	 that	 just	 to	 sit	 with	 them	 and	 learn	 is	 a	 great	 education.	 Once	 a	 person
enters	 jail,	he	comes	out	a	 seasoned	criminal,	graduated.	He	has	 learned	many
things	 that	 he	 had	 never	 known	 before	 and	 now	 it	 becomes	more	 difficult	 to
catch	him."
Condemning	 homosexuality	 as	 a	 crime	 will	 drive	 homosexuals	 underground.
Right	now,	 it	 is	better	not	 to	make	homosexuality	 a	 crime,	because	people	are
ready	to	go	for	the	test.	Once	it	is	a	crime,	people	will	stop	going	for	the	test	or
they	will	start	bribing	the	doctor.	They	may	have	AIDS	and	they	will	bribe	the
doctors.	 In	 that	 bribe,	 they	 are	 saved	 and	 the	 doctor	 is	 also	 saved	 because	 no
doctor	 wants,	 in	 his	 hospital,	 patients	 suffering	 from	 AIDS.	 But	 then	 those
people	are	free	in	the	society,	spreading	the	virus	--	which	spreads	like	wildfire.
But	I	was	amazed	that	a	cultured	country	like	Holland	should	prevent	me	from
having	just	a	tourist	visa	because	I	had	been	speaking	against	homosexuality	and
AIDS	and	celibacy.
Man	is	more	barbarous	than	you	ever	conceive	him	to	be.	And	man	has	done	to
other	men	such	cruel	acts	 that	are	unbelievable	--	and	 in	 the	name	of	beautiful
words:	God,	religion,	nation,	race.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 make	 you	 aware,	 in	 every	 possible	 way,	 what	 kind	 of
humanity	we	have	--	and	how	to	transcend	it,	because	it	is	not	only	outside	you,
it	is	also	inside	you.	You	have	been	brought	up	by	this	mad	society	so	they	have
given	all	kinds	of	mad	ideas	to	you.
And	nobody	 seems	 to	bother	 that	man's	 life	 can	be	 such	a	 joy,	 and	 it	 is	going
down	 the	 drain	 every	 day	 --	 from	bad	 to	worse.	But	 at	 least	 for	my	 people,	 I
would	like	you	to	remember:	if	you	can	do	only	one	thing,	everything	else	that	is
ugly	will	disappear	from	your	life	and	everything	that	is	beautiful	will	come	on
its	own.	And	that	simple	thing	is:	learning	to	be	silent,	learning	to	be	meditative,
being	a	watcher,	being	natural	and	yet	alert	and	conscious	of	whatever	you	are
doing,	of	whatever	you	are	thinking.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
55
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
Consciousness	and	nature	--	and	just	be	easy	and	relaxed	and	you	can	get	rid	of
this	whole	madness,	 in	which	man	is	rushing	so	fast	 that	 it	seems	it	won't	 take
much	to	destroy	life	on	this	planet.	Perhaps	this	is	the	last	century.	We	may	not
be	able	to	see	life	after	this	century.
This	beautiful	earth	will	become	just	a	dead	graveyard.
So	 remember:	whatever	 I	 say,	 don't	 think	 that	 it	 is	 something	 like	 an	 absolute
law.	 I	 am	 saying	 it	 in	 a	 very	 general	way;	 then	 you	 have	 to	 adjust	 it	 to	 your
individuality.	You	have	to	make	out	of	it	your	own	discipline,	your	own	religion,
your	own	path.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMETIMES,	 REMEMBERING	YOU,	 IT	 FEELS	 THAT	YOUR	LONGING
FOR	ME
IS	 MUCH	 BIGGER	 THAN	 MY	 LONGING	 FOR	 YOU.	 SOMETIMES,
SAYING	HELLO
TO	A	TREE	OR	LOOKING	AT	A	MOUNTAIN	OR	A	STAR,	IT	FEELS	THAT
THEY	ARE
WHISPERING:	 "DON'T	 FORGET	 THAT	 WE	 LOVE	 YOU."	 AM	 I
IMAGINING,	OR	IS	IT
TRUE	THAT	ALL	EXISTENCE	WANTS	OF	ME	IS	TO	OPEN	MYSELF	TO
ALL
DIMENSIONS	OF	ITS	LOVE?
Deva	Parigyan,	rather	than	being	concerned	whether	what	you	are	experiencing
is	 imagination	 or	 reality,	 you	 should	 enjoy	 each	 moment	 with	 totality	 and
intensity,	not	holding	anything	back.	You	are	not	doing	that.	If	you	were	doing
that,	 the	question	would	not	have	arisen.	 I	will	 read	your	question	 so	 that	you
can	understand:	"Sometimes,	remembering	You,	it	feels	that	Your	longing	for	me
is	much	bigger	than	my	longing	for	You."
Why	should	my	longing	for	you	be	bigger	than	your	longing	for	me?	I	don't	have
any	longing	at	all	--	for	you,	or	for	anybody	else.	This	idea	is	arising	out	of	your
ego.	 You	 want	 it	 that	 way:	 my	 longing	 should	 be	 bigger	 for	 you	 than	 your
longing	is	for	me.	But	you	are	not	aware	that	this	is	the	game	of	the	ego	and	you
are	being	befooled	by	it.	I	don't	have	any	longing	at	all.	All	that	is	past,	far	away.
All	longings	have	disappeared.	Your	longing	for	me	will	also	disappear,	and	only
then	is	there	a	possibility	of	meeting.	Longing	is	a	barrier,	desire	is	a	barrier.
I	 don't	 have	 any	 longing.	 That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 I	 am	 hurting	 you,	 don't
misunderstand	me.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	you;	it	is	just	explaining	to	you	my
situation.	In	my	heart,	there	is	no	longing.	It	is	completely	fulfilled.	If	I	die	this
very	moment,	 I	will	 die	 in	 utter	 contentment	 because	 nothing	 is	 left	which	 is
incomplete.
I	have	nothing	special	to	do	tomorrow.
I	have	not	postponed	anything.
For	 thirty	 years	 continuously	 I	 am	 living	 in	 the	 moment,	 neither	 looking
backwards	nor	looking	forwards.	Just	this	very	moment	is	enough.	It	is	so	much,
so	overwhelming	that	I	am	absolutely	grateful	to	existence	for	this	moment,	and
I	don't	have	time	to	think	about	the	next	moment.
When	the	next	moment	comes,	I	will	live	it.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
56
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
But	your	ego	must	be	telling	you	that	my	longing	is	bigger	than	your	longing	for
me.	 I	 want	 your	 longing	 also	 to	 disappear,	 so	 we	 can	 meet	 with	 each	 other
without	any	longing,	without	any	desire,	without	any	expectation.
The	meeting	with	 the	master	happens	only	when	 there	 is	nothing	else	between
them	--	just	a	pure	meeting	of	two	consciousnesses,	of	two	flames.	For	no	reason
at	all	--	just	for	the	sheer	joy.
You	are	saying,	"Sometimes	saying	hello	to	a	tree	or	looking	at	a	mountain	or	a
star,	 it	 feels	 like	 they	 are	whispering,	 'Don't	 forget	 that	we	 love	 you.'"	Again,
your	ego	seems	to	be	the	center.	Just	as	my	longing	has	to	be	bigger	than	your
longing,	 even	 the	mountains	and	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 trees	are	 telling	you,	 "Don't
forget	that	we	love	you."	It	is	not	that	you	love	them.
Your	ego	is	feeling	very	nourished.
You	are	saying,	"Am	I	imagining?"
This	 question	 would	 not	 have	 arisen	 at	 all.	 It	 arises	 only	 when	 you	 are
imagining.	Do	you	ever	think	that	you	are	imagining	this	meeting	here?	Do	you
ever	 think	 you	 are	 imagining	 these	 lights	 here?	 Do	 you	 ever	 think	 you	 are
imagining	my	words,	my	being,	my	presence?
No,	the	question	arises	only	when	you	are	imagining.
And	 it	 is	 certainly	 imagination	 that	mountains	and	 rivers	and	 trees	 say	 to	you,
"Don't	forget	that	we	love	you."	That's	how	you	distort	everything.	I	have	been
telling	you:	love	the	mountains,	love	the	trees,	love	the	stars,	because	by	loving,
your	consciousness	will	expand.
But	you	are	doing	just	the	opposite:	you	are	imagining	that	the	whole	existence
is	in	need	of	you.	They	are	all	begging	you,	"Don't	forget	us.	Without	you,	what
will	happen	to	us?	The	whole	existence	will	become	a	widow."
The	rivers	will	cry,	the	mountains	will	mourn,	the	stars	will	commit	suicide.
Again,	you	are	saying:	"Is	it	true	that	all	existence	wants	of	me	is	to	open	myself
to	all	dimensions	of	its	love?"	But	you	are	not	saying	even	once	that	you	have	to
love	the	existence.
Again,	you	are	saying	that	"Existence	wants	me	to	open	so	that	it	can	love	me."
The	ways	of	the	ego	are	very	subtle.	But	howsoever	subtle	they	are,	if	you	are	a
little	alert,	a	little	intelligent,	you	can	catch	hold	of	the	ego.
You	were	not	here;	 the	existence	was	here	and	perfectly	happy.	The	stars	were
not	missing	you,	neither	the	mountains	nor	the	rivers.	And	one	day,	you	will	not
be	again	and	the	existence	will	continue	its	celebration,	its	dance,	its	song.	It	will
not	miss	you.	But	don't	feel	hurt.	You	have	not	done	anything	that	you	should	be
missed.
The	existence	misses	Gautam	Buddha	even	today,	the	existence	misses	Socrates
even	 today.	The	 last	words	of	Socrates	 to	 the	 judges	were,	 "When	 I	 am	gone,
then	you	will	miss	me.	And	your	names	will	be	remembered	only	because	of	me.
Otherwise,	nobody	will	remember	even	your	names.	But	right	now,	you	are	deaf
and	blind."
Love	the	existence	so	much	that	certainly	when	you	leave,	the	whole	existence
misses	you.
But	what	have	you	done	to	be	missed?	You	have	been	only	exploiting	existence.
You	have	been	only	destructive	to	existence.	Do	you	think	you	have	contributed
to	the	beauty	of	existence	a	little	bit	more?
Have	you	made	its	music	a	little	deeper?	Have	you	joined	in	its	dance	and	made
it	 a	 little	 juicier?	What	 have	 you	 done?	 Have	 you	 added	 your	 silence	 to	 the
silence	of	existence?	Have	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
57
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
you	raised	the	consciousness	of	humanity	by	raising	your	consciousness?	Then
certainly,	it	will	miss	you.
But	to	raise	your	consciousness,	you	will	have	to	drop	this	ego	and	you	will	have
to	drop	all	this	imagination	and	you	will	have	to	drop	this	mind	which	is	playing
tricks	with	you.
Mind	 is	 so	 tricky	and	plays	 such	games,	 so	convincing	 to	you.	That's	why	 the
whole	humanity	goes	on	living	in	misery.
Two	Jews	meet	on	a	train.	One	asks	the	other	if	he	has	the	time.
No	answer.
Again	he	asks.	Again,	no	answer.
Eventually,	he	taps	him	hard	on	the	knee	and	almost	shouts	his	question,	and	the
other	at	last	tells	him	the	time.
"And	why	did	it	take	you	so	long,	if	I	may	ask?"
"Well,	it	is	like	this.	We	will	get	talking.	We	will	become	friendly.	When	we	get
to	Vienna,	 I	will	ask	you	 to	come	home	with	me	to	have	a	bite	 to	eat	and	you
will	meet	my	daughter.	She	is	beautiful	and	you	are	a	nice-looking	chap	and	you
will	fall	in	love	and	you	will	want	to	get	married	and	quite	frankly,	I	don't	want	a
son-in-law	who	has	not	got	a	watch."
Such	long	range	thinking!	But	everybody's	mind	is	doing	such	things.
Beware:	imagination	is	not	going	to	help.	Howsoever	beautiful	it	 is,	 it	 is	 just	a
soap	bubble.
Deva	Parigyan,	meditate	more.	First	get	in	touch	with	your	own	being,	then	only
you	have	the	right	to	say	hello	to	the	trees.	Then	only	you	know	the	language	of
how	 to	 talk	 with	 the	 mountains	 and	 the	 clouds	 and	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 rivers.
Because	their	language	is	silence,	and	unless	you	know	that	language,	how	can
you	talk	with	them?
And	in	silence,	there	is	no	talking	involved	but	still	a	dialogue	happens,	a	deep
understanding	without	words,	a	 transfer	of	energy	without	 language.	Trees	will
not	say	anything	and	you	will	not	hear	anything	but	between	you	and	the	being
of	the	tree,	there	will	be	a	transfer	of	energy	--	not	of	language.	And	only	then
you	will	know	that	you	have	to	love	if	you	want	love	to	be	showered	on	you.
Yes,	mountains	 can	 love,	 rivers	 can	 love,	 trees	 can	 love,	 clouds	 can	 love.	But
before	 they	 love	you,	you	have	 to	 learn	how	to	 love	--	how	to	 love	 this	whole
existence,	how	to	respect	life,	how	to	have	a	reverence	for	all	that	is.
To	me,	this	is	authentic	religion:	reverence	for	all	that	is.	And	then	certainly,	you
will	be	showered	with	flowers	which	nobody	will	see,	but	you	will	understand.
And	certainly	you	will	find	you	are	needed.
And	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 joys	 in	 existence:	 to	 be	 needed	 by	 existence,	 to
know	that	you	are	fulfilling	something	essential	by	being	here.
But	don't	start	with	imagination	--	start	with	meditation.	Begin	with	meditation,
and	let	your	meditation	make	you	so	silent	that	you	can	join	with	existence	in	its
eternal	silence.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
58
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
There	are	experiences	which	are	beyond	words.	Don't	try	to	imagine	those	great
experiences,	because	your	imagination	can	become	a	barrier.	Only	silence	is	the
bridge.
The	mind	is	the	barrier.
The	no-mind	is	the	bridge.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	MEANT	BY	A	SPIRITUAL	EGO?	IS	SPIRITUAL	GREED	ONE	OF
ITS
SYMPTOMS?	IS	IT	CURABLE?
Anand	Tarangini,	 the	spiritual	ego	is	not	something	different	from	the	ordinary
ego.
Somebody	 feels	 his	 ego	 because	 he	 has	 money,	 somebody	 feels	 his	 ego
strengthened	because	he	has	political	power.	Somebody	feels	ego	because	he	has
great	respectability.	But	the	ego	is	the	same.	Somebody	feels	that	he	is	spiritual	-
-	he's	a	great	saint,	holier	 than	you	--	 that	 is	also	the	same	ego.	You	can	call	 it
"spiritual	ego"	but	spiritual	ego	is	a	contradiction	in	terms.
I	have	heard	 a	 story.	There	were	 three	monasteries	 in	 the	mountains.	And	one
day,	three	monks,	from	each	of	the	monasteries,	just	by	chance	met	on	the	road.
One	of	them	said,	"You	have	beautiful	monasteries.	But	as	far	as	our	monastery
is	concerned,	you	cannot	compete	with	us	in	our	austerity."
The	 second	 said,	 "We	 know	 your	 monastery;	 its	 discipline	 is	 arduous,	 your
austerity	 is	 great.	 But	 nobody	 can	 compete	 with	 us	 as	 far	 as	 learning	 is
concerned.	Our	monastery	is	full	of	scholars,	great	scholars."	Both	looked	at	the
third	man.	He	said,	"You	are	both	right.	One	monastery	is	very	perfectionistic	in
its	disciplines,	austerities,	and	the	second	is	certainly	full	of	great	scholars.	But
we	are	the	tops	in	humbleness."
"Tops	in	humbleness..."	You	can	see	the	contradiction.	There	is	no	such	thing	as
spiritual	ego.	Yes,	there	is	such	a	thing	that	ego	can	exploit	any	direction	of	life:
it	can	be	religious,	it	can	be	spiritual,	it	can	be	financial,	it	can	be	political.	It	can
be	 scholarship,	 it	 can	be	beauty,	 it	 can	be	physical	 strength.	Ego	 is	 capable	of
exploiting	 anything.	 But	 spiritual	 ego	 is	 simply	 an	 impossibility	 because
spirituality	arises	in	you	only	when	the	ego	dissolves.	Either	you	are	an	egoist	or
you	are	in	the	world	of	the	spirit,	you	can't	be	both	together.	They	don't	have	any
coexistence.
And	you	are	asking,	"Is	spiritual	greed	one	of	its	symptoms?"
Any	 greed	 --	 material	 or	 spiritual	 --	 is	 simply	 greed.	 Greed	 means	 you	 want
more	 and	 more	 and	 more;	 there	 never	 comes	 a	 time	 when	 this	 continuous
hankering	for	more,	stops.	So	whether	you	are	in	search	of	more	spirituality	or
more	money	or	more	power,	it	does	not	matter.
But	in	fact,	about	spirituality,	you	should	understand	that	the	same	contradiction
again	 arises:	 you	 become	 spiritual	 only	 when	 this	 desire	 for	 more	 and	 more
disappears,	when	you	are	utterly	satisfied	and	contented	as	you	are,	when	there
is	no	"more"	goading	you...	because	the	"more"	creates	the	future.	"More"	means
tomorrow	is	needed.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
59
Chapter	5	-	This	moment	is	more	than	enough
For	the	spiritual	person,	this	moment	is	more	than	enough.	He	is	utterly	grateful
for	 whatever	 is	 allowed	 to	 him.	 His	 contentment	 cannot	 be	 disturbed	 by	 any
desire	for	more.
And	 you	 are	 asking,	 Anand	 Tarangini,	 "Is	 it	 curable?"	 It	 is	 a	 very	 strange
question.	Do	you	want	 to	get	 rid	of	 the	 ego	or	do	you	want	 to	 cure	 it?	 If	 you
want	 to	cure	 it,	 then	you	are	 in	a	wrong	place.	Here,	we	simply	chop	the	head
off!	We	know	only	one	cure:	a	simple	surgery.
What	 do	 you	 mean	 by	 "curable"?	 Do	 you	 want	 your	 ego	 to	 become	 more
healthy?
stronger?	more	powerful?	But	 that	will	be	destructive	 to	your	spirituality.	That
will	be	against	your	inner	growth.
The	 ego	 is	 your	 enemy,	 not	 your	 friend.	 The	 enemy	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed	 --
completely	destroyed.	Not	to	be	cured,	but	killed!
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
60
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
6
Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
15	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
PRIME	MINISTER	 RAJIV	 GANDHI	 IS	 GOING	 TO	 HOLD	 A	 NATIONAL
DEBATE
ON	 THE	 NEED	 FOR	 SEPARATING	 POLITICS	 FROM	 RELIGION.	 WE
WOULD	LOVE
TO	HEAR	YOUR	VISION	ON	THIS	QUESTION.
Anand	Maitreya,	 politics	 is	mundane	 --	 the	 politicians	 are	 the	 servants	 of	 the
people.
Religion	 is	 sacred	 --	 it	 is	 the	 guide	 for	 people's	 spiritual	 growth.	 Certainly,
politics	is	the	lowest	as	far	as	values	are	concerned,	and	religion	the	highest	as
far	as	values	are	concerned.
They	are	separate.
Rajiv	Gandhi	wants	religion	not	to	interfere	with	politics;	I	want	politics	not	to
interfere	with	religion.	The	higher	has	every	right	to	interfere,	but	the	lower	has
no	right.
Religion	has	been	raising	human	consciousness	for	centuries.	Whatever	man	is
now,	 whatever	 little	 consciousness	 he	 has,	 the	 whole	 credit	 goes	 to	 religion.
Politics	has	been	a	curse,	a	calamity;	and	whatever	is	ugly	in	humanity,	politics
is	responsible	for.
But	the	problem	is	that	politics	has	power;	religion	has	only	love,	peace	and	the
experience	 of	 the	 divine.	 Politics	 can	 easily	 interfere	with	 religion;	 and	 it	 has
been	interfering	all	along,	to	such	an	extent	that	it	has	destroyed	many	religious
values	which	are	absolutely	necessary	 for	 the	survival	of	humanity	and	 life	on
this	earth.
Religion	 has	 no	 mundane	 power	 like	 nuclear	 weapons	 and	 atom	 bombs	 and
guns;	its	dimension	is	totally	different.	Religion	is	not	a	will	to	power;	religion	is
a	search	for	truth,	for	God.	And	the	very	search	makes	the	religious	man	humble,
simple,	innocent.
Politics	 has	 all	 the	 destructive	 weapons	 --	 religion	 is	 absolutely	 vulnerable.
Politics	has	no	heart	--	religion	is	pure	heart.	It	is	just	like	a	beautiful	roseflower:
its	beauty,	 its	poetry,	 its	dance	makes	 life	worth	 living,	gives	 life	meaning	and
significance.	Politics	 is	 like	a	stone,	dead,	but	 the	stone	can	destroy	 the	flower
and	the	flower	has	no	defense.	Politics	is	aggressive.
Rajiv	Gandhi	 is	putting	 things	upside	down.	He	wants	 religion	not	 to	 interfere
with	politics.	Politics	should	have	the	whole	monopoly	to	enslave	humanity,	 to
reduce	men	to	slaves,	to	destroy	their	freedom,	to	destroy	their	consciousness;	to
convert	 them	 into	 robots	 so	 that	 the	 politicians	 can	 enjoy	 the	 power	 and	 the
domination.
Religion	 is	 the	 only	 problem	 for	 the	 politicians.	 It	 is	 beyond	 their	 reach	 and
beyond	their	understanding.	Religion	is	the	only	area	where	politics	should	not
interfere	at	all,	because	religion	is	the	only	hope.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
61
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
Politics,	 for	 centuries,	 has	 been	 just	 killing,	 destroying	 people	 --	 the	 whole
history	of	politics	is	the	history	of	criminals,	murderers.	In	three	thousand	years,
politicians	have	created	 five	 thousand	wars.	 It	 seems	 that	 inside	 the	politician,
the	barbarous	instinct	is	very	powerful;	its	only	joy	is	to	destroy,	to	dominate.
Religion	creates	a	problem	for	it,	because	religion	has	given	the	world	its	highest
peaks	of	consciousness	--	a	Gautam	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Chuang	Tzu,	a	Nanak,	a
Kabir.	These	are	the	very	salt	of	the	earth.	What	has	politics	given	to	the	world?
Genghis	 Khan?	 Tamerlane?	 Nadir	 Shah?	 Alexander?	 Napoleon?	 Ivan	 the
Terrible?	Josef	Stalin?	Adolf	Hitler?	Benito	Mussolini?	Mao	Tse-tung?	Ronald
Reagan?	 --	 these	are	all	 criminals.	Rather	 than	being	 in	power,	 they	 should	be
behind	bars;	they	are	inhuman.
And	 they	are	 spiritually	 sick	people.	The	will	 to	power	and	 to	dominate	arises
only	in	the	sick	mind.	It	arises	out	of	the	inferiority	complex.	People	who	are	not
suffering	 from	 an	 inferiority	 complex	 do	 not	 care	 about	 power;	 their	 whole
endeavor	is	for	peace,	because	the	meaning	of	life	can	be	known	only	in	peace	--
power	is	not	the	way.	Peace,	silence,	gratitude,	meditation	--	these	are	the	basic
constituents	of	religion.
Religion	cannot	be	allowed	to	be	dominated	by	stupid	politicians.	The	situation
is	 as	 if	 sick	 people	 are	 trying	 to	 dominate	 the	 physicians,	 directing	what	 they
should	do	and	what	 they	should	not	do.	Accept	 it	 --	 the	 sick	people	are	 in	 the
majority,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	the	physician	should	be	dominated	by	the
majority.	 The	 physician	 can	 heal	 the	 wounds,	 can	 cure	 the	 sicknesses	 of
humanity.	Religion	is	the	physician.
Politicians	have	done	enough	harm,	and	they	are	leading	the	whole	of	humanity
towards	 a	 global	 suicide.	 And	 still	 Rajiv	 Gandhi	 has	 the	 nerve	 to	 say	 that
religion	should	not	interfere	--
when	 the	 whole	 of	 life	 on	 this	 planet	 is	 in	 danger!	 Not	 only	 man,	 but	 the
innocent	birds	and	their	songs,	the	silent	trees	and	their	flowers	--	everything	that
is	alive.
Politicians	have	managed	to	create	enough	destructive	power	to	destroy	life	from
the	earth;	and	they	are	continuously	piling	up	more	and	more	nuclear	weapons.
In	fact,	three	years	ago	there	were	enough	nuclear	weapons	to	destroy	every	man
seven	times,	to	destroy	this	whole	earth	seven	times,	or	to	destroy	seven	earths.
A	 man	 dies	 only	 once;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 accumulate	 so	 much	 destructive
power.
The	whole	of	politics	depends	on	lies.
Just	the	other	day	--	I	could	not	believe	that	any	man	who	is	sane	can	make	such
a	 statement	 --	 Ronald	 Reagan	 made	 a	 statement.	 He	 was	 denying	 before	 the
Senate,	continually,	that	any	weapons	were	being	given	to	a	few	countries.	And
now	investigation	has	shown	that	he	was	lying	--	lying	for	two	years	continually.
Destructive	 weapons	 have	 been	 given	 to	 poor	 countries	 --	 and	 not	 in	 a	 small
measure,	a	great	lot.	Now	the	facts	are	there	and	Ronald	Reagan	had	to	make	a
statement,	and	the	statement	he	has	made,	made	me	laugh	--	so	ridiculous.
He	 said,	 "In	my	heart,	 I	 still	 know	 that	whatever	 I	 said	was	 the	 truth.	But	 the
facts	 that	have	been	discovered	say	 that	 it	was	a	 lie.	 I	still	believe	 in	my	heart
that	 I	 have	 been	 speaking	 the	 truth."	 He	 is	 accepting	 the	 facts,	 and	 still,
simultaneously,	 saying,	 "I	 still	 believe	 in	my	heart	 that	whatever	 I	was	 saying
was	true,	although	the	facts	are	proving	it	wrong."
Politicians	 live	 on	 lies;	 politicians	 live	 on	 promises	 --	 but	 those	 promises	 are
never	 fulfilled.	They	 are	 the	most	 unqualified	 people	 in	 the	world.	Their	 only
quality	is	that	they	can	manage	to	befool	the	poor	masses	--	or,	in	poor	countries,
they	can	purchase	their	votes.	And	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
62
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
once	 they	 are	 in	 power,	 they	 forget	 completely	 that	 they	 are	 servants	 of	 the
people;	they	start	behaving	as	if	they	are	the	masters	of	the	people.
What	 do	 they	 know	 about	 the	 inner	 world	 of	 man?	 What	 do	 they	 know	 of
blissfulness,	of	godliness?	Still,	they	want	religion	not	to	be	allowed	to	interfere
with	 politics.	 What	 about	 them?	 They	 should	 be	 allowed	 to	 interfere	 with
religion?	 Is	 the	 lower	 going	 to	 dominate	 the	 higher?	 Is	 the	mundane	 going	 to
dominate	the	sacred?	That	will	be	the	ultimate	misfortune	for	humanity.
As	far	as	I	can	see,	all	politicians	should	be	meditators,	should	know	something
of	the	inner	world.	They	should	be	more	conscious,	more	compassionate,	should
know	 the	 taste	 of	 love.	 They	 should	 know	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 silence	 of
existence,	 and	 the	 beauty	 of	 this	 planet,	 and	 the	 gifts	 of	 existence.	 And	 they
should	learn	to	be	humble	and	grateful.
Religion	 should	 be	 the	 teacher	 of	 all	 the	 politicians.	 Unless	 politicians	 have
something	 of	 religiousness,	 there	 is	 no	 future	 for	 humanity.	 Religion	 has	 to
interfere	with	the	politicians.
Without	religion	interfering	with	the	politicians...	 the	politicians	are	blind,	they
don't	have	eyes,	they	are	deaf;	they	don't	have	a	silent	mind	to	listen	to	the	truth.
But	 why	 is	 Rajiv	 Gandhi	 concerned	 that	 religion	 and	 politics	 should	 be
separated?	Politics	 is	a	small	 thing.	Religion	 is	man's	whole	evolution.	Politics
should	be	only	a	minor	part	of	the	vastness	of	religious	experience.	There	is	no
need	for	any	separation.	But	the	politician,	as	he	is	in	power,	becomes	so	egoistic
that	he	cannot	think	of	going	to	those	humble,	simple,	but	wise	people.
The	 problems	 go	 on	 increasing;	 the	 politicians	 have	 proved	 impotent	 to	 solve
them.	But	they	will	not	go	to	the	people	who	can	give	them	direction,	who	can
give	them	advice	because	they	have	the	clarity.
I	am	not	a	politician.	I	have	never	voted	in	my	life	and	I	am	not	going	to	vote	--
ever	--
because	what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 choosing	between	 two	 chimpanzees,	 just	 because
they	 are	 holding	 different	 flags?	 just	 because	 they	 have	 different	 symbols?
Chimpanzees	are	chimpanzees.
They	need	a	deep	respect	for	religion,	for	religious	people,	because	one	thing	is
certain:	religious	people	are	not	going	to	fight	the	elections	--	no	religious	person
is	 going	 to	 beg	 for	 votes.	 Basically,	 he	 has	 no	 desire	 to	 fulfill	 his	 ego	 and	 to
cover	up	his	inferiority	complex.	In	his	silence,	in	his	peace,	in	his	blissfulness,
he	 has	 known	 the	 ultimate	 superiority.	 Now	 there	 is	 nothing	 more	 than	 that,
nothing	higher	than	that.	He	has	become	a	temple;	his	god	is	within	his	being.
The	politician	lives	on	war,	lives	on	creating	riots,	lives	on	disturbance	--	these
are	his	nourishment.	Adolf	Hitler	has	written	in	his	autobiography:	"Unless	you
have	 enemies,	 you	 cannot	 become	 a	 great	 leader.	 Even	 if	 you	 don't	 have
enemies,	create	the	fiction	that	your	country	is	in	danger,	because	when	people
are	 afraid	 they	 are	 ready	 to	 become	 slaves.	When	 people	 are	 afraid	 they	 are
ready	to	follow	politicians."
Although	he	was	an	 insane	person,	once	 in	a	while	he	made	statements	which
are	very	significant.	He	has	said,	"The	greatest	leaders	of	humanity	are	born	in
times	of	war."	So	unless	there	is	a	great	war,	you	cannot	be	a	great	leader;	just	to
fulfill	the	desire	of	being	a	great	leader,	you	have	to	kill	millions	of	people.
And	he	is	right:	in	days	of	peace,	people	don't	need	to	follow;	people	don't	make
the	leader	almost	a	god,	so	that	his	word	becomes	the	law.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
63
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
Politicians	try	in	every	way	to	keep	countries	afraid.	China	is	gathering	nuclear
weapons	 on	 its	 boundary	 with	 India;	 Pakistan	 is	 gathering	 armies	 on	 its
boundary	 with	 India	 --	 the	 Indian	 politicians	 go	 on	 insisting	 this	 is	 so.	 In
Pakistan,	they	go	on	insisting	that	India	is	gathering	armies	on	its	boundary;	in
China,	 they	 go	 on	 insisting	 that	 India	 is	 preparing	 nuclear	 weapons.	 In	 the
parliaments,	they	go	on	saying,	"We	are	not	creating	anything"	--	but	that	is	an
absolute	lie.
The	Chinese	leader	has	to	keep	the	people	of	China	afraid.	The	Indian	leader	has
to	keep	the	Indian	people	afraid.	The	Pakistani	leaders	have	to	keep	the	Pakistani
people	afraid.
In	your	fear	is	their	power.
The	more	they	make	you	afraid,	the	more	powerful	they	are.	Outside	the	country
they	 go	 on	 creating	 fictions,	 and	 inside	 the	 country	 they	 also	 continue:	Hindu
and	Mohammedan	 riots,	 riots	between	Hindi-speaking	and	non-Hindi-speaking
people.	They	want	you	 to	continue	fighting	for	anything	--	any	 trivial	 thing.	 If
you	are	engaged	in	fighting,	they	are	in	power.	If	you	stop	fighting,	their	power
disappears.	This	is	an	ugly	game.
It	is	one	of	the	duties	of	religious	people	to	keep	themselves	above	politics	and
lead	 the	 people	 towards	 creative	 values,	 towards	 more	 humanity.	 In	 fact,	 if
religions	understand	one	thing	--	that	the	whole	of	humanity	is	one,	and	there	is
no	need	for	any	nations	--	all	these	pygmy	politicians	will	disappear.
But	the	strangest	thing	is	that	politicians	go	on	saying	that	religion	and	politics
should	be	separate.	Why?	Why	should	truth	be	separate	from	politics?	And	why
should	love	be	separate	from	politics?	Why	should	meditative	consciousness	be
separate	from	politics?	Why	should	a	prayerful	heart	be	separate	from	politics?
Yes,	I	understand	that	it	should	be	separate	in	the	sense	that	it	is	higher.	And	the
politician	 is	 in	need	of	 psychological	 treatment	 and	 spiritual	 treatment,	 and	he
should	go	 to	 the	 religious	 people	 for	 advice.	That	was	 the	 situation	 in	 ancient
India.	We	 have	 seen	 those	 days;	 those	 golden	 days	 are	 still	 alive	 in	memory.
There	was	a	 time	when	kings	would	go	 to	 the	forest	 to	pay	 their	 respects	 --	 to
beggars,	who	had	nothing	--	and	to	ask	for	advice.
Kings	used	to	touch	the	feet	of	those	who	had	realized	themselves,	because	even
their	blessing	can	transform	you.	Politics	is	functional;	it	is	utilitarian.	But	it	has
no	 way	 of	 transforming	 man	 into	 higher	 consciousness.	 And,	 particularly	 in
reference	to	India,	it	has	been	such	an	ugly	situation.	It	hurts.
Mahatma	Gandhi	 used	 to	 say,	 before	 freedom,	 that	 the	 first	 president	 of	 India
would	be	a	woman	--	and	not	only	a	woman,	but	she	would	be	a	sudra,	from	the
lowest	untouchables.
But	as	freedom	came,	he	forgot	all	the	promises	that	he	had	been	talking	about
and	the	power	game	started	again	in	the	old	style.	Pandit	Jawaharlal	Nehru	was	a
brahmin;	 he	 was	 not	 a	 woman	 and	 he	 was	 not	 a	 sudra.	 Again,	 the	 brahmin
becomes	 the	 power,	 and	 for	 forty	 years,	 one	 family	 of	 brahmins	 have	 been
dominating	 India.	 They	 have	 made	 it	 almost	 their	 personal	 dynasty.	 It	 is	 no
longer	a	democracy.
Just	 look	 at	 the	 facts:	What	was	 the	hold	of	Mahatma	Gandhi	over	 the	 Indian
people?	 He	 was	 pretending	 to	 be	 religious	 --	 he	 was	 not	 a	 religious	 man	 --
pretending	 to	be	 a	Hindu	 saint,	 because	Hindus	were	 in	 the	majority	 and	 they
were	 going	 to	 rule	 the	 country.	 That's	 why	 he	was	 insistent	 that	 India	 should
remain	 undivided,	 because	 in	 an	 undivided	 India,	 Hindus	 will	 be	 in	 power;
nobody	can	take	the	power	from	the	hands	of	the	Hindus	because	everybody	else
is	in	a	minority.	Nobody	looks	at	gandhi's	politics:	he	was	using	even	religion	for
ugly	ends.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
64
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
Doctor	 Ambedkar	 wanted	 a	 separate	 vote	 for	 the	 untouchables,	 and	 I	 am	 in
absolute	agreement	with	him	for	the	simple	reason	that	for	five	thousand	years
these	 people	 have	 been	 oppressed,	 exploited;	 their	 whole	 dignity	 as	 human
beings	had	been	destroyed	 --	and	 they	are	one-fourth	of	 the	Hindu	population.
And	they	do	the	ugliest	jobs;	they	should	be	respected,	they	should	be	honored
for	that.	But	on	the	contrary,	even	their	shadow	is	untouchable.	If	the	shadow	of
an	 untouchable	 falls	 on	 you,	 you	 have	 to	 take	 a	 bath	 immediately	 to	 purify
yourself.
Ambedkar	was	absolutely	right	to	ask	for	a	separate	vote	for	the	untouchables	so
that	 they	 could	 be	 certain	 of	 having	 one-fourth	 of	 the	members	 in	 parliament.
Otherwise,	 they	will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 be	 in	 the	 parliament;	 they	will	 never	 be
able	to	change	the	five-thousand-year-old,	ugly	laws	created	by	Manu.
There	are	great	criminals,	but	Manu	seems	to	top	them	all.	Adolf	Hitler	was	very
respectful	of	Manu;	Friedrich	Nietzsche	was	very	 respectful	of	Manu	--	not	of
Gautam	Buddha	--	and	Manu	has	been	a	curse	to	this	country.	He	has	taken	all
humanity	from	millions	of	people;	they	are	living	like	animals.
Ambedkar	was	absolutely	logical	and	right	in	saying	that	they	should	be	given	a
separate	vote,	but	Gandhi	started	a	fast	unto	death	for	Ambedkar	to	take	back	his
movement;	otherwise,	Gandhi	will	not	eat	until	he	dies.	Now	this	 is	absolutely
illogical.	Because	you	convince	people	by	fasting,	it	does	not	mean	that	you	are
right.	It	is	blackmail,	it	is	threatening:	"I	will	commit	suicide	if	you	don't	agree
with	me."
Naturally,	 the	 whole	 country	 was	 pressurizing	 Ambedkar:	 "Take	 back	 your
movement;	otherwise	Gandhi's	death	will	prove	very	dangerous	to	you	and	to	the
untouchables.	 They	 will	 be	 burned	 alive.	 Their	 villages	 will	 be	 burned;	 the
Hindus	 will	 take	 revenge	 because	 the	 untouchables	 have	 killed	 Gandhi."
Ambedkar	 tried	as	 long	as	possible,	and	finally	gave	up,	seeing	 that	perhaps	 if
Gandhi	does	die...	Although	this	is	no	argument.
If	I	was	in	Ambedkar's	place,	I	would	have	told	Gandhi,	"You	can	die	because
your	death	is	not	an	argument.	It	is	as	stupid	a	story	as	I	have	heard."
A	very	ugly	man	wanted	to	marry	a	beautiful	girl	 --	and	he	was	 the	age	of	 the
girl's	father.
And	he	tried	the	Gandhian	methodology:	he	took	his	mattress,	lay	down	in	front
of	the	house	of	the	girl	and	declared	a	fast	unto	death	unless	her	father	agreed	to
give	his	daughter	in	marriage	to	him.	Now	everybody	was	in	sympathy	with	the
poor	man:	 "He	 is	dying...	what	 a	great	 lover!	We	have	only	heard	about	 these
lovers	in	stories,	and	he's	actually	a	Majnu,	a	Farhad,	a	Mahival."
The	 father	was	 in	great	distress;	 the	girl	was	 in	great	 fear.	The	whole	day,	 the
house	was	 crowded	 and	 they	were	 shouting:	 "His	 death	will	 be	 dangerous	 for
you.	 The	 man	 is	 not	 being	 violent:	 he	 is	 being	 nonviolent,	 a	 religious	 man,
fasting."
Somebody	suggested	to	the	father	of	the	girl,	"You	go	to	some	old	Gandhian	to
find	out	what	to	do."
The	 Gandhian	 said,	 "There	 is	 no	 problem.	 There	 is	 one	 ugly	 prostitute,	 very
old...	You	just	give	her	a	hundred	rupees	and	she	also	takes	her	mattress	and	lies
down	by	 the	 side	 of	 the	man,	 saying,	 'I	will	 fast	 unto	 death	 unless	 you	marry
me.'"	 In	 the	 night,	 the	man	 rolled	 up	 his	mattress	 and	 escaped!	These	 are	 not
arguments...
But	Ambedkar	was	forced	to	take	back	his	movement,	and	went	to	Gandhi	with
a	glass	of	orange	juice	to	break	his	fast.	This	is	using	religion	in	the	service	of
politics.	No	religious	man	can	do	that.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
65
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
The	idea	of	India	remaining	whole	and	one	was	also	nothing	but	politics	being
used	in	the	service	of	Hindus,	so	that	Mohammedans	or	Christians	or	Jainas	or
Sikhs	will	never	be	able	to	be	in	power.	Hindus	will	remain	in	power	--	they	are
in	the	majority.
Jinnah,	the	man	who	created	Pakistan,	was	not	a	religious	man	at	all;	but	he	also
used	 religion.	He	 created	 the	movement	 for	Mohammedans	 to	have	 a	 separate
country;	otherwise	they	could	not	be	in	power,	ever.	Suddenly	he	became	a	great
Mohammedan,	 a	 great	 religious	man.	 And	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion,	 it	 was	 all
politics:	 neither	Mahatma	Gandhi	was	 religious	 nor	Muhammadali	 Jinnah	was
religious.	But	both	wanted	power.
Since	 then,	 forty	 years	 have	 passed	 --	 what	 have	 the	 politicians	 done	 to	 this
country?	When	 it	 became	 independent,	 the	 population	was	 only	 four	 hundred
million.	 They	 have	 not	 even	 been	 able	 to	 prevent	 the	 population	 explosion	 --
which	 is	 going	 to	 kill	 the	 country	 without	 any	 nuclear	 weapons.	 Now	 the
population	is	more	than	double:	nine	hundred	million	people!	And	by	the	end	of
this	century,	India	will	have	the	greatest	population	in	the	world.	Up	to	now,	it
has	been	China,	but	China	 is	behaving	more	scientifically	and	trying	 to	reduce
its	population.
By	the	end	of	this	century,	one	in	every	four	men	will	be	Indian.
And	what	are	the	politicians	doing?	They	are	afraid	to	say	anything	to	the	people
in	favor	of	birth	control,	in	favor	of	abortion,	because	their	whole	interest	is	not
whether	 this	 country	 survives	 or	 dies;	 their	 interest	 is	 that	 they	 don't	 want
anybody	 to	 be	 hurt.	 People	 have	 their	 prejudices,	 the	 politicians	 don't	want	 to
touch	their	prejudices	because	they	need	their	votes.	If	they	hurt	their	prejudices,
these	people	are	not	going	to	give	them	their	votes.
Only	a	religious	man	with	a	clarity	of	vision,	who	does	not	need	the	votes	of	the
people,	can	say	the	truth.	Politicians	can	only	say	beautiful	 lies,	consoling	lies,
just	to	get	your	votes.
The	 religious	man	 has	 nothing	 to	 get	 from	 you;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 speaking	 the
truth	 can	 be	 dangerous	 to	 his	 life	 --	 it	 has	 always	 been	 so.	Whenever	 truth	 is
spoken,	 the	man	who	has	spoken	it	has	been	crucified.	Politicians	need	power,
not	crucifixion.	The	world	needs	more	religious	people	who	are	ready	to	say	the
truth	 even	 if	 it	 means	 crucifixion.	 The	 religious	 man	 is	 not	 afraid	 of	 being
crucified,	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	knows	there	is	no	death.	At	the	most	they
can	destroy	his	body	--	but	his	consciousness,	his	soul,	his	god	within,	will	go	on
living.
Religion	should	have	a	higher	status,	and	religious	people	should	be	listened	to.
Parliament	should	continually	invite	religious	people	to	give	them	some	ideas	on
how	to	solve	 the	problems	of	 the	country,	because	 they	 themselves	seem	to	be
absolutely	impotent	in	solving	anything.	Problems	go	on	growing.	But	the	ego	of
the	politician	wants	nobody	to	be	higher	 than	him.	But	whether	you	want	 it	or
not,	the	religious	person	is	higher	than	you.	You	cannot	bring	transformation	into
people's	consciousness	--	he	can.
Certainly,	 religion	 should	 not	 step	 down	 from	 its	 sacredness	 into	 the	 trivial
matters	of	politics.	So	I	agree	with	this	point:	religion	and	politics	should	remain
separate.	The	distance	is	big.	Religion	is	a	star	in	the	sky	and	the	politicians	are
creatures	crawling	on	the	earth.	They	are	separate;	there	is	no	question	but	that
they	 should	 be	 separate.	 But	 politicians	 should	 remember	 that	 they	 are
functioning	in	mundane	matters.	And	that	is	not	the	true	goal	of	humanity.
Religious	people	are	making	every	effort	to	raise	humanity	--	its	consciousness,
its	 love,	 its	 compassion	 --	 to	 a	 point	 where	 wars	 become	 impossible,	 where
politicians	 cannot	 deceive	 people,	 where	 their	 lies	 and	 their	 promises	 can	 be
exposed.	This	is	not	interfering	with	politics	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
66
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
--	 this	 is	 simply	protecting	 the	people	 from	 the	exploitation	of	politicians.	The
separation	 is	 already	 there.	Who	has	given	Rajiv	Gandhi	 the	 idea	 that	 religion
and	politics	are	not	separate?
Politics	 is	 something	 that	belongs	 to	 the	gutters.	Religion	belongs	 to	 the	open,
clean	sky	--
just	like	a	bird	on	the	wing,	flying	across	the	sun	to	reach	to	the	very	center	of
existence.
Certainly	 religious	 people	 cannot	 be	 participants	 in	 politics;	 but	 politicians
should	 learn	 to	 be	 humble	 --	 their	 power	 should	 not	make	 them	 blind.	 Power
corrupts	and	absolute	power	corrupts	absolutely;	and	all	politicians	are	corrupted
by	their	power.	And	what	power	do	they	have?	They	can	kill	you	--	their	power
is	the	power	of	a	butcher;	nothing	glorious,	respectable.
The	religious	man	has	a	totally	different	quality	of	power.	It	is	in	his	presence;	it
is	in	his	great	love	and	reverence	for	life;	it	is	in	his	gratitude	to	existence.
We	should	not	forget	that	the	lower	should	remain	within	its	own	limits.	And	the
wise	people	of	the	country	should	be	asked	to	address	the	parliament	as	often	as
possible	on	problems	which	politicians	cannot	solve	--	don't	have	even	the	brains
to	solve.
But	Rajiv	Gandhi's	 intentions	 are	 totally	 different.	He	wants	 politics	 to	 be	 the
only	power	dominating	everybody,	religion	included,	and	that	religion	follow	the
dictates	of	the	politicians.
I	 absolutely	 condemn	 the	 idea.	 Religion	 cannot	 follow	 the	 dictates	 of	 the
politicians.
Politicians	should	learn,	should	listen	to	the	advice	of	the	religious	people.	The
problems	are	so	small	that	any	man	of	intelligence	and	good	will	can	easily	solve
them.	But	the	politician	does	not	want	to	solve	them;	he	only	talks	about	solving
them	 because	 his	 power	 is	 dependent	 on	 how	many	 problems	 you	 have.	 The
more	problems	you	have,	the	more	miserable	you	are,	the	more	powerful	he	is.
To	 the	 religious	 consciousness,	 the	more	 joyful	 you	 are,	 the	more	 loving,	 the
more	rejoicing...	He	wants	your	life	to	be	songs	and	to	be	a	dance.	Because	that
is	 the	only	way	we	should	worship	 the	 source	of	 life	 --	with	our	 joy,	with	our
songs	and	with	our	dances.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEFORE	I	CAME	TO	POONA	THIS	TIME,	I	WAS	JUST	A	NOBODY.	BUT
SITTING
IN	 FRONT	 OF	 YOU	 EVERY	DAY,	 READING	 PEOPLE'S	 QUESTIONS,	 A
FEELING
AROSE	OF	BEING	SOMEBODY,	AND	THAT	THERE	WAS	NO	NEED	FOR
ME	TO
ASK	ANY	QUESTIONS.	BUT	THE	OTHER	NIGHT	IN	DARSHAN,	WHEN
YOU
RAISED	 YOUR	 ARMS	 AND	 STOPPED	 THE	MUSIC	 IN	 FRONT	 OF	ME,
YOU	CAUGHT
THIS	 SOMEBODY	 IN	 HIS	 MIND.	 NOW,	 INSTEAD	 OF	 FEELING	 FINE
ABOUT	BEING
A	NOBODY,	 I	FEEL	LIKE	A	VERY	STUPID	SOMEBODY.	PLEASE	WILL
YOU
EXPLAIN	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING	TO	ME?
Vimal,	 that	 is	 the	difference	between	 the	politician	and	 the	 religious	man.	The
politician	feels	he	is	somebody,	and	the	religious	man	feels	that	he	is	nobody.
But	to	be	a	nobody	is	to	be	divine,	because	you	have	dropped	your	ego	and	you
have	allowed	God	to	enter	in	you.	When	you	are	somebody,	you	are	just	an	ugly
ego,	and	you	have	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
67
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
closed	the	doors	for	God	to	enter	within	you	--	because	God	and	your	ego	cannot
exist	together.	They	are	just	like	darkness	and	light:	you	cannot	have	them	both.
Either	 you	 have	 light...	 then	 there	 is	 no	 darkness,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 state	 of	 a
nobody.	He	is	spacious,	without	any	tensions,	without	any	anxiety,	without	any
anguish;	 just	 a	 tremendous	 silence	 prevails	 over	 his	 heart.	 There	 is	 a	 song
without	 sounds	 in	 his	 being;	 there	 is	 a	 poetry	 without	 any	 words.	 Nothing
moves,	and	still	everything	is	dancing.
It	 is	good	that	you	have	experienced	both:	now	it	 is	up	to	you	to	choose.	Only
fools	choose	 to	be	 somebody	 --	 that	means	you	are	 limiting	yourself,	 encased,
imprisoned.	Being	a	nobody	means	you	are	as	vast	as	the	sky;	perhaps	even	the
sky	is	not	the	limit.
So	it	has	been	a	good	experience	for	you,	and	I	will	keep	an	eye	on	you	so	that
you	don't	become	somebody.	I	am	not	very	reliable	--	I	can	even	hit	you	on	your
head.	Just	as	I	stop	the	music,	if	I	see	somebody	is	arising	in	you,	I	will	stop	it
too.	Just	a	good	hit	on	your	head...
So	be	careful:	remain	a	nobody.	It	is	so	beautiful	to	be	nobody,	anonymous,	just
like	a	newborn	child	with	no	name,	no	 fame,	but	 tremendous	 innocence,	great
joy,	eyes	full	of	wonder	and	freshness.	To	be	nobody	is	an	absolute	necessity	on
the	path.	The	moment	you	become	somebody,	you	become	frozen.	As	you	allow
yourself	 to	 be	 nobody,	 the	 ice	 starts	 melting	 and	 the	 river	 starts	 flowing	 --
flowing	towards	the	ocean.	That	is	the	goal	of	us	all.
Just	a	joke	for	you,	Vimal,	because	when	you	laugh	totally	--	in	those	moments
you	cannot	be	somebody.	The	people	who	are	somebody	are	very	serious;	they
never	laugh,	they	don't	even	smile.	Only	people	who	are	nobody	can	enjoy	the
great	 blessing	of	 laughter.	And	 I	 have	been	watching:	when	you	 laugh	 totally,
you	are	no	longer	there	--	only	laughter.	Every	cell	of	your	body	has	become	just
a	dance.
So	 don't	 hold	 yourself	 back,	 because	 this	 is	 not	 a	 serious	 place.	 It	 is	 for	 the
gamblers,	for	the	drunkards,	for	all	kinds	of	good	people	who	can	relax	and	who
can	laugh	and	who	can	dance,	and	who	don't	care	what	 the	world	 thinks	about
them.	At	the	most	they	will	think	you	are	mad	--	so	what?	Madness	is	better	than
politics.	You	are	not	going	to	harm	anybody.	And	mad	people	are	always	joyous,
not	worrying	about	anything	in	the	world.
A	 man	 with	 a	 poodle	 goes	 into	 a	 bar.	 After	 ordering	 a	 drink,	 he	 tells	 the
bartender	 that	 he	would	 like	 to	 buy	 some	 cigarettes.	But	 the	 bartender	 replies
that	they	have	run	out.
So	the	man	says,	"That's	alright,	I	will	just	send	my	dog	across	the	street	to	get
some."	He	reaches	into	his	pockets	for	the	money,	and	discovers	that	the	smallest
bill	he	has	is	a	twenty.
He	puts	it	in	the	dog's	mouth	and	tells	the	dog,	"Boy,	run	across	the	street	and	get
me	 some	 cigarettes.	 And	 don't	 forget	 to	 bring	 the	 change."	 Immediately	 the
poodle	runs	out	the	front	door.
A	 man	 sitting	 at	 the	 bar	 says	 to	 the	 dog's	 owner,	 "Say,	 that	 dog	 is	 really
something!"
"Sure,"	says	the	man,	"he	can	do	all	sorts	of	stuff.	He	is	an	amazing	dog."
Just	then	they	hear	the	loud	sound	of	tires	screeching.	The	man	runs	out	into	the
street,	 and	 sees	 a	 car	 stopped	 right	 in	 front	 of	 his	 dog,	who	 is	making	 love	 to
another	poodle,	right	in	the	middle	of	the	road.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
68
Chapter	6	-	Only	fools	choose	to	be	somebody
"Hey,"	says	the	man	to	his	dog,	"what	is	going	on?	You	never	did	anything	like
this	before."
The	dog	looks	up	at	him	and	says,	"I	never	had	twenty	dollars	before."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
69
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
7
Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
15	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	PEACE	WAS	OFFICIALLY	RESTORED	TO	THE	WORLD	AT	THE
END	OF
WORLD	WAR	TWO,	WHAT	HAVE	THE	POLITICIANS	BEEN	DOING?
Anand	Maitreya,	 there	 has	 never	 been	 any	 peace.	 There	 have	 been	 only	 two
periods	 in	 history:	 the	 period	we	 know	 as	war,	 and	 the	 period	we	 call	 peace,
which	is	a	cover	up	--	in	reality	it	should	be	called	preparation	for	another	war.
The	whole	history	consists	only	of	two	things:	war	and	preparation	for	war.	And
you	are	asking	me,	"Since	peace	was	officially	restored	to	the	world	at	the	end	of
World	War	Two,	what	have	the	politicians	been	doing?"
The	 politicians	 have	 been	 doing	 exactly	 what	 they	 have	 always	 been	 doing:
creating	 more	 conflict,	 more	 unrest,	 more	 discrimination,	 more	 destructive
weapons	--	and	preparing	for	the	third	world	war.
Once,	 Albert	 Einstein	 was	 asked:	 "You,	 being	 the	 scientist	 who	 discovered
atomic	energy,	must	be	 able	 to	 inform	us	what	 is	going	 to	happen	 in	 the	 third
world	war."
Einstein	had	tears	 in	his	eyes	and	he	said,	"Don't	ask	me	about	 the	third	world
war	--	I	do	not	know	anything	about	it.	But	if	you	want	to	know	about	the	fourth
world	war,	I	can	say	something."
The	 journalist	 who	 was	 asking	 the	 question	 was	 immensely	 surprised	 and
amazed:	 The	 man	 is	 not	 saying	 anything	 about	 the	 third	 world	 war,	 says	 he
knows	nothing	about	it,	but	he	is	ready	to	say	something	about	the	fourth	world
war?	He	asked	excitedly,	"Then	please	tell	me	about	the	fourth	world	war."
Einstein	 said,	 "Only	 one	 thing	 can	be	 said	 about	 it	 --	 that	 it	 is	 never	 going	 to
happen."
The	 third	 world	 war	 will	 be	 the	 last	 world	 war.	 For	 this	 last	 world	 war,
politicians	 have	 been	 preparing	 since	 peace	 was	 officially	 restored	 after	 the
second	world	war.
The	politician	and	his	game	are	the	ugliest	 things	you	can	conceive	of.	We	are
facing	a	dark	night,	and	I	am	reminded	of	the	old	saying	that	"When	the	night	is
darkest,	the	dawn	is	very	close	by."	But	I	hesitate	to	say	that	this	dark	night	that
is	surrounding	us	will	have	any	dawn	to	it.
I	will	just	tell	you	exactly	what	has	been	happening	since	1945	--	and	people	are
kept	in	absolute	ignorance;	they	are	not	aware	that	they	are	sitting	on	a	volcano
which	 can	 erupt	 any	 moment.	 They	 are	 kept	 engaged	 in	 trivia,	 and	 the	 real
problems	are	kept	hidden	as	if	they	don't	exist.
Since	 1945	 there	 have	 been	 one	 hundred	 and	 five	 wars	 fought	 in	 sixty-six
countries	 --	all	of	 them	 in	 the	Third	World.	One	 is	necessarily	 tempted	 to	ask,
"Why	in	the	Third	World?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
70
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
America	 and	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 both	 have	 gone	 so	 far	 ahead	 in	 developing
destructive	weapons,	that	the	weapons	used	in	the	second	world	war	are	out	of
date.	 For	 them,	 they	 are	 of	 no	 use.	 They	 have	 to	 be	 sold	 somewhere;	 some
market	is	needed,	and	the	market	is	possible	only	if	there	is	war.
America	 goes	 on	 giving	 weapons	 to	 Pakistan.	 Then,	 naturally,	 India	 goes	 on
taking	weapons	from	the	Soviet	Union.	And	this	has	been	happening	in	the	Third
World:	one	country	purchases	out-of-date	material	from	the	Soviet	Union;	then
its	enemy	purchases	from	America.	This	is	good	business.
And	 they	 don't	 want	 these	 people	 to	 stop	wars,	 because	 otherwise,	 where	 are
they	going	 to	sell	 these	weapons	on	which	 they	have	spent	billions	of	dollars?
And	 these	 poor	 countries	 and	 their	 politicians	 are	 ready	 to	 purchase	 them,
although	their	people	are	dying	of	hunger	--
seventy-five	percent	of	their	budget	goes	towards	war.
On	the	average,	each	war	has	lasted	three	and	a	half	years.	So	who	says	peace
has	been	 restored?	One	hundred	and	 five	wars	 in	 sixty-six	countries,	each	war
lasting	at	least	three	and	a	half	years	--	and	you	call	it	peace?
These	wars	caused	sixteen	million	deaths.	 In	 the	second	world	war,	 there	were
also	millions	of	deaths.	Since	the	second	world	war,	which	is	the	time	of	peace,
sixteen	million	people	have	been	killed	in	wars	--	and	still	you	go	on	calling	it
peace?
But	the	politicians	are	so	cunning,	and	people	are	so	blind	that	they	will	not	look
around	at	what	is	happening.	They	will	go	on	fighting	about	small	things:	which
district	should	remain	in	which	state?	Belgaum	is	a	district	here;	should	it	remain
in	 Maharashtra?	 --	 because	 it	 is	 a	 boundary	 district	 between	 the	 states	 of
Karnataka	and	Maharashtra.
There	are	people	belonging	to	both	languages,	and	they	have	been	killing	each
other	continually	for	three	decades	--	and	just	a	small	thing	cannot	be	decided.
In	fact,	nobody	wants	to	decide	it.	Otherwise,	what	is	the	problem?	Just	a	small
plebiscite,	 a	vote	under	neutral	observation,	 and	people	can	decide	where	 they
want	to	be.	There	is	no	need	for	killing	each	other.	But	it	seems	politicians	are
deeply	 interested	 in	 trouble	 continuing	 somewhere	 or	 other,	 so	 that	 they	 are
needed.
Sixteen	 million	 people	 have	 been	 killed,	 and	 yet	 in	 every	 school	 and	 every
college	and	in	every	university,	they	go	on	repeating,	"We	are	living	in	a	period
of	peace."	In	fact,	the	world	war	was	almost	more	peaceful!
The	majority	 of	 the	wars	 have	 been	 in	Asia.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 strategies	 of	 the
powerful	nations	and	their	politicians	that	they	should	fight	always	in	some	other
country;	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 and	 America	 should	 fight	 in	 Afghanistan.	 So	 the
people	 of	 Afghanistan	 are	 killed;	 Afghanistan	 becomes	 a	 graveyard,	 and
America	 and	 the	Soviet	Union	 are	both	profited	by	 selling	weapons.	They	are
sending	 their	 experts,	 their	 weapons;	 they	 are	 training	 the	 Afghanis,	 and
Afghanis	 are	killing	other	Afghanis.	One	 side	has	weapons	 from	America,	 the
other	side	has	weapons	from	the	Soviet	Union.
Nine	million	civilians	have	been	killed	in	conventional	wars	since	Hiroshima.	In
ancient	times,	civilians	were	never	killed.	It	is	absolutely	absurd:	if	your	armies
are	fighting,	the	people	who	are	fighting	in	armies	may	be	killed,	but	now	there
seems	 to	 be	 no	 sensibility,	 no	 reasonability	 --	 nine	 million	 people	 who	 are
civilians	are	killed.	There	may	be	small	children,	women,	old	people	--	who	have
nothing	 to	do	with	 the	war,	who	may	be	 reading	 in	 their	 schools,	who	may	be
working	in	their	factories,	or	who	may	be	cooking	in	their	kitchens.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
71
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
Just	 a	 few	days	 ago	Ronald	Reagan,	 for	no	 reason	at	 all,	 attacked	Libya	 --	 he
bombed	the	civilian	parts	of	Libya.	His	target	was	Kaddafi,	and	because	Kaddafi
has	three	houses	inside	the	city,	all	his	 three	houses	had	to	be	bombed.	And	in
bombing	 his	 houses,	 other	 houses	 were	 burned	 and	 bombed.	 And	 just	 now,
investigators	 have	 come	 to	 know	 that	 while	 the	 bombing	 was	 going	 on,
professional	 killers	 were	 searching	 inside	 Libya	 for	 Kaddafi	 because	 it	 was
possible	he	might	not	be	killed	by	the	bombs,	he	might	not	be	in	his	own	house.
So	 they	 were	 bombing	 the	 civilians,	 and	 professional	 killers	 were	 searching
inside	 Libya	 to	 find	 Kaddafi.	 They	 could	 only	 kill	 Kaddafi's	 daughter.	 And
neither	Kaddafi	nor	the	Libyans	have	done	anything	wrong	against	them.
And	 it	 is	 a	 coincidence	 that	 the	 day	 England	 allowed	 Ronald	 Reagan	 to	 use
England	as	a	base	for	bombing	Libya,	the	parliament	of	England	did	not	allow
me	to	stay	at	the	airport,	in	the	lounge,	for	six	hours	--	because	I	am	a	dangerous
man!	 And	 Ronald	 Reagan	 is	 allowed	 to	 use	 England	 to	 bomb	 an	 innocent
country	which	has	done	no	harm	to	him.
This	is	as	dark	a	night	as	humanity	has	ever	faced.
The	current	war	budget	is	around	seven	hundred	billion	dollars	per	year.	Every
year,	 fifteen	million	 people	 die	 from	malnutrition	 and	 disease,	 and	 every	 year
seven	hundred	billion	dollars	are	spent	on	warfare.
Every	minute,	thirty	children	die	for	want	of	food	and	inexpensive	vaccines	and
every	minute	 one	 point	 three	million	 dollars	 of	 public	 funds	 are	 spent	 on	 the
world's	military	budget.
It	 seems	 we	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 life	 anymore;	 we	 have	 decided	 to	 commit
suicide.	Man	 has	 never	 been	 in	 such	 a	 suicidal	mood	 --	 ever,	 in	 the	whole	 of
history.
Two	hundred	and	fifty	million	children	have	not	received	even	a	basic	education.
A	single	nuclear	submarine	equals	the	annual	education	budget	for	one	hundred
and	sixty	million	school-age	children	in	twenty-three	developing	countries.	Just
one	submarine!	And	there	are	thousands	of	submarines	moving	around	the	ocean
all	 over	 the	 world	 --	 American	 and	 Russian	 both	 --	 and	 each	 submarine	 has
nuclear	weapons	six	times	more	powerful	than	all	the	weapons	that	were	used	in
the	second	world	war.	And	they	are	so	costly	 that	we	could	have	provided	our
children	with	education	and	food,	nutrition.	But	our	interests	are	not	there.
These	are	the	politicians	who	don't	want	to	be	interfered	with,	who	want	absolute
control	of	humanity	--	nobody	above	them.
The	 world's	 forests	 are	 disappearing	 at	 the	 rate	 of	 eighteen	 to	 twenty	million
hectares	a	year	--	an	area	half	the	size	of	California,	and	California	is	one	of	the
biggest	states	in	America.	Within	the	next	twenty	to	thirty	years,	all	the	tropical
forests	will	be	gone;	and	the	implications	are	tremendous	because	these	forests
are	supplying	you	with	oxygen	and	life.	If	these	forests	disappear	at	the	rate	they
are	 disappearing,	 mankind	 will	 be	 at	 a	 loss	 to	 find	 enough	 oxygen	 --	 from
where?
And	on	the	other	hand,	whatever	carbon	dioxide	you	exhale,	these	forests	inhale.
If	 these	 forests	 were	 not	 there...	 already	 there	 is	 a	 very	 thick	 layer	 of	 carbon
dioxide	continuously	accumulating	in	the	sky,	just	on	the	twenty-mile	boundary
where	the	atmosphere	ends.	And	because	of	that	carbon	dioxide,	the	temperature
of	 the	 atmosphere	 is	 rising.	 It	 is	 already	 four	 degrees	 higher	 than	 it	 has	 ever
been.
If	all	 the	 forests	disappear,	 the	 temperature	will	become	so	high	 that	 it	will	do
two	things:	firstly,	it	will	become	impossible	for	life	to	survive;	secondly,	all	the
ice	at	the	north	and	the	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
72
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
south	 poles,	 on	 the	 Himalayas	 and	 the	 Alps	 and	 other	 mountains,	 will	 start
melting	because	of	 the	heat.	And	 this	will	 raise	all	 the	oceans	by	 forty	 feet.	 It
will	flood	all	our	cities,	all	our	countries;	it	will	drown	almost	the	whole	earth	--
and	this	is	not	a	flood	that	is	going	to	recede.
But	these	politicians	go	on	doing	it.	Just	a	few	months	ago	I	was	in	Nepal.	Nepal
is	the	poorest	country	in	the	world,	but	rather	than	dropping	its	arrangements	for
war,	 it	 has	 sold	 its	 forests	 --	 eternal	 forests	 of	 the	Himalayas	 --	 to	 the	 Soviet
Union.	And	 the	 Soviet	Union	 has	 cut	whole	mountainsides	 and	 left	 them	dry.
And	for	what?	To	create	more	newspapers.
What	is	the	need	of	so	many	newspapers?	It	is	almost	the	same	news	every	day,
and	now	that	we	have	got	far	better	media	systems,	the	newspaper	is	out	of	date
--	 there	 is	 radio,	 there	 is	 television.	Why	do	you	go	on	clinging	 to	newspapers
and	 destroying	 all	 the	 forests?	 Just	 because	 all	 the	 politicians,	 presidents	 and
prime	ministers	need	their	pictures	on	the	front	page;	their	speeches,	which	are
simply	bullshit,	to	be	published	--	without	any	consideration	of	what	harm	they
are	doing.
During	 the	 same	period,	 the	world	population	 is	 expected	 to	 increase	 thirty	 to
forty	 percent,	 from	 five	 billion	 to	 seven	 billion.	 This	 population	 growth	 alone
will	 cause	 requirements	 for	water	 to	 double	 in	 nearly	 half	 the	world.	 Food	 is
another	thing...	even	water	will	become	difficult,	because	the	requirement	will	be
double	and	we	don't	have	that	much	water	for	drinking.
In	addition,	the	United	Nations	reports	say	that	globally,	twenty	million	hectares
a	 year	 of	 farm	 and	 grazing	 land	 are	 being	 reduced	 to	 zero	 productivity.	More
than	one	 thousand	plant	and	animal	 species	become	extinct	each	year	 --	a	 rate
that	is	expected	to	increase.	One	and	a	half	to	two	million	people	in	developing
countries	suffer	acute	pesticide	poisoning	annually,	and	pesticide-related	deaths
are	estimated	at	ten	thousand	per	year.
Officers	of	 India's	planning	commission	reported	recently:	"We	in	India	are	on
the	verge	of	an	enormous	ecological	disaster,	with	our	water	reserves	drying	up.
What	is	happening	in	Africa	is	going	to	happen	in	India	within	a	few	decades."
Your	 population	 goes	 on	 growing,	 your	 land	 goes	 on	 becoming	 more	 barren,
your	water	supply	is	becoming	less	and	less,	and	because	forests	have	been	cut,
the	 rivers	 that	 go	 through	Nepal	 to	 Bangladesh	 are	 creating,	 every	 year,	 such
floods	as	have	never	been	seen	before.
Thousands	 of	 people	 are	 dying,	 thousands	 of	 villages	 simply	 disappear	 --
because	those	thick	trees	were	making	the	rivers	flow	slowly.	Now	that	there	are
no	 trees,	 the	 rivers	come	with	such	 force	 that	 the	ocean	 is	not	 ready	 to	absorb
that	much	water	so	quickly.	The	water	starts	returning	and	that	returning	water
creates	the	floods	that	happen	in	Bangladesh.
Neither	Indian	politicians	nor	Nepalese	politicians	are	ready	to	stop	cutting	the
trees.
Nobody	is	interested	in	human	life.	Nobody	is	interested	in	finding	out	what	our
priority	should	be.
A	poor	country	like	India	has	so	many	newspapers,	so	many	magazines,	which
are	absolutely	unnecessary.	And	that	newsprint	paper	does	not	grow	in	the	fields,
does	 not	 fall	 from	 the	 sky;	 you	 have	 to	 cut	 trees.	 Trees	 that	 have	 taken	 one
hundred	fifty	years,	two	hundred	years	to	grow,	disappear.	And	what	do	you	gain
from	your	newspapers?
Politicians	 are	 the	 real	 criminals	 --	 not	 the	 criminals	who	 are	 in	 your	 jails.	 It
would	be	a	 far	better	world	 if	 there	was	an	exchange:	all	 the	politicians	 in	 the
jails,	and	all	the	criminals	in	the	politician's	positions	--	they	would	prove	more
human.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
73
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
The	politicians	go	on	hiding	facts	as	long	as	possible,	as	if	by	hiding	facts	you
can	change	anything.
Now	 many	 countries	 are	 not	 declaring	 how	 many	 homosexuals	 they	 have.
Families	 are	not	 declaring	 that	 the	person	who	has	died,	 has	died	 from	AIDS.
They	are	bribing	doctors	to	get	certificates	that	he	has	died	of	a	heart	attack,	or
of	 cancer	 --	 because	 the	 family	 is	more	worried	 about	 its	 respectability,	 about
what	people	will	think:	"Somebody	has	died	of	AIDS	in	your	family?"
But	hiding	 the	 fact	means...	 that	man	had	 a	wife;	 he	may	have	 transferred	 the
disease	to	the	wife	and	if	there	are	children,	they	may	be	born	with	the	disease	--
and	nobody	will	know	it	and	they	will	go	on	spreading	it	all	around.
The	disease	is	not	an	ordinary	sexual	disease	--	anything	that	comes	out	of	your
body,	 even	 your	 tears,	 carries	 the	 virus.	 If	 a	 child	 is	 crying,	 and	 just	 out	 of
kindness	and	compassion	you	wipe	the	tears	of	the	child,	there	is	a	danger	you
may	 be	 getting	 AIDS.	 Saliva	 carries	 the	 virus,	 and	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 is
being	kept	in	darkness:	kissing	should	be	stopped	now	--
completely!
There	is	only	one	small	part	of	humanity	--	 the	people	who	live	in	Siberia,	 the
Eskimos	--
they	 are	 the	 only	 people	 in	 the	whole	 of	 history	who	 have	 never	 kissed.	And
when	 for	 the	 first	 time	 they	saw	Christian	missionaries	kissing,	 they	could	not
believe	it:	"How	dirty	these	people	are,	mixing	saliva	with	each	other!	Are	they
human	beings	or	some	kind	of	monsters?"
Their	way	 is	 far	more	 scientific	and	 far	more	hygienic.	They	don't	kiss	 just	 to
show	love	--
because	it	can	be	not	love,	but	death	--	they	rub	noses	with	each	other;	that	looks
very	clean,	unless	you	have	a	cold.
The	other	day	it	was	accepted	that	 ten	million	people	are	suffering	from	AIDS
right	now;	and	this	is	not	a	definitive	report	because	countries	like	India	have	no
way	of	knowing	--	nor	the	means	to	know.	Only	very	developed	countries	have
come	 to	 know	 that	 ten	 million	 people	 are	 suffering...	 Perhaps	 at	 least	 one
hundred	million	people	are	suffering	in	all	these	backward	countries.
For	example,	in	Africa,	AIDS	is	more	prevalent	than	anywhere	else.	And	it	was
never	made	known	 that	Africans	are	not	homosexuals,	but	 they	have	a	strange
perversion:	they	make	love	to	women,	but	not	from	the	front.
There	 are	 people	 around	 the	world,	 in	 small	 villages,	who	 even	make	 love	 to
animals	--
and	 they	 have	 given	 AIDS	 to	 animals!	 And	 now	 animals	 are	 spreading	 that
AIDS	through	their	milk,	 through	their	meat.	Things	have	gone	beyond	human
control.
No	doctor	wants...	even	if	he	comes	to	know	that	his	patient	has	AIDS,	he	does
not	want	to	tell	the	patient	because	then	the	patient	will	insist,	"Treat	me!"	There
is	no	 treatment.	So	 the	doctor	 tries,	 "You	have	some	other	disease,"	and	sends
him	 to	 some	 other	 expert	 because	 being	 in	 contact	with	 the	AIDS	 patient	 the
doctor	is	in	danger,	the	nurses	are	in	danger.	The	whole	staff	is	in	danger.
In	one	of	the	reports	I	saw	about	jails...	 thirty	percent	of	the	people	in	jails	are
homosexuals.	And	 that	 does	not	 seem	 to	be	 an	 accurate	 report.	 It	must	 be	 the
minimum	that	jail	authorities	have	accepted	--	because	people	who	are	living	in
jails	for	twenty	years,	thirty	years,	and	cannot	come	in	contact	with	women,	are
bound	to	force	homosexuality	on	each	other.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
74
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
The	simplest	thing	would	be...	There	are	separate	jails	for	women	--	why	should
they	 be	 separate?	The	 prisoners	 should	 live	 in	 a	mixed	way,	with	women	 and
men	together,	and	then	AIDS	and	homosexuality	can	be	avoided.	But	politicians
will	not	say	anything	about	 it,	simply	because	of	fear.	Their	whole	object	 is	 to
say	only	 things	which	people	 like,	only	 things	which	don't	go	against	people's
prejudices,	their	traditional	mind	--	because	they	depend	on	people's	votes.
That's	 why	 I	 said	 that	 religious	 people	 should	 always	 be	 consulted	 by	 the
politicians;	 their	 advice	 should	 be	 given	 every	 possible	 attention.	 But	 Rajiv
Gandhi	 says	 that	 politicians	 should	 not	 be	 interfered	with	 by	 religious	 people.
Religious	people	can	be	 interfered	with	by	politicians	--	about	 that,	 there	 is	no
question.	This	 is	 an	unfortunate	 thing,	but	 it	 goes	on	and	on,	 and	 time	 is	very
short.
I	used	 to	be	very	hopeful.	Still,	 I	go	on	hoping	against	hope	 that	perhaps,	 in	a
very	dangerous	situation,	man	may	awaken.	But	there	seems	to	be	a	sadness	in
my	heart	because	I	can	see	that	if	nothing	is	done,	then	this	century	is	going	to
be	our	end.
And	not	only	our	end,	but	the	end	of	the	whole	of	existence's	dream	of	creating
consciousness.	It	has	been	successful	only	on	this	planet.	There	are	millions	of
stars	 and	 each	 star	 has	 dozens	 of	 planets;	 only	 on	 this	 small	 planet	 has	 the
miracle	 happened	 that	 not	 only	 life	 exists	 --	 consciousness	 exists;	 not	 only
consciousness	exists,	but	there	are	people	who	have	reached	to	the	ultimate	peak
of	consciousness:	a	Gautam	Buddha,	a	Socrates,	a	Pythagoras,	a	Chuang	Tzu.
Life	disappearing	from	this	small	planet	will	make	 the	whole	universe	so	poor
that	it	will	take	millions	of	years	to	come	again	to	this	state	where	consciousness
can	become	enlightened.
My	sadness	 is	not	 about	myself.	 I	 am	absolutely	 contented.	Death	cannot	 take
anything	 from	 me.	 My	 sadness	 is	 concerned	 with	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity,
because	 their	 death	 will	 take	 away	 any	 opportunity	 of	 their	 becoming
enlightened,	 of	 their	 becoming	 blissful,	 of	 their	 knowing	 meaning	 and
significance.	They	have	lived	in	darkness.	Are	they	going	to	die	in	darkness	too?
I	 would	 like	 my	 people,	 at	 least,	 not	 to	 waste	 time	 in	 postponing	 their	 own
growth,	 because	 politicians	 are	 absolutely	 prepared	 to	 destroy	 each	 other	 --	 to
destroy	all	and	everything.	Their	lust	for	power	has	come	to	the	climax.	Before
they	succeed	in	committing	a	global	suicide,	at	least	you	should	have	known	the
god	that	exists	within	you.
You	should	spread	your	joy	and	your	silence	and	your	laughter	to	anybody	you
come	 in	 contact	 with.	 You	 cannot	 give	 a	 better	 gift	 to	 your	 friends,	 to	 your
acquaintances,	to	your	lovers,	to	your	children.
The	time	is	very	short	and	the	work	is	tremendous,	but	if	you	have	courage,	the
challenge	can	be	accepted.	Don't	depend	on	politicians;	they	cannot	do	anything;
they	are	not	even	aware	of	where	they	have	been	leading	humanity	--	into	what
darkness.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
75
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 NOW	 GONE	 --	 GOOD	 FOR	 NOTHING;	 SORRY	 TO	 SAY,	 DON'T
EXPECT
ANYTHING	FROM	ME.	KOTI	KOTI	PRANAM.
Gyan	 Asanga,	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 a	 small,	 beautiful	 story.	 Just	 before	 Ninakawa
passed	away	--
he	was	a	great	master	--	the	Zen	master	Ikkyu	visited	him.	"Shall	I	lead	you	on?"
Ikkyu	asked.
Ninakawa	was	dying	and	Ikkyu	said,	"Shall	I	lead	you	on?"
Ninakawa	replied,	"I	came	here	alone	and	I	go	alone.	What	help	could	you	be	to
me?"
Ikkyu	answered,	"If	you	think	you	really	come	and	go,	that	is	your	delusion.	Let
me	show	you	the	path	on	which	there	is	no	coming	and	going."
With	his	words,	Ikkyu	had	revealed	the	path	so	clearly	that	Ninakawa	smiled	and
passed	away.
Gyan	Asanga,	where	are	you	going?	You	say,	"I	am	gone	--	good	for	nothing."
That	is	true.
You	have	proved	definitively	that	you	are	good	for	nothing.	Nothing	is	wrong	in
it...	but	where	are	you	going?	because	there	is	nowhere	to	go!
We	are	always	here	and	always	now.	Neither	we	go	nor	we	come.	All	going	and
all	coming	is	only	dreaming,	so	 just	wash	your	face	with	cold	water	and	wake
up!	You	have	not	gone	anywhere,	you	are	just	sleeping	in	your	bed.
And	you	are	saying,	"Sorry	to	say,	don't	expect	anything	from	me."
You	amaze	me!	Who	has	ever	expected	anything	from	you,	good	for	nothing?	So
don't	be	worried	about	it.	Just	remember	one	thing	that	Ikkyu	said	to	Ninakawa:
"If	you	think	you	really	come	and	go,	that	is	your	delusion.	Let	me	show	you	the
path	on	which	there	is	no	coming	and	no	going"	--	just	awakening.
A	young	nun	said	to	her	mother	superior,	"I	was	out	walking	in	the	garden	last
night	and	the	gardener	took	me,	threw	me	to	the	ground,	and	well,	you	know...
Can	you	give	me	penance?"
"Go	and	eat	ten	lemons,"	said	the	mother	superior.
"But	that	won't	cleanse	my	sins	away."
"I	know,	but	it	will	wipe	that	contented	grin	off	your	face!"
So	Gyan	Asanga,	first	get	up,	wash	your	face	and	eat	ten	lemons!	I	think	that	is
not	too	much	to	ask.	You	can	do	that	and	if	you	cannot,	there	are	many	people
here	who	will	force	you	to	do	it	--	till	your	grin	is	gone!
And	 to	whom	 are	 you	 saying	 this	 koti	 koti	 pranam?	Koti	 koti	 pranam	means
millions	and	millions	of	goodbyes.	You	are	not	going	anywhere.	I	am	not	going
anywhere.	Stop	talking	in	your	dream!	Koti	koti	pranam!
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
76
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT	ON	THIS	BEAUTIFUL	POEM	BY	RUMI
WHICH	I	LOVE	SO	MUCH:	"OUTSIDE,	THE	FREEZING	DESERT	NIGHT.
THIS	OTHER	NIGHT
INSIDE	 GROWS	 WARM,	 KINDLING.	 LET	 THE	 LANDSCAPE	 BE
COVERED	WITH
THORNY	 CRUST.	 WE	 HAVE	 A	 SOFT	 GARDEN	 IN	 HERE.	 THE
CONTINENTS
BLASTED,	 CITIES	 AND	 LITTLE	 TOWNS,	 EVERYTHING	 BECOMES	 A
SCORCHED
BLACKENED	 BALL.	 THE	 NEWS	 WE	 HEAR	 IS	 FULL	 OF	 GRIEF	 FOR
THAT	FUTURE.
BUT	THE	REAL	NEWS	INSIDE	HERE	IS	THERE'S	NO	NEWS	AT	ALL."
Devaprem,	 the	 poem	 by	Mevlana	 Jalaluddin	Rumi	 is	 beautiful,	 as	 always.	He
has	spoken	only	beautiful	words.
He	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 poets	 who	 are	 also	 mystics.	 That	 is	 a	 rare
combination;	there	are	millions	of	poets	in	the	world	and	there	are	a	few	mystics
in	the	world,	but	a	man	who	is	both	is	very	rare	to	find.
Rumi	 is	a	very	 rare	 flower.	He	 is	as	great	a	poet	as	he	 is	a	mystic.	Hence,	his
poetry	 is	not	 just	poetry,	not	 just	a	beautiful	arrangement	of	words.	 It	contains
immense	meaning	and	points	towards	the	ultimate	truth.
It	is	not	entertainment,	it	is	enlightenment.
He	 is	 saying,	 OUTSIDE,	 THE	 FREEZING	 DESERT	 NIGHT.	 THIS	 OTHER
NIGHT
INSIDE	GROWS	WARM,	KINDLING.	The	outside	is	not	the	real	space	for	you
to	be.
Outside,	you	are	 a	 foreigner:	 inside,	you	are	 at	home.	Outside,	 it	 is	 a	 freezing
desert	night.
Inside,	it	is	warm,	kindling,	cozy.
But	very	few	are	fortunate	enough	to	move	from	the	outside	to	the	inside.	They
have	 completely	 forgotten	 that	 they	 have	 a	 home	within	 themselves;	 they	 are
searching	for	it	but	they	are	searching	in	the	wrong	place.	They	search	for	their
whole	lives	but	always	outside;	they	never	stop	for	a	moment	and	look	inwards.
LET	THE	LANDSCAPE	BE	COVERED	WITH	THORNY	CRUST.	WE	HAVE
A	SOFT
GARDEN	 IN	 HERE.	 Don't	 be	 worried	 about	 what	 happens	 on	 the	 outside.
Inside,	there	is	always	a	garden	ready	to	welcome	you.
THE	 CONTINENTS	 BLASTED,	 CITIES	 AND	 LITTLE	 TOWNS,
EVERYTHING
BECOMES	A	SCORCHED,	BLACKENED	BALL.	THE	NEWS	WE	HEAR	IS
FULL	OF
GRIEF	FOR	THAT	FUTURE.
These	words	 of	Rumi	 are	more	 significant,	meaningful,	 today,	 than	 they	were
when	he	wrote	them.	He	wrote	them	seven	hundred	years	ago,	but	today	it	is	not
only	 a	 symbolic	 thing,	 it	 is	 going	 to	 become	 the	 reality:	 THE	CONTINENTS
BLASTED,	CITIES	AND	LITTLE
TOWNS,	 EVERYTHING	 BECOMES	 A	 SCORCHED	 BLACKENED	 BALL.
THE	NEWS
WE	 HEAR	 IS	 FULL	 OF	 GRIEF	 FOR	 THAT	 FUTURE.	 BUT	 THE	 REAL
NEWS	INSIDE
HERE	IS	THERE'S	NO	NEWS	AT	ALL.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
77
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
This	 last	 sentence	depends	on	an	ancient	 saying	which	 says:	No	news	 is	good
news.	I	was	born	in	a	very	small	village	where	the	postman	used	to	come	only
once	a	week.	And	people	were	afraid	that	he	may	be	bringing	a	letter	for	them;
they	were	happy	when	they	found	that	there	was	no	letter.	Once	in	a	while,	there
was	 a	 telegram	 for	 someone.	 Just	 the	 rumor	 that	 somebody	 had	 received	 a
telegram	was	 such	 a	 shock	 in	 the	 whole	 village	 that	 everybody	would	 gather
there	--	and	only	one	man	was	educated	enough	to	read.	Everybody	was	afraid:
A	 telegram?	 That	 means	 some	 bad	 news.	 Otherwise,	 why	 should	 you	 waste
money	on	a	telegram?
I	learned	from	my	very	childhood	that	no	news	is	good	news.	People	were	happy
when	 they	 received	 no	 news	 from	 their	 relatives,	 from	 their	 friends	 or	 from
anybody.	That	meant	everything	was	going	well.
Rumi	 is	 saying:	 THE	 NEWS	 WE	 HEAR	 IS	 FULL	 OF	 GRIEF	 FOR	 THE
FUTURE.	BUT
THE	REAL	NEWS	INSIDE,	 IS	THERE'S	NO	NEWS	AT	ALL.	Everything	 is
silent	 and	 everything	 is	 as	 beautiful,	 peaceful,	 blissful	 as	 it	 has	 always	 been.
There	is	no	change	at	all;	hence,	there	is	no	news.
Inside	it	is	an	eternal	ecstasy,	forever	and	forever.
I	will	repeat	again	that	these	lines	may	become	true	in	your	lifetime.	Before	that
happens,	 you	 must	 reach	 within	 yourself	 where	 no	 news	 has	 ever	 happened,
where	everything	is	eternally	the	same,	where	the	spring	never	comes	and	goes
but	always	remains;	where	flowers	have	been	from	the	very	beginning	--	if	there
was	any	beginning	--	and	are	going	to	remain	to	the	very	end,	if	there	is	going	to
be	 any	 end.	 In	 fact,	 there	 is	 no	 beginning	 and	no	 end,	 and	 the	 garden	 is	 lush,
green,	and	full	of	flowers.
Before	the	outside	world	is	destroyed	by	your	politicians,	enter	 into	your	 inner
world.
That's	 the	 only	 safety	 left,	 the	 only	 shelter	 against	 nuclear	 weapons,	 against
global	suicide,	against	all	these	idiots	who	have	so	much	power	to	destroy.
You	can	at	least	save	yourself.
I	was	hopeful,	but	as	 the	days	have	passed	and	I	have	become	more	and	more
acquainted	with	the	stupidity	of	man...	I	still	hope	but	just	out	of	old	habit;	really
my	heart	has	accepted	the	fact	that	only	a	few	people	can	be	saved.	The	whole	of
humanity	 is	determined	 to	destroy	 itself.	And	 these	are	 the	people...	 if	you	 tell
them	how	they	can	be	saved,	they	will	crucify	you.
They	will	stone	you	to	death.	Going	around	the	world,	I	still	laugh,	but	there	is	a
subtle	 sadness	 in	 it.	 I	 still	 dance	 with	 you	 but	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 with	 the	 same
enthusiasm	as	it	was	ten	years	ago.
It	seems	that	the	higher	powers	of	consciousness	are	helpless	against	the	lower
and	ugly	powers	of	politicians.	The	higher	 is	always	fragile,	 like	a	 roseflower;
you	 can	 destroy	 it	 with	 a	 stone.	 That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 the	 stone	 becomes
higher	than	the	roseflower;	it	simply	means	the	stone	is	unconscious	of	what	it	is
doing.
The	crowds	are	unconscious	of	what	they	are	doing,	and	the	politicians	belong	to
the	 crowd.	 They	 are	 their	 representatives.	And	when	 blind	 people	 are	 leading
other	blind	people,	it	is	almost	impossible	to	wake	them	up;	because	the	question
is	not	only	that	they	are	asleep
--	they	are	blind	too.
There	is	not	time	enough	to	cure	their	eyes.	There	is	time	enough	to	wake	them
but	 not	 enough	 time	 to	 cure	 their	 eyes.	 So	 now	 I	 have	 confined	 myself
completely	to	my	own	people.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
78
Chapter	7	-	Preparing	for	the	last	world	war
That	 is	my	world,	 because	 I	 know	 those	who	 are	with	me	may	be	 asleep,	 but
they	are	not	blind.	They	can	be	awakened.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
79
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
8
The	taste	of	your	being
16	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	 IS	 RELIGION?	 WHAT	 IS	 YOUR	 OPINION	 ON	 ORGANIZED
RELIGION?
Anand	Maitreya,	religion	is	the	highest	flight	of	human	consciousness	--	it	is	the
individual	search	for	truth.
The	inner	truth	cannot	be	made	an	object	of	common	knowledge.	Each	one	has
to	go	within	himself;	 each	 time,	 it	 is	 a	 new	discovery.	 It	 does	not	matter	 how
many	people	have	attained	awakening,	 realization;	 the	moment	you	attain	 it,	 it
will	be	absolutely	fresh	--	because	it	cannot	be	borrowed.
The	search	basically	consists	of	knowing	your	interiority.	You	have	an	outside,
and	no	outside	can	exist	without	an	 inside:	 the	very	existence	of	 the	outside	 is
proof	of	an	inner	world.
The	 inner	 world	 consists	 of	 three	 layers:	 thoughts	 are	 the	 most	 superficial;
feelings	are	deeper	 --	and	 then	 is	 the	being,	which	 is	your	godliness.	To	know
one's	own	godliness,	to	know	one's	own	eternity,	is	the	basic	search	of	religion.
All	your	 senses	 lead	you	outside:	 eyes	open	 to	 look	outside,	 ears	hear	what	 is
happening	outside,	your	hands	can	touch	what	is	outside.	Senses	are	the	doors	to
go	out	--	and	always	remember,	the	door	that	takes	you	out,	can	also	take	you	in.
It	is	the	same	door	from	which	you	go	out	of	your	home	and	through	which	you
come	back	in;	just	the	direction	changes.
To	 go	 out,	 you	 need	 open	 eyes.	 To	 come	 in,	 you	 need	 closed	 eyes,	 all	 your
senses	silent.
The	first	encounter	is	with	the	mind	--	but	that	is	not	your	reality.	Although	it	is
inside	 your	 skull,	 it	 is	 not	 you	 --	 it	 is	 the	 reflection	 of	 the	 outside.	 All	 your
thoughts	are	reflections	of	the	outside.
For	 example,	 a	 blind	man	 cannot	 think	 about	 colors	 because	 he	 has	 not	 seen
colors	--
hence	the	reflection	is	not	possible.	The	blind	man	cannot	even	see	darkness;	and
because	he	has	never	seen	light	or	darkness	outside,	there	is	no	possibility	of	any
reflection.	The	blind	man	does	not	 know	whether	 there	 is	 darkness	or	 there	 is
light	--	both	words	are	meaningless.
And	if	you	analyze	your	thoughts,	you	will	find	they	are	all	triggered	inside	you
by	outside	reality	--	so	they	are	basically	of	the	outside,	reflected	in	your	inner
lake	of	consciousness.
But	because	of	these	thoughts...	and	they	are	a	tremendous	crowd	in	you;	they	go
on	 accumulating,	 they	 create	 a	 China	 wall.	 You	 have	 to	 go	 beyond	 your
thoughts.	And	religion	knows	only	one	method	--	there	are	different	names,	but
the	method	 is	 one:	 it	 is	watchfulness,	 it	 is	witnessing.	You	 simply	watch	your
thoughts,	with	no	 judgment,	no	condemnation,	no	appreciation	--	utterly	aloof;
you	just	see	the	process	of	thoughts	passing	on	the	screen	of	your	mind.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
80
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
As	 your	 watcher	 becomes	 stronger,	 thoughts	 become	 less	 --	 in	 the	 same
proportion.	 If	 the	watcher	 is	 ten	percent	of	your	energy,	 then	ninety	percent	of
your	energy	is	wasted	in	thoughts;	if	your	watcher	becomes	ninety	percent,	then
only	ten	percent	remains	in	thoughts.
The	moment	you	are	one	hundred	percent	a	watcher,	the	mind	becomes	empty.
This	whole	process	 is	known	as	meditation.	As	you	pass	 through	the	 thoughts,
you	will	 come	 to	 the	 second	 layer	which	 is	 inside	 you	 --	 of	 feelings,	 of	 your
heart,	 which	 is	 more	 subtle.	 But	 by	 now,	 your	 watcher	 is	 capable	 even	 of
watching	 your	 moods,	 your	 sentiments,	 your	 emotions,	 your	 feelings	 --
howsoever	subtle	they	may	be.	And	the	same	method	works	in	the	same	way	as
it	worked	with	 the	 thoughts:	 soon	 there	will	 be	 no	 sentiments,	 no	 feelings,	 no
moods.	 You	 have	 gone	 beyond	 the	 mind,	 and	 the	 heart.	 Now	 there	 is	 utter
silence;	nothing	moves.	This	is	your	being;	this	is	you.
The	taste	of	your	being	is	truth.
The	beauty	of	your	being	is	the	beauty	of	existence.
The	 silence	of	your	being	 is	 the	 language	 that	 existence	understands.	And	 just
settled	in	being,	you	have	come	home.	The	wandering	is	finished.	The	struggle	is
finished.	At	ease,	you	sit	silently	within	yourself.
A	great	hidden	splendor	is	revealed	to	you:	you	are	not	separate	from	reality,	you
are	one	with	it.	The	trees	and	the	moon	and	the	stars	and	the	mountains	are	all
part	of	one	organic	unity;	you	are	also	part	of	that	organic	unity	--	you	become
part	of	God.
Religion	is	man's	highest	achievement.
Beyond	religion,	there	is	nothing	--	but	there	is	no	need	either.	Your	being	is	so
abundant,	so	overflowing	with	bliss,	silence,	peace,	understanding,	ecstasy,	that
for	the	first	time,	life	becomes	really	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration.	Those	who
do	not	know	religion,	don't	know	celebration.
But	organized	religion	 is	a	 totally	different	affair,	 so	 I	have	 to	make	 it	clear	 to
you	that	authentic	religion	is	always	individual.	The	moment	truth	is	organized,
it	 dies;	 it	 becomes	 a	 doctrine,	 a	 theology,	 a	 philosophy	 --	 but	 it	 is	 no	 longer
experienced,	because	the	crowd	cannot	experience.	Experience	happens	only	to
individuals	--	separately.
It	is	almost	like	love.	You	cannot	have	organizations	of	love	--	so	that	you	need
not	bother;	 the	organization	will	 take	care,	 the	priest	will	 love	on	your	behalf.
But	 that's	what	has	happened	 to	 religion.	Each	 time	a	man	discovers	 the	 truth,
immediately	 one	 of	 the	most	 cunning	 parts	 of	 humanity,	 the	 priests,	 surround
him.	They	start	compiling	his	words;	they	start	interpreting	his	words;	and	they
start	making	it	clear	to	people	that	if	you	want	to	know	truth,	you	have	to	go	via
them	--	 they	are	agents	of	God.	They	may	call	 themselves	prophets,	 they	may
call	themselves	messengers;	they	may	choose	any	name,	but	the	reality	is,	they
are	self-appointed	agents	of	God.	They	don't	know	God,	but	in	the	name	of	God,
they	exploit	humanity.
Organized	religion	is	another	form	of	politics.	Just	as	I	have	always	condemned
politics	 as	 the	 lowest	 activity	 of	 human	 beings,	 the	 same	 is	my	 attitude	 about
organized	 religions.	You	can	 see	 it:	 the	priests	 and	 the	politicians	have	always
been	in	conspiracy	against	humanity.
They	 have	 been	 supporting	 each	 other.	 They	 have	 divided	 things	 between
themselves	 so	 that	 your	 worldly	 life	 belongs	 to	 the	 politician,	 he	 is	 the	 ruler
there,	and	your	inner	life	belongs	to	the	priest,	he	is	the	ruler	there.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
81
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
One	 sometimes	 feels	 so	 amazed...	 it	 seems	 unbelievable,	 that	 even	 in	 the
twentieth	century	the	pope	could	declare,	a	few	months	ago,	that	to	communicate
with	God	directly	is	a	sin.	You	should	go	through	the	priest,	the	right	channel	--
because	if	people	start	going	directly	to	God,	confessing	to	God,	praying	to	God,
the	millions	of	priests	will	be	unemployed.	They	don't	do	anything;	their	whole
function	is	 to	deceive	you.	Because	you	don't	understand	the	language	of	God,
and	you	are	not	so	evolved,	just	for	some	fee	--	a	donation	to	their	church	or	to
their	temple	--	they	will	do	the	job	for	you.
All	 those	donations	go	 in	 the	pockets	of	 the	priests.	They	don't	know	anything
about	God,	but	 they	are	very	 learned	 --	 they	can	 repeat	 scriptures	 like	parrots.
But	their	inner	desire	is	not	for	God,	not	for	truth	--	they	are	not	seekers,	they	are
exploiters.
I	 have	 heard...	 a	 priest	 bought	 two	 parrots	 and	 he	 taught	 them,	 with	 great
hardship,	beautiful	statements	of	Jesus	Christ.	And	everybody	was	really	amazed
--	 the	 parrots	 were	 so	 accurate.	 He	 made	 small	 beads	 for	 them	 so	 they	 were
constantly	 praying,	 and	 he	 also	 found	 small	 bibles	 for	 them...	 So	 they	 were
always	keeping	their	bibles	open,	and	moving	their	beads.	Although	they	could
not	read,	they	had	already	crammed	everything.	The	priest	would	open	the	page
and	 say,	 "Twelfth	 page,"	 and	 they	would	 start	 reading	 it	 --	 not	 that	 they	were
reading;	they	had	memorized	it.
The	 priest	 was	 very	 pleased	 and	 he	 felt	 it	 would	 be	 good	 to	 have	 one	 more
parrot.	Rather	than	learning	the	bible	and	the	beads,	he	could	be	taught	to	give
whole	sermons.	He	found	a	parrot,	and	the	pet	shop	owner	said,	"Your	wish	will
be	fulfilled;	this	parrot	is	the	most	intelligent	I	have	ever	seen."
But	he	was	not	aware	that	it	was	a	female	parrot.	And	as	the	parrot	was	put	in
the	same	cage	as	the	two	parrots	who	were	moving	their	beads	and	reading	the
bible,	 they	 both	 looked	 at	 the	 female	 parrot,	 and	 one	 parrot	 said	 to	 the	 other,
"George,	now	drop	those	beads!	Our	prayers	have	been	heard."
Your	 priests	 are	 no	 more	 than	 parrots	 --	 and	 their	 prayers	 are	 for	 power,	 for
prestige,	 for	money.	They	are	politicians	 in	disguise;	 they	are	doing	politics	 in
the	 name	 of	 God	 --	 the	 politics	 of	 numbers.	 There	 are	 now	 seven	 hundred
million	Catholics;	naturally	 the	pope	 is	 the	most	powerful	religious	man	in	 the
world.
Every	religion	has	been	trying	to	increase	its	population	by	different	methods.
Mohammedans	are	allowed	to	marry	four	women	so	that	they	can	produce	four
children	 per	 year.	And	 they	 have	 been	 successful:	 they	 are	 the	 second	 largest
religion	after	Christianity.
Organized	religion	is	only	a	content-less,	meaningless	word;	hidden	inside	is	the
politics	of	numbers.	And	you	know	perfectly	well	--	as	the	election	comes	near,
your	 politicians	 start	 going	 to	 see	 the	 shankaracharya.	 For	 five	 years,	 nobody
goes	 to	 visit	 the	 shankaracharya,	 but	 when	 the	 election	 comes	 near,	 then	 the
prime	minister	goes	to	visit	the	shankaracharya.	He	goes	for	a	pilgrimage	to	the
temples,	high	and	deep	in	the	mountains	of	the	Himalayan	range.
For	what?	 Suddenly,	 a	 great	 religious	 urge	 has	 arisen...	which	 subsides	 as	 the
election	ends.
These	 people	 need	 votes;	 they	 have	 to	 pay	 respect	 to	 the	 leaders	 of	 religions.
And	 a	 shankaracharya	 feels	 great	 that	 the	 prime	minister	 is	 touching	 his	 feet.
And	 the	 followers	 of	 the	 shankaracharya,	 the	 Hindus,	 feel	 that	 "our	 prime
minister	is	a	very	religious	person."
When	the	pope	comes	to	India,	even	the	president	and	the	prime	minister	with
his	whole	cabinet,	stand	in	line	at	the	airport	to	receive	him.	For	what?	The	third
largest	religion	in	India	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
82
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
is	 now	Christianity,	 and	 to	 pay	 respect	 to	 the	 pope	means	 all	 the	 votes	 of	 the
Christians	will	be	yours.
Organized	 religions	 --	 whether	 it	 is	 Christianity	 or	 Hinduism	 or
Mohammedanism	--	have	not	been	seekers	of	truth.	In	two	thousand	years,	what
truth	has	organized	Christianity	added	to	the	statements	of	Jesus?	So	what	is	the
need	 of	 this	 organization?	 It	 is	 not	 increasing	 religiousness	 in	 the	world,	 it	 is
simply	repeating	what	Jesus	has	said	--	which	is	available	in	books	for	anybody
to	 read.	 In	 twenty-five	 centuries,	 how	many	 Buddhists	 have	 searched	 for	 the
truth,	 or	 have	 found	 the	 truth?	 --	 just	 a	 long	 line	 of	 parrots	 repeating	 what
Gautam	Buddha	has	found.
And	you	should	be	reminded	that	Gautam	Buddha	was	not	part	of	any	organized
religion;	neither	was	Mahavira	part	of	any	organized	religion,	nor	was	Jesus	part
of	any	organized	religion	--	they	were	individual	seekers.
Truth	 has	 always	 been	 found	 by	 individuals.	 That	 is	 the	 privilege	 of	 the
individual,	and	his	dignity.
Organized	 religions	 have	 created	wars	 --	 just	 like	 politicians	 have	done.	Their
names	 may	 be	 different...	 politicians	 fight	 for	 socialism,	 for	 communism,	 for
fascism,	 for	 nazism,	 and	 organized	 religions	 have	 been	 fighting	 for	 God,	 for
love,	for	their	concept	of	what	truth	is.
And	millions	of	people	have	been	killed	 in	 the	clashes	between	Christians	and
Mohammedans,	 between	 Christians	 and	 Jews,	 between	 Mohammedans	 and
Hindus,	between	Hindus	and	Buddhists.	Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	war;	it
is	a	search	for	peace.	But	organized	religions	are	not	interested	in	peace,	they	are
interested	in	becoming	more	and	more	powerful	and	dominant.
I	condemn	the	organized	religions	in	the	same	way	I	condemn	the	politicians	--
they	are	nothing	but	politics.	So	when	I	said	to	you	that	religious	people	should
be	respected,	honored
--	 the	 politicians	 should	 go	 to	 them	 for	 advice	 --	 I	 was	 not	 talking	 about
organized	 religions;	 I	 was	 talking	 only	 about	 religious	 individuals.	 And	 a
religious	individual	is	neither	Hindu	nor	Christian	nor	Mohammedan.	How	can
he	be?	 --	God	himself	 is	not	Hindu,	not	Mohammedan,	not	Christian.	And	 the
man	 who	 knows	 something	 of	 the	 divine	 becomes	 colored	 with	 his	 divinity,
becomes	fragrant	with	godliness.
In	 the	 ancient	 East	 these	 religious	 people	were	 our	 highest	 flowers,	 and	 even
kings	and	emperors	used	to	go	to	them	to	touch	their	feet	and	to	be	blessed	--	to
ask	their	advice	on	problems	which	they	were	unable	to	solve.
If	 we	 want	 the	 world	 to	 remain	 alive,	 we	 have	 to	 bring	 back	 our	 ancient
childhood	days	when	the	religious	person	had	no	interest	of	his	own.	That's	why
his	eyes	were	clear,	his	heart	was	pure	love,	his	being	was	nothing	but	a	blessing.
Whomsoever	came	to	him	was	healed,	his	problems	were	solved;	he	was	given
new	insights	into	rotten	old	problems.
Organized	 religions	 should	 disappear	 from	 the	world	 --	 they	 should	 drop	 this
mask	of	being	religious.	They	are	simply	politicians,	wolves	hiding	themselves
in	the	skin	of	sheep.
They	should	come	into	their	true	colors;	they	should	be	politicians	--	there	is	no
harm	in	that.
And	all	the	time	they	are	politicians,	but	they	are	playing	the	game	in	the	name
of	religion.
Organized	religions	don't	have	any	future.
They	should	drop	their	disguise	and	come	truly	out	in	front	as	politicians,	and	be
part	of	the	political	world	so	that	we	can	find	the	authentic	religious	individual	--
who	will	be	very	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
83
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
rare.	 But	 just	 a	 few	 authentic	 religious	 individuals	 can	 lead	 the	 whole	 world
towards	light,	towards	immortal	life,	towards	ultimate	truth.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 LIVING	 IN	 AMERICA	 WHILE	 YOU	 HAVE	 BEEN
TRAVELING
AROUND	THE	WORLD.	NOW	I	HAVE	COME	HERE	TO	YOUR	MYSTERY
SCHOOL,	 TO	 ENJOY	YOU	 FOR	A	 FEW	WEEKS	 BEFORE	 I	 CONTINUE
MY	LIFE	IN	THE	WEST.
OSHO,	 I	 FEEL	 YOU	 SO	 STRONGLY	 INSIDE	 OF	 ME	 THAT	 I	 DON'T
EXPERIENCE	THE
ACHE	 OF	 BEING	 PHYSICALLY	 AWAY	 FROM	 YOU.	 I	 AM	 SAVORING
EVERY
MOMENT	OF	 BEING	 IN	YOUR	 PRESENCE	WHILE	 I	 AM	HERE,	 YET	 I
DON'T	 FEEL	 A	 LONGING	 TO	 STAY.	 IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 FOR	 THE
MARKETPLACE	TO	ACTUALLY	BE
MY	MYSTERY	SCHOOL	FOR	NOW?	IS	THERE	ANYTHING	THAT	I	CAN
DO	FOR
YOU	OUT	THERE?	YOU	ARE	THE	CENTER	OF	THE	CYCLONE,	OSHO.	I
AM	SO
GRATEFUL,	AND	I	LOVE	YOU.
Prem	 Sunshine,	 the	 love	 between	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 is	 not	 of	 the
physical;	hence	space	makes	no	difference.	You	can	be	far	away	on	another	star,
but	your	heart	will	be	still	beating	with	me.	That	is	the	only	closeness,	the	real
closeness;	 otherwise,	 you	 can	 be	 sitting	 by	 my	 side	 and	 still	 you	 may	 be
wandering	somewhere	on	some	other	star.
I	 am	not	 interested	 in	 your	 physical	 body,	where	 it	 is;	 I	 am	 interested	 in	 your
being,	that	it	is	centered.	I	am	interested	in	your	love	--	that	it	reaches	to	as	many
people	as	possible.
The	 marketplace	 is	 perfectly	 the	 right	 place	 for	 anyone	 who	 wants	 to	 grow
spiritually.	In	the	past,	the	fallacy	was	to	renounce	the	marketplace	and	run	away
to	the	mountains.	But	if	your	mind	has	not	changed,	even	in	the	mountains	it	will
be	 thinking	 of	 your	 business,	 of	 your	wife,	 of	 your	 children.	 If	 some	 traveler
comes	by,	you	will	be	hankering	to	know	what	is	happening	there.	If	your	mind
remains	the	same,	it	does	not	matter	that	you	have	renounced	a	palace.
I	was	 traveling	 in	 the	Himalayas	 and	 I	 saw	 a	 very	 beautiful	 bodhi	 tree.	 I	was
tired,	and	it	was	time...	I	have	never	in	my	whole	life	missed	a	good	two	hours'
sleep	in	the	afternoon.	It	was	very	cool	and	the	shadow	was	thick,	so	I	was	just
going	to	lie	down,	and	a	man	came,	saying,	"You	cannot	lie	down	here."
I	said,	"What	is	the	problem?"
He	said,	"This	is	my	tree,	and	I	have	been	living	under	this	tree	for	five	years."
I	said,	"You	look	like	a	sannyasin."
He	said,	"I	am;	I	am	a	Hindu	monk."
I	said,	"You	have	renounced	the	world?"
He	said,	"Yes,	I	have	renounced	everything."
"Well,"	I	said,	"What	about	this	tree?	--	it	is	still	yours.	The	shadow	is	so	big,	we
can	both	rest	underneath	 it.	And	I	will	not	be	disturbing	you	because	I	will	be
sleeping,	and	I	don't	snore	--	unless	I	decide	to."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
84
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
I	said,	"If	you	snore,	then	I	will	snore	loudly.	I	cannot	snore	while	I	am	asleep;
so	 I	 have	 to	 pretend	 that	 I	 am	asleep;	 and	 I	will	 snore	 loudly	 unless	 you	 stop
your	snoring.	If	you	don't	snore,	there	is	no	problem:	there	is	a	lot	of	space	here,
and	I	am	going	on	my	way	after	just	two	hours.
"But	I	must	say	to	you,	that	you	have	left	the	world,	but	the	world	is	still	within
your	heart.
The	 very	 idea	 of	 'my	 tree'	 is	 not	 different	 in	 any	way	 from	my	 kingdom,	my
palace,	 my	 wife.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 what	 you	 are	 claiming	 as	 mine;	 the
question	is	that	you	are	possessing."
Humanity	has	 to	 face	 two	problems	from	the	past.	People	 renounce	 the	world,
but	nothing	 is	 renounced.	You	can	 leave	your	house,	you	can	 leave	your	wife,
you	 can	 leave	 your	 friends,	 you	 can	 leave	 your	money	 --	 but	where	will	 you
leave	your	mind,	and	how	will	you	leave	your	mind?	And	if	you	can	leave	your
mind,	then	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere;	then	your	very	house	becomes	the
temple,	 because	 the	 real	 question	 is	 transcending	 the	mind.	These	monks	who
left	 the	world	 lived	 in	a	very	 illusory	 idea	 that	 they	were	no	 longer	concerned
about	the	world.	They	missed	the	chance	to	grow.
Secondly,	living	in	a	mountain	cave	you	may	not	get	angry,	because	anger	needs
somebody	to	provoke	it;	there	is	nobody	to	provoke	you...
I	have	heard...	 a	man	 lived	 for	 thirty	years	 in	 the	Himalayas,	and	he	had	gone
there	because	of	his	too-angry	mind;	his	mind	was	so	angry	that	when	he	was	in
anger	he	was	almost	mad.
One	day	he	had	pushed	his	wife	into	the	well,	and	then	as	he	became	aware	of
what	he	had	done,	he	decided	that	now	he	would	renounce	this	world.	And	for
thirty	years	 anger	never	happened,	because	 there	was	no	wife,	no	children,	no
customers,	no	friends,	no	enemies	--
there	was	 nobody.	 Slowly,	 slowly,	 his	 fame	 spread	 to	 the	 plains:	 "A	man	 has
been	 living	 for	 thirty	years	 in	 the	caves,	and	we	have	never	 seen	such	a	 silent
man."
There	was	going	 to	be	 a	great	 fair,	 the	Kumbha	Mela,	 in	Prayag	 --	 it	 happens
every	 twelve	years.	 It	 is	 the	 biggest	 gathering	 in	 the	whole	world;	millions	 of
people	come.	A	few	people	went	to	this	silent	monk,	saying,	"Now	all	the	great
saints	and	monks	are	coming	to	the	fair	to	give	their	teachings	to	the	people	who
are	going	to	participate	in	it.	It	is	time	you	came	down:	you	have	not	come	down
for	thirty	years;	now	you	are	ripe."	It	was	very	ego-fulfilling,	this	invitation.
He	came	down	to	the	plains.	As	he	entered	the	crowd	of	millions	--	and	they	did
not	 know	 anything	 about	 him	 --	 somebody	 stepped	 on	 his	 feet,	 and	 all	 those
thirty	 years	 disappeared.	 He	 grabbed	 the	 man	 by	 his	 neck	 and	 he	 said,	 "You
idiot,	don't	you	see	that	I	am	a	saint?"	It	was	very	difficult	to	take	him	away,	he
was	going	to	kill	the	man.	He	was	the	same	man	who	had	killed	his	wife	thirty
years	 before.	 It	 was	 not	 such	 a	 great	 crime;	 the	 crowd	 was	 so	 thick	 that	 if
somebody	stepped	on	your	feet,	it	was	not	intentional.	But	it	made	him	aware	of
one	 thing:	 that	even	 thirty	years	 in	 the	Himalayas	had	not	changed	him	a	 little
bit.
So	this	is	the	second	problem.	Your	real	test	is	in	the	world	--	whether	you	are
becoming	 silent	 or	 not;	 whether	 you	 are	 becoming	 more	 loving	 and
compassionate	or	not;	whether	you	are	growing	spiritually	or	not.
Sunshine,	 go	 to	 the	marketplace,	 but	 remember	not	 to	 get	 lost	 in	 it.	Remain	 a
watcher.	It	is	very	easy	to	get	lost.
You	have	asked	me,	"Is	there	anything	that	I	can	do	for	You	out	there?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
85
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Only	one	 thing	I	expect	 from	all	of	you:	 to	be	yourself,	 to	discover	your	 inner
beauty,	your	purity	of	consciousness,	your	hidden	splendor	--	and	spread	it	to	as
many	people	as	possible.
People	are	miserable.	Help	them	to	laugh	a	little,	to	sing	a	little,	to	dance	a	little.
I	don't	want	missionaries.	You	are	not	to	spread	my	teachings	--	I	don't	have	any
anyway	--
but	 you	 have	 to	 spread	 the	 joy,	 the	 blissfulness,	 the	 silence	 that	 you	 have	 felt
here.	Don't	let	it	become	just	a	faded	memory.	And	you	are	going	to	the	greatest
marketplace	 in	 the	world,	 to	California.	You	will	 have	 to	 be	 very	watchful.	 If
you	 can	 remain	 untouched	 by	 California	 and	 all	 its	 stupidities...	 I	 have	 been
thinking	to	call	the	saints	"California-returned."
Just	take	a	joke	from	me;	laugh	and	help	others	to	laugh...
An	 American	 traveling	 in	 the	 United	 Kingdom	 was	 riding	 in	 a	 train	 with	 an
Englishman	 and	 an	 elderly	 English	 lady	 with	 her	 pet	 Pekingese.	 They	 had
traveled	 only	 a	 short	 distance	when	 the	 dog	 threw	 up	 all	 over	 the	American's
trousers.	 Instead	 of	 apologizing,	 the	 English	 woman	 fondled	 her	 dog	 and
comforted	it,	saying,	"Poor,	itsy-bitsy	doggy	has	a	little	tummy	ache."
A	few	miles	later	the	dog	raised	its	leg	and	pissed	all	over	the	American.	Again
the	English	woman	consoled	her	dog,	saying,	"Poor	itsy-bitsy	doggy	has	a	cold
in	the	bladder."
A	short	while	later	the	dog	shat	all	over	the	Yank's	other	things.	Exasperated,	the
American	stood	up,	grabbed	the	dog	and	threw	it	out	of	the	window.
At	 this	 point	 the	 Englishman	 commented,	 "You	Yanks	 are	 a	 peculiar	 lot.	You
speak	the	wrong	language,	you	live	on	the	wrong	side	of	the	ocean,	and	you,	sir,
threw	the	wrong	bitch	out	of	the	window."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	THE	YEARS	HAVE	GONE	BY	SINCE	 I	TOOK	SANNYAS,	MY	LOVE
HAS
CHANGED	 ITS	QUALITY.	AT	FIRST	 I	 FELT	A	CERTAIN	EXCITEMENT;
NOW	THERE
IS	A	DEEP	COOLNESS	AND	I	FEEL	RELAXED	WITHIN	MYSELF.	THIS	IS
ACCENTUATED	WHEN	I	SIT	IN	FRONT	OF	YOU	IN	MEDITATION.	AS	I
AM
WRITING	THIS,	A	CERTAIN	LITTLE	VOICE	INSIDE	BUBBLES	UP	AND
SAYS,	"YES,	EVERYTHING	IS	FINE.	"BELOVED	OSHO,	IS	THIS	LITTLE
VOICE	A	FIGMENT	OF
MY	IMAGINATION,	MY	MIND	PLAYING	TRICKS?
Yoga	Videh,	I	have	been	watching	you.	I	have	seen	you	becoming	more	silent,
more	peaceful.	A	certain	grace	 is	arising	 in	your	eyes	and	on	your	face.	 In	 the
beginning	I	used	to	see	that	it	was	even	difficult	for	you	to	sit	for	two	hours	--
you	were	tossing	and	turning.	Now	all	that	is	past;	you	sit	almost	like	a	marble
statue.	This	shows	the	inner	centering.
So	whatever	you	have	heard	is	not	a	figment	of	your	imagination.	I	also	say	to
you:	Yes,	everything	is	fine.	But	don't	be	satisfied	with	what	you	have	attained.
There	is	much	more	--
infinitely	much	more.	As	you	go	deeper	and	deeper,	you	will	find	more	and	more
treasures;	and	unless	you	come	to	the	feeling	of	immortality,	eternity,	remember
that	the	journey	has	not	ended.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
86
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
You	will	come	across	beautiful	spaces	which	are	so	enchanting,	so	magical	that
one	thinks,	what	more	can	there	be	in	life?	--	so	much	bliss,	so	much	benediction
--	but	don't	stop.
Everybody	has	 to	discover	his	 eternity,	 that	 "I	 am	part	of	 a	 life	 that	knows	no
death.	"And	it	is	not	far	away	if	you	go	on	and	on.
Whatever	happens,	be	grateful	to	existence	and	move	on.
Charaiveti,	 charaiveti	 --	 this	 was	 one	 of	 the	 constant	 messages	 of	 Gautam
Buddha.
Whenever	 sannyasins	 came	 to	 relate	 to	 him	 their	 state	 of	 mind,	 their
consciousness,	 he	 would	 always	 say,	 "Everything	 is	 fine,	 but	 charaiveti,
charaiveti.	Continue,	continue	going	on	and	on	and	on,	because	I	know	there	is
much	more	to	be	discovered."
Remember	the	fragrance	of	the	beautiful	words	of	one	of	the	great	Zen	masters,
Ryokan:	WITH	NO	MIND,	BLOSSOMS	INVITE	THE	BUTTERFLY.
WITH	NO	MIND,	THE	BUTTERFLY	VISITS	THE	BLOSSOMS.
There	is	no	cerebral	activity	in	it.	The	flowers	are	not	thinking	and	planning	how
to	invite	the	butterfly.	With	no	mind,	in	their	silence,	is	their	invitation.
WITH	NO	MIND,	BLOSSOMS	INVITE	THE	BUTTERFLY.
WITH	NO	MIND,	THE	BUTTERFLY	VISITS	THE	BLOSSOMS.
WHEN	THE	FLOWER	BLOOMS,	THE	BUTTERFLY	COMES.
WHEN	THE	BUTTERFLY	COMES,	THE	FLOWER	BLOSSOMS.
There	 is	 such	 a	 synchronicity	 in	 existence.	 You	 become	 graceful,	 the	 whole
existence	becomes	graceful;	you	become	silent,	everything	else	becomes	silent.
A	song	arises	in	you,	and	all	around	the	birds	start	singing;	you	dance,	and	you
see	the	whole	of	existence	is	dancing	with	you,	hand	in	hand.
Says	Ryokan,
I	DO	NOT	KNOW	OTHERS,	OTHERS	DO	NOT	KNOW	ME.
NOT	KNOWING	EACH	OTHER	WE	NATURALLY	FOLLOW	THE	WAY.
There	is	no	need	of	knowledge,	because	nature	has	its	own	wisdom.	If	you	don't
interfere	with	nature	and	its	wisdom,	everything	goes	as	it	should	go.
I	DO	NOT	KNOW	OTHERS,	OTHERS	DO	NOT	KNOW	ME.
NOT	KNOWING	EACH	OTHER	WE	NATURALLY	FOLLOW	THE	WAY.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
87
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Whatever	is	happening	to	you	Videh,	just	follow	it,	very	naturally.	Don't	be	in	a
hurry,	don't	bring	your	knowledge	to	improve	upon	it.	Nobody	can	improve	upon
nature:	when	the	spring	comes,	the	flowers	will	come	also	--	and	there	is	no	way
to	bring	the	spring,	and	without	the	spring	the	flowers	won't	come.	So	you	go	on
the	way	you	are	moving.	 It	 is	 the	 right	path,	 the	easy	path	 in	your	naturalness
and	spontaneity,	and	you	will	not	be	going	astray.
You	will	reach	to	the	ultimate	ocean	where	one	merges	with	the	eternal	life.
Knowledge	is	really	a	very	complicated	phenomenon;	you	have	to	be	like	little
children.
Little	William	went	to	his	father	and	said,	"Daddy,	where	did	I	come	from?"	The
father	started	to	stutter	and	stammer,	but	he	realized	that	he	had	to	tell	his	son	the
facts	of	life.
"Sit	down,	Willie,"	he	said.	At	great	 length	he	described	the	whole	business	of
creation,	 beginning	 with	 the	 birds	 and	 the	 bees.	 Then	 he	 went	 into	 the	 most
graphic	 descriptions	 of	 human	 intercourse.	 He	 concluded	 at	 last,	 feeling	 limp
and	drained.	He	took	a	handkerchief	and	wiped	the	perspiration	from	his	brow:
"Okay,	Willie,	do	you	understand	now?"
Willie	 scratched	 his	 head.	 "Not	 really,	 Dad.	 Henry	 says	 he	 came	 from	 New
Jersey,	but	you	have	not	told	me	where	I	came	from."
His	question	 is	of	a	very	 innocent	character,	but	 the	 father	 is	 a	knowledgeable
person.	He	gives	a	whole	discourse	on	how	human	beings	are	produced	--	and	he
is	perspiring	and	stuttering	and	stammering.	And	the	boy	must	be	puzzled	about
what	 is	 going	 on?	He	 has	 simply	 asked	 a	 simple	 question:	Where	 did	 I	 come
from?	Such	a	complicated	journey...	and	Henry	has	come	from	New	Jersey.
Be	natural,	be	simple,	be	innocent,	and	allow	nature	to	guide	you	--	it	has	never
misguided	anybody.	Knowledge,	on	 the	contrary,	has	never	been	able	 to	guide
anybody	 to	 the	 ultimate	 goal,	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 our	 experience,	 of	 our
consciousness,	of	our	blissfulness,	of	our	enlightenment.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
88
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
9
Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
16	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	ARE	 AGAINST	 THE	 POPE	 SO	MUCH	 --	 IS	 THAT	 BECAUSE	 THE
ROMAN
CATHOLIC	RELIGION	IS	THE	MOST	ORGANIZED	RELIGION?
Anand	Maitreya,	 I	 am	 not	 against	 anyone	 --	 but	 I	 am	 certainly	 for	 the	 truth.
Anything	that	goes	against	the	truth,	I	am	determined	to	criticize;	it	 is	a	sacred
duty	as	far	as	I	am	concerned.
That	 the	Roman	Catholic	religion	is	 the	most	organized	religion	is	only	one	of
the	reasons	I	am	criticizing	the	pope	so	much.	There	are	many	other	things,	too.
I	would	like	to	give	you	all	the	implications	of	my	criticism.	First,	the	Catholic
church	in	particular,	and	Christianity	in	general,	is	not	a	religion	at	all.	To	call	it
an	"organized	religion"
is	to	use	the	wrong	language.	It	is	organized	superstition.
In	the	twenty	centuries	after	Jesus,	Christianity	has	been	defending	all	kinds	of
superstitions,	 and	 fighting	 against	 science,	 against	 any	discovery	of	 truth.	And
the	 people	 who	 have	 been	 the	 leaders	 of	 this	 war	 between	 superstitions	 and
science	are	the	popes.
In	the	first	place,	the	popes	down	these	twenty	centuries	have	been	declaring	one
thing:	 that	 they	 are	 infallible	 --	which	 is	 an	 absurdity.	 But	 their	 logic	 is:	 they
represent	Jesus	Christ,	and	Jesus	Christ	is	the	only	son	of	God.	So,	in	an	indirect
way,	they	are	the	vehicles	of	God	--
how	can	they	be	fallible?
But	 life	 is	 not	 logic.	 Your	God	 itself	 is	 a	 fiction;	 Jesus	 Christ	 being	 the	 only
begotten	son	is	another	fiction.	And	the	infallibility	of	the	pope	is	just	ridiculous.
When	Galileo	discovered	for	the	first	time	that	it	is	not	the	sun	that	goes	around
the	earth,	but	the	earth	that	goes	around	the	sun	--	he	was	very	old,	seventy-five
or	eighty,	almost	on	his	deathbed	--	he	was	dragged	to	the	court	of	the	pope.	And
the	 pope	 said,	 "Before	 you	die,	 change	 that	 statement,	 because	 it	 goes	 against
THE	 BIBLE.	 And	 anything	 that	 goes	 against	 THE	 BIBLE	 is	 automatically
wrong,	because	THE	BIBLE	is	the	word	of	God."
Galileo	was	a	great	scientist,	and	I	have	immense	respect	for	a	man	who,	even	at
the	age	of	eighty,	when	he	was	dying,	had	such	a	beautiful	sense	of	humor.
He	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	I	will	change	it;	I	will	write	in	my	book	exactly
what	God	has	written	in	THE	BIBLE	--	that	the	sun	goes	around	the	earth.	But
one	thing	I	must	make	clear	to	you:	neither	the	sun	reads	my	book	nor	the	earth
reads	 my	 book.	 As	 far	 as	 reality	 is	 concerned,	 the	 earth	 will	 continue	 going
around	the	sun.
"And	why	 should	 you	 insist?	Because	 I	 have	 every	 proof;	 I	 have	 devoted	my
whole	life	to	the	search,	and	all	those	who	have	a	scientific	mind	are	in	absolute
agreement	with	me.
Sooner	or	later	you	will	have	to	agree	because	one	cannot	remain	against	 truth
for	long."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
89
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
The	 pope	 said,	 "We	 cannot	 allow	 even	 a	 single	 statement	 to	 go	 against	 THE
BIBLE	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 if	 one	 statement	 becomes	 false,	 God's
infallibility	disappears.	And	if	God	himself	is	fallible,	what	about	Jesus	Christ?
And	what	about	the	pope?	And	if	God	can	write	one	thing	wrong,	who	knows?	--
he	may	have	written	many	things	wrong.	We	cannot	afford	it."
For	three	hundred	years,	the	popes	have	been	fighting	a	hard	battle	against	each
and	every	scientific	discovery	of	 truth.	Nobody	can	be	victorious	against	 truth,
but	they	have	tried	their	best.	It	is	the	only	religion	that	has	been	fighting	against
science	--	that	is	one	of	the	fundamental	reasons	why	I	criticize	the	pope.
Even	 today	 they	go	on	 fighting	science,	knowing	perfectly	well	 that	each	 time
they	will	be	defeated,	and	that	they	are	fighting	a	losing	battle.	And	still,	they	go
on	declaring	themselves	infallible.
It	is	amazing	that	people	can	be	so	shameless.
It	is	time	they	learned.
They	 crucified	 and	 burned	 Joan	 of	 Arc	 by	 the	 order	 of	 the	 pope,	 because	 he
declared	 that	 she	 was	 a	 witch.	 Now	 on	 what	 grounds,	 what	 reasoning,	 what
revelation?	because	the	pope	says	it	is	so,	it	has	to	be	right.	The	word	of	the	pope
is	 the	 law;	 the	word	 of	 the	 pope	 is	 the	 truth.	They	 burned	 a	 young,	 beautiful,
courageous,	 intelligent	woman	who	had	 fought	 for	 the	 freedom	of	 the	 country
and	who	had	won	 the	 freedom	of	 the	country.	And	 that	was	 the	 reason	for	 the
jealousy	--	that	a	woman	should	become	so	prominent	that	even	the	pope	is	left
behind.
She	was	burned	because	of	jealousy;	she	had	not	committed	any	sin.	The	whole
of	 Europe	was	 shocked	 and	 slowly,	 slowly,	 people	 started	 raising	 their	 voices
against	her	crucifixion;	but	it	took	almost	three	hundred	years	for	people	to	be	so
strong	about	it	that	another	pope	declared	Joan	of	Arc	a	great	saint.
One	pope	burns	her	alive	because	she	is	a	witch	--	she	is	in	sexual	relationship
with	 the	 devil.	 And	 after	 three	 hundred	 years,	 another	 pope	 --	 his	 own
descendant,	his	own	successor,	 representative	of	 the	same	Jesus	Christ	and	 the
same	God	--	declares	that	she	was	a	saint.	Her	bones	were	taken	out	of	the	grave
and	 worshiped,	 and	 a	 beautiful	 cathedral	 now	 stands	 in	 her	 memory.	 Now,
nobody	calls	her	just	"Joan	of	Arc"	--	her	name	is	"Saint	Joan	of	Arc."
The	 pope	 goes	 on	 traveling	 around	 the	 world	 preaching	 that	 birth	 control	 is
against	God,	 that	 any	method	 of	 preventing	 the	 birth	 of	 a	 child	 is	 anti-God	 --
particularly	 in	 the	countries	of	 the	East	where	people	are	so	poor,	and	they	are
going	to	become	poorer	and	poorer	every	day.
But	the	pope's	interest	is	not	that	man	should	live	comfortably	without	hunger.
People	should	not	die	just	because	they	cannot	even	get	water,	cannot	get	food.
And	you	will	be	surprised	 to	know	that	on	one	hand,	 the	pope	goes	on	 talking
against	birth	control	methods,	and	on	the	other,	the	Vatican	has	a	hidden	factory
where	 they	 create	 birth	 control	 pills	 --	 because	 it	 is	 good	 business;	 it	 brings
millions	of	dollars.
You	call	such	people	religious?
He	goes	around	the	world	saying	that	Christian	priests	and	bishops	and	cardinals
should	not	get	involved	in	politics	--	because	he	wants	politicians	to	be	in	favor
of	 him.	 And	 it	 has	 been	 found	 that	 the	 same	 man	 sent	 one	 hundred	 million
dollars	to	Poland,	to	a	political	party,	to	fight	against	the	Communists.
Is	this	not	politics?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
90
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
And	his	 interest	 in	 birth	 control	 is	 really	 to	 increase	 the	population.	Whatever
consequences	 happen	 to	 people	 is	 not	 the	 problem.	 If	 people	 are	 poor	 and
hungry,	they	can	be	easily	converted	to	Christianity,	and	particularly	the	Catholic
church.	Their	schools,	their	hospitals,	their	orphanages	are	nothing	but	factories
for	converting	people	into	Catholics.
It	 is	 now	 a	 well-known	 fact	 that	 by	 the	 end	 of	 the	 century,	 almost	 half	 the
population	of	 the	world	will	be	dying	of	hunger.	You	cannot	even	conceive	of
the	situation	where	one	man	out	of	every	two	will	be	dying.	All	around	there	will
be	corpses	and	 there	will	be	nobody	even	 to	bury	 them	or	 to	 take	 them	 to	 the
mortuary	or	to	the	funeral.	In	fact,	dying	will	be	better	than	living	amongst	those
corpses.
The	whole	world	will	be	stinking	of	death.
The	popes	don't	seem	to	be	interested	in	saving	humanity.	Their	basic	interest	is
how	to	get	more	and	more	people	into	their	religion,	because	that	is	going	to	be
their	power.	It	is	pure	politics.
The	 whole	 Christian	 theology	 is	 based	 on	 such	 stupid	 ideas	 that	 to	 call	 it
"religion"	is	just	absurd.	Jesus	is	born	of	a	virgin	mother.	The	whole	of	medical
science	is	against	it	--	it	cannot	be	possible,	but	it	is	one	of	their	fundamentals.	If
you	remove	it,	the	whole	edifice	of	Christianity	falls	down.
They	have	not	given	the	world	any	method	for	how	to	raise	consciousness.	They
have	 not	 produced	 awakened	 and	 enlightened	 people;	 but	 they	 have	 caught
seven	hundred	million	people	in	the	Catholic	fold	alone.	These	people	are	full	of
absurd	beliefs	--	and	even	though	they	have	eyes,	they	don't	see;	they	have	ears,
but	 they	 don't	 hear.	 And	 if	 you	 say	 anything,	 immediately	 they	 are	 ready	 to
crucify	 you.	 They	 are	 against	 the	 crucifixion	 of	 Jesus,	 but	 they	 are,	 every
moment,	ready	to	crucify	you	if	you	just	tell	the	truth.
I	said	in	one	of	my	speeches,	that	THE	HOLY	BIBLE	is	the	most	unholy	book	in
the	whole	world,	because	 it	has	 five	hundred	solid	pages	of	pure	pornography.
One	 of	 my	 friends	 in	 America,	 hearing	 this,	 actually	 collected	 all	 those	 five
hundred	pages	and	published	a	book	called	the	X-RATED	HOLY	BIBLE.	And
now	I	have	received	a	summons	from	Kanpur	--	ten	Christian	associations	have
made	a	case	against	me;	that	I	am	hurting	their	religious	feelings.
I	 cannot	 believe	 that	 people	 are	 so	 blind.	 If	 anything	 is	 hurting	 your	 religious
feelings	 it	 is	 your	BIBLE	 --	 I	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 it.	You	 should	 tell	 the
government	that	THE	BIBLE
should	 be	 banned,	 or	 it	 should	 be	 labeled	 and	 listed	 among	 the	 pornographic
literature.
I	 am	 not	 saying	 anything	myself.	 Those	 five	 hundred	 pages	 are	 there	 in	 THE
BIBLE	and	those	ten	associations	at	least	could	have	looked	in	their	BIBLES	to
see	 what	 I	 am	 talking	 about;	 otherwise	 in	 the	 court	 they	 will	 look	 absolutely
foolish.
Now,	they	are	creating	agitation	in	every	country	for	homosexuality	to	be	made	a
severe	crime.	And	everybody	in	the	world	knows	that	Pope	Paul	the	Sixth	was	a
homosexual.	Before	he	became	the	pope,	he	was	the	cardinal	in	Milan	--	and	that
was	the	talk	of	the	town.	The	whole	of	Milan	was	surprised	that	he	was	always
seen	with	his	boyfriend	--	a	young,	beautiful	man.	Knowing	this	perfectly	well...
still	he	became	 the	pope.	And	 the	moment	he	became	pope,	his	boyfriend	was
called	to	the	Vatican,	and	the	boyfriend	became	the	secretary.
Ordinarily,	 the	 secretary	 becomes	 the	 girlfriend;	 here,	 it	 was	 just	 a	 little
different...	but	the	same	story.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
91
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
And	it	has	never	been	denied	by	the	Vatican;	they	could	not	deny	it	--	it	was	so
factual.
But	if	you	say	it,	that	means	you	are	against	the	pope.	I	am	not	against	the	pope.
I	am	just	in	favor	of	truth.
But	perhaps	this	kind	of	thing	begins	with	the	virginity	of	Mary	and	the	birth	of
Jesus.	I	have	heard...	it	is	a	story	of	the	future,	because	this	Polack	pope	seems	to
be	very	slow	to	die.
Popes	 ordinarily	 have	 died	within	 an	 average	 of	 one	 or	 two	 years	 at	 the	most
because	 by	 the	 time	 they	 become	 popes,	 they	 are	 always	 around	 the	 age	 of
seventy-five,	 seventy-eight.	 And	 they	must	 have	 been	 hoping	 that	 this	 Polack
would	 also	 die	 --	 but	 they	 don't	 know	 Polacks.	 He	 has	 completely	 forgotten
about	 dying;	 and	 he	 is	 enjoying	 his	 popehood	 so	 greatly	 --	 no	 other	 pope	 has
ever	done	such	things.
He	is	continuously	touring	around	the	world,	and	the	Vatican	is	getting	into	debt:
nine	million	dollars	he	has	spent	on	traveling.	The	last	time	he	went	to	Australia,
just	 two	 days	 before	 him	 the	 British	 queen	 had	 also	 gone	 to	 Australia.	More
money	was	 spent	 on	 the	 pope's	 visit	 to	Australia	 than	 on	 that	 of	 the	 queen	 of
England.	And	these	are	the	people	who	say,
"Blessed	are	the	poor."
But	 finally,	 the	 Polack	 pope	 died	 and	 went	 to	 heaven	 with	 pomp	 and
circumstance.	At	 the	pearly	gates,	Saint	Peter	stopped	him	and	said,	"Hey,	you
can't	walk	in	just	like	that.	Who	are	you?"
The	pope	answered,	"Well,	I	am	your	very	own	representative	on	earth.	I	am	the
pope."
Saint	Peter	said,	"Pope?	My	representative?	I	have	never	heard	of	you."
The	pope,	puzzled,	said,	"Ah,	just	tell	God	I	am	here.	He	will	tell	you	to	let	me
in."
Saint	 Peter	 yelled,	 "Hey,	 boss,	 a	 guy	 here	 says	 he	 is	 the	 pope.	Do	 you	 know
him?"
God	answered,	"Never	heard	of	him."	The	pope	said,	"Strange,	but	ask	Jesus.	He
knows	me."
Saint	 Peter	 yelled,	 "Hey,	 sonny.	There	 is	 a	 guy	 here	 says	 he	 is	 the	 pope.	You
know	him?"
Jesus	answered,	"No."
Saint	Peter	said,	"Sorry,	I	can't	let	you	in.	Nobody	around	here	knows	you."
The	pope	said,	"You	can't	turn	me	away	like	this.	I	am	the	pope	himself.	Ask	the
Holy	Ghost.	He	knows	me	for	sure."
Saint	Peter	yelled	again,	"Hey,	spook!	A	guy	here	claims	you	know	him.	Says	he
is	the	pope."
And	 the	Holy	Ghost	 shouted,	 "The	pope,	 sure	 I	 know	him.	He	 is	 the	guy	 that
spread	those	dirty	rumors	about	me	and	Mary.	Kick	him	out	of	here."
The	whole	religion	is	founded	on	a	dirty	joke.
Pope	Paul	the	Sixth,	who	was	the	homosexual,	was	followed	by	Pope	John	Paul
the	First.
He	was	an	intelligent,	liberal	man	who	ordered	an	investigation	of	the	cardinals
and	 bishops	 who	 belonged	 to	 Masonic	 Lodges,	 which	 were	 outlawed	 by	 the
Catholic	church.
These	Masonic	Lodges	have	as	their	members	only	the	wealthiest	people	of	the
world.
They	 are	 secret	 societies	 doing	 secret	 rituals.	 They	 were	 outlawed	 by
Christianity	--	no	Christian	priest,	bishop	or	cardinal,	or	anybody	officiating	 in
any	position,	should	be	a	member	of	any	Masonic	Lodge	--	because	their	secret
rituals	consist	of	sexual	orgies	and	all	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
92
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
kinds	of	ugly	things.	John	Paul	the	First	ordered	an	investigation	of	the	cardinals
and	bishops	who	belonged	 to	 these	Masonic	Lodges.	He	discovered	 that	many
top	Vatican	officials	were	Freemasons,	and	ordered	 that	 they	be	 removed	from
office.
You	 see	 the	 hypocrisy?	These	 are	 the	 same	people	who	made	 the	 law	 that	 no
Christian	priest	could	become	members	of	Masonic	Lodges,	but	 in	 the	Vatican
itself,	 the	cardinals	and	bishops	and	archbishops	were	found	 to	be	members	of
Masonic	Lodges.	And	because	John	Paul	the	First	ordered	that	they	be	removed
from	 office,	 the	whole	Catholic	 hierarchy	 and	 bureaucracy	 turned	 against	 that
intelligent	man.	 In	 the	whole	 history	 of	 Christianity,	 perhaps	 he	was	 the	 only
pope	who	had	some	intelligence,	some	humanity,	some	understanding.
At	the	same	time,	he	ordered	an	investigation	into	the	Vatican	bank	which	would
have	 shown	 that	 the	 bank	 was	 laundering	 hundreds	 of	 millions	 of	 dollars	 of
Mafia	heroin	money	every	year.
These	are	your	religious	institutions.	The	Vatican	bank	itself,	which	is	under	the
pope,	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 greatest	Mafia	 organization.	 Hundreds	 of	millions	 of
dollars	of	heroin	money...	They	go	on	talking	and	preaching	against	drugs,	while
behind	the	curtain	they	are	dealing	in	drugs	themselves.
He	also	ordered	a	meeting	to	announce	that	the	church	supported	birth	control.
He	was	really	a	man	of	understanding	--	he	wanted	to	call	the	pill	the	"Catholic
pill."	But	before	any	of	these	orders	could	be	carried	out,	he	was	found	dead	in
suspicious	circumstances.
He	 was	 murdered.	 Vatican	 officials	 said	 it	 was	 of	 a	 heart	 attack,	 but	 that	 is
absolutely	wrong	because	his	own	personal	physician	said	he	had	a	perfect	heart
--	he	had	had	no	heart	trouble,	ever.	And	the	most	important	thing	was	that	his
personal	physician	was	not	called.
Instead,	the	Vatican	officials	ordered	immediate	embalming	and	refused	to	let	his
personal	physician	examine	the	body	--	even	the	dead	body.	They	also	refused	a
post-mortem.	No	 death	 certificate	was	 issued;	 even	 up	 to	 now,	 officially	 he	 is
living	because	there	was	no	death	certificate	issued	for	him.
After	 they	 had	 embalmed	him,	 an	 autopsy	was	 done.	But	 once	 you	 embalm	 a
dead	body	--
once	 you	 take	 all	 the	 blood	 out	 of	 the	 body	 and	 fill	 it	 with	 chemicals	 --	 it
becomes	impossible	to	find	whether	it	has	been	poisoned	or	what	has	happened.
But	the	whole	situation	is	very	clear:	insiders	say	that	papers	he	was	clutching	in
his	hand	when	the	body	was	discovered	were	the	papers	in	which	he	had	written
his	will.	Realizing	in	the	middle	of	the	night	that	he	has	been	poisoned,	feeling
that	he	was	going	 to	die,	he	may	have	 tried	 to	write	his	will.	Or	he	may	have
tried	 to	write	what	 had	 happened	 to	 him,	what	 had	 been	 done	 to	 him.	But	 all
those	 papers	mysteriously	 disappeared,	 along	with	 his	medicine	 bottle	 and	 the
will.	 It	has	been	 thought	 that	 they	mixed	poison	 in	his	medicine	bottle,	and	he
drank	 the	poison,	 thinking	 it	was	medicine.	Once	 the	poison	 started	having	 its
effects,	he	must	have	tried	to	write	his	will,	and	he	tried	to	write	that	it	seemed
he	had	been	poisoned	and	 that	 he	was	dying.	The	people	who	 found	him	 first
saw	the	will	he	was	clutching	in	his	hands.
And	 the	 most	 amazing	 thing	 is:	 even	 before	 his	 body	 was	 found,	 orders	 for
embalming	the	body	were	given	because	the	people	who	were	in	the	conspiracy
were	 aware	 that	 in	 the	 morning	 the	 embalmers	 would	 be	 needed,	 so	 every
arrangement	was	made	beforehand.
It	was	not	an	accidental	death.
He	was	followed	by	Pope	John	Paul	the	Second,	the	Polack	who	prohibited	all
birth	 control	 methods	 except	 the	 rhythm	 method	 --	 even	 though	 the	 Vatican
actually	owned	a	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
93
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
company	 which	 made	 birth	 control	 pills.	 He	 also	 dropped	 the	 church	 law
forbidding	 membership	 in	 the	 Freemasons.	 And	 he	 promoted	 Marcinkus,	 the
head	 of	 the	 Vatican	 bank,	 to	 Archbishop,	 and	 made	 him	 part	 of	 his	 personal
group.	This	is	the	man	who	was	running	all	the	Mafia	heroin	money	through	the
bank.
In	1982	Archbishop	Marcinkus	was	involved	in	a	huge	financial	scandal	after	an
Italian	bank	collapsed.	One	of	his	business	friends	was	found	hanged	beneath	a
London	bridge.	And	another	colleague,	who	was	in	jail	on	charges	of	murdering
a	police	commissioner,	died	from	drinking	coffee	with	cyanide.	These	were	the
people	who	could	have	been	witnesses	against	Archbishop	Marcinkus;	these	two
people	knew	all	the	secrets	--	and	both	were	killed.
A	warrant	for	the	arrest	of	the	Archbishop	had	been	issued,	but	the	Vatican	is	a
separate	government	--	just	eight	square	miles	--	and	the	Italian	government	has
no	power	to	interfere	in	the	Vatican.	And	the	pope	was	hiding	the	man	inside	the
Vatican;	the	arrest	warrant	was	waiting	outside.	These	are	your	religious	leaders.
The	 Polack	 pope	 also	 strongly	 reprimanded	 priests	 around	 the	world	 for	 their
involvement	 in	politics,	 but	 he	himself	 ordered	one	hundred	million	dollars	 of
Vatican	money	 to	 go	 to	 the	 Solidarity	 group	 in	 Poland	who	were	 fighting	 the
communist	government.
I	 am	 against	 organized	 religion	 because	 the	 moment	 anything	 becomes
organized,	it	has	its	own	vested	interest.	Then	religion	is	forgotten	--	other	things
become	 more	 important.	 Truth	 and	 the	 search	 for	 truth	 need	 your	 total
involvement;	nothing	else	should	be	in	the	way.
Organized	 religion	 becomes	 a	 prison.	 It	 gives	 you	 ready-made	 doctrines,	 and
your	only	function	is	to	believe	in	them	--	whether	they	are	reasonable,	logical,
or	not.	You	are	not	supposed	to	experiment	on	your	own	because,	who	knows?	--
you	may	find	something	which	goes	against	the	official	doctrine.
But	 official	 doctrine	 cannot	 become	 your	 enlightenment.	 The	 official	 doctrine
can	make	you	learned,	scholarly	--	but	it	cannot	make	you	wise,	it	cannot	make
you	intuitive,	it	cannot	make	you	aware	of	God.
I	 am	 criticizing	 the	 pope	 because	 he	 is	 not	 only	 the	 head	 of	 an	 organized
religion,	but	also	the	head	of	a	government.	It	is	not	much	of	a	government,	eight
square	 miles,	 but	 still,	 he	 is	 being	 accepted	 as	 head	 of	 a	 country;	 he	 has	 his
representatives	in	the	U.N.;	he	has	his	ambassadors	in	different	countries.
Religion	 is	 something	 so	 high,	 and	 politics	 is	 so	 low	 that	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be
remembered:	whenever	 there	 is	 a	mixture	 of	 something	 lower	with	 something
higher,	 it	 is	 always	 the	 higher	 which	 becomes	 polluted	 --	 not	 the	 lower.	 It	 is
always	the	higher	which	loses	its	quality	of	being	higher.	The	lower	has	nothing
to	lose;	it	cannot	fall	any	more	--	it	has	already	fallen	to	its	uttermost.
Religion	and	politics	should	be	separate.
And	the	moment	religion	becomes	organized,	it	becomes	politics.	Hence	religion
should	 not	 be	 organized	 at	 all;	 it	 should	 be	 everybody's	 private,	 personal,
intimate	search.
At	least	some	area	of	life	should	be	left	to	the	individual	where	he	is	totally	free,
without	 anybody	 else	 deciding	 for	 him,	 where	 he	 can	 open	 his	 wings	 like	 an
eagle	and	fly	across	the	sun	--	no	chains,	no	bondages,	no	hindrances.
Religion	blossoms	only	 in	 a	heart	which	 is	 absolutely	 free	of	 all	 doctrines,	 all
beliefs,	all	churches,	all	mosques.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
94
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
I	want	the	whole	world	to	be	religious	but	not	Christian,	not	Catholic,	not	Hindu,
not	Mohammedan.	Just	to	be	religious	is	enough.
Can't	you	see	these	simple	facts?	Honesty	is	honesty	--	it	is	neither	Christian	nor
Hindu.
Truth	is	simply	truth	--	it	cannot	be	Mohammedan,	it	cannot	be	Christian.	Love
is	simply	love
--	it	cannot	be	Eastern	and	it	cannot	be	Western.	Compassion	is	compassion	--	it
does	not	belong	to	any	race,	to	any	country,	to	any	climate;	it	is	not	dependent	on
any	 geography,	 or	 any	 history.	 These	 are	 the	 ingredients	 of	 a	 religious
consciousness.
Meditation	 is	 simply	 so	 scientific	 that	 just	 as	 you	 accept	 physics	 without
bothering	 about	 whether	 it	 is	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan,	 you	 accept	 chemistry
without	ever	thinking	whether	it	is	Protestant	or	Catholic...	When	you	go	to	the
doctor,	you	never	bother	whether	the	medicine	is	Hindu	or	Buddhist.
The	 inner	 reality	 is	 simply	 a	 pure	 silence:	 thousands	of	 flowers	 blossom	 there
but	 they	 don't	 belong	 to	 any	 organization.	 They	 are	 the	 reward	 of	 your	 own
search,	of	your	own	inward-going.
All	the	organized	religions	care	basically	depriving	humanity	of	religion	because
they	are	misdirecting	you.	They	are	always	directing	you	outwards	--	their	God
is	far	away	in	the	sky.
And	when	you	pray,	 folding	your	hands	 towards	 the	sky,	you	don't	 realize	 that
there	is	nobody	to	hear	you.
In	 fact,	 the	 one	who	 is	 praying,	 the	 one	who	 is	 alive	 in	 you,	 the	 one	who	 is
breathing	in	you,	is	the	God.
You	have	just	to	discover	it.
It	is	hidden	in	the	layers	of	your	false	personality.	Find	out,	in	your	innocence,
and	life	becomes	a	sheer	joy,	a	song	without	words,	a	dance,	a	celebration.
And	at	the	very	end	of	your	celebration,	there	is	nothing	but	tears	of	gratitude.	I
cannot	 think	 or	 conceive	 that	 those	 tears	 of	 gratitude	 belong	 to	 any	 religion.
They	 belong	 to	 the	 individual	 heart,	 overflowing	 with	 gratefulness	 towards
existence.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	MORNING	BEFORE	LECTURE,	I	SUDDENLY	FELT	AN
OVERWHELMING	URGE	 TO	 TOUCH,	WITH	GREAT	GRATITUDE,	 THE
FLOOR
WHERE	YOU	WALK.	IN	THAT	MOMENT,	I	HEARD	AGAIN	THAT	VOICE
--	IT	STILL
SOUNDS	LIKE	YOUR	VOICE:	 "IF	YOU	CAN	KISS	 IN	GRATITUDE	THE
PLACE	ON
EARTH	WHERE	I	HAVE	STEPPED...	 I	WANT	TO	TELL	YOU,	THAT	I'VE
STEPPED
EVERYWHERE	ON	THIS	EARTH.	"THIS	 IS	REALLY	TOO	MUCH,	FOR	I
SEE	MYSELF
IN	TEARS,	KISSING	EVERY	SPOT	ON	THE	EARTH.	AND	AGAIN	THAT
VOICE
COMES	 IN	 ME,	 OR	 FROM	ME,	 WHISPERING,	 "IF	 YOU	 CAN	 KISS	 IN
GRATITUDE
ALL	THE	EARTH,	AND	ALL	THAT	ABIDES	ON	THE	EARTH,	YOU	DON'T
NEED	ME
ANYMORE.	"PLEASE,	OSHO,	TELL	ME	THAT	I	WAS	JUST	IMAGINING,
THAT	IT
WAS	JUST	A	DREAM.	YOU	HAVEN'T	SAID	THAT	TO	ME,	HAVE	YOU?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
95
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
Sarjano,	 the	 idea	is	Catholic.	You	come	from	the	country	of	 the	pope,	and	that
fellow	goes	on	kissing	the	earth	wherever	he	goes	--	even	in	India,	where	kissing
the	earth	means	kissing	cow	dung.	When	he	kissed	it	here,	that	very	day	I	said,
"He	has	tasted	something	of	Hindu	religion."
It	 is	 just	 your	 imagination,	 Sarjano.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 your	 gratitude	 to	 be
expressed	 in	 stupid	 gestures.	 Just	 being	 grateful,	 your	 eyes	 full	 of	 tears,	 your
heart	just	melting	and	merging	with	existence,	is	enough.	Kissing	the	earth	is	just
an	idiotic	symbol;	I	could	never	have	said	anything	like	this	to	you.	But	you	love
me,	and	you	are	so	full	of	me	 that	even	 if	you	speak	 in	your	 imagination,	you
may	hear	my	voice.
But	remember	one	thing:	except	for	silence,	everything	else	is	your	imagination
--
howsoever	beautiful.	Only	your	silence	I	can	say	has	my	support,	because	only
in	your	silence	are	you	close	to	the	very	center	of	existence.	In	absolute	silence,
you	 become	 the	 very	 center	 yourself.	 But	 remember	 to	 avoid	 any	 kind	 of
imagination	--	all	imagination	--	even	beautiful	imagination,	apparently	looking
like	the	divine.
It	happened	once:	I	had	a	few	Mohammedan	friends	and	they	were	followers	of
a	 Sufi	 mystic.	 The	 mystic	 used	 to	 come	 to	 the	 city	 once	 a	 year	 to	 see	 his
disciples,	 and	 they	 were	 continuously	 telling	me,	 "This	 time	 when	 he	 comes,
some	way	has	to	be	found	so	that	you	both	can	meet."
I	said,	"There	is	no	problem	with	it.	I	can	be	his	host;	he	can	be	my	guest.	That
will	be	the	best	thing	because	he	is	going	to	be	here	three	days,	so	for	three	days
we	can	be	together."
They	liked	the	idea.	The	most	 impressive	thing	to	them	in	the	Sufi	mystic	was
that	he	saw	God	everywhere:	he	would	see	a	tree	and	he	would	go	and	hug	the
tree	and	start	talking	to	the	tree.	Almost	in	a	trance,	he	would	kiss	the	earth;	he
would	 hold	 your	 hand	 and	 kiss	 it	 and	 he	 would	 start	 talking	 in	 a	 trance	 and
address	you	as	"God!	My	Lord!"	People	were	very	impressed.
He	came	to	stay	with	me.	Before	he	could	kiss	my	hand,	I	said,	"Wait!	Do	you
really	see	God	in	me	or	have	you	been	imagining	for	years?"	--	because	that	is
one	 of	 the	 traditions	 in	 the	 Sufis:	 you	 start	 imagining	 and	 slowly,	 slowly,	 the
imagination	becomes	a	reality.
He	was	shocked.	There	was	a	moment	of	silence	--	painful	silence,	because	his
disciples	were	there.	But	he	was	an	honest	man;	he	said,	"Ah,	at	least	thirty	years
ago	I	started	on	the	path,	and	this	was	the	path	shown	by	my	teacher:	'Look	into
everything	for	God.'
"In	 the	 beginning,	 it	 was	 difficult	 to	 see	 God	 in	 a	 camel,	 in	 a	 donkey,	 in	 a
buffalo.	 But	 my	master	 insisted:	 All	 these	 forms	 are	 gods;	 you	 don't	 have	 to
judge	them	--	your	path	is	just	to	see	God	in	everything,	so	that	one	day	you	can
see	God	everywhere.	And	I	succeeded	 in	 three	years,	and	I	started	seeing	God
everywhere.	Now	I	see	God	everywhere."
I	 said,	 "Just	 listen	 to	me.	For	 the	 three	days	you	will	 be	here,	 stop	 imagining.
Just	see	 things	as	 they	are:	a	 table	 is	a	 table,	not	God;	a	camel	 is	a	camel,	not
God;	and	a	buffalo	is	a	buffalo,	not	God	--	just	for	three	days."
He	was	very	reluctant	and	afraid	and	nervous,	but	he	was	staying	with	me,	so	I
said,	 "I	 will	 remind	 you	 about	 this	 kissing	 and	 hugging	 --	 don't	 forget!	 After
three	days	you	can	hug	with	a	vengeance,	because	no	tree	can	prevent	how	much
you	hug	it.	For	three	days...	you	can	fill	the	quota	afterwards,	but	for	three	days	I
will	be	constantly	after	you.	You	have	to	see	things	as	they	are."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
96
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
There	was	no	need	for	three	days.	Within	just	one	day,	in	twenty-four	hours,	the
god	 that	 had	 been	 there	 for	 thirty	 years,	 disappeared.	 In	 the	morning,	 he	was
very	angry	at	me.	He	said,
"What	have	you	done?	I	really	see	a	table	is	a	table!	Just	now	I	saw	a	man	going
by	on	a	bicycle,	and	I	 saw	neither	 the	god	 in	 the	man,	nor	 in	 the	bicycle.	You
destroyed	my	thirty	years	of	practice."
I	 said,	 "Just	 think	 a	 little.	 If	 something	 that	 you	 have	 spent	 thirty	 years
discovering	was	 really	 true,	 then	 in	 one	 day	 it	 could	 not	 disappear.	 For	 thirty
years	you	have	lived	in	a	hallucination	--	you	created	the	hallucination,	and	the
hallucination	 can	 be	 so	 strong	 that	 all	 doubts	 disappear.	 And	 thirty	 years	 is	 a
long	time."
I	 told	him	a	story	of	Ramakrishna	which	is	very	rare	 in	 the	history	of	mystics.
After	attaining	enlightenment,	nobody	ever	 tries	 to	 look	 into	other	paths	 to	see
whether	they	also	reach	to	enlightenment	or	not	--	there	is	no	point.	You	wanted
to	reach	here,	you	have	reached
--	now	what	 is	 the	point	of	 finding	out	whether	other	 roads	also	 reach	here	or
not?	But	Ramakrishna	had	something	tremendously	significant	on	his	mind,	so
he	 gave	 six	months	 to	 each	 religion	 that	was	 available	 in	 his	 vicinity;	 for	 six
months	he	would	practice	the	religion	and	forget	everything	else.	Of	course,	he
was	already	enlightened	so	the	path	was	not	a	problem;	in	six	months,	he	would
reach	back	to	the	point	of	consciousness.
In	Bengal,	 there	 is	 a	 small	 local	group	of	a	very	 strange	 religion:	 they	believe
that	Krishna	 is	 the	only	man,	 and	 those	who	 follow	him	are	 all	women.	They
may	be	men,	but	that	is	only	an	illusion;	in	reality,	except	for	Krishna,	there	is	no
other	man	--	all	are	women.	He	is	the	lover	and	you	are	the	beloved.	In	the	night,
the	followers	of	that	sect,	men	and	women	both,	dress	alike	--	like	women.	And
even	men	sleep	with	a	statue	of	Krishna	in	their	beds	--	he	is	their	husband.
Ramakrishna	 followed	 that	 path	 also	 for	 six	 months.	 For	 others	 it	 was	 just	 a
ritual;	they	were	born	into	that	religion,	just	as	you	are	born	into	Christianity,	or
Hinduism,	or	Jainism.
You	don't	really	care;	it	is	just	accidental	that	you	are	born	into	a	certain	religion
and	you	follow	it,	but	it	is	a	formality	--	at	the	most.
But	Ramakrishna	was	not	going	into	those	processes	in	a	formal	way:	when	he
was	 following	 something,	 he	was	 following	 it	with	 totality	 and	 intensity.	And
almost	a	miracle	was	seen!	Even	in	the	day,	he	used	the	same	clothes	as	women
use	 in	Bengal.	Even	 the	people	of	 that	 sect	 told	him,	 "In	 the	day	you	 can	use
men's	clothes;	otherwise	it	looks	very	awkward."
But	he	 said,	 "When	 I	 follow	something,	 I	 follow	 it	 totally.	 I	 cannot	divide	my
day	from	my	night.	And	I	don't	care	about	the	world."
His	 breasts	 started	 growing;	 his	 disciples	 became	 very	much	 afraid.	 So	much
intensity	of	 projecting	 that	 even	 the	doctors	who	 came	 to	know	about	 it	when
they	visited	Ramakrishna	and	saw	his	breasts,	could	not	believe	it	--	because	this
was	 a	 physiological	 miracle.	 But	 his	 disciples	 whispered	 in	 the	 ears	 of	 the
doctor,	"This	is	nothing	--	he	is	having	monthly	periods!"
For	 six	 months	 continuously...	 his	 voice	 changed,	 it	 became	 more	 like	 a
woman's.	He	 started	walking	 like	 a	woman	 --	which	 is	 very	 difficult;	 difficult
because	only	a	woman	can	walk	that	way.	She	has	a	womb	inside	her	body	and
that	womb	gives	 a	different	kind	of	movement	 to	 the	 legs.	Man	has	no	womb
inside;	his	legs	have	a	different	movement.
He	 started	walking	 like	 a	woman,	 speaking	 like	 a	woman,	 his	 voice	 changed.
And	when	the	menstrual	period	started,	then	the	disciples	became	really	afraid.
They	said,	"We	have	lost	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
97
Chapter	9	-	Papal	politics:	organized	superstition
him.	 How	 can	 we	 get	 him	 back?"	 They	 tried	 to	 persuade	 him,	 but	 until	 six
months	was	up,	he	was	not	going	 to	change	his	path.	They	 said,	 "This	path	 is
dangerous.	 We	 don't	 think	 that	 these	 breasts	 and	 this	 period	 are	 going	 to
disappear	even	after	six	months.	Your	whole	life	you	will	be	a	laughingstock	--
and	we	are	going	to	be	laughingstocks	because	we	are	your	disciples."
It	 took	 almost	 six	months	 after	 he	 stopped	 for	 the	 change	 to	 take	place	 again.
Slowly,	slowly,	he	became	a	man	again	--	before	that	he	had	become	a	woman.
Such	a	deep	psychological	projection...	It	is	through	such	projections	that	people
are	experiencing	Krishna,	Jesus,	Buddha	--	and	when	they	experience	it,	they	see
it.
And	 if	 you	 say	 to	 them	 that	 it	 is	 only	 an	 illusion,	 how	 can	 they	 believe	 you?
Their	 illusion	 looks	 more	 real	 than	 you	 are.	 Mind	 has	 a	 capacity	 to	 project
anything	 and	 make	 it	 appear	 almost	 real;	 or	 sometimes,	 if	 the	 mind	 is	 very
powerful,	even	more	than	real.
But	my	path	 is	not	 the	path	of	 imagination:	 It	 is	 the	path	 that	does	not	use	 the
mind	at	all.
Imagination	and	projection	and	hallucination	and	illusion	--	they	are	all	parts	of
the	mind.
My	 simple	 approach	 is	 transcendence	 of	mind;	 so	 only	when	 you	 start	 seeing
absolute	nothingness,	utter	silence,	can	you	see	that	I	am	very	close	by.
In	that	silence,	you	have	heard	me;	in	that	nothingness,	you	have	seen	me.	But	if
you	 see	 something,	 if	 you	 hear	 something,	 then	 it	 is	 your	 imagination	 --	 you
have	fallen	from	the	beyond,	back	into	the	mind.
Only	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered:	the	mind	is	the	world	--	and	going	beyond
the	mind	is	the	beginning	of	God.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
98
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
10
Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
17	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	YOUR	SURGERY,	OR	HITTING	PEOPLE
HARD,	 I	 CAN	 SENSE	WHAT	 YOU	 MEAN	 BY	 IT.	 YET	 IN	 ALL	 THESE
YEARS	I	HAVE	NEVER
EXPERIENCED	IT	MYSELF.	TO	ME,	YOU	ARE	LIKE	A	POTTER:	I	FEEL
YOUR
HANDS	 MOLDING	 ME,	 GUIDING	 ME,	 LEADING	 ME,	 STRONG	 AND
FIRM,	BUT
ALSO	 WITH	 SUCH	 TENDERNESS	 AND	 LOVE	 AS	 I	 HAVE	 NEVER
EXPERIENCED
BEFORE.	 IT	 IS	 SUCH	 A	 JOY	 TO	 BE	 FORMED	 BY	 YOUR	 GORGEOUS
HANDS.
BELOVED	MASTER,	 IN	 MY	 DOUBTING	MIND	 A	 QUESTION	 ARISES:
CAN	IT
REALLY	BE	TRUE	THAT	YOU	ARE	GUIDING	ME	EVER	SO	GENTLY?
Prem	 Nandano,	 each	 individual	 needs	 a	 different	 treatment	 because	 each
individual	is	so	unique.	On	the	path	there	can	be	no	mass	surgery.	You	are	right
that	you	have	not	been	hit;	you	don't	need	it.
You	are	saying,	"Whenever	you	talk	about	your	surgery,	or	hitting	people	hard,	I
can	sense	what	you	mean	by	it."
Only	people	who	are	so	unconscious	that	unless	you	hit	them	they	cannot	wake
up...
everybody	is	not	so	asleep,	so	unconscious.	There	are	so	many	categories.	A	few
people	are	 just	on	 the	verge,	where	a	 small	push	by	a	 loving	hand	will	do	 the
whole	 surgery;	 a	 small	 push	 and	 the	 bird	 is	 on	 the	 wing.	 There	 was	 a	 little
hesitation;	 just	 that	 little	 hesitation	 has	 to	 be	 removed.	 A	 little	 fear	 of	 the
unknown...	and	the	only	way	to	remove	the	fear	of	the	unknown	is	to	push	you
into	the	unknown.	Because	what	is	unknown	to	you	is	known	to	me;	so	on	my
part	there	is	no	question	of	any	hesitation.
You	 say,	 "Yet	 in	 all	 these	years	 I	 have	never	 experienced	 it	myself."	You	will
never	 experience	 it.	 You	 are	 one	 of	 those	 fortunate	 people	 who	 need	 a	 very
tender	and	 loving	 treatment	 --	a	hit	can	destroy	you,	a	hit	can	make	you	more
afraid	of	the	future	and	the	unknown.
The	master	works	 according	 to	 the	need	of	 the	disciple;	 each	 according	 to	his
need.
You	say	to	me,	"You	are	like	a	potter.	I	feel	your	hands	molding	me,	guiding	me,
leading	me,	 strong	 and	 firm,	but	 also	with	 such	 tenderness	 and	 love	 as	 I	 have
never	experienced	before.	It	is	such	a	joy	to	be	formed	by	your	gorgeous	hands."
To	you	I	am	a	potter,	because	to	me	you	are	a	pot!	Now,	to	hit	a	pot	is	to	destroy
it	 --	 and	 a	very	 immature	pot;	 you	have	not	 even	gone	 through	 the	 fire	 test	 --
that's	why	you	have	not	experienced	it.
But	if	you	want	to	experience,	it	is	up	to	you:	just	wait	a	little!	Once	you	have
passed	 through	 the	 fire	 and	you	have	become	hard	 and	 capable	 of	 receiving	 a
hit...	 because	 the	hit	 is	 also	 so	beautiful,	 so	 loving,	 that	you	will	 forget	 all	 the
tenderness	and	all	the	love	that	I	am	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
99
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
showing	to	you	--	it	is	out	of	pity.	And	when	I	strongly	hit	somebody	--	that	too
is	out	of	love
--	my	hit	gives	you	dignity.	 It	 is	a	 recognition	of	your	 strength,	your	 integrity,
your	centeredness.
You	are	asking,	"Beloved	Master,	in	my	doubting	mind,	a	question	arises:	can	it
really	be	true	that	You	are	guiding	me	ever	so	gently?"	I	have	to,	you	are	fragile.
But	 you	 will	 not	 remain	 fragile	 forever.	 And	 it	 is	 a	 spiritual	 surgery,	 not	 a
butcher's	shop.
Rejoice	in	whatever	you	are	getting.	The	hits	will	also	come	in	their	right	time.
Perhaps	they	are	also	a	basic	need,	finally	--	just	as	a	child	is	born	and	the	cord
that	joins	him	to	the	mother	has	to	be	cut,	although	it	has	been	his	life	for	nine
months.	 And	 cutting	 this	 life	 source	 is	 the	 most	 shocking	 thing	 he	 will	 ever
experience	--	unless	he	meets	a	master.	Because	to	cut	a	physical	cord	between
two	 bodies	 is	 not	 a	 very	 big	 thing,	 but	 to	 cut	 the	 cord	 between	 your
consciousness	and	your	body	 is	 certainly	 the	biggest	 shock	possible.	 It	 comes,
finally	--	when	the	season	is	right,	and	the	moment	has	arrived	that	you	have	to
be	 taken	out	 of	your	body,	out	 of	your	 imprisonment,	 and	 left	 totally	 alone	 in
your	 tremendous	 freedom.	 This	 is	 called,	 in	 the	 mystic	 language,	 the	 second
birth.
The	first	birth	is	from	the	mother's	body.
The	second	birth	is	from	your	own	body.
From	the	first	birth,	you	become	a	personality.
From	the	second	birth	you	become	an	individual.
The	 first	 birth	 is	 bound	 to	 lead	 you	 one	 day	 to	 death.	 The	 second	 birth	 only
begins,	and	never	ends.	It	leads	you	to	immortality.
But	whatever	 is	needed	at	a	certain	 time	will	be	provided	 to	you.	That's	why	I
don't	give	you	a	discipline.	All	the	religions	are	doing	that	stupidity	--	they	are
giving	disciplines,	commandments,	without	even	bothering	about	whom	they	are
addressing.	Because	 to	one,	 something	 is	 a	medicine,	 and	 to	 another	 the	 same
thing	becomes	poison.
Unless	you	have	the	fortune	of	being	with	a	 living	master,	with	whom	you	are
related	--
not	the	way	people	are	related	to	organizations,	but	with	whom	you	are	related
individually,	 the	way	 lovers	 are	 related,	 in	 personal	 intimacy	 --	 only	 then	 can
care	be	taken,	and	you	can	be	helped	slowly,	slowly,	towards	the	final	quantum
jump.
I	 can	 also	 read	 in	 your	 question,	 between	 the	 lines,	 that	 somewhere	 you	 think
you	are	missing	the	hits.	Right	now,	any	hit	will	be	dangerous.	Just	wait	a	little
more	and	you	will	get	as	big	a	hit...	because	what	is	the	use	of	giving	you	small
hits?	 I'm	 accumulating	 all	 your	 hits	 for	 a	 single	 hit:	 one	 hit	 and	 your	 head	 is
gone!	Be	intelligent,	and	be	patient.
Mrs.	Harris	stood	before	 the	chimpanzee	cage	and	watched	in	frozen	horror	as
one	of	the	chimps	picked	up	a	peanut	and	placed	it	in	his	rectum,	then	pulled	it
out	and	ate	it.	The	distraught	woman	rushed	over	to	the	zookeeper	and	said,	"I
thought	 chimpanzees	were	 supposed	 to	 be	 the	most	 intelligent	 animal	 next	 to
man."
"That's	right,	lady,"	said	the	zookeeper.
"Then	why	is	he	doing	that	disgusting	thing?"	she	countered.
"Well,	some	boy	scouts	were	here	yesterday	and	gave	him	peaches	to	eat.	He	had
trouble	passing	the	pits.	Now	he	checks	everything	for	size."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
100
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	NIGHT	WHEN	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	FALSE	AND	THE
REAL,	 I	 CAME	 TO	 A	 PLACE	 INSIDE	 OF	 ME	 THAT	 COULD	 FOR	 THE
FIRST	TIME	REALLY
UNDERSTAND	YOU.	IT	WAS	AS	IF	I	WAS	LOOKING	AT	MYSELF	FROM
THE
OUTSIDE,	 AS	 A	 BODY	 THAT	 WAS	 GIVEN	 TO	 ME	 BUT	 WAS	 NOT
REALLY	"ME";	THEN	A	LAYER	OF	MY	PERSONALITY	THAT	WAS	ALSO
JUST	A	LAYER	OF
FALSENESS	 AND	 NOT	 REALLY	 "ME".	 AND	 EVEN	 FURTHER	 INSIDE
WAS	A	SPACE
THAT	WAS	VERY	SILENT	AND	BEAUTIFUL,	BUT	THAT	COULDN'T	BE
ME	EITHER,	BECAUSE	IT	WAS	NEITHER	MASCULINE	NOR	FEMININE,
NOR	COULD	IT
UNDERSTAND	 ANY	 LANGUAGE	 OF	 WORDS	 --	 IT	 WAS	 JUST	 A
NOTHINGNESS.
BELOVED	OSHO,	IF	NONE	OF	THOSE	THREE	THINGS	ARE	ME,	THEN
WHERE	AM
I?
Anand	Disha,	one	of	the	most	fundamental	things	to	be	remembered	--	not	only
by	 you	 but	 by	 everyone	 --	 is	 that	 whatever	 you	 come	 across	 in	 your	 inner
journey,	you	are	not	it.
You	 are	 the	 one	 who	 is	 witnessing	 it.	 It	 may	 be	 nothingness,	 it	 may	 be
blissfulness,	 it	may	 be	 silence,	 but	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	 however
beautiful	and	however	enchanting	an	experience	you	come	across,	you	are	not	it.
You	 are	 the	 one	who	 is	 experiencing	 it.	And	 if	 you	go	on	 and	on	 and	on,	 the
ultimate	in	the	journey	is	the	point	when	there	is	no	experience	left	--
neither	silence,	nor	blissfulness,	nor	nothingness.	There	 is	nothing	as	an	object
for	you,	but	only	your	subjectivity.
The	mirror	is	empty;	it	is	not	reflecting	anything.
It	is	you.
Even	great	travelers	of	the	inner	world	have	got	stuck	in	beautiful	experiences,
and	 have	 become	 identified	 with	 those	 experiences,	 thinking,	 "I	 have	 found
myself."	They	have	stopped	before	reaching	the	final	stage	where	all	experiences
disappear.
Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience.
It	 is	 the	state	where	you	are	 left	absolutely	alone,	nothing	 to	know.	No	object,
howsoever	beautiful,	 is	present.	Only	in	that	moment	does	your	consciousness,
unobstructed	by	any	object,	take	a	turn	and	move	back	to	the	source.	It	becomes
self-realization,	it	becomes	enlightenment.
I	must	remind	you	about	 the	word	"object."	Every	object	means	a	hindrance	--
the	very	meaning	of	the	word	is	"hindrance,"	objection.
So	the	objects	can	be	outside	you,	in	the	material	world;	the	objects	can	be	inside
you,	 in	 your	 psychological	 world;	 the	 objects	 can	 be	 in	 your	 heart,	 feelings,
emotions,	 sentiments,	moods.	The	objects	 can	be	even	 in	your	 spiritual	world.
And	 they	 are	 so	 ecstatic	 that	 one	 cannot	 imagine	 there	 can	 be	 more.	 Many
mystics	of	the	world	have	stopped	at	ecstasy.	It	is	a	beautiful	spot,	a	scenic	spot,
but	they	have	not	arrived	home	yet.
When	 you	 come	 to	 a	 point	when	 all	 experiences	 are	 absent,	when	 there	 is	 no
object,	then	consciousness	without	obstruction	moves	in	a	circle	--	in	existence
everything	moves	in	a	circle,	if	not	obstructed	--	it	comes	from	the	same	source
of	your	being,	goes	around.	Finding	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
101
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
no	obstacle	 to	 it	 --	 no	 experience,	 no	 object	 --	 it	moves	 back,	 and	 the	 subject
itself	becomes	the	object.
That's	what	J.	Krishnamurti,	for	his	whole	life,	continued	to	say:	that	when	the
observer	becomes	the	observed,	know	that	you	have	arrived.
Before	 that,	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 things	 in	 the	way.	The	 body	 gives	 its	 own
experiences,	 which	 have	 become	 known	 as	 the	 experiences	 of	 the	 centers	 of
kundalini;	 seven	 centers	 become	 seven	 lotus	 flowers.	 Each	 is	 bigger	 than	 the
other	 and	 higher,	 and	 the	 fragrance	 is	 intoxicating.	 The	mind	 gives	 you	 great
spaces,	unlimited,	 infinite.	But	remember	 the	fundamental	maxim	that	still,	 the
home	has	not	come.
Enjoy	the	journey	and	enjoy	all	the	scenes	that	come	on	the	journey	--	the	trees,
the	mountains,	the	flowers,	the	rivers,	the	sun	and	the	moon	and	the	stars	--	but
don't	stop	anywhere	unless	your	very	subjectivity	becomes	its	own	object.	When
the	observer	is	the	observed,	when	the	knower	is	the	known,	when	the	seer	is	the
seen,	the	home	has	arrived.
This	home	is	the	real	temple	we	have	been	searching	for,	for	lives	together,	but
we	 always	 go	 astray.	 We	 become	 satisfied	 with	 beautiful	 experiences.	 A
courageous	seeker	has	to	leave	all	those	beautiful	experiences	behind,	and	go	on
moving.	When	all	experiences	are	exhausted	and	only	he	himself	remains	in	his
aloneness...	 no	 ecstasy	 is	 bigger	 than	 that,	 no	 blissfulness	 is	more	 blissful,	 no
truth	is	truer.	You	have	entered	what	I	call	godliness;	you	have	become	a	god.
Anand	Disha,	you	are	asking,	"If	none	of	those	three	things	are	me,	then	where
am	I?"
An	old	man	went	to	his	doctor.	"I	have	got	toilet	problems,"	he	complained.
"Well,	let	us	see.	How	is	your	urination?"
"Every	morning	at	seven	o'clock,	like	a	baby."
"Good.	How	about	your	bowel	movement?"
"Eight	o'clock	each	morning,	like	clockwork."
"So,	what	is	the	problem?"	the	doctor	asked.
"I	don't	wake	up	until	nine."
Anand	Disha,	you	are	asleep	and	it	is	time	to	wake	up.	All	these	experiences	are
experiences	of	a	sleeping	mind.
The	awakened	mind	has	no	experiences	at	all.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	YEAR	AGO,	ON	MARCH	15TH,	I	WAS	VISITING	FRIENDS	IN	SANTA
FE.
EARLY	 THAT	 MORNING,	 MAHAMATI	 AND	 I	 WERE	 LYING	 IN	 THE
BACK	OF	MY
VAN	 WHEN	 IT	 WAS	 STRUCK	 FROM	 BEHIND.	 FOLLOWING	 THE
IMPACT	I	COULDN'T	BREATHE.	MY	NECK	AND	BACK	WERE	AFLAME
WITH	 PAIN,	 AND	 I	 PANICKED.	 MY	 HAND	 DISCOVERED	 MY	 MALA
AND	THE	STRUGGLE	DROPPED
WITH	THE	DEEP	REMEMBRANCE	OF	SANNYAS,	AND	I	RELAXED	TO
BE	AWARE
FOR	DEATH.	IRONICALLY,	I	BEGAN	TO	GET	AIR,	JUST	A	LITTLE,	AND
TOLD
MATI	NOT	TO	FREAK	OUT	IF	I	DROPPED	THE	BODY,	BECAUSE	I	WAS
STILL
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
102
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
INTACT.	 IN	 THE	 HOSPITAL	 EMERGENCY	 ROOM,	 WE	 BOTH,
SIMULTANEOUSLY,	 FELT	 YOUR	 PRESENCE,	 AND	 ECSTATICALLY
LAUGHED,	TO	THE	DISMAY	OF
THE	DOCTORS	AND	NURSES.	FOR	SEVEN	WEEKS	I	WAS	FLAT	ON	MY
BACK,	AND	MY	HEART	FLOWERED	AS	NEVER	BEFORE.	 THE	 SPINE
WAS	FRACTURED
IN	 TWO	 PLACES,	 AND	 THIS	 WHOLE	 YEAR	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 LAZY	 --
DOING	 ART,	 PORTRAITS	 OF	 YOU,	 AND	 A	 NOVEL	 DEPICTING	 MY
EXPERIENCES	WITH	YOU.
BELOVED	 MASTER,	 I	 AM	 SO	 GRATEFUL	 TO	 FIND	 I	 CAN	 LET	 GO
WHEN	DEATH
KNOCKS	ON	MY	DOOR,	AND	I	FEEL	SO	FORTUNATE	TO	LOOK	INTO
YOUR	EYES
ONCE	MORE.	THANK	YOU.	WOULD	YOU	LIKE	TO	COMMENT	ON	MY
EXPERIENCE?	 WAS	 IT	 REALLY	 YOU	 WHO	 CAME	 TO	 THE
EMERGENCY	ROOM,	OR	JUST	OUR	LET-GO	TO	EXISTENCE	AND	LIFE?
Atmo	Shahid,	my	whole	work	--	day	in,	day	out	--	is	going	from	one	emergency
room	to	another	emergency	room.	I	don't	have	any	other	work.	I	have	so	many
people	 in	 the	world,	 and	 they	 are	 so	 expert	 in	 creating	 emergencies,	 that	 I	 am
running	like	crazy.	Why	do	you	think	I	have	told	you	now	to	drop	the	mala	and
orange	clothes?	Because	it	is	getting	too	much!	--
running,	without	any	rest.
But	whatever	 happened	 to	 you	has	 been	of	 great	 value;	 this	 is	 the	 preparation
every	sannyasin	is	going	through.
Life	has	to	be	a	joy,	a	dance,	a	celebration.	And	when	death	comes,	it	has	to	be
welcomed	 with	 silence,	 with	 serenity	 --	 wholeheartedly,	 not	 holding	 anything
back.	This	is	a	way	to	kill	death	itself.
If	you	have	lived	joyously,	you	will	be	ready	to	welcome	death	too	--	invite	her
for	a	dance!	Death	is	powerful	only	over	people	who	have	never	lived,	who	don't
have	 the	 courage	 to	 relax	 peacefully	 in	moments	 of	 death	without	 any	 fear	 --
because	 no	 accident,	 no	 disease,	 nothing	 can	 make	 even	 a	 dent	 in	 your
consciousness;	you	are	always	intact.
But	 the	problem	with	people	 is,	 they	 live	 their	whole	 lives	unconsciously	 --	 in
such	 misery,	 anguish,	 anxiety,	 that	 it	 is	 almost	 necessary	 for	 them	 to	 remain
unconscious.	 They	 find	 new	 ways	 to	 be	 unconscious:	 drugs...	 anything	 that
makes	 them	 unconscious.	 But	 then	 when	 death	 comes,	 they	 fall	 into	 a	 deep
coma.	The	very	fear	of	death,	the	very	presence	of	death	makes	them	absolutely
unconscious,	without	any	anesthesia.
Only	for	these	people	does	death	happen.	Otherwise,	death	is	a	fiction.	It	is	just
moving	 the	house;	your	old	house	has	become	 such	 that	 renovating	 it	 is	more
troublesome	 than	moving	 into	a	new	house.	The	moment	 the	body	comes	 to	a
point	when	it	 is	no	longer	functioning	organically	--	when	its	 inner	structure	is
fractured,	 when	 things	 are	 not	 happening	 as	 they	 should	 happen,	 when
mechanisms	have	run	to	their	full	capacity...
Each	child	brings	with	himself	at	birth,	 the	genes	which	 tell	his	whole	history.
And	soon	it	may	become	possible	--	it	is	almost	possible	now	--	in	the	reports	of
the	scientists,	they	say	that	they	can	read	the	program	of	the	first	cells	that	begin
your	life.	At	least	they	will	be	able	to	know	the	great	events	in	your	life:	when
you	will	become	sexually	mature,	at	what	age;	when	you	will	become	old,	when
death	will	strike	your	body	just	to	make	you	free.
Death	is	in	the	service	of	life.	Life	never	dies.
But	in	unconsciousness	you	go	on	doing	things	that	you	are	not	clearly	aware	of
why	you	are	doing.	You	go	on	moving	because	everybody	else	 is	moving,	but
you	don't	know	where	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
103
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
you	are	moving	and	for	what.	You	go	on	living	because	everybody	else	is	living,
but	without	any	consciousness.
Why?	Why	should	you	wake	up	 tomorrow	morning	and	 still	 go	on	breathing?
Your	whole	past	proves	 that	 it	has	been	nothing	but	an	exercise	 in	futility,	and
you	 know	 perfectly	 well	 you	 will	 be	 repeating	 it	 as	 long	 as	 you	 are	 alive	 --
unless	 by	 accident,	 you	 come	 across	 a	man	who	 is	 awake.	And	 the	 awakened
people	 have	 become	 so	 few,	 as	 centuries	 have	 passed,	 that	 it	 is	 almost
improbable	that	you	will	come	across	an	awakened	person.
But	only	the	awakened	person	can	wake	you	up,	shake	you	up;	can	give	you	a
little	consciousness	of	what	you	are	doing:	This	 is	not	 life.	This	 is	only	a	slow
death	which	will	 be	 completed	 in	 seventy	or	 seventy-five	years'	 time.	You	are
dying	every	day,	every	moment.
The	great	masses	of	the	world	only	know	slow	death.
Only	very	few	people	who	have	become	awakened	have	known	the	tremendous
tidal	wave	of	life.
Just	 as	 the	 unconscious	 goes	 on	 dying,	 the	 conscious	 goes	 on	 becoming	more
and	more	alive.	The	unconsciousness	only	grows	old;	 the	conscious	grows	up,
becomes	mature,	reaches	heights	of	consciousness.	It	is	in	its	seed	in	everybody,
but	 the	 problem	 is	 how	 to	 challenge	 the	 seed,	 how	 to	 call	 to	 the	 seed:	 "Don't
remain	dormant!"	Only	 the	 awakened	person	can	create	 the	presence	 in	which
your	seed	inside	starts	waking	up.
It	was	a	good	experience,	Shahid.	You	remained	aware	in	the	moment	of	death.
Now	don't	take	it	for	granted.	You	have	to	be	aware	each	moment	in	life.
Sometimes,	particularly	in	accidents,	people	become	aware	because	the	accident
is	 such	 a	 shock	 that	 the	 unconsciousness	 disappears.	 But	 if	 they	 survive,	 the
unconsciousness	again	starts	gathering	around	 them	like	a	dark	cloud	and	 they
start	living	a	life	which	is	meaningless,	imitative,	not	knowing	why.
Goldstein	got	a	job	in	the	sports	section	of	a	large	department	store.	On	his	first
day	 there,	 the	 store	 manager	 overheard	 him	 with	 a	 customer:	 "Look,"	 said
Goldstein,	"these	fish	hooks	are	 fifty	cents	each.	But	 I	can	sell	you	 three	for	a
dollar."
"I	will	buy	them!"	exclaimed	the	customer.
"Now,	you	have	fish	hooks	but	you	need	a	fishing	line.	This	excellent	nylon	line
normally	costs	two	dollars	for	a	hundred	yards	but	I	can	give	you	two	hundred
yards	for	three	dollars,"
said	Goldstein.
"I	will	buy	it!"	exclaimed	the	customer.
"Now	 you	 have	 fish	 hooks	 and	 a	 line,	 but	 you	 need	 a	 rod.	 Here	 is	 a	 rod	 --
normally	costing	one	hundred	dollars,	but	I	can	sell	 it	 to	you	for	only	seventy-
five	dollars,"	said	Goldstein.
"I	will	buy	it!"	exclaimed	the	customer.
"Now	you	have	fish	hooks,	a	line	and	a	rod	but	you	need	a	fishing	boat.	Here	is	a
boat	 normally	 costing	 eight	 thousand	 dollars	 but	 it	 is	 yours	 for	 five	 thousand
dollars."
"I	will	buy	it!"	exclaimed	the	customer.
"Now	you	 have	 fish	 hooks,	 a	 line,	 a	 rod,	 and	 a	 boat	 but	 you	 need	 a	 trailer	 to
carry	the	boat	on.	Normally,	 this	one	costs	 two	thousand	dollars	but	 it	 is	yours
for	eighteen-hundred	dollars."
"I	will	buy	it!"	exclaimed	the	customer.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
104
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
"Now,"	said	Goldstein,	"you	have	fish	hooks,	a	line,	a	rod,	a	boat	and	a	trailer.
All	you	need	now	is	a	car	to	pull	your	boat	and	trailer.	Here	is	a	car	especially
made	 for	 fishermen,	designed	 to	pull	a	boat	and	 trailer	 --	normally	costing	 ten
thousand	dollars,	but	you	can	have	it	for	eight	thousand	dollars."
"I	will	buy	it!"	exclaimed	the	customer.
After	 the	 customer	 had	 left	 with	 all	 his	 purchases,	 the	 manager	 went	 up	 to
Goldstein.
"Goldstein,"	he	said.	"I've	been	running	this	store	for	thirty	years	and	never	have
I	seen	anyone	making	such	an	incredible	sale.	Starting	with	fifty-cent	fish	hooks
and	working	up	to	a	ten-thousand-dollar	car!"
"What	do	you	mean	I	started	with	fish	hooks?"	demanded	Goldstein.	"The	man
came	in	asking	where	he	could	buy	tablets	for	his	wife's	period,	and	I	told	him
that	what	he	needs	right	now	is	a	weeks'	fishing	holiday!"
This	is	your	life...	Why	are	you	doing	things?	Why	are	you	buying	things?	How
are	you	spending	your	life?	You	are	not	at	all	aware.	You	are	just	a	sleepwalker,
a	somnambulist.
Anybody	can	cheat	you	--	the	politicians	are	doing	it,	the	priests	are	doing	it,	but
in	your	unconsciousness	it	is	absolutely	natural.	Only	a	conscious	man	cannot	be
exploited.
Only	 a	 conscious	man	 really	 lives.	And	 those	who	 really	 live,	 die	 peacefully,
silently,	with	 a	 smile	 on	 their	 face.	 For	 these	 people	who	 die	with	 a	 smile	 on
their	face,	there	is	no	death	--
because	deep	down	in	their	consciousness	there	is	an	absolute	certainty	that	it	is
only	 the	 body	 that	 is	 being	 dropped.	 Life	 has	 continued	 always,	 and	 will
continue	always.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
AT	 THE	MOMENT,	MY	 LIFE	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 AN	 ENDLESS	 DIVE	 INTO
DEEP,	DARK	VALLEYS	OF	GREED,	JEALOUSY,	SELF-CONDEMNATION;
DEEP	PAIN,	AND
FEELING	 VERY	 LOST.	 COMING	 OUT	 OF	 THESE	 VALLEYS,	 I	 FEEL
REFRESHED,	MORE	CLEAR	--	LIKE	AFTER	A	THUNDERSTORM	IN	HOT
SUMMER.	BUT	THE
NEXT	 VALLEY	 FOLLOWS	 SOON	 AFTERWARDS.	 ARE	 THESE	 DARK
VALLEYS	A	SORT	OF	CLEANING,	AND	HAS	THIS	TO	HAPPEN	AGAIN
AND	AGAIN?
Prem	Vanshi,	 the	question	 is:	 "At	 the	moment,	my	 life	 seems	 to	be	an	endless
dive	into	deep	dark	valleys	of	greed,	jealousy,	self-condemnation,	deep	pain	and
feeling	very	lost.
Coming	 out	 of	 these	 valleys,	 I	 feel	 refreshed,	 more	 clear	 --	 like	 after	 a
thunderstorm	 in	hot	 summer.	But	 the	next	valley	 follows	 soon	afterwards.	Are
these	dark	valleys	a	sort	of	cleaning,	and	has	this	to	happen	again	and	again?"
As	long	as	you	wish.
Because	these	valleys	are	your	creation.	This	is	your	creativity;	they	don't	come
from	outside.
You	have	managed	your	life	in	such	a	way	that	these	have	become	your	constant
companions:	 greed,	 jealousy,	 self-condemnation,	 deep	 pain.	 You	 cannot	 live
without	them,	or	you	will	feel	very	alone.	However	miserable	they	are,	anyway
it	 is	 your	 family.	However	 ugly	 the	mother	 is,	 no	 boy	 says	 that	 his	mother	 is
ugly.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
105
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
The	gaps	between	valleys	are	not	your	creation.	The	valleys	that	you	create	are
so	painful	that	you	cannot	tolerate	them	continuously.	Once	in	awhile	you	want
to	be	alone,	and	when	you	are	alone	you	again	feel	fresh.
But	just	look	at	your	logic:	You	are	consoling	yourself	that	these	deep	valleys	of
darkness	are	cleansing	you.	Those	few	moments	between	two	valleys,	you	think
are	 cleansing,	 refreshing,	 because	 of	 the	 valleys.	 You	 are	 indebted	 to	 all	 the
nonsense	that	you	are	creating	yourself.
What	 is	 the	 need	 of	 greed	 in	 life?	 Greed	 arises	 only	 because	 your	 present
moment	is	empty,	and	to	live	in	an	empty	moment	hurts	very	much.	To	forget	it
you	project	greed	into	the	future,	thinking	that	tomorrow	things	are	going	to	be
better,	a	lottery	is	going	to	open	in	your	name.	But	of	course	you	have	to	wait	for
tomorrow,	it	cannot	be	just	now	--	and	tomorrow	never	comes.	All	that	comes	is
always	the	present	moment,	which	is	empty.
Greed	 is	 because	 we	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 live	 the	 present	 moment	 in	 its	 total
richness.
Just	the	other	night	I	saw	a	small	anecdote	about	a	great	Zen	master,	Ryokan.	He
used	 to	 live	 in	 the	mountains	 in	 a	 small	 hut.	Another	Zen	master	was	 staying
with	 him.	 The	 whole	 day	 passed,	 talking	 about	 poetry,	 painting,	 sculpture,
music,	and	they	both	forgot	about	food.
He	had	to	go	to	beg	for	his	food	in	the	town.	By	the	evening,	he	became	aware.
He	said,	"I	am	sorry	--	 to	me	it	 is	not	much,	 it	 is	my	usual	habit.	Sometimes	I
forget.	 But	 I	 am	 keeping	 you	 hungry,	 so	 I	 will	 go	 immediately	 and	 find
something	before	the	sun	sets."	So	he	rushed	down	the	mountain	and	his	friend
waited	and	waited	and	waited	for	three	hours.	No	sign...	and	he	was	feeling	so
hungry	 that	 he	 came	 out	 of	 the	 house	 --	 what	 has	 happened?	Has	 there	 been
some	accident?
And	he	could	not	believe	his	eyes:	Ryokan	was	sitting	outside	the	house	under	a
tree	 with	 closed	 eyes,	 a	 great	 grace	 on	 his	 face,	 murmuring	 --	 almost	 in	 a
whisper	--	new	haikus,	new	poetries.	The	guest	went	there,	shook	him	and	asked
him,	"What	happened	about	the	food?"
Ryokan	 said,	 "My	god!	When	 I	 saw	 the	 sun	 setting,	 it	was	 so	 beautiful	 that	 I
could	 not	 move	 away	 from	 this	 tree.	 From	 this	 tree,	 the	 sunset	 is	 a	 golden
experience.	 I	 had	 stopped	 only	 for	 a	 moment	 but	 the	 sunset	 and	 its	 beauty
impressed	me	so	much	that	I	forgot	all	about	food	and	all	about	you!	But	here
are	a	few	beautiful	haikus..."
The	guest	said,	"But	haikus	won't	help.	I	cannot	sleep	with	such	hunger."
Ryokan	said,	"Wait	--	I	will	go.	Although	it	is	late,	I	may	find	something."	And
he	rushed	down	from	the	hill	towards	the	town.	The	whole	night,	the	guest	was
tossing	and	turning,	and	coming	out	again	and	again	to	see	what	had	happened	to
Ryokan.
In	the	early	morning,	when	the	sun	was	rising,	the	guest	went	out	again	--	he	had
not	slept	a	single	wink.	Ryokan	was	still	 sitting	under	 the	same	 tree	 --	smiling
and	swaying	and	murmuring.
The	guest	said,	"Ryokan,	what	about	food?"
Ryokan	 said,	 "My	 god!	 When	 I	 reached	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 hill,	 people	 were
asleep	and	it	was	a	fullmoon	night.	It	was	so	beautiful,	you	would	not	believe.	I
have	seen	fullmoon	nights	before,	but	never	anything	comparable	to	this.	So	just
to	enjoy	it	a	little,	I	sat	under	a	tree	--
and	 I	 don't	 know	 when	 the	 night	 passed,	 but	 I	 have	 found	 some	 beautiful
haikus...
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
106
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
"And	living	in	this	glory	of	the	full	moon...	you	can	understand	me,	and	forgive
me.	I	forgot	all	about	food.	In	fact,	I	was	wondering,	when	the	sun	started	rising
--	what	am	I	doing	here?	So	I	returned	to	my	tree,	from	where	sunset,	sunrise,
both	have	such	a	divine	splendor."
The	guest	said,	"You	will	kill	me!	I	am	going."
Ryokan	 said,	 "But	 at	 least	 listen	 to	my	 few	 haikus.	 They	 are	 not	mine,	 truly.
Some	are	given	by	 the	 full	moon,	 some	are	given	by	 the	 rising	 sun,	 some	are
given	by	 the	birds	singing	 in	 the	 trees.	And	 life	has	been	so	 rich	and	I	was	so
nourished	by	it	that	even	the	idea	of	food	never	crossed	my	mind."
The	guest	 left.	He	 said,	 "You	 seem	 to	be	 a	madman!"	But	 a	man	 like	Ryokan
cannot	have	greed.
Each	moment	is	so	full	of	blessings,	each	moment	is	such	an	eternity	of	joy,	each
moment	is	such	a	dance	of	beauty.	Greed	arises,	Vanshi,	only	because	you	don't
know	how	to	live	herenow.
Greed	is	a	postponement	of	life.
It	is	one	of	the	most	stupid	things	one	can	do,	because	it	will	land	you	in	death
and	nowhere	else.
And	 a	 man	 who	 lives	 totally	 in	 the	 moment	 --	 his	 heart	 full	 of	 songs,	 his
presence	 radiating	 joy	 --	 how	 can	 he	 feel	 jealous?	The	whole	world	may	 feel
jealous	 of	 him,	 but	 he	 cannot	 feel	 any	 jealousy.	 These	 are	 your	 wrong
approaches	to	life,	that	greed	and	jealousy	arise	in	you	and	create	dark	valleys.
And	then	comes	self-condemnation,	because	you	know	deep	down	that	you	are
the	creator	of	your	greed,	of	your	jealousy.	But	self-condemnation	does	not	help.
it	makes	things	worse:	you	become	depressed,	you	start	feeling	unworthy	of	life.
You	start	feeling	that	you	don't	deserve	even	a	single	breath	more,	and	that	gives
great	pain.
You	have	not	lived	life	at	all.
Each	moment	has	gone	empty.
It	is	great	pain,	great	anguish	--	but	remember	it	is	your	creation.
When	you	become	tired,	and	out	of	the	tiredness	there	is	a	little	relief,	then	you
feel	clean.
No	 condemnation,	 no	pain,	 no	 jealousy,	 no	greed	 --	 but	 no	 energy	 either.	You
have	spent	all	your	energy	in	those	idiotic	fantasies.	Because	there	is	no	energy,
for	a	few	moments,	a	few	hours,	you	are	left	alone.	It	is	peaceful.	But	this	peace
is	not	the	authentic	peace.	It	is	the	peace	that	rains	on	the	graveyard;	it	is	not	the
peace	of	the	garden,	full	of	songs	and	full	of	flowers.
And	as	you	gather	energy	again,	the	old	companions	are	back.
This	wheel	will	go	on	rotating	unless	you	understand	and	jump	out	of	it.	And	the
only	way	to	jump	out	of	it	 is	to	live	each	moment	so	totally	that	it	brings	such
contentment,	 such	 fulfillment	 that	 you	 cannot	 be	 greedy.	 And	 you	 cannot	 be
jealous,	and	you	cannot	be	in	self-condemnation,	and	you	cannot	feel	pain.
Existence	gives	you	one	moment	by	one	moment.
So	if	you	know	to	live	one	moment	totally,	you	know	the	whole	secret	of	life.
An	Irish	worker	used	to	take	tunafish	sandwiches	to	work	every	day,	but	a	fellow
worker	noticed	that	each	day	he	would	take	one	bite	and	throw	the	rest	away	in
disgust.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
107
Chapter	 10	 -	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an
experience
"But	if	you	don't	like	tunafish,"	said	his	friend,	"why	don't	you	ask	your	wife	to
make	something	else?"
"Ah,"	said	the	Irishman,	"it	is	not	as	easy	as	that.	I	have	not	got	a	wife,	I	make
them	myself."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
108
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
11
A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
17	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	TELL	US	TO	BE	AWARE	OF	EVERYTHING	--	WHICH	MEANS	TO
BE	A	WITNESS	TO	EVERYTHING,	EVERY	ACT.	WHEN	I	DECIDE	TO	BE
AWARE	IN
WORK,	I	FORGET	ABOUT	AWARENESS,	AND	WHEN	I	BECOME	AWARE
THAT	I	WAS	NOT	AWARE.	I	FEEL	GUILTY;	I	FEEL	THAT	I	HAVE	MADE
A	MISTAKE.
COULD	YOU	PLEASE	EXPLAIN?
Manish	Bharti,	 it	 is	one	of	 the	basic	problems	for	anybody	who	is	 trying	to	be
aware	while	at	work	 --	because	work	demands	 that	you	should	 forget	yourself
completely.	You	should	be	involved	in	it	so	deeply...	as	if	you	are	absent.	Unless
such	total	involvement	is	there,	the	work	remains	superficial.
All	 that	 is	 great,	 created	 by	 man	 --	 in	 painting,	 in	 poetry,	 in	 architecture,	 in
sculpture	--	in	any	dimension	of	life	--	needs	you	to	be	totally	involved.	And	if
you	are	trying	to	be	aware	at	the	same	time,	your	work	will	never	be	first	rate,
because	you	will	not	be	in	it.
So	awareness	while	you	are	working	needs	a	tremendous	training	and	discipline,
and	one	has	 to	 start	 from	very	 simple	 actions.	 For	 example,	walking:	 you	 can
walk,	 and	 you	 can	 be	 aware	 that	 you	 are	walking	 --	 each	 step	 can	 be	 full	 of
awareness.	Eating...	 just	the	way	in	Zen	monasteries	they	drink	tea;	they	call	 it
the	"tea	ceremony"	because	sipping	the	tea,	one	has	to	remain	alert	and	aware.
These	are	small	actions,	but	 to	begin	with	 they	are	perfectly	good.	One	should
not	 start	 with	 something	 like	 painting,	 dancing	 --	 those	 are	 very	 deep	 and
complex	 phenomena.	 Start	 with	 small	 actions	 of	 daily	 routine	 life.	 As	 you
become	more	 and	more	 accustomed	 to	 awareness,	 as	 awareness	 becomes	 just
like	 breathing	 --	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 make	 any	 effort	 for	 it,	 it	 has	 become
spontaneous	--	then	in	any	act,	any	work,	you	can	be	aware.
But	 remember	 the	 condition:	 it	 has	 to	 be	 effortless;	 it	 has	 to	 come	 out	 of
spontaneity.	Then	painting	or	composing	music,	or	dancing,	or	even	fighting	an
enemy	with	a	sword,	you	can	remain	absolutely	aware.	But	that	awareness	is	not
the	awareness	you	are	trying	for.	It	is	not	the	beginning,	it	is	the	culmination	of	a
long	 discipline.	 Sometimes	 it	 can	 happen	 without	 discipline	 too.	 At	 least	 one
story	I	remember...
A	great	swordsman,	a	great	warrior,	came	back	home	and	found	that	his	servant
was	making	love	to	his	wife.	According	to	custom,	he	challenged	the	servant	--
gave	him	a	sword	and	told	him	to	come	out	of	the	house	and	let	it	be	decided;
whoever	remains	alive	will	be	the	husband	of	the	woman.
The	servant	did	not	even	know	how	to	hold	a	sword	--	he	was	a	poor	servant,	he
had	 never	 been	 trained	 in	 swordsmanship.	He	 said,	 "Master,	 although	 you	 are
following	a	convention,	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
109
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
and	respecting	even	a	servant	and	giving	him	an	opportunity,	this	is	for	you	just
a	 game.	 I	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 swordsmanship.	At	 least	 give	me	 a	 few
minutes	 so	 that	 I	 can	 go	 to	 the	 greatest	 master	 --	 who	 lives	 nearby	 in	 a
monastery,	a	Zen	monk	--	to	have	some	clue."
The	man	agreed.	He	said,	"You	can	go.	And	if	it	is	needed,	a	few	hours,	or	even
a	few	days,	or	even	a	few	months	--	you	can	get	disciplined.	I	will	wait	for	you."
He	went	to	the	great	warrior,	the	Zen	master.	The	Zen	master	said,	"Even	years
of	training	will	not	help	you.	Your	boss	is	just	second	to	me	in	the	whole	country
--	 you	 cannot	 hope	 to	 compete	 with	 him.	 My	 suggestion	 is:	 this	 is	 the	 right
moment	to	fight."
The	servant	could	not	understand.	He	said,	"What	kind	of	puzzle	are	you	giving
to	me:	this	moment	is	the	right	moment?"
And	he	said,	"Yes,	because	you	have	one	thing	certain	--	your	death.	Now	more
than	 that	 you	 cannot	 lose.	Your	master	 has	many	 things	 to	 lose:	 his	wife,	 his
prestige,	his	respectability	as	a	warrior;	he	is	a	great	landlord...	all	his	money	--
his	mind	cannot	be	total	while	he	is	fighting.	But	you	can	be	total.	You	have	to
be	 total	 --	 just	 a	 moment	 of	 unawareness	 and	 you	 are	 gone;	 you	 have	 to	 be
totally	alert.	This	 is	 the	right	moment;	don't	bother	about	any	discipline	--	you
simply	take	the	sword	and	go."
The	 servant	 came	 back	 within	 minutes.	 His	 boss	 said,	 "Have	 you	 learned
anything?"
He	said,	"There	is	no	need	of	learning	anything.	Come	out	of	the	house!"
And	the	way	he	shouted,	"Come	out	of	the	house"	...	The	boss	could	not	believe
what	magical	change	had	happened	to	his	servant.	As	he	came	out,	the	servant,
according	to	convention,	bowed	down	to	the	boss;	the	boss	bowed	down	to	the
servant.	That	is,	in	Japan,	part	of	their	culture;	even	with	the	enemy,	you	have	to
respect	his	dignity,	his	humanity,	his	divinity.
And	 then	 the	 servant	 started	 hitting	 the	 warrior	 --	 knowing	 nothing	 about
swordsmanship.
The	warrior	was	at	a	loss,	because	where	any	expert	would	have	hit,	the	servant
would	not	hit	because	he	had	no	idea;	he	would	hit	somewhere	where	no	expert
would	 have	 ever	 hit.	 And	 he	 was	 fighting	 with	 such	 totality	 that	 the	 warrior
started	 moving	 backwards,	 and	 as	 the	 warrior	 started	 moving	 backwards,	 the
servant	gathered	more	courage.	He	was	moving	his	sword	without	knowing	why
--	to	what	purpose,	or	where	he	was	hitting.	And	since	it	has	been	decided	that
his	death	is	certain,	now	there	is	nothing	to	worry	about	--	all	worries	belong	to
life.
Soon	he	cornered	the	master.	Behind,	there	was	the	wall	surrounding	the	master's
garden.
He	could	not	move	backwards	anymore.	He	was	so	afraid	of	death,	for	the	first
time	 in	 his	 life,	 and	he	 said,	 "Wait!	You	 can	have	my	wife,	 you	 can	have	my
properties;	I	am	renouncing	the	world,	I	am	becoming	a	monk."
He	was	trembling	with	fear.	Even	he	could	not	understand	what	happened.	From
where	 did	 this	 courage	 come?	 From	 where	 this	 totality?	 From	 where	 this
awareness?	 But	 it	 can	 be	 only	 in	 such	 special	 situations	 that	 without	 any
discipline,	just	the	situation	can	create	so	much	awakening	in	you.
Whenever	 I	 have	 read	 this	 story,	 I	 have	 always	 remembered	Adolf	Hitler.	 For
five	years	continuously	he	was	winning	 the	war	on	all	 fronts,	alone	 --	 fighting
the	whole	world.	And	 the	 reason	he	was	winning	 the	war	was	 that	he	was	not
listening	to	the	generals	at	all.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
110
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Fighting	is	an	art;	in	the	military	you	go	through	a	long	training.	Hitler's	advisors
were	not	generals	and	experts	in	military	science;	his	advisors	were	astrologers.
They	would	 tell	him	where	 to	attack	and	where	not	 to	attack,	and	 that	was	 the
reason	 that	 for	 five	 years	 he	 went	 on	 winning	 --	 because	 the	 other	 side	 was
following	military	science.	And	if	he	had	also	listened	to	his	generals,	then	there
would	have	been	no	possibility	for	five	years'	of	continual	victory.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	finally	Churchill	had	to	call	astrologers	from
India	 to	 find	 out	 where	 he	 was	 going	 to	 attack	 --	 because	 it	 is	 normal	 and
common	 sense	 that	wherever	 the	 enemy	 is	weak,	 you	 attack	 at	 that	 point,	 and
wherever	 the	enemy	 is	 strong,	you	avoid	 that	point	until	 the	very	 last.	But	 the
astrologers	have	nothing	to	do	with	the	army	or	fighting;	they	consult	the	stars.
The	enemy	would	be	following	military	science	and	would	be	preparing	at	 the
weakest	 point,	 knowing	 that	 this	 would	 be	 the	 point	 where	 Adolf	 Hitler's
generals	 would	 decide	 to	 attack.	 And	Adolf	 Hitler	 would	 attack	 the	 strongest
point	of	the	enemy,	where	they	were	fast	asleep...	not	even	bothering	--	because
no	military	 scientist	would	 ever	 suggest	 to	 attack	 at	 the	 strongest	 point.	 They
were	not	prepared	there;	they	were	preparing	at	the	weakest	link.
In	a	haphazard	way...	the	enemies	were	simply	puzzled:	What	to	make	of	it?	He
knows	nothing	of	 the	army;	he	knows	nothing	of	military	 science.	But	his	not
knowing	was	immensely	helpful	for	five	years	until	Churchill	decided,	 in	spite
of	himself	--	knowing	that	this	is	stupidity	--	that	astrologers	from	India	would
come	 to	 London.	 And	 from	 that	 very	 day,	 Germany	 started	 falling	 apart	 --
because	now	astrologers	were	against	astrologers;	it	was	no	more	a	war	between
two	armies.	As	 stupid	as	Adolf	Hitler	was,	Winston	Churchill	 had	 found	even
greater	idiots	from	India.	Things	changed	--	just	within	two	months,	Adolf	Hitler
was	retreating.
Whenever	I	have	come	across	the	story	of	the	Zen	master	and	his	servant,	I	have
always	remembered	Adolf	Hitler:	he	had	absolute	certainty	about	astrology,	he
was	total	in	his	action.
Not	even	a	single	doubt	crossed	his	mind,	ever.
The	 same	 must	 have	 happened	 to	 the	 servant.	 When	 death	 is	 certain,	 fear
disappears.	Fear	 is	only	 there	because	of	death.	But	when	death	 is	 certain	and
there	is	no	way	to	avoid	it,	what	is	the	point	of	being	afraid?	He	became	almost	a
man	of	total	integrity	--	knowing	nothing,	but	defeating	the	master	who	had	been
a	victorious	man	in	many	combats.
But	 this	 can	 happen	 only	 rarely,	 in	 extreme	 conditions.	 In	 everyday	 life	 you
should	follow	the	simple	course.	First	become	aware	about	actions	which	do	not
need	your	involvement.
You	 can	 walk	 and	 you	 can	 go	 on	 thinking;	 you	 can	 eat	 and	 you	 can	 go	 on
thinking.	Replace	thinking	by	awareness.	Go	on	eating,	and	remain	alert	that	you
are	eating.	Walk;	 replace	 thinking	by	awareness.	Go	on	walking;	perhaps	your
walking	will	be	a	little	slower	and	more	graceful.	But	awareness	is	possible	with
these	 small	 acts.	 And	 as	 you	 become	 more	 and	 more	 articulate,	 use	 more
complicated	activities.
A	day	comes	when	there	is	no	activity	in	the	world	in	which	you	cannot	remain
alert	and	at	the	same	time,	act	with	totality.
You	are	saying,	"When	I	decide	to	be	aware	in	work,	I	forget	about	awareness."
It	has	not	to	be	your	decision,	it	has	to	be	your	long	discipline.	And	awareness
has	to	come	spontaneously;	you	are	not	to	call	it,	you	are	not	to	force	it.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
111
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
"And	when	I	become	aware	that	I	was	not	aware,	I	feel	guilty."	That	is	absolute
stupidity.
When	you	become	aware	that	you	were	not	aware,	feel	happy	that	at	least	now
you	are	aware.
For	the	concept	of	guilt,	there	is	no	place	in	my	teachings.
Guilt	is	one	of	the	cancers	of	the	soul.
And	all	the	religions	have	used	guilt	to	destroy	your	dignity,	your	pride,	and	to
make	you	just	slaves.	There	is	no	need	to	feel	guilty,	it	is	natural.	Awareness	is
such	a	great	thing	that	even	if	you	can	be	aware	for	few	seconds,	rejoice.	Don't
pay	attention	to	those	moments	when	you	forgot.	Pay	attention	to	that	state	when
you	suddenly	remember,	"I	was	not	aware."	Feel	fortunate	that	at	least	after	few
hours,	awareness	has	returned.
Don't	make	it	a	repentance,	a	guilt,	a	sadness	--	because	by	being	guilty	and	sad,
you	are	not	going	to	be	helped.	You	will	feel,	deep	down,	a	failure.	And	once	a
feeling	of	failure	settles	in	you,	awareness	will	become	even	more	difficult.
Change	 your	 whole	 focus.	 It	 is	 great	 that	 you	 became	 aware	 that	 you	 had
forgotten	to	be	aware.	Now	don't	forget,	for	as	long	as	possible.	Again	you	will
forget;	again	you	will	 remember	--	but	each	 time,	 the	gap	of	forgetfulness	will
become	smaller	and	smaller.	If	you	can	avoid	guilt,	which	is	basically	Christian,
your	 gaps	 of	 unawareness	 will	 become	 shorter,	 and	 one	 day	 they	will	 simply
disappear.	Awareness	will	become	just	like	breathing	or	heartbeat,	or	the	blood
circulating	in	you	--	day	in,	day	out.
So	be	watchful	that	you	don't	feel	guilty.	There	is	nothing	to	feel	guilty	about.	It
is	 immensely	 significant	 that	 the	 trees	 don't	 listen	 to	 your	 Catholic	 priests.
Otherwise,	they	will	make	the	roses	feel	guilty:	"Why	do	you	have	thorns?"	And
the	rose,	dancing	in	the	wind,	in	the	rain,	in	the	sun,	will	suddenly	become	sad.
The	 dance	will	 disappear,	 the	 joy	will	 disappear,	 the	 fragrance	will	 disappear.
Now	the	thorn	will	become	his	only	reality,	a	wound
--	"Why	do	you	have	thorns?"
But	because	there	are	no	rose	bushes	so	foolish	as	to	listen	to	any	priest	of	any
religion,	roses	go	on	dancing,	and	with	the	roses,	thorns	also	go	on	dancing.
The	whole	existence	is	guiltless.	And	a	man,	the	moment	he	becomes	guiltless,
becomes	 part	 of	 the	 universal	 flow	 of	 life.	 That	 is	 enlightenment:	 a	 guiltless
consciousness,	 rejoicing	 in	 everything	 that	 life	 makes	 available	 --	 the	 light	 is
beautiful;	so	is	darkness.
When	 you	 cannot	 find	 anything	 to	 be	 guilty	 about,	 to	me	 you	 have	 become	 a
religious	 man.	 To	 the	 so-called	 religions,	 unless	 you	 are	 guilty	 you	 are	 not
religious;	the	more	guilty	you	are,	the	more	religious	you	are.
People	are	 torturing	 themselves	as	punishment,	as	penance.	People	are	 fasting;
people	are	beating	their	chests	with	their	fists	till	blood	oozes	from	their	chests.
These	 people,	 to	 me,	 are	 psychopaths;	 they	 are	 not	 religious.	 Their	 so-called
religions	 have	 taught	 them	 that	 if	 you	 commit	 anything	wrong,	 it	 is	 better	 to
punish	 yourself	 than	 be	 punished	 by	 God	 on	 Judgment	 Day	 --	 because	 that
punishment	is	to	be	thrown	into	the	abysmal	darkness	of	hell	for	eternity.
There	is	no	escape,	no	exit.	Once	you	enter	hell,	you	have	entered.
The	whole	humanity	has	been	made	guilty	in	some	measure	or	other.	It	has	taken
away	the	shine	from	your	eyes,	it	has	taken	away	the	beauty	from	your	face,	it
has	 taken	 away	 the	 grace	 of	 your	 being.	 It	 has	 reduced	 you	 to	 a	 criminal	 --
unnecessarily.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
112
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Remember:	man	 is	 frail	 and	weak,	 and	 to	 err	 is	 human.	And	 the	 people	who
invented	 the	 proverb,	 "To	 err	 is	 human,"	 have	 also	 invented	 the	 proverb,	 "To
forgive	is	divine."	I	don't	agree	with	the	second	part.
I	say,	"To	err	is	human	and	to	forgive	is	also	human."	And	to	forgive	oneself	is
one	of	 the	greatest	virtues,	because	 if	you	cannot	 forgive	yourself,	 you	cannot
forgive	anybody	else	in	the	world	--	it	is	impossible.	You	are	so	full	of	wounds,
of	guilt	--	how	can	you	forgive	anybody?
Your	so-called	saints	go	on	saying	that	you	will	be	thrown	into	hell.	The	reality
is,	they	are	living	in	hell!	They	cannot	allow	even	God	to	forgive	you.
One	great	Sufi	poet,	Omar	Khayyam,	has	written	in	his	RUBAIYAT,	his	world-
famous	collection	of	poetry:	"I	am	going	to	drink,	to	dance,	to	love.	I	am	going
to	 commit	 every	 kind	 of	 sin	 because	 I	 trust	 God	 is	 compassionate	 --	 he	 will
forgive.	My	sins	are	very	small;	his	forgiveness	is	immense."
When	the	priests	came	to	know	about	his	book	--	because	in	 those	days	books
were	 written	 by	 hand,	 there	 were	 no	 printing	 presses...	 When	 the	 priests
discovered	 that	 he	 was	 writing	 such	 sacrilegious	 things,	 that	 he	 was	 saying,
"Don't	be	worried,	go	on	doing	anything	you	want	because	God	is	nothing	but
pure	compassion	and	 love.	How	much	sin	can	you	commit	 in	seventy	years	of
life?	--	in	comparison	to	his	forgiveness,	it	is	nothing."
He	 was	 a	 famous	 mathematician	 too,	 renowned	 in	 his	 country.	 The	 priests
approached	 him	 and	 said,	 "What	 kind	 of	 things	 are	 you	 writing?	 You	 will
destroy	people's	religiousness!
Create	fear	in	people,	tell	people	that	God	is	very	just:	--	if	you	have	committed
a	sin,	you	will	be	punished.	There	will	be	no	compassion."
Omar	Khayyam's	book	was	burned	 in	his	day.	Whenever	a	copy	was	 found,	 it
was	burned	by	the	priests,	because	this	man	was	teaching	such	a	dangerous	idea.
If	 it	 spreads	 among	 human	 beings	 and	 everybody	 starts	 rejoicing	 in	 life,	what
will	happen	to	the	priests?	What	happen	to	the	saints?	What	will	happen	to	their
mythologies	of	hell	and	heaven	and	god?	All	will	disappear	in	thin	air.
At	 least	with	me,	Omar	Khayyam	 is	 one	 of	 the	 enlightened	Sufi	mystics,	 and
what	 he	 is	 saying	 has	 immense	 truth	 in	 it.	He	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you	 should
commit	sin.	What	he	means	simply	is	that	you	should	not	feel	guilty.	Whatever
you	do	--	if	it	is	not	right,	don't	do	it	again.
If	you	feel	it	hurts	somebody,	don't	do	it	again.	But	there	is	no	need	to	feel	guilty,
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 repentant,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 do	 penance	 and	 torture
yourself.
I	want	to	change	your	focus	completely.	Rather	than	counting	how	many	times
you	forgot	 to	remember	 to	be	aware,	count	 those	few	beautiful	moments	when
you	were	crystal	clear	and	aware.	Those	few	moments	are	enough	to	save	you,
are	enough	to	cure	you,	to	heal	you.	And	if	you	pay	attention	to	them,	they	will
go	on	growing	and	spreading	in	your	consciousness.
Slowly,	slowly	the	whole	darkness	of	unawareness	will	disappear.
A	young	man	 is	 about	 to	be	married	 so	before	his	wife-to-be	moves	 into	 their
apartment,	he	has	a	man-to-man	chat	with	his	pet	parrot.
"Now	 listen,	 buddy,	 there	 is	 this	 beautiful	 young	woman	whom	 I	 am	about	 to
marry	and	we	are	going	to	live	together	in	this	flat.	She	comes	from	a	very	good
family	and	I	want	you	to	forget	all	about	those	dirty,	four-letter	words	that	you
have	picked	up	from	living	with	me	these	past	few	years.	If	I	hear	you	utter	one
dirty	remark	in	front	of	her,	I	am	going	to	sell	you	to	the	zoo.	Got	it?"
"Okay,"	says	the	parrot.	"Got	it!"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
113
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
After	the	wedding,	the	couple	are	packing	their	bags	for	their	honeymoon.	There
are	 suitcases	 all	 over	 the	 apartment,	 and	 after	 hours	 of	 struggle	 everything	 is
packed	 --	 even	 the	parrot's	 cage	has	a	cover	on	 it.	But	 suddenly	 they	discover
that	one	shoe	has	been	left	out.	The	girl	tries	to	push	it	into	a	large	suitcase	but	it
just	won't	go	in.
So	the	husband	says,	"You	will	have	to	sit	on	top	and	I	will	push	it	in."
They	try	and	try	but	it	does	not	work.	"Let's	try	it	another	way,"	says	the	wife.
"Let's	both	be	on	top	and	push	it	in	together."
At	this	point,	the	parrot	pushes	his	covering	aside	and	says,	"The	zoo	be	damned.
This	one	I've	got	to	see!"
He	kept	in	control	of	himself	so	much,	but	there	comes	a	point	that	even	he	has
to	go	to	the	zoo.	He	says,	"Let	the	zoo	be	damned,	but	this	thing	I	have	got	to
see."	The	curiosity...	he	could	not	believe	that	this	kind	of	thing	is	possible.
In	the	beginning	you	will	also	find	many	times	that	perhaps	it	is	not	possible	to
be	 working	 and	 to	 be	 aware	 together.	 But	 I	 say	 unto	 you	 that	 it	 is	 not	 only
possible,	 it	 is	 very	 easily	 possible.	 Just	 begin	 in	 the	 right	way.	 Just	 don't	 start
from	XYZ;	start	from	ABC.
In	 life,	 we	 go	 on	 missing	 many	 things	 because	 of	 wrong	 starts.	 Everything
should	be	started	from	the	very	beginning.	Our	minds	are	impatient;	we	want	to
do	everything	quickly.
We	want	 to	 reach	 the	highest	 point	without	 passing	 through	 every	 rung	of	 the
ladder.
But	 that	 means	 an	 absolute	 failure.	 And	 once	 you	 fail	 in	 something	 like
awareness	--	it	is	not	a	small	failure	--	perhaps	you	will	not	try	it	again,	ever.	The
failure	hurts.
So	anything	that	is	as	valuable	as	awareness	--	because	it	can	open	all	the	doors
of	the	mysteries	of	existence,	it	can	bring	you	to	the	very	temple	of	God	--	you
should	start	very	carefully	and	from	the	very	beginning.	And	move	very	slowly.
Just	a	little	patience	and	the	goal	is	not	far	away.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
PLEASE	 TALK	 TO	 US	 OF	 TENSION	 AND	 RELAXATION.	 USUALLY,
WHEN	I	SIT
IN	 FRONT	 OF	 YOU	 I	 RELAX	 ALL	 THROUGH	 MYSELF.	 I	 LOSE	 ANY
ALERTNESS	 I	MAY	HAVE.	WHEN	 I	 AM	ALERT,	 THERE	 IS	 A	 SUBTLE
TENSION	WHICH	I	NEED	TO
MAINTAIN	 THIS	 WAKEFULNESS.	 IT	 WINDS	 ME	 UP	 LIKE	 A	 SPRING
AND	 THEN	 I	 FEEL	 HORRIBLE.	 HOW	 CAN	 I	 STAY	 AWAKE	WITHOUT
ALL	THIS	TENSION?	HOW
TO	FIND	THE	STILLNESS,	THOUGH	BUSY?	I	WATCH	YOU	MOVE	AND
SIT	WITH
SUCH	JOY.
Anand	 Trinda,	 it	 is	 the	 same	 question	 that	 I	 was	 answering,	 just	 written	 in	 a
different	way.
If	you	have	listened	to	my	first	answer,	your	question	has	also	been	answered.	I
will	just	tell	a	small	anecdote.
One	day	a	man	from	a	small	village	in	the	mountains	sees	a	tourist	driving	his
car	backwards	up	a	narrow	road	towards	the	top	of	the	mountain.	The	man	stops
him	and	says,
"Why	are	you	driving	backwards?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
114
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
The	tourist	replies,	"They	told	me	that	there	is	no	room	to	turn	a	car	around	on
top	of	the	mountain."
The	man	says,	"I	have	lived	here	all	my	life.	I	know	there	is	enough	space	to	turn
around."
Half	an	hour	later,	he	sees	the	tourist	driving	down	again,	backwards.	He	stops
the	car	and	says,	"What	are	you	doing	now?"
The	tourist	replies,	"You	were	right.	There	was	enough	room	to	turn	around."
Whatever	 I	 have	 said	 is	 simple:	 Start	 being	 aware	 with	 day-to-day,	 routine
actions,	and	while	you	are	doing	your	routine	actions,	remain	relaxed.	There	is
no	 need	 to	 be	 tense.	When	 you	 are	washing	 the	 floor,	what	 is	 the	 need	 to	 be
tense?	Or	when	you	are	cooking	the	food,	what	is	the	need	to	be	tense?	There	is
not	a	single	thing	in	life	which	requires	your	tension.	It	is	just	your	unawareness
and	your	impatience.
I	have	not	found	anything	--	and	I	have	lived	in	all	kinds	of	ways,	with	all	kinds
of	people.
And	I	have	always	been	puzzled:	why	are	they	tense?
It	seems	tension	has	nothing	to	do	with	anything	outside	you,	it	has	something	to
do	 within	 you.	 Outside	 you	 always	 find	 an	 excuse	 only	 because	 it	 looks	 so
idiotic	to	be	tense	without	any	reason.	Just	to	rationalize,	you	find	some	reason
outside	yourself	to	explain	why	you	are	tense.
But	tension	is	not	outside	you,	it	is	in	your	wrong	style	of	life.	You	are	living	in
competition	--	that	will	create	tension.	You	are	living	in	continuous	comparison	-
-	 that	will	 create	 tension.	You	 are	 always	 thinking	 either	 of	 the	 past	 or	 of	 the
future,	 and	 missing	 the	 present	 which	 is	 the	 only	 reality	 --	 that	 will	 create
tension.
It	is	a	question	of	simple	understanding;	there	is	no	need	of	any	competition	with
anybody.
You	are	yourself,	and	as	you	are,	you	are	perfectly	good.
Accept	yourself.
This	is	the	way	existence	wants	you	to	be.	Some	trees	are	taller;	some	trees	are
smaller.
But	 the	 smaller	 trees	 are	 not	 tense	 --	 neither	 are	 the	 taller	 trees	 full	 of	 ego.
Existence	 needs	 variety.	 Somebody	 is	 stronger	 than	 you;	 somebody	 is	 more
intelligent	 than	 you	 --	 but	 in	 something,	 you	 also	must	 be	more	 talented	 than
anybody	else.
Just	find	your	own	talent.	Nature	never	sends	any	single	individual	without	some
unique	gift.	Just	a	little	search...	perhaps	you	can	play	on	the	flute	better	than	the
president	of	the	country	can	be	a	president	--	you	are	a	better	flautist	than	he	is	a
president.
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 comparison.	 Comparison	 leads	 people	 astray.
Competition	keeps	them	continuously	tense,	and	because	their	life	is	empty,	they
never	live	in	the	moment.
All	 they	do	 is	 to	 think	of	 the	 past,	which	 is	 no	more,	 or	 project	 in	 the	 future,
which	is	not	yet.
This	whole	thing	drives	people	almost	abnormal	--	insane.	Otherwise	there	is	no
need:	 no	 animal	 goes	 mad,	 no	 tree	 needs	 any	 psychoanalysis.	 The	 whole
existence	is	living	in	constant	celebration,	except	man.	He	is	sitting	aloof,	tense,
worried.
A	 small	 life,	 and	you	are	 losing	 it	 and	 every	day	death	 is	 coming	closer.	That
creates	even	more	angst	--	"Death	is	coming	closer	and	I	have	not	even	started
living."	Most	people	realize	only	when	they	die	that	they	were	alive	--	but	then	it
is	too	late.
Just	live	the	moment.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
115
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
And	whatever	qualities	and	whatever	talents	you	have,	use	them	to	the	fullest.
One	of	the	mystics	in	India,	Kabir,	was	a	weaver.	He	had	thousands	of	followers
and	still	he	continued	to	weave	clothes.	Even	kings	were	his	followers.
The	king	of	Varanasi	asked	him,	"Master,	it	doesn't	look	good,	it	makes	us	feel
embarrassed.	We	can	take	care	of	you.	There	is	no	need	for	you	to	weave	clothes
and	every	week	on	market	day,	go	into	the	market	to	sell	your	clothes.	Just	think
of	us:	people	laugh	at	us."
Kabir	said,	"I	can	understand	your	problem	but	I	have	only	one	talent	and	that	is
to	weave	beautiful	clothes.	If	I	stop	doing	it,	who	will	do	it?	And	God	comes	in
different	 faces,	 in	 different	 bodies,	 to	 purchase	 clothes	 every	 week	 in	 the
marketplace."
He	used	 to	address	every	customer,	 "Lord,	be	very	careful	of	 the	cloth.	 I	have
been	weaving	it,	not	just	like	any	other	weaver	--	my	songs	are	in	it	and	my	soul
is	in	it.	I	have	poured	my	whole	being	in	it.	Be	careful,	use	it	with	tenderness	and
love	and	remember:	Kabir	has	woven	it	especially	for	you,	Lord."	And	it	was	not
something	that	he	was	addressing	to	anybody	in	particular	--	any	customer!
This	was	his	contribution.	He	used	to	say	to	his	disciples,	"What	else	can	I	do?	I
am	doing	my	best:	I	can	weave,	I	can	sing,	I	can	dance	--	and	I	am	immensely
contented."
Whatever	 you	 are	 doing,	 if	 there	 is	 contentment	 and	 a	 feeling	 that	 this	whole
existence	is	nothing	but	the	manifestation	of	godliness,	that	we	are	traveling	on
holy	earth,	that	whomever	you	are	meeting,	you	are	meeting	God	--	there	is	no
other	way;	only	faces	are	different,	but	 the	 inner	reality	 is	 the	same	--	all	your
tensions	 will	 disappear.	 And	 the	 energy	 that	 is	 involved	 in	 tensions	 will	 start
becoming	your	grace,	your	beauty.
Then	life	will	not	be	just	an	ordinary,	routine,	day-to-day	existence,	but	a	dance
from	cradle	to	grave.	And	existence	will	be	immensely	enriched	by	your	grace,
by	your	relaxation,	by	your	silence,	by	your	awareness.
You	will	not	leave	the	world	without	contributing	something	valuable	to	it.	But
people	 are	 always	 looking	 at	 others,	 at	 what	 others	 are	 doing	 --	 somebody	 is
playing	the	flute	and	you	cannot,	and	immediately	there	is	misery;	somebody	is
painting	and	you	cannot,	and	there	is	misery.
Whatever	you	are	doing,	do	 it	with	such	 love,	with	such	care	 that	 the	smallest
thing	in	the	world	becomes	a	piece	of	art.	It	will	bring	great	joy	to	you.	And	it
will	create	a	world	without	competition,	without	comparison;	it	will	give	dignity
to	all	people;	it	will	restore	their	pride,	which	religions	have	destroyed.
In	my	whole	life,	I	have	never	judged	any	person.	If	God	is	happy	with	him,	why
should	 I	 be	 worried	 whether	 he	 is	 a	 thief	 or	 a	 murderer?	 Perhaps	 that	 is	 the
function	existence	wants	him	to	do.	All	that	is	needed	is	that	he	should	do	it	with
as	much	artfulness	and	as	much	intelligence	as	he	can	gather	--	with	his	totality.
Any	act	done	with	totality	becomes	your	prayer.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
116
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
ROCKS	 EASILY	 DESTROY	 FLOWERS.	 THE	 POLITICIANS	 AND
RELIGIONS
SENSE	 THAT	 ENLIGHTENMENT,	 FREEDOM	 AND	 INDIVIDUALITY
THREATEN
THEIR	POWER.	IS	IT	FEAR	ALONE	THAT	IS	THE	BASIS	OF	THE	DARK
USE	OF
INTELLIGENCE	TO	CRUSH	MAN'S	FINEST	BLOSSOMS?	OR	 IS	THERE
AN
UNCONSCIOUS	URGE	FOR	"ENDARKENMENT"	TOO?
Devageet,	 there	 is	 an	 unconscious	 urge	 for	 endarkenment	 too.	 It	 was	 only	 a
hundred	years	ago	that	Sigmund	Freud	stumbled,	in	the	unconsciousness	of	man,
on	a	very	strange	instinct.
Man	 has	 been,	 for	 almost	 ten	 thousand	 years,	 working	 on	 himself,	 on	 his
consciousness,	but	it	was	left	to	Freud	to	find	a	totally	new	idea.	He	himself	was
shocked,	but	when	he	came,	across	 it	again	and	again,	 in	different	patients,	he
had	to	give	it	recognition.	And	the	idea	was,	that	just	as	there	is	a	lust	for	life,	to
balance	it	 in	the	unconscious	of	the	human	mind,	there	is	an	instinct	for	death.
Perhaps	 this	 was	 one	 of	 the	 great	 contributions	 of	 Sigmund	 Freud	 to	 human
knowledge,	and	for	the	future	transformation	of	man.
Slowly,	 slowly,	 then	 he	 started	 gathering	 facts,	 and	 now	 it	 is	 almost	 an
established	thing	that	 in	 life,	everything	exists	with	its	opposite	balancing	it.	 If
there	 is	 a	 lust	 for	 life	 --	 that	 one	wants	 to	 live	 --	 somewhere	 hidden,	 there	 is
bound	 to	 be	 a	 lust	 for	 death.	 In	 certain	 situations,	 it	may	get	 a	 grip	 on	 you	 --
that's	 why	 so	 many	 people	 commit	 suicide.	 Otherwise,	 suicide	 has	 no
explanation.
Devageet	is	asking:	"Rocks	easily	destroy	flowers.	The	politicians	and	religions
sense	 that	 enlightenment,	 freedom	 and	 individuality	 threaten	 their	 power.	 Is	 it
fear	alone	 that	 is	 the	basis	of	 the	dark	use	of	 intelligence	 to	crush	man's	 finest
blossoms?	or	is	there	an	unconscious	urge	for	'endarkenment'	too?"
There	is;	there	has	to	be.	Just	as	there	is	a	longing	for	enlightenment,	to	reach	to
the	 highest	 peak	 of	 consciousness,	 there	 is	 certainly,	 parallel	 to	 it	 in	 the
unconscious	of	 human	mind,	 a	 deep	urge	 to	 drown	oneself	 into	darkness,	 into
death.
It	has	been	observed,	although	never	made	clear,	by	all	the	physicians	of	all	the
ages,	 that	 there	 are	 people	 who	 can	 be	 helped	 by	 medicine	 but	 it	 seems
impossible	 to	 help	 them	 because	 they	 have	 completely	 lost	 the	willpower,	 the
will	 to	 live,	 --	 completely.	 They	 don't	 support	 the	 medicine.	 But	 none	 of	 the
physicians	 found	 the	 thing	 that	 Sigmund	 Freud	 discovered.	 Perhaps	 this	 had
some	 sense	 in	 it:	 a	 man	 who	 loses	 the	 will	 to	 live	 is	 bound	 to	 replace	 it	 by
something	of	its	opposite:	--	the	will	to	die.
And	now	medicine	accepts	that	the	physician	can	only	help	by	his	medicines	and
other	 things,	 if	 the	person	wants	 to	 live.	 If	 the	person	has	dropped	 the	 idea	of
living,	then	all	those	medicines	are	useless.	Medicines	don't	cure	you.	Your	will
to	 live	 cures	 you	 --	 medicines	 are	 only	 a	 secondary	 help,	 a	 support.	 But	 if
somebody	has	moved	to	the	opposite	pole	--	the	instinct	for	death,	for	darkness	-
-	then	no	medicine	can	pull	him	out.
As	I	was	reading	the	question,	I	thought	about	AIDS.	Perhaps	someday	it	may	be
found	that	AIDS	is	nothing	but	an	unconscious	desire	to	die;	that's	why	scientists
are	unable	to	find	any	cure	for	it.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
117
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
At	 this	moment	 in	 history,	 Devageet's	 question	 becomes	 even	more	 pertinent,
because	 one	 wonders	 that	 seventy-five	 percent	 of	 the	 budget	 of	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	is	being	devoted	to	create	destructive	weapons	--	nuclear	weapons,	and
half	of	humanity	 is	 starving.	Thousands	of	people	are	dying	without	medicine,
and	 millions	 of	 children	 are	 dying	 because	 they	 cannot	 get	 very	 inexpensive
vaccines.
On	 the	one	hand,	humanity	 is	on	 the	verge,	 just	because	of	overpopulation,	of
dying	of	starvation;	and	on	the	other	hand,	all	politicians	in	the	world	have	only
one	 desire:	 to	 become	 nuclear	 powers.	 Five	 countries	 are	 already	 nuclear
powers,	 and	 by	 the	 end	 of	 this	 century,	 twenty-five	 more	 countries	 will	 be
nuclear	powers.	Already,	we	have	enough	nuclear	weapons	to	destroy	humanity
seven	times.
It	seems	absolutely	ridiculous	now	to	go	on	piling	up	nuclear	weapons.	Billions
of	dollars	are	wasted	on	nuclear	weapons	while	children	are	dying	because	they
cannot	get	medicine,	they	cannot	get	food.	By	the	end	of	this	century,	half	of	the
population	of	the	world	will	die	from	starvation;	and	the	other	half,	perhaps,	will
die	through	nuclear	warfare.
It	seems	it	is	not	only	one	individual,	but	perhaps	the	whole	of	humanity	that	has
lost	the	will	to	live,	the	will	to	be	more	conscious,	the	will	to	be	more	aware,	the
will	to	reach	to	the	highest	peak	of	enlightenment,	to	be	a	Gautam	Buddha.
On	 the	 contrary,	 people	 are	 waiting	 to	 disappear	 into	 darkness,	 into	 death,
because	life	is	so	meaningless	and	so	futile.	There	seems	to	be	no	reason	to	go
on	living.	For	the	first	time,	on	a	tremendous	scale,	millions	of	people	are	feeling
meaninglessness.	It	is	creating	tremendous	anxiety,	and	it	seems	death	is	the	only
cure.	With	death,	everything	will	subside.
There	will	be	no	problem,	no	anxiety,	no	struggle,	no	jealousy,	no	tension.
Perhaps,	 Devageet,	 your	 word	 "endarkenment"	 may	 become	 a	 contribution	 to
our	 language,	 as	 the	 opposite	 of	 enlightenment.	 People	 have	 always	 lived
unconsciously,	but	 today,	 the	unconsciousness	has	 reached	 to	 such	a	point	 that
even	death	is	preferable	to	unconsciousness.
A	Scotsman	named	Angus	needed	a	new	kilt.	When	he	went	 to	pick	out	some
material	at	the	store,	he	decided	to	purchase	two	extra	yards	of	fabric	to	make	a
matching	scarf	for	his	girlfriend.
He	then	went	home	and	made	such	a	beautiful	kilt	that	when	he	tried	it	on,	and
looked	in	the	mirror,	he	forgot	all	about	the	scarf	and	thought,	"I	shall	go	right
now	and	show	this	to	my	lady."
As	 he	 ran	 out	 of	 the	 door,	 a	 thread	 of	 the	 new	 kilt	 caught	 on	 the	 doorway,
unraveling	the	garment.	Eventually,	Angus	was	running	across	the	heather	with
his	jewels	dangling	in	the	dew.	He	got	to	his	girlfriend's	house	and	knocked	on
the	door.
As	his	girlfriend	opened	the	door	and	looked	him	up	and	down,	she	said,	"Hello
Angus,	so	nice	of	you	to	drop	in."
"Hello	my	 bonny	 lass.	And	what	 do	 you	 think	 of	 this?"	Angus	 said,	 pointing
down	to	where	he	thought	his	new	kilt	was.
She	said,	"Ah	Angus,	it	is	just	lovely."
Angus	said,	"That's	right	my	pretty	lass,	and	I	have	got	two	more	yards	at	home
to	wrap	around	your	neck."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
118
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Man	has	always	lived	in	unconsciousness,	but	the	darkness	was	never	as	much
as	it	is	today.	There	have	been	nights,	but	always	the	dawn	has	come.	This	time
it	seems	to	be	doubtful	whether	the	dawn	will	come	or	not.
I	am	not	a	pessimist,	but	I	am	no	longer	an	optimist	either.	I	used	to	be	--	now,	I
am	simply	a	realist.	And	the	reality	is:	perhaps	we	are	very	close	to	the	end	of
this	beautiful	planet,	with	all	its	beauty,	all	its	life,	and	all	its	great	achievements.
There	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 ray	 of	 hope	 from	 anywhere.	 And	 perhaps	 when	 I	 am
saying	this,	 it	 is	not	me	who	is	saying	it;	perhaps	 it	 is	existence	 itself	who	has
lost	hope	about	humanity	and	its	future.
The	only	thing	that	I	still	go	on	dreaming	for	 is	my	people.	Perhaps	 the	planet
will	not	be	saved,	but	those	who	have	come	to	me,	if	they	make	a	little	effort	to
become	 conscious,	 to	 create	 a	 longing	 for	 enlightenment,	 at	 least	 they	 can	 be
saved.	But	if	you	go	on	behaving	like	the	masses	of	the	world,	you	are	also	a	lost
case.
Immense	 responsibility	 rests	 on	you	because	nowhere	 else	 in	 the	whole	world
are	 people	 trying,	 even	 in	 small	 groups,	 to	 achieve	 enlightenment,	 to	 be
meditative,	to	be	loving,	to	be	rejoicing.	We	are	a	very	small	island	in	the	ocean
of	the	world,	but	it	does	not	matter.	If	these	few	people	can	be	saved,	the	whole
heritage	of	humanity,	the	heritage	of	all	the	mystics,	of	all	the	awakened	people,
can	be	saved	through	you.
If	 this	planet	dies,	perhaps	on	another	planet...	There	are	fifty	thousand	planets
which	 can	 sustain	 life;	 perhaps	 civilization	 has	 to	 begin	 from	 ABC	 on	 some
other	 planet.	 But	 who	 will	 be	 the	 pioneers?	 These	 dark	 masses,	 utterly
unconscious,	cannot	be.	Only	a	few	chosen	ones	who	have	strived	hard	to	make
themselves	deserving	of	light,	of	eternal	life,	of	some	experience	of	godliness	--
perhaps	they	will	be	the	ones	who	will	be	starting	a	new	civilization	somewhere
in	the	universe,	on	some	new	planet.
I	 have	 never	 said	 this	 before	 but,	 going	 around	 the	 world,	 I	 have	 felt	 such	 a
wound	in	my	heart	that	the	people	who	need	to	be	saved	are	the	people	who	are
creating	every	kind	of	barrier	to	being	saved.	Even	to	approach	them	has	become
impossible.	And	seeing	the	whole	world,	I	started	feeling	that	there	is	now	only
one	possibility,	and	that	is	to	create	in	the	consciousness	of	those	few	who	have
come	close	to	me,	a	Noah's	Ark.	It	will	not	be	a	physical	thing,	but	a	Noah's	Ark
of	 consciousness	 which	 moves	 a	 small	 group	 of	 conscious	 people	 to	 another
planet.	 That	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 possibility	 to	 save	 the	 great	 heritage	 of
humanity.
You	cannot	depend	any	longer	on	the	politicians	and	on	the	priests,	and	on	the
masses	who	seem	to	be	willing,	deeply	desiring,	 to	die.	Death	seems	 to	be	 the
greatest	desire	in	the	world	today,	and	because	I	have	been	talking	about	life	and
love	and	laughter,	I	have	been	condemned	from	every	corner.
I	 can	 understand	 the	 reason:	 to	 spread	 the	message	 of	 life,	 love	 and	 laughter
amongst	people	who,	deep	down,	are	getting	ready	to	commit	a	global	suicide...
this	is	very	contradictory	to	them.
Perhaps	we	will	 have	 to	meet	 on	 some	other	 planet	 --	 this	 planet	 seems	 to	 be
spent.	And	it	is	not	new:	planets	are	born,	planets	die;	stars	are	born,	stars	die	--
so	 it	 is	 not	 something	 strange.	 And	 the	 preparations	 are	 going	 so	 well	 that	 it
seems	almost	an	 impossibility	 for	 life	 to	survive	here	on	 this	earth.	The	whole
blame	goes	on	those	vested	interests	which	have	kept	humanity	unconscious,	and
don't	want	man	to	become	intelligent	and	conscious,	alert	and	aware.	Anyway,	it
seems	too	late.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
119
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
The	 police	were	 investigating	 the	 death	 of	Markowitz,	 the	 dress	manufacturer
who	had	jumped	from	the	window	of	his	office.	The	detective	decided	to	query
Marlone,	his	lovely	young	secretary.
"Can	you	offer	any	explanation?"	he	asked	the	girl.
"Well,	after	working	for	Mr.	Markowitz	one	month,"	she	began,	"I	got	a	forty-
dollar-a-week	 raise.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 second	month,	 he	 gave	me	 a	 beautiful
black	necklace.	At	the	end	of	the	third	month,	he	gave	me	a	new	Thunderbird,
and	 a	 stunning	Persian	 lamb	 coat.	 Then	 he	 asked	me	 if	 I	would	 be	willing	 to
make	 love,	and	how	much	I	would	charge	him.	I	 told	him	that	he	had	been	so
nice	 to	 me,	 I	 would	 charge	 him	 only	 ten	 dollars,	 even	 though	 I	 was	 getting
twenty	from	the	other	guys	in	the	office.	And	that	is	when	he	jumped	out	of	the
window."
Okay	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
120
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
12
Life	itself	is	a	miracle
18	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	HAPPENS	TO	HUMAN	CONSCIOUSNESS	WHEN	THE	PEOPLE	OF
THE
WORLD	 SUDDENLY	 REALIZE	 THEY	 ARE	 IN	 THE	 MIDST	 OF	 AN
UNSTOPPABLE,	 DEVASTATING	 PLAGUE	 THAT	 WILL	 KILL	 MOST	 OF
THE	PEOPLE	THEY	KNOW?
Amrito,	 it	 depends	 on	 different	 people.	 For	 one	 who	 is	 absolutely	 conscious,
nothing	will	happen;	he	will	 accept	 it,	 just	 as	he	has	accepted	everything	else.
There	will	be	no	struggles,	no	anxieties.
As	he	can	accept	his	own	death,	he	can	accept	the	death	of	his	planet	too.	And
this	acceptance	is	not	in	any	way	a	kind	of	helplessness	but	on	the	contrary,	just
seeing	the	suchness	of	things	--	that	everything	is	born,	lives	and	has	to	die.
This	planet	was	not	here	four	million	years	ago;	then	it	was	born.	Perhaps	it	has
lived	 its	 whole	 life.	 And	 anyway,	 even	 if	 the	 human	 mind	 manages	 to	 pull
through	this	crisis	created	by	the	politicians,	the	planet	cannot	live	long	because
the	sun	is	dying.	In	four	thousand	years'
time	 it	 will	 have	 exhausted	 all	 its	 energy;	 and	 once	 the	 sun	 dies,	 this	 planet
cannot	remain	alive.	Our	whole	life	energy	comes	from	the	sun.
The	man	 of	 perfect	 awareness	will	 simply	 accept	 it	 as	 a	 natural	 phenomenon.
Just	 now,	 leaves	 are	 falling	 from	 the	 trees;	 the	 other	 evening,	 the	 wind	 was
blowing	strong	and	the	leaves	were	falling	just	like	rain.	But	what	can	you	do?
This	is	the	law	of	existence.
Everything	 comes	 into	 form	 and	 disappears	 into	 formlessness.	 So	 for	 the	man
who	 is	 awakened,	 there	will	 not	 be	 any	 change	 in	 his	 consciousness.	 For	 the
unawakened	man	there	will	be	different	reactions.
I	have	heard...	a	man	was	dying;	he	was	very	old,	had	lived	his	life	--	there	was
no	need	 to	be	worried	about	death.	 It	was	getting	dark	as	 the	sun	had	set.	The
man	 opened	 his	 eyes	 and	 asked	 his	 wife	 who	 was	 sitting	 by	 his	 right	 side,
"Where	is	my	eldest	son?"
The	wife	said,	"He	is	sitting	just	in	front	of	me	on	the	other	side	of	the	bed.	Don't
be	worried	 about	 him;	 don't	 be	worried	 about	 anything	 in	 this	moment.	Relax
and	pray."
But	the	man	said,	"And	where	is	my	second	son?"
The	wife	 said,	 "He	 is	 sitting	by	 the	 side	of	your	eldest	 son."	And	 the	old	man
who	was	almost	on	the	verge	of	death	started	to	get	up.
The	wife	said,	"What	are	you	doing?"
He	said,	"I	am	looking	for	my	third	son."	And	the	wife	and	the	sons	all	felt	how
much	he	loved	them.	The	third	son	was	sitting	just	near	his	feet.
He	said,	"I'm	here	pappa.	You	relax,	we	are	all	here."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
121
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
He	said,	"You	are	all	here,	and	you	want	me	to	relax?.	Who	is	tending	the	shop?"
At	the	moment	of	death	he	is	still	concerned	about	the	shop.
It	is	very	difficult	to	predict	how	different	people's	unconscious	minds	will	react.
Their	 whole	 life	 will	 be	 reflected	 in	 their	 reaction,	 that	 much	 is	 certain.	 But
everybody's	 life	 has	moved	 through	 different	 paths,	 different	 experiences,	 and
the	culminating	point	is	going	to	be	different.
Death	brings	to	the	surface	your	essential	personality.
Another	old	man	was	dying	 --	he	was	a	very	 rich	man.	His	whole	 family	was
gathered	there.	The	eldest	son	said,	"What	should	we	do	when	he	dies?	We	will
have	to	rent	a	car	to	take	him	to	the	graveyard."
The	youngest	son	said,	"He	always	longed	for	a	Rolls	Royce.	In	life	he	could	not
sit	in	one,	but	at	the	least,	dead,	he	can	enjoy	a	ride	--	a	one-way	ride	of	course	--
to	the	graveyard."
But	 the	eldest	son	said,	"You	are	 too	young,	and	you	don't	understand	a	 thing.
Dead	people	don't	enjoy	anything.	It	does	not	matter	to	the	dead	person	whether
it	is	a	Rolls	Royce,	or	just	a	Ford.	A	Ford	will	do."
The	second	son	said,	"Why	are	you	being	so	extravagant?	Anyway,	a	dead	body
only	 has	 to	 be	 carried.	 I	 know	 a	 person	 who	 has	 a	 truck	 --	 it	 will	 be	 more
comfortable,	and	cheaper	also."
The	 third	son	said,	 "I	cannot	 tolerate	all	 this	nonsense.	What	 is	 the	need	 to	be
worried	about	Rolls	Royces	and	Fords	and	trucks?	Is	he	going	to	be	married?	He
is	 going	 to	 die.	We	will	 just	 put	 him	 outside	 the	 house	where	we	 put	 all	 our
garbage.	The	municipal	truck	will	take	him	automatically,	no	expense	at	all."
At	this	moment	the	old	man	opened	his	eyes	and	said,	"Where	are	my	shoes?"
They	said,	"What	are	you	going	to	do	with	your	shoes?	You	just	rest."
But	he	said,	"I	want	my	shoes."
The	 eldest	 son	 said,	 "He	 is	 a	 stubborn	man.	 Perhaps	 he	wants	 to	 die	with	 his
shoes	on.	Let	him	have	his	shoes."
And	the	old	man,	as	he	was	putting	the	shoes	on,	said,	"You	need	not	be	worried
about	expenses.	I	still	have	a	 little	 life	 left;	 I	will	walk	down	to	 the	graveyard.
See	 you	 there!	 I	will	 die	 exactly	 by	 the	 grave.	 It	 hurts	me	 that	 you	 are	 all	 so
extravagant;	even	in	my	life	I	only	dreamt	about	a	Rolls	Royce,	or	some	other
beautiful	car.	Dreaming	is	inexpensive,	you	can	dream	about	anything."
And,	 it	 is	said,	 the	old	man	walked	to	 the	graveyard,	his	sons	and	his	relatives
following	him,	and	he	died	exactly	by	his	grave	--	to	save	money.
The	last	thought	in	a	dying	man	is	very	characteristic	of	his	whole	life,	his	whole
philosophy,	his	whole	religion.	It	is	a	tremendous	exposure.
One	of	the	followers	of	J.	Krishnamurti	--	an	old	man	and	very	respected	in	India
--	used	to	come	to	me	because	his	son	was	attorney	general	of	Madhya	Pradesh,
and	the	MP	court	is	in	Jabalpur.	He	used	to	come	to	visit	his	son,	and	whenever
he	was	there	he	made	it	a	point	to	see	me	if	I	was	in	town.	The	old	man	had	been
Krishnamurti's	follower	for	almost	fifty	years.
He	had	dropped	all	rituals,	all	scriptures;	he	was	absolutely	convinced	logically,
intellectually,	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
122
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
that	 Krishnamurti	 was	 right.	 I	 used	 to	 say	 to	 him,	 "You	 should	 remember,
intellectual	conviction,	logical	or	rational	conviction	is	very	superficial.	In	times
of	crisis	it	disappears,	evaporates."
But	he	used	to	say	to	me,	"Fifty	years	--	it	cannot	remain	superficial."
One	day	his	son	came	to	me	and	said,	"My	father	is	dying	and	I	could	not	think
of	anybody	else	whom	he	would	like	to	have	near	him	--	he	loves	you	so	much.
So	you	just	come	with	me;	I	have	brought	the	car,	there	is	not	much	time."
So	I	simply	went	with	him.	As	I	entered	through	the	door	of	his	father's	room,
very	 silently	 his	 lips	were	moving.	 So	 I	went	 in,	 also	 very	 silently,	 because	 I
wanted	 to	 hear	what	 he	was	 repeating.	He	was	 saying,	 "Ram	Ram	Ram,"	 the
Hindu	name	of	God.	And	for	fifty	years	he	had	been	saying	there	was	no	God.
I	shook	him.	He	opened	his	eyes,	and	he	said,	"Don't	disturb	me.	This	is	no	time
for	argumentation."
I	 said,	 "I	 am	not	 going	 to	 argue,	 but	 just	 to	 ask:	what	 happened	 to	 those	 fifty
years?	From	where	does	this	repetition	of	the	name	of	God	come?	You	insisted
that	there	is	no	God."
He	said,	"That	was	okay	at	that	time,	but	now	that	I	am	dying	--	and	the	doctors
have	said	I	cannot	survive	more	than	half	an	hour	--	just	don't	disturb	me;	let	me
repeat	the	name	of	God.
Anyway,	 who	 knows?	 He	 may	 be.	 If	 there	 is	 no	 God,	 there	 is	 no	 harm	 in
repeating	his	name.
But	if	there	is	a	God,	and	you	don't	die	repeating	his	name,	then	you	are	on	the
blacklist.	 And	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 go	 to	 hell,	 I	 have	 suffered	 enough	 here	 on	 the
earth."
I	said,	"That's	what	I	was	saying	to	you,	that	intellectual	conviction	is	of	no	use."
He	did	not	die;	he	 survived.	After	 three,	 four	days	 I	went	 to	 see	him.	He	was
sitting	in	the	garden	and	I	said,	"What	about	that	evening?"
He	said,	"Forget	all	about	it.	It	was	just	a	time	of	weakness,	a	fear	of	death	that
made	me	start	repeating	the	name	of	God.	Otherwise	there	is	no	God."
I	said,	"It	means	you	need	another	experience	of	dying?	This	was	your	first	heart
attack:	 you	 survived	 --	 the	 second	will	 be	 coming	 soon.	At	 the	most	 you	 can
survive	the	second,	but	the	third	you	will	not	be	able	to	survive.	And	remember
what	you	were	saying	to	me."
He	said,	"Forget	all	that.	I	am	absolutely	certain	there	is	no	God."
I	 said,	 "Just	 let	 death	 start	 approaching	 near	 you,	 and	 immediately	 your
superficial,	intellectual	convictions	will	disappear.	This	idea	that	there	is	no	God
is	not	your	own,	it	is	borrowed.	It	is	not	your	own	exploration;	it	is	not	your	own
insight;	it	is	not	part	of	your	consciousness	but	only	part	of	your	mind."
People	will	behave	differently.
You	are	asking:	"What	happens	to	human	consciousness	when	the	people	of	the
world	 suddenly	 realize	 they	 are	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 an	 unstoppable,	 devastating
plague	that	will	kill	most	of	the	people	they	know?"
A	few	points	can	be	certainly	asserted.	One,	when	the	whole	world	is	dying,	all
your	 relationships	 --	your	mother,	 your	 father,	 your	girlfriend,	your	wife,	 your
husband,	 your	 boyfriend,	 your	 children	 --	 do	 not	 mean	 anything.	 When	 the
whole	world	 is	 on	 the	 point	 of	 disappearing	 into	 death,	 into	 a	 black	 hole,	 the
relationships	 that	you	have	created	 in	 life	cannot	 remain	 intact.	 In	 fact,	behind
our	relationships	we	are	strangers.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
123
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
It	makes	one	feel	afraid,	so	one	never	 looks	 into	 it.	Otherwise,	even	when	you
are	in	the	crowd,	you	are	alone;	even	if	your	name	is	known	to	people,	does	that
make	any	difference?
You	 are	 still	 a	 stranger.	And	 this	 can	be	 seen...	 a	 husband	 and	wife	may	have
lived	 thirty	 years,	 forty	 years,	 fifty	 years	 together,	 but	 the	 more	 they	 live
together,	the	more	they	become	aware	that	they	are	strangers.
Before	they	got	married	they	had	the	hallucination	that	perhaps	they	were	made
for	each	other,	but	as	 the	honeymoon	ends,	 that	 illusion	disappears.	And	every
day	they	start	becoming	distant	and	more	distant	--	pretending	that	everything	is
all	 right,	everything	 is	 fine,	but	deep	down	 they	know	 that	 their	 strangeness	 is
untouched.
This	whole	world	is	full	of	strangers.	And	if	it	was	going	to	disappear	the	next
moment,	 if	 it	was	announced	on	all	 the	radios	and	all	 the	 televisions,	suddenly
you	would	see	yourself	in	your	utter	nudity	--	alone.
A	small	child	had	gone	to	the	zoo	with	his	father,	and	they	were	watching	a	very
ferocious	lion	in	his	cage	--	he	was	walking	up	and	down.	The	boy	became	very
much	afraid;	he	was	not	more	than	nine.	He	asked	his	father,	"Dad,	if	 this	lion
gets	out	and	something	happens	to	you...	please	just	tell	me	what	number	bus	I
have	to	take	to	reach	home!"
In	such	a	situation	he	is	asking	a	very	relevant	question.	He	cannot	conceive	that
if	 something	 happens	 to	 his	 father,	 something	will	 also	 happen	 to	 him;	 but	 in
case	 something	 happens	 to	 his	 father	 and	 he	 is	 alive,	 he	 needs	 to	 know	 the
number	of	the	bus.	The	father	was	shocked	that	he	was	not	concerned	about	him
at	all.	Whatever	happens	to	him	happens	--	his	concern	is	to	know	the	number	of
the	bus.
The	very	climate	of	death	suddenly	takes	away	all	your	masks,	suddenly	makes
you	aware	that	you	are	alone	and	all	your	relationships	were	deceptions,	ways	to
forget	your	aloneness	--
somehow	to	create	a	family	in	which	you	feel	you	are	not	alone.
But	death	exposes	without	fail.	And	this	is	only	about	small	deaths;	if	the	whole
world	is	going	to	die,	all	your	relationships	will	disappear	before	it.	You	will	die
alone,	 a	 stranger	 who	 has	 no	 name,	 no	 fame,	 no	 respectability,	 no	 power	 --
utterly	helpless.	But	in	this	helplessness	people	will	still	behave	differently.
An	 old	man	 is	 about	 to	 have	 a	 date	 with	 a	 young	woman;	 so	 he	 goes	 to	 the
doctor,	 who	 prescribes	 him	 an	 aphrodisiac	 that	 will	 increase	 and	 prolong	 his
libido.	He	takes	his	date	to	one	of	the	best	restaurants	in	town.	When	they	have
ordered	 their	 soup,	 he	 sends	 his	 date	 to	 powder	 her	 nose	 and	 then	 takes	 the
waiter	aside.	"Put	these	pills	into	my	soup,"	he	confides	in	him,	"just	before	you
bring	 it	 out	 from	 the	 kitchen."	 The	 young	 lady	 comes	 back,	 but	 when,	 after
fifteen	minutes,	the	soup	has	not	been	served,	the	old	man	calls	the	waiter	over.
"Where	is	our	soup?"	he	demands.
"It	will	be	here	in	a	few	minutes,"	replies	the	waiter,	"just	as	soon	as	the	noodles
lie	down	again."
At	the	time	of	death,	the	most	important	subject	in	the	minds	of	people	who	are
not	conscious	 is	going	 to	be	sex	 --	because	sex	and	death	are	 two	sides	of	 the
same	coin.
Life	is	so	full	of	mysteries:	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	when	people	are
crucified,	 just	as	 they	are	crucified	 they	almost	always	ejaculate.	Doctors	have
been	thinking	why,	and	they	have	come	upon	the	explanation	that	those	sperms,
which	are	alive,	seeing	the	situation	--
that	 the	 body	 is	 dead	 --	 rush	 out	 of	 it.	 Their	 life	 out	 of	 the	 body	 is	 only	 two
hours,	but	in	two	hours	they	may	find	some	other	body,	some	other	center.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
124
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
First	 it	was	thought	 to	be	a	very	mysterious	 thing,	 that	crucified	people	should
ejaculate	--
but	it	is	just	as	though	your	house	is	on	fire	and	you	start	escaping	out	of	it.	Your
sperms	are	 living	beings,	and	you	are	dying	 --	why	should	 they	die	with	you?
You	have	been	just	a	house	to	them	and	the	house	is	on	fire	--	and	everybody	has
the	right	to	make	an	effort	at	least	to	save	his	life.
When	the	whole	world	is	dying,	most	of	the	unconscious	people	who	have	been
repressing	their	sexuality	will	think	only	of	sex.	They	cannot	think	of	anything
else;	all	 their	 interests	and	hobbies	and	 religions	will	disappear	 --	 the	world	 is
dying,	 perhaps	 they	 can	 make	 love	 one	 more	 time	 before	 death	 destroys
everything.	They	have	been	repressing	their	whole	life's	libido,	the	sexual	urge,
according	 to	 the	priests,	 according	 to	 the	 society	and	 the	culture	 --	 and	now	 it
does	 not	 matter.	 Everything	 is	 going	 to	 disappear;	 they	 don't	 need	 any
respectability,	they	don't	care	about	religion.
One	man	was	told	by	his	doctor	that	this	would	be	the	last	night	in	his	life.	"As
the	 sun	 rises	 in	 the	morning,	you	will	 be	dead.	Everything	has	been	done,	but
nothing	 seems	 to	 succeed.	What	 do	 you	 want?	 If	 you	 have	 any	 wishes	 to	 be
fulfilled,	you	have	one	night."
The	man	 simply	 rushed	 home.	He	 told	 his	 wife,	 "This	 is	my	 last	 night	 and	 I
always	 wanted	 to	 make	 love	 to	 you	 with	 totality,	 but	 there	 were	 so	 many
hindrances,	inhibitions.	And	at	this	moment	the	only	idea	in	my	mind	is,	before	I
die,	I	should	at	least	experience	a	total	orgasm."
He	made	 love.	 In	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	 he	 again	 nudged	 the	wife	 and	 said,
"The	morning	is	coming	close.	I	will	never	be	able	to	see	you	again.	If	I	make
love	one	more	time,	it	won't	harm	you."
So	 he	made	 love	 a	 second	 time,	 and	 as	 he	 felt	 --	 because	 he	 could	 not	 sleep;
when	death	is	going	to	knock	on	your	doors,	how	can	you	sleep?	As	the	morning
was	very	close	he	again	nudged	the	wife	and	said,	"Darling,	just	one	time	more."
The	wife	 said,	 "Listen,	you	never	 think	of	others.	You	don't	 realize	 the	 simple
fact	that	in	the	morning	I	have	to	wake	up.	You	will	be	gone,	that's	okay,	but	I
have	to	wake	up	--	so	just	let	me	rest	a	little.	And	when	you	die	there	is	going	to
be	so	much	fuss,	so	much	trouble	--
crying	and	weeping	and	all	those	things.	You	just	go	to	sleep."
Once	 you	 know	 the	 person	 is	 going	 to	 die,	 suddenly	 the	 small	 thread	 of
relationship	breaks	down.
The	world	 disappearing	 into	 a	 black	 hole,	 in	 the	 ultimate	 death,	 perhaps	may
make	people	almost	crazy,	may	bring	out	all	their	repressed	sexuality,	sensuality.
But	it	will	all	depend	on	different	individuals,	how	they	have	lived.	If	they	have
lived	an	uninhibited,	natural	life,	each	moment	given	its	total	share,	then	perhaps
they	will	 simply	watch	 it	 --	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 greatest	 tragedy,	 the	 greatest
drama	in	the	world.	They	will	not	do	anything	but	sit	silently	and	watch.	But	no
general	law	can	be	established	as	to	what	people	will	do.
Only	about	 the	enlightened	people	can	 it	be	said,	with	absolute	guarantee,	 that
there	will	be	no	difference	at	 all.	They	know	 that	 such	 is	 the	nature	of	 things.
This	is	the	whole	approach	of	Gautam	Buddha	--	the	philosophy	of	suchness	--
that	there	is	a	time	when	the	fall	comes,	and	the	leaves	have	to	leave	the	tree.
When	the	spring	comes	there	are	flowers,	and	in	the	East	particularly...	the	West
has	no	idea	about	it;	in	the	East	it	is	not	one	creation,	but	every	creation	that	goes
into	a	de-creation	--
just	as	every	man,	after	the	whole	day's	work,	goes	to	sleep	in	the	night.	This	a
very	potent	idea.	Each	creation,	after	a	time	--	they	have	even	talked	about	the
exact	time,	how	long	one	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
125
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
creation	lasts	--	goes	into	de-creation.	It	also	needs	rest.	So	for	the	enlightened
person	 it	 is	 not	 anything	 unusual;	 it	 is	 part	 of	 existence	 itself.	As	 the	 day	 has
ended,	the	night	will	end	also	--
and	again	the	creation	wakes	up.
Modern	physics	is	coming	closer	to	the	idea.	First	they	discovered	black	holes:
that	 in	 space	 there	are	 strange	black	holes	and	 if	 any	planet	or	 any	 sun	comes
close	 to	 the	 black	 holes	 it	 is	 pulled	 in	 and	 simply	 disappears.	 But	 science
understands	 the	 balance	 in	 nature,	 so	 now	 they	 are	 saying	 that	 there	must	 be
white	holes;	perhaps	the	black	hole	is	one	side	of	the	door,	and	the	white	hole	is
the	other	side	of	 the	door.	From	one	side	a	planet	or	a	star	goes	 into	 the	black
hole	and	disappears	from	us,	and	from	the	other	side,	the	white	hole,	a	new	star
is	born.
Every	 day	 new	 stars	 are	 born	 and	 old	 stars	 are	 dying;	 life	 and	 death	 is	 a
continuous	circle.
If	 life	 is	 the	day,	death	 is	 the	night	--	 it	 is	not	against	 it;	 it	 is	 just	 rest,	sleep,	a
time	to	be	rejuvenated.
The	 man	 of	 understanding	 will	 not	 be	 disturbed	 by	 it.	 But	 the	 unconscious
people	will	 simply	 freak	 out,	 and	 they	will	 start	 doing	 things	 they	 have	 never
done.	 They	 have	 been	 controlling	 themselves	 and	 now	 there	 is	 no	 point	 in
controlling,	there	is	no	need.
If	 it	 is	 known	 beforehand	 --	which	 is	 not	 very	 possible,	 because	with	 nuclear
weapons	it	will	 take	only	ten	minutes	for	the	earth	to	disappear,	so	there	is	not
much	possibility	that	you	will	be	informed	in	advance.	Get	ready!	Just	the	shock
of	hearing	on	your	radios	or	on	your	television	sets	that	within	ten	minutes	the
world	 is	 going	 to	 collapse,	 you	may	get	 simply	 frozen,	 paralyzed	 --	 the	 shock
will	be	so	big	and	so	unfamiliar.
Perhaps	most	of	the	people	will	die	from	shock,	not	from	nuclear	weapons.	Just
hearing	that	within	ten	minutes	the	whole	world	is	going	to	die	will	be	enough	--
the	shock	will	destroy	their	fragile	existence.	So	how	people	will	behave	is	going
to	be	only	hypothetical.
Only	about	the	enlightened	ones	I	can	say	with	absolute	guarantee,	on	my	own
authority,	 that	 there	 will	 be	 no	 difference.	 If	 they	 are	 drinking	 tea,	 they	 will
continue	 to	 drink	 tea;	 their	 hands	 will	 not	 even	 shake.	 If	 they	 are	 taking	 a
shower,	they	will	continue	to	take	a	shower.
They	will	not	be	in	shock;	neither	will	they	be	paralyzed,	nor	will	they	freak	out.
Nor	 will	 they	 indulge	 in	 things	 which	 they	 have	 been	 repressing,	 because	 an
enlightened	 man	 has	 no	 repressions	 in	 his	 being;	 he	 knows	 always	 only	 one
word	to	say	to	nature	--	"yes".
They	will	say	"yes"	to	the	disappearing	earth,	to	the	ultimate	death	--	they	don't
know	the	word	"no."	There	 is	not	going	to	be	any	resistance	on	their	part;	and
they	 will	 be	 the	 only	 ones	 who	 will	 die	 consciously.	 And	 the	 one	 who	 dies
consciously	enters	into	the	eternal	flow	of	life;	he	does	not	die.
Those	who	die	unconsciously	will	be	born	on	some	other	planet,	in	some	other
womb	--
because	life	cannot	be	destroyed,	even	by	nuclear	weapons.	It	can	destroy	only
the	houses	in	which	life	exists.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	REALLY	ARE	TOO	MUCH!	THE	OTHER	NIGHT	YOU	SAID	THAT
YOU
DON'T	DO	MIRACLES,	BUT	THIS	MORNING,	 IN	 FRONT	OF	MY	OWN
EYES,	I	SAW
OLD	MAITREYA	LEVITATING	WHEN	YOU	DANCED	WITH	HIM.	 ISN'T
THAT	A	MIRACLE?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
126
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Anando,	I	still	say	the	same:	I	do	not	do	miracles.	But	that	does	not	mean	that
miracles	don't	happen.	I	was	not	doing	anything,	and	Maitreya	was	levitating.	I
had	to	move	quickly	because	if	he	levitates	too	much	--	he	is	old	and	may	get	hit
with	the	ceiling.
A	group	of	men	gave	a	testimonial	dinner	to	Goldberg,	and	after	they	had	praised
him	for	an	hour,	Goldberg	finally	got	up	to	speak.
"Gentlemen,"	he	said,	"when	I	came	to	this	town	forty-one	years	ago,	I	walked
down	a	dirt	road	with	one	suit	of	clothes,	one	pair	of	shoes,	carrying	a	dirty	old
suitcase.	 And	 to	 show	 you	 what	 hard	 work	 can	 do,	 along	 with	 the	 great
opportunities	 this	 country	 can	 offer,	 today	 I	 own	 three	 banks,	 five	 apartment
houses	and	ten	oil	wells!"
Everybody	applauded,	and	right	after	the	dinner	one	salesman	walked	up	to	the
old	man	and	said,	"Pardon	me,	sir,	I	would	like	to	ask	you	a	question.	When	you
came	here	forty-one	years	ago	with	just	that	one	suit,	a	pair	of	shoes	and	an	old
suitcase	--	what	was	in	the	suitcase?"
The	 old	 man	 said,	 "I	 had	 three	 million	 dollars	 in	 bonds	 and	 two	 hundred
thousand	dollars	in	cash."
Miracles	only	appear	to	happen;	they	do	not	really	happen.	When	you	are	totally
singing	and	moving	with	the	energy	of	the	whole,	you	still	cannot	levitate	--	but
you	can	start	hopping.
That's	 what	 was	 happening:	 old	Maitreya	 was	 hopping,	 and	 Anando	was	 just
behind	 him	 so	 she	 must	 have	 been	 afraid	 --	 What	 has	 happened	 to	 old
Milarepa?...	 I	 called	 him	 Milarepa	 by	 mistake,	 because	 it	 was	 expected	 to
happen	to	Milarepa,	not	to	Maitreya!
For	centuries	 it	has	been	observed	 that	when	you	are	silent,	 joyous,	and	 if	you
are	sitting	with	closed	eyes,	you	start	feeling	as	if	you	are	levitating.	If	you	open
your	eyes	you	will	find	you	are	sitting	on	the	ground.	You	have	not	levitated,	but
consciousness	can	move	upwards	and	that	can	give	you	a	feeling	of	levitation.
Thousands	of	seekers	have	felt	levitation;	it	is	not	physical,	but	with	closed	eyes
you	 will	 feel	 exactly	 as	 if	 your	 whole	 body	 is	 moving	 up.	 It	 is	 only	 your
consciousness	 which	 is	 rising	 up,	 but	 you	 and	 your	 consciousness	 are	 so
identified	 that	 unless	 you	 open	 your	 eyes	 you	will	 not	 become	 aware	 that	 the
body	 has	 not	 levitated	 --	 only	 the	 consciousness	 went	 higher	 than	 the	 body,
beyond	 the	 body.	 It	 is	 a	 law	 of	 consciousness:	 just	 as	 things	 gravitate,
consciousness	levitates	--	it	is	simply	balance.	But	there	are	no	miracles.
I	have	heard	 that	 two	rabbis	and	one	bishop	were	very	close	 friends.	All	 three
had	 gone	 to	 Israel	 for	 a	 holy	 pilgrimage,	 of	 course	 for	 different	 reasons.	 The
rabbis	had	gone	for	their	own	religion	--	that	is	their	holy	land.	And	the	bishop
had	gone	because	of	Jesus	Christ;	it	is	also	the	Christian	holy	land.
Now	all	three	went	to	see	Lake	Galilee,	where	Jesus	is	supposed	to	have	walked
on	water.
They	went	in	a	boat	on	the	lake,	and	the	bishop	said	while	they	were	on	the	lake,
"Do	you	really	believe	 that	Jesus	walked	on	 the	waters?"	The	rabbis	 looked	at
each	other,	winked	their	eyes	and	said,	"Yes!"
The	bishop	said,	"Can	you	do	that	miracle	also?"
The	rabbi	said,	"It	 is	a	very	simple	 thing	in	 these	parts;	 it	was	nothing	special,
not	a	miracle."	And	the	rabbi	got	out	of	the	boat	from	his	corner,	and	walked	a
few	feet.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
127
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
The	bishop	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	The	rabbi	got	 in.	The	second	rabbi	also
walked	 a	 few	 feet	 and	 he	 also	 came	 back.	 They	 said	 to	 him,	 "We	 are	 not
Christians	 and	we	 don't	 believe	 in	 Jesus,	 but	 as	 far	 as	walking	 on	 this	 lake	 is
concerned,	anybody	who	lives	around	here	can	do	it.	Would	you	like	to	give	it	a
try?"
The	bishop	said,	"Certainly	--	since	you	two	have	walked,	and	I	am	a	believer	in
Jesus	Christ..."	So	he	stepped	out	into	the	lake	from	his	side,	and	the	moment	he
stepped	out	he	started	drowning	and	shouting,	"Save	me,	save	me!"
Both	the	rabbis	laughed,	and	they	said,	"Should	we	tell	 the	poor	boy	about	the
stones	--
that	he	has	stepped	out	on	 the	wrong	side	of	 the	boat?	 If	you	want	 to	walk	on
water,	there	are	rocks,	hidden	just	under	the	surface!"
There	 are	 no	miracles	 in	 the	 world	 in	 the	 sense	 people	 think	 about	 miracles.
Otherwise	everything	is	a	miracle.	Just	that	we	are	here	is	a	miracle;	just	that	the
sun	has	again	risen	today	is	a	miracle.	That	roses	bloom,	that	lotuses	open,	that
trees	sway	and	dance	in	the	wind
--	everything	is	a	miracle.
You	can	choose	between	the	two:	either	there	are	no	miracles,	or	everything	is	a
miracle.
My	preference	is	for	the	second,	because	the	first	is	a	very	dry	attitude	towards
life,	and	that	attitude	will	make	your	life	flat,	without	any	mystery	and	without
anything	miraculous.	My	preference	is	the	second.
Everything	is	a	miracle:	a	seed	turning	into	a	sprout,	growing	into	a	huge	tree,
flowering,	bringing	fruits	--	it	is	a	miracle.
Just	the	other	day,	Shunyo	said	to	me	that	it	is	strange	that	old	leaves	are	falling
and	new	leaves	have	already	arrived	in	the	same	place	where	the	old	leaves	used
to	be;	one	has	 just	fallen	and	a	new	leaf	has	started	growing	in	 its	place,	fresh
and	young...
Life	itself	is	a	miracle.
But	I	am	not	interested	in	miracles	like	Jesus	walking	on	water,	or	bringing	the
dead	 back	 to	 life.	 Those	 are	 only	 fictions.	 It	 is	 strange...	 you	 can	 easily
understand,	 if	 somebody	walks	on	water,	 then	he	will	 be	 reported	 all	 over	 the
world,	in	all	the	newspapers;	he	will	make	a	mark	in	history.	If	somebody	makes
people	 come	 back	 to	 life	 historians	 cannot	 ignore	 such	 a	 person,	 and	 such	 a
person	cannot	be	crucified;	he	should	be	worshipped	like	a	God.
But	strangely	enough,	Jesus,	who	was	a	man	of	miracles	according	to	Christians,
was	thought	by	his	contemporaries	to	be	only	a	nuisance,	someone	who	should
be	 destroyed.	Not	 a	 single	 Jewish	 contemporary	 book,	 scripture	 or	 inscription
even	mentions	his	name.	He	is	mentioned	only	by	his	four	disciples	in	the	New
Testament.	Other	than	those	four	gospels	the	whole	of	Judea	did	not	bother	about
the	man	--	and	he	was	a	man	of	such	qualities,	at	least	his	name	must	have	been
referred	to.	Even	if	they	were	against	him,	as	an	enemy	his	name	must	have	been
mentioned.	But	there	is	no	reference	in	any	Jewish	scripture.
This	gave	an	 idea	 to	George	Gurdjieff,	 and	his	 idea	 seems	 to	be	plausible.	He
used	 to	 say	 that	 Jesus	Christ	never	existed;	 that	 there	used	 to	be	a	drama,	and
Jesus	Christ	was	only	an	actor	in	that	drama	that	was	played	year	by	year	--	just
as	in	India,	the	story	of	Rama	is	played	as	drama	all	over	the	country	every	year.
That	drama	became	a	reality,	or	was	made	a	reality	by	a	Christian	priest	to	create
a	new	religion.	The	fiction	in	the	drama	of	Jesus	Christ	was	perfect	for	creating	a
religion,	and	because	they	created	the	religion,	the	Jews	stopped	the	drama.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
128
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
That	too	is	a	hypothesis,	but	no	Christian	authority	has	refuted	George	Gurdjieff
because	they	don't	have	any	evidence	except	for	those	four	gospels.	And	they	are
written	by	his	own	disciples	and	are	not	much	different	from	each	other;	they	are
the	same	gospel	written	by	four	different	people.
One	thing	is	certain,	even	if	Jesus	was	a	historical	figure,	too	much	mythology
and	too	much	fiction	have	been	added	just	to	make	him	"the	only	begotten	son	of
God."	And	it	becomes	more	probable,	because	the	same	has	happened	to	Gautam
Buddha	and	to	Mahavira
--	who	were	absolutely	historical	personages.	There	is	so	much	reference	to	them
in	their	contemporary	literature,	even	in	the	literature	of	their	enemies,	that	they
cannot	be	said	to	be	simply	mythological.
But	 to	 make	 them	 superior	 human	 beings,	 supermen,	 the	 disciples	 went	 on
adding	new	miracles.	And	that	can	be	seen:	the	older	the	book,	the	less	miracles
there	were;	as	new	books	were	written,	more	miracles	were	added.	From	where
were	they	getting	those	miracles?	--
because	in	the	old	literature	those	miracles	are	not	there.
For	example,	in	the	oldest	book	about	Gautam	Buddha	it	was	not	mentioned	that
he	was	born	when	his	mother	was	standing	under	a	sal	 tree.	To	give	birth	 to	a
child	while	 standing	 is	 a	very	unfamiliar	 and	very	 strange	 style.	And	not	only
that	Gautam	Buddha	was	born	while	she	was	standing	--	he	stood	on	the	earth	as
he	came	out	of	the	womb.	Not	only	that	--	he	walked	seven	feet!	And	not	only
that,	he	declared,	"I	am	the	greatest	awakened	man	in	the	whole	history	of	man	-
-	past,	present,	and	future."
To	the	superstitious	these	may	seem	miraculous,	but	to	any	reasonable	man	they
are	fictions,	added	to	make	Gautam	Buddha	a	superman,	a	god	--	because	unless
you	 have	 a	 god,	 you	 cannot	 create	 a	 religion.	 All	 those	miracles	 are	 cunning
strategies	to	create	religions.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
129
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
13
Truth	is	not	divisible
18	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
LET'S	 REVERSE	 THE	 QUESTION	 FOR	 ONCE:	 WHAT	 HAVE	 YOU
LEARNED
BEING	WITH	US?
Sarjano,	 it	 is	 the	 last	 supper.	 Jesus	 has	 gathered	 all	 his	 disciples	 together	 and
there	 is	 a	 great	 feeling	 of	 gloom	 in	 the	 air.	 A	 single	 candle	 lights	 the	 room.
Everybody	can	sense	that	something	momentous	is	going	to	happen	and	that	this
may	be	their	last	meal	together.
Jesus	pours	out	the	wine	and	passes	the	glasses	around	and	then	divides	up	the
food	and	personally	serves	his	disciples.	The	candle	burns	low	and	at	last,	all	the
food	is	gone	except	for	one	hard-boiled	egg.
Jesus	says	 to	Peter,	sitting	on	his	 right,	"Peter,	my	blessed	disciple,	would	you
like	to	eat	this	last	egg?"
"Ah,	no	master,"	says	Peter.	You	must	have	it."
Jesus	then	turns	to	his	left	and	says,	"John,	my	blessed	disciple,	would	you	like
to	eat	this	last	egg?"
"Ah,	 no	 master,"	 says	 John.	 "You	 must	 have	 it."	 Jesus	 asked	 all	 his	 twelve
disciples	 in	 turn,	and	 they	all	 refused	 the	 last	egg,	saying	 that	he,	 their	master,
must	have	it.	Just	then	a	gust	of	wind	comes	through	the	window	and	blows	out
the	candle.	The	room	is	plunged	into	darkness	and	it	is	filled	with	an	awesome
silence.
Suddenly,	there	is	a	hideous	scream.	Someone	lights	a	new	candle,	and	everyone
gasps	as	they	see	Jesus	with	his	hand	stretched	out	for	the	remaining	egg	--	and
embedded	in	the	back	of	his	hand,	are	twelve	forks!	But	it	was	too	late	to	learn...
I	have	learned	much.	One	of	the	most	significant	things	that	I	have	learned	is	not
to	feel	sad	when	you	betray,	not	to	feel	sorry	when	you	go	astray	--	in	fact,	not
even	to	expect	that	you	have	to	trust.
The	relationship	between	me	and	you	has	to	be	one-sided,	only	from	your	side,
not	 from	my	 side	 at	 all.	You	are	here	of	your	own	 free	 choice;	you	can	move
away	just	as	freely	as	you	had	come.	You	love	me	--	that	is	your	decision.	You
can	 start	 hating	 me	 --	 that	 will	 also	 be	 your	 decision.	 I	 am	 absolutely
unconcerned;	only	then	is	it	possible	not	to	feel	hurt,	not	to	feel	wounded.
Jesus	was	betrayed	only	once,	by	one	disciple.	I	have	been	betrayed	continually
for	almost	as	much	time	as	Jesus	lived	on	the	earth	--	thirty-three	years.	So	many
people	I	have	trusted	so	totally	have	betrayed	me	so	easily.	There	was	a	moment
they	were	ready	to	die	for	me	and	just	some	small	thing...	if	I	was	not	fulfilling
their	expectation,	which	I	have	never	agreed	to	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
130
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
fulfill,	their	love	changes	into	great	hate.	The	same	person	who	was	ready	to	die
for	me	is	ready	to	kill	me.
So	I	have	learned	it	the	hard	way	that	if	you	love,	it	is	your	decision.	If	you	hate,
it	 is	 your	 decision.	 I	 am	 almost	 non-existent	 as	 far	 as	 my	 side	 is	 concerned:
neither	am	I	a	partner	in	your	love,	nor	am	I	going	to	be	a	partner	in	your	hate.
This	is	a	sad	lesson	but	it	is	good	that	I	have	learned	it	long	before.
If	somebody	assassinates	me,	at	least	I	will	not	have	any	complaint,	any	grudge	-
-	because	to	love	was	his	freedom,	to	hate	is	also	his	freedom.	I	am	absolutely
out	of	the	relationship.
I	 will	 go	 on	 doing	 whatever	 I	 feel	 is	 needed	 for	 the	 growth	 of	 your
consciousness.	 But	 people	 have	 been	 going	 on,	 changing...	 such	 stupid
expectations	and	if	they	are	not	fulfilled...
it	seems	as	if	they	have	come	to	me	to	change	me,	to	transform	me.	They	want
me	to	be	according	to	their	idea	of	how	a	master	should	be.
I	give	you	total	freedom	to	be	yourself.	I	never	expect	anything,	any	ideal	to	be
imposed	 on	 you.	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 commandments.	 And	 yet	 you	 go	 on
carrying	within	your	mind	certain	expectations	that	I	have	to	fulfill,	and	if	they
are	not	fulfilled...	and	they	cannot	be	fulfilled.	Thousands	of	people	are	related
to	 me.	 They	 have	 different	 ideals,	 different	 moral	 concepts.	 It	 is	 almost
impossible	--	and	even	if	it	were	possible,	I	am	not	a	man	to	fit	with	those	who
are	unconscious,	who	are	themselves	living	in	darkness.
You	are	here	to	go	through	a	transformation.	It	 is	none	of	your	business	how	I
live,	what	I	say,	what	I	do	--	the	moment	you	start	thinking	to	change	something
in	me,	the	bridge	between	me	and	you	is	broken.
And	it	is	a	one-sided	bridge;	I	am	not	a	partner	in	it.	I	know	it	is	hard	for	you	but
your	 very	 question	 implies,	 Sarjano	 --	 perhaps	 you	 have	 not	 read	 it	 very
consciously	while	you	were	writing	it.	You	say,	"Let	us	reverse	the	question	for
once."	You	cannot	reverse	it	even	for	once.	You	are	asking	now,	"What	have	you
learned	being	with	us?"
I	have	nothing	to	learn.
You	 are	 here	 only	 because	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 have	 found	 a	 person	who	 has
nothing	 to	 learn	 --	 and	particularly	 from	you,	who	 are	 groping	 in	 darkness,	 in
unconsciousness,	 who	 are	 almost	 on	 the	 boundary	 line	 of	 insanity	 --	 any
moment,	just	one	step	more	and	you	are	in	a	madhouse.
Neither	from	you,	nor	from	anyone	else.
And	my	whole	approach	is	--	and	I	have	been	insisting	millions	of	times	--	that
as	 far	 as	 truth	 or	 the	 ultimate	 reality	 is	 concerned,	 you	 cannot	 learn	 it	 from
anybody	else.	And	once	you	have	known	it,	there	is	nothing	that	remains	to	be
learned.
So	I	say	to	you:	not	even	once	can	the	question	be	reversed.	I	have	not	learned
anything	from	you.	You	need	not	feel	responsible	for	anything.	Just	being	with
you	for	all	these	three	decades,	it	has	not	been	a	learning	but	simply	a	discovery:
that	there	is	nobody	in	the	world	who	is	so	awakened	that	you	can	even	call	him
a	friend,	so	awakened	that	you	can	even	call	him,	a	beloved.	This	has	not	been	a
learning	 --	 this	 is	 simply	 a	 discovery,	 slowly	 slowly,	 as	 I	 have	 come	 to	 know
human	beings.
And	as	I	went	around	the	world,	my	discovery	has	become	absolutely	clear:	this
humanity	has	come	to	a	dead	end.	To	hope	for	anything	from	this	humanity	 is
sheer	 nonsense.	 Perhaps	 a	 few	 people	may	 be	 saved	 --	 and	 for	 them	 I	 go	 on
creating	the	Noah's	Ark,	knowing	perfectly	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
131
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
well	that	perhaps	when	the	Noah's	Ark	is	ready,	there	may	not	be	anybody	left	to
be	saved.
They	may	have	all	gone	their	own	ways.
It	rarely	happens:	never	have	so	many	people	come	in	contact	with	anybody	--
either	 Jesus	 or	 Mahavira	 or	 Buddha	 --	 and	 never	 have	 so	 many	 people	 left
Buddha,	Mahavira	or	 Jesus.	 It	 is	 significant	 to	have	some	 insight	 into	 it.	Even
Gautam	Buddha,	a	man	of	immense	insight,	was	ready	to	compromise	on	minor
points	with	his	disciples.	And	the	disciple	feels	 immensely	happy	if	 the	master
agrees	with	 him	 --	 although	 the	master	 agreeing	with	 the	 disciple	 is	 like	 light
agreeing	with	darkness,	truth	agreeing	with	that	which	is	not	true,	life	agreeing
with	death.	But	because	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Jesus	and	other	teachers	of	the	past
have	compromised	on	minor	points,	very	few	people	have	left	them.
I	 am	 an	 absolutely	 non-compromising	 person.	 Either	 you	 have	 to	 be	with	me
absolutely...
without	 expecting	 anything	 from	 my	 side,	 because	 I	 cannot	 agree	 on	 any
smallest,	most	minute	point	if	it	is	not	true.
And	truth	is	indivisible.	You	cannot	say,	"I	may	not	have	the	whole	truth...	but	a
little	bit,	a	piece	of	it,	a	fragment	of	truth."	Truth	is	not	divisible.	Truth	is	almost
like	 a	 circle.	 Have	 you	 ever	 seen	 a	 half	 circle?	 Perhaps	 you	 may	 have
misunderstood:	if	you	have	seen	a	half	circle,	 it	 is	no	longer	a	circle	at	all;	 the
circle	can	only	be	full.	The	half	is	only	an	arc,	it	is	not	a	circle.
Just	as	the	circle	is	indivisible,	so	is	truth,	so	is	life,	so	is	existence,	so	is	love,	so
is	ecstasy.
Either	you	have	it	or	you	don't	have	it.
If	you	have	it,	there	is	no	question	of	your	being	here.	If	you	don't	have	it,	then
be	 absolutely	 clear	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 it,	 because	 living	 in	 the	 illusion	 that
perhaps	you	have	a	little	bit	of	it,	is	dangerous.
What	can	I	learn	from	you?	--	being	unconscious?	Being	greedy?	Being	jealous?
Being	violent?	What	can	I	learn	from	you?
As	I	have	gone	on	discovering	more	and	more	people,	my	hope	for	humanity	has
disappeared.	If	you	want	to	call	it	a	learning,	you	can.
I	don't	see	any	future	possible.	And	the	time	is	so	short	before	the	curtain	falls,
that	 you	 should	 not	 waste	 it	 in	 unnecessary	 things.	 Your	 life	 has	 now	 to	 be
absolutely	devoted	to	the	most	essential	thing,	the	most	fundamental	thing:	to	be
enlightened	has	to	be	your	single-pointed	concentration.
Everything	else	has	to	be	sacrificed	for	it,	because	you	cannot	even	postpone	it
for	tomorrow.	Tomorrow	may	never	come.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 COMMENT	 ON	 COMMITMENT	 AND
SPONTANEITY.	ARE
THEY	OPPOSITE	POLES	OF	THE	SAME	ENERGY?
Prem	Nirmala,	commitment	and	spontaneity	are	certainly	opposite	poles,	and	of
the	same	energy.	Commitment	is	something	like	death;	spontaneity	is	something
like	life.	Commitment	is	something	like	darkness,	and	spontaneity	is	something
like	light.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
132
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Although	 they	 belong	 to	 the	 same	 energy	 as	 opposite	 poles,	 you	 have	 to	 start
from	being	 spontaneous.	All	 the	 religions	of	 the	world	want	 you	 to	 start	 from
commitment,	all	political	parties	want	you	to	start	from	commitment.
Commitment,	 if	 you	 start	 with	 it,	 is	 very	 dangerous.	 It	 is	 another	 name	 of
slavery.	 It	means	you	are	 saying	and	promising	something	which	 is	not	within
your	capacity.	You	are	saying	that	"Tomorrow	also,	I	will	be	the	same."	But	who
can	say	what	tomorrow	is	going	to	bring?
Commitment	means,	 "I	will	 remain	blind	 to	 anything	 else	 that	 can	 change	my
commitment."	That's	why	every	belief	makes	people	blind.	They	have	 to	keep
their	eyes	closed,	out	of	fear	--	they	may	see	something	which	goes	against	their
belief,	their	commitment.
Every	year,	the	Catholic	pope	declares	a	black	list	of	books	that	Catholics	are	not
supposed	 to	read.	Reading	 them	means	a	certainty	of	your	going	 to	hell.	 I	was
talking	to	a	bishop	in	Nagpur,	because	a	few	of	my	books	had	been	listed	by	the
Catholic	pope	as	not	to	be	read	by	any	Catholics;	whoever	reads	them	is	paving
his	path	 towards	hell.	And	 this	 is	not	new,	 this	 is	an	almost	eighteen-hundred-
year-old	tradition	in	the	Catholic	Church.
Before	 this	 century,	 they	used	 to	burn	and	destroy	any	book	 they	decided	was
dangerous	for	Catholics.	Now	they	cannot	do	that,	but	at	least	they	can	prevent
the	Catholics	 --	who	 are	 a	 great	majority	 in	 the	world,	 seven	 hundred	million
people.
I	 simply	 said	 to	 the	 bishop	 of	 Nagpur,	 "At	 least	 somebody	 must	 have	 been
reading	my	books;	otherwise	how	do	they	decide?	Either	the	pope	himself	must
be	reading,	or	some	associate	cardinals	in	the	Vatican	must	be	reading	--	without
reading,	you	cannot	decide	that	a	book	is	dangerous	to	the	Catholic	belief."
He	was	in	a	dilemma:	he	could	not	say	yes,	he	could	not	say	no.	Because	if	he
says	"Yes,	somebody	reads	it,"	that	means	that	person	is	bound	to	fall	into	hell.
And	if	that	person	is	not	going	to	fall	into	hell,	then	the	whole	idea	is	ridiculous;
then	nobody	is	going	to	fall	into	hell.
It	is	just	to	keep	people's	eyes	closed:	no	facts	should	be	allowed	to	be	known	to
them	that	go	against	their	belief.
Commitment	demands	that	you	lose	your	eyes,	lose	your	mind,	lose	your	reason,
your	 logic,	 your	 intelligence,	 your	 consciousness.	 It	 is	 almost	 a	 living	 death.
Never	begin	anything	with	commitment.
But	such	is	the	mystery	of	life...	Begin	everything	with	spontaneity,	with	natural
awareness,	with	 no	 commitment	 for	 anything,	 but	 always	 ready	 and	 open	 and
available	to	anything	new	that	you	come	across	on	the	path.	Only	a	spontaneous
lifestyle	can	lead	you	to	your	authentic	being.
And	 this	 is	 the	miracle:	 that	 once	 spontaneous	 living	has	 led	you	 to	 clarity	 of
vision,	to	purity	of	intelligence	--	has	destroyed	all	the	darkness	of	your	soul	and
has	 made	 everything	 light	 within	 you	 --	 then	 spontaneousness	 itself	 becomes
commitment.
But	it	is	not	being	imposed	from	outside,	it	is	a	growth	within	yourself.	It	is	your
experience	 to	which	you	are	committed;	 it	 is	your	understanding	 to	which	you
are	committed.
You	are	committed	to	your	own	eyes,	 to	your	own	consciousness,	 to	your	own
intelligence,	to	your	own	experience.
This	commitment	has	a	beauty	and	an	aliveness.
It	is	spontaneity	becoming	mature.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
133
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Spontaneity	 was	 like	 a	 child;	 commitment	 is	 maturity,	 crystallization.	 Just	 as
nobody	can	start	from	the	middle	of	life,	or	from	the	end	of	life	--	everybody	has
to	 start	 from	 the	 childhood.	Although	 every	 childhood	will	 reach	old	 age,	 and
every	birth	will	reach	death...	but	nobody	can	begin	with	death.	And	a	life	that
has	been	lived	with	joy	and	dance	and	love	--	its	crescendo,	the	death,	will	not	be
dark.	It	will	not	be	an	end	of	something	but	a	new	beginning,	a	new	beginning	of
a	higher	spontaneity	on	another	plane.
But	religions	have	deceived	humanity	in	such	cunning	ways.	And	unless	you	are
very	 alert,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 understand	 in	 what	 ways	 they	 have	 deceived	 you.
Spontaneity	and	commitment	are	two	poles	of	the	same	energy,	but	there	is	one
commitment	 --	 which	 is	 imposed	 from	 outside,	 which	 has	 not	 come	 as	 a
flowering	of	your	own	spontaneity	 --	 that	 is	a	 false	commitment:	your	being	a
Christian,	or	a	Hindu,	or	a	Mohammedan,	or	a	Jew	is	a	false	commitment.	It	has
not	grown	within	you,	you	have	not	 lived	up	 to	 it.	 It	 is	not	a	maturity	of	your
own	consciousness,	not	a	crystallization	of	your	being,	but	something	 imposed
from	above	by	others.
It	has	no	roots	within	you.	That's	why	the	whole	world	is	full	of	religious	people
but	 there	seems	to	be	no	religiousness	anywhere.	No	religious	values	blossom,
but	just	the	opposite	--
humanity	lives	on	an	almost	subhuman	level.
Prem	 Nirmala,	 start	 from	 spontaneity.	 But	 no	 tradition,	 no	 culture,	 no
civilization,	will	allow	it,	because	they	can	control	only	dead	people.	And	they
can	control	through	commitment.
The	 spontaneous	 person	 is	 beyond	 anybody's	 enslavement.	 And	 if	 the
spontaneous	person	grows,	he	will	come	to	a	commitment	--	but	that	will	be	his
own	 commitment	 to	 existence,	 between	 himself	 and	 existence.	 No	 other
mediator,	 no	 priest,	 no	 pope,	 no	 imam,	 no	 shankaracharya	 is	 going	 to	 stand
between	 him	 and	 this	 immensely	 beautiful	 existence,	 this	 great	 life,	 this
divineness	that	is	spread	all	over	the	world.
His	 spontaneity	will	bring	him	 to	 a	 commitment,	but	 that	 commitment	will	 be
out	of	his	own	freedom.	It	will	have	roots	deep	in	his	own	being.	He	will	not	be
a	Christian	--	he	can	be	a	Jesus	Christ.	He	will	not	be	a	Buddhist	--	he	can	be	a
Gautam	Buddha.	He	will	not	be	a	Hindu,	but	he	can	be	a	Krishna;	he	will	not	be
a	Jaina,	but	he	can	be	a	Mahavira.
It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 that	 I	 emphasize	 that	 religion	 is	 a	 private,	 personal	 and
individual	 affair.	 It	 cannot	 be	 organized.	 The	 moment	 you	 organize	 it,	 you
destroy	it.	And	if	we	want	humanity	to	be	religious,	then	all	the	religions	have	to
disappear.	They	are	the	barriers.
There	are	three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth.	They	are	dividing	human	beings,
giving	them	different	commitments,	and	those	commitments	have	nothing	to	do
with	the	time,	with	the	space	in	which	we	find	ourselves.
When	 a	 commitment	 comes	 out	 of	 spontaneity,	 it	 is	 always	 timely,	 it	 is	 never
dead	--	it	is	always	growing	with	the	changes	that	are	happening	every	moment.
It	is	just	a	riverlike	flow,	it	is	not	frozen	ice.
But	it	is	very	easy	to	deceive	people	because	both	the	phenomena	are	so	deeply
interrelated.	And	people	are	living	in	such	a	deep	sleep	--	without	any	alertness
at	all,	that	they	cannot	make	the	discrimination	between	such	closely	connected
experiences.
But	just	a	little	turn	makes	all	the	difference.	If	you	start	from	commitment,	then
you	will	never	reach	to	spontaneity;	you	have	started	from	death.	But	if	you	start
from	spontaneity,	you	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
134
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
will	 reach	 to	 commitment	 --	 and	 that	 commitment	 will	 not	 be	 death.	 Out	 of
spontaneity,	death	cannot	grow	--	only	more	life	and	more	life	and	infinite	life.
But	you	have	to	be	alert,	just	a	little	conscious...
Two	criminals	were	caught	and	went	to	jail.	They	became	friends,	and	most	of
the	day	they	were	talking	about	how	to	escape.	One	morning,	George	looked	so
blissful	that	his	friend	Arthur	asked,	"Hey,	what	happened	to	you	last	night?"
"Well,"	said	George,	"first	tell	me	how	you	spent	the	night."
"Okay,"	replied	Arthur.	"I	had	a	beautiful	dream:	The	gate	opened	by	itself	and	I
walked	out.	In	the	street,	there	was	a	racing	bike	with	ten	gears	and	I	jumped	on
it	and	rode	away.
Great,	was	it	not?	But	now,	tell	me	about	you?"
George	 answered,	 "In	my	dream,	 the	door	 also	opened	and	 two	very	beautiful
young	girls	came	in,	stripped,	belly	dancing.
"At	this	point,	Arthur	could	not	hold	back	and	said,	"George,	but	why	didn't	you
wake	me	up?"
"Impossible,"	 replied	 George.	 "Don't	 you	 remember?	 You	 were	 gone	 on	 the
bike!"
Our	lives	are	not	different	from	our	dreams.	Have	you	ever	observed	that	even	in
your	dreams,	the	dream	also	looks	real?	as	real	as	the	life	when	you	are	awake	--
perhaps	more	real	because	when	you	are	awake,	you	can	doubt.
You	can	doubt	 --	 right	now	you	can	doubt;	perhaps	 this	 is	 real	or	perhaps	 it	 is
just	a	dream.
There	have	been	great	philosophers	in	the	world,	like	Shankara	in	the	East,	and
Bradley	 in	 the	West,	whose	whole	 philosophy	 consists	 of	 a	 single,	 significant
statement:	that	the	world	is	illusory.	There	is	no	way	to	prove	that	it	is	real.	One
thing	is	certain,	that	you	can	doubt	it.	But	in	the	dream,	you	cannot	even	doubt.
The	reality	of	the	dream	is	so	tremendous	that	you	cannot	dream	and	wonder	if
perhaps	it	is	a	dream.	No,	the	dream	overwhelms	you	completely.
We	are	living,	although	with	open	eyes,	 in	different	dreams.	And	those	dreams
don't	 allow	us	 the	 alertness	 to	 see	 simple	 things:	 how	we	 are	 being	 exploited,
how	 our	 dignity	 as	 human	 beings	 is	 destroyed,	 what	 very	 stupid	 and	 idiotic
people	 become	 our	 religious	 saints	 --	 those	 who	 have	 no	 sharpness	 of
intelligence.	But	we	find	strange	excuses...
Just	a	few	days	ago,	one	young	Jaina	nun	escaped	from	a	Jaina	monastery	with	a
young	man.	The	whole	Jaina	community	in	that	area	near	Indore	was	in	such	a
turmoil,	 and	 the	 turmoil	became	even	more	 significant	because	 the	girl	gave	a
statement	 to	 the	 press	 and	wrote	 letters	 to	 her	 parents	 saying	 that	 "Now	 I	 am
twenty-one	years	of	age	and	I	have	the	right	to	choose	my	lifestyle.	I	don't	want
to	be	a	nun,	and	if	you	insist..."	Because	they	were	trying	in	every	way	to	catch
hold	 of	 her,	 to	 find	 where	 she	 was	 hiding.	 And	 Jainas	 are	 rich	 people.	 The
government	was	supporting	them,	the	police	officers	were	supporting	them.
She	gave	the	statement	to	the	newspapers:	"If	they	insist	that	I	have	to	remain	a
nun,	then	I	will	expose	the	reality,	the	inside	story	of	the	monastery	and	what	is
going	on	inside	there.
Nobody	is	following	the	teachings	that	they	teach	to	the	layman	outside.	There
are	all	kinds	of	corruption.	Monks,	who	are	not	supposed	to	have	money,	have
accumulated	money.	Monks	and	nuns	who	are	not	supposed	to	have	any	sexual
relationship	are	having	sexual	relationships.	And	I	have	been	tortured	in	so	many
ways	 that	 if	 you	 insist,	 I	 will	 expose	 it	 to	 the	 whole	 world."	 She	 said,	 "My
younger	sister	is	still	there.	She	also	wants	to	come	out	of	the	monastery	but	she
is	only	eighteen	years	of	age."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
135
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
But	 still,	 in	 India,	 money	 functions	 like	miracles.	 They	must	 have	 bribed	 the
police,	they	must	have	bribed	the	magistrate.	An	arrest	warrant	was	issued.	Now,
that	girl	has	not	done	any	harm	to	anybody	--	is	she	not	free	to	have	her	own	way
of	life?	If	she	does	not	want	to	be	a	nun,	has	she	to	be	forced	to	be	a	nun	by	the
police	and	by	the	government	and	by	the	court?
And	 the	 parents	 started	 fasting.	 These	 are	 ways	 of	 torturing	 people	 --	 people
think	these	are	ways	of	nonviolence,	they	are	not.	The	father	and	mother	started
fasting	in	front	of	the	monastery,	and	declared	they	would	not	eat	unless	the	girl
came	back.	Now,	it	is	a	very	subtle	way	of	forcing	the	girl	to	come	back.
The	 prestige	 of	 the	 family,	 the	 prestige	 of	 the	 religion,	 the	 prestige	 of	 the
monastery	is	at	stake.	But	the	girl	must	be	courageous;	she	did	not	turn	up.	And
before	the	police	reached	the	place	where	she	and	the	young	man	were	hiding,
they	escaped	from	there.	 I	hope	 they	will	come	here,	because	 they	cannot	 find
anywhere	any	shelter	with	dignity	and	respect.	Wherever	 they	go,	 they	will	be
thought	to	be	criminals.
In	 fact,	 she	 has	 done	 a	 really	 courageous	 act;	 she	 needs	 immense	 respect	 and
honor.	And	their	whole	effort	 is	 to	catch	hold	of	her,	alive	or	dead.	The	fear	is
what	she	is	going	to	expose	about	the	monastery	--	but	every	monastery	is	doing
all	those	things.
I	 used	 to	 meet	 Jaina	 monks	 while	 I	 was	 traveling	 around	 India,	 and	 I	 was
surprised.	When	 I	 became	 intimate	 and	 friendly	 with	 a	 few	 Jaina	monks	 and
nuns...	They	would	close	the	door	and	they	were	hiding	in	their	bags	Coca	Cola,
Fanta,	and	they	would	offer	it	to	me.	I	would	say,	"This	is	a	miracle!	From	where
have	you	got	 this?	You	are	not	 supposed	 to	keep	 these	 things..."	They	are	not
supposed	 to	 keep	 anything	with	 them.	They	 all	 had	money,	 and	 they	were	 all
hiding	their	money.	And	they	all	had	their	agents	everywhere	who	were	bringing
things	--	even	in	the	night	--	for	them	to	eat.	And	none	of	them	was	celibate.
I	would	love	that	girl	to	turn	up	here,	because	here	we	can	give	her	total	freedom
to	 be	 herself.	 We	 don't	 have	 any	 belief	 system	 and	 we	 don't	 have	 any
commitment.	And	from	here,	she	can	expose	all	that	she	has	passed	through.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
REFERRING	TO	THE	PRESENT	SITUATION	OF	THE	WORLD	AND	OF
HUMANITY,	 THE	 FAMOUS	 PSYCHIATRIST,	 R.D.	 LAING,	 ASKS
HIMSELF	THE
QUESTION:	 "WHAT	 TO	DO	WHEN	WE	DON'T	KNOW	WHAT	TO	DO?"
CAN	YOU
PLEASE	ANSWER	HIM	AND	ALL	OF	US?
Chidananda,	R.D.	Laing	is	certainly	one	of	the	most	sensitive	psychiatrists	of	the
world.	 In	 fact,	 he	was	 responsible	 for	 sending	Chidananda's	mother,	 Pratiti,	 to
me.	She	was	Laing's	patient	for	twelve	years,	and	because	he	could	not	cure	her,
he	sent	her	here	to	me.	And	it	is	because	of	Pratiti's	coming	here	that	Chidananda
also	came	to	the	commune.
The	very	fact	that	Laing	accepted	that	what	psychiatry	cannot	do,	meditation	can
do,	shows	immense	sensibility	and	understanding.	What	he	is	asking	is	"What	to
do	when	we	don't	know	what	to	do?"	If	he	wants	a	really	Eastern	answer	--	and
he	 is	 well-acquainted	 with	 the	 Western	 answers;	 they	 have	 all	 failed	 --	 the
Eastern	answer	is	in	Basho's	haiku:	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
136
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
SITTING	SILENTLY,	DOING	NOTHING,
THE	SPRING	COMES
AND	THE	GRASS	GROWS	BY	ITSELF.
R.D.	Laing	must	have	read	this	small	haiku	of	Basho.	There	are	moments	in	life
when	you	don't	know	what	to	do.	But	still	you	go	on	doing	something	as	if	all
the	answers	need	some	kind	of	doing	to	find	them,	as	if	all	the	questions	can	be
solved	by	doing.	The	whole	of	the	East	stands	on	a	very	different	level.	It	says:
the	questions	that	cannot	be	solved	by	doing	can	only	be	solved	by	non-doing.
Don't	go	on	searching	for	something	else	to	do;	there	are	questions	which	cannot
be	solved	by	any	doing.	In	fact,	every	doing	will	make	them	more	complicated.
For	example,	if	you	are	not	falling	asleep	one	night	and	you	want	to	go	to	sleep,
and	 you	 ask,	 "What	 to	 do?"	 and	 somebody	 suggests,	 "Do	 this	mantra,	 do	 this
chanting;	 count	 from	one	 to	a	hundred	and	 then	backwards	 from	a	hundred	 to
one,"	all	these	efforts	will	keep	you	awake.	They	are	not	going	to	help	you	to	fall
asleep	because	doing	them	needs	awareness,	not	sleep.
I	would	say	 to	you,	 forget	all	about	 sleep.	What	 is	wrong	 in	 it?	 If	you	are	not
able	 to	 fall	 asleep,	 enjoy	 it.	Lying	down	 in	your	bed,	 doing	nothing,	 the	night
comes	and	sleep	follows.
There	 are	 things	which	 do	 not	 have	 to	 be	 done,	which	 have	 to	 be	 allowed	 to
happen.	The	West	knows	only	one	category	of	things:	everything	that	has	to	be
done.	Unless	you	do	it,	how	can	it	happen?	But	they	are	forgetting	that	there	is	a
category	which	 is	 not	 available	 to	 doing,	which	 is	 available	 only	 to	 a	 state	 of
relaxedness,	of	non-doing.
I	have	seen	an	American	book	on	relaxation,	and	 the	 title	of	 the	book	 is	YOU
MUST
RELAX!	The	very	word	"must"	makes	even	relaxation	some	kind	of	tremendous
effort.	And	the	book	has	sold	millions	of	copies	because	America	is	one	of	the
places	where	people	suffer	from	sleeplessness	most.
Poor	people	cannot	afford	sleeplessness;	 it	 is	a	rich	man's	disease.	Poor	people
snore	 perfectly,	 rich	 people	 suffer.	Even	 sleep	 --	which	 is	 so	 natural	 to	 all	 the
animals,	to	all	the	trees	--	even	that	has	become	difficult	for	man,	and	the	reason
is	that	our	whole	day	is	full	of	doing.	And	the	doing	is	so	much	that	when	we	go
to	bed,	the	mind	needs	time	to	drop	the	habit	--	but	before	it	can	drop	it,	you	start
a	new	doing:	methods	of	sleep.	So	you	continue	in	 the	same	rut	of	doing.	You
never	touch	a	deeper	layer	of	your	being	where	all	is	relaxed,	where	all	is	at	rest,
where	nothing	moves...	just	eternal	silence.
This	 is	 the	 time,	 certainly,	 to	 find	 the	 right	 answer	 for	R.D.	 Laing's	 question:
"What	to	do	when	we	don't	know	what	to	do?"	He	is	still	asking,	"What	to	do?"
That	is	the	Western	conditioning	of	the	mind.	He	should	have	asked,	"What	not
to	do	when	we	don't	know	what	to	do?"
Doing	has	failed.	Now	let	us	try	non-doing	--	and	non-doing	is	another	name	for
relaxation,	another	name	for	meditation.
Basho	is	absolutely	right.	The	world	has	known	great	poets	but	perhaps	none	of
them	was	a	great	meditator	like	Basho;	hence	his	poetry	is	not	just	poetry,	it	 is
the	very	essence	of	his	meditations.	Each	word	contains	immensities.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
137
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
So	when	 I	 repeat	Basho's	 haiku,	 don't	 just	 listen	 to	 the	words.	 Try	 to	 feel	 the
content	of	the	words,	not	the	container	--	the	words	are	only	containers.
SITTING	SILENTLY,	DOING	NOTHING,
THE	SPRING	COMES
AND	THE	GRASS	GROWS	BY	ITSELF.
He	has	 said	 everything	 about	meditation,	 all	 the	 essential	 ingredients.	 It	 is	 not
something	 that	 you	have	 to	 do;	 it	 is	 something	 that	 happens.	You	have	 just	 to
wait;	 it	 happens	 in	 its	 own	 time.	When	 the	 spring	 comes,	 the	 grass	 grows	 by
itself.	And	 just	 sitting	won't	do,	because	you	can	sit	 and	your	mind	can	go	on
wandering	 around	 the	world.	Hence,	 he	has	 added:	 "Doing	nothing"	 --	 neither
with	your	body,	nor	with	your	mind.	 Just	 sitting	 like	a	 stone	statue	of	Gautam
Buddha,	and	waiting	 for	 the	spring...	There	 is	no	 impatience:	 it	always	comes,
and	when	it	comes,	the	grass	grows.
The	world	 has	 come	 to	 a	 point...	 and	 it	 has	 been	 brought	 to	 this	 point	 by	 the
Western	 attitude	 of	 action,	 and	 always	 action,	 and	 condemnation	 of	 inaction.
Now	the	East	can	be	of	immense	help.	Action	is	good,	it	is	needful,	but	it	is	not
all.
Action	 can	 give	 you	 only	 the	mundane	 things	 of	 life.	 If	 you	want	 the	 higher
values	of	 life,	 then	 they	are	beyond	 the	 reach	of	your	doing.	You	will	have	 to
learn	to	be	silent	and	open,	available,	in	a	prayerful	mood,	trusting	that	existence
will	give	it	to	you	when	you	are	ripe,	that	whenever	your	silence	is	complete,	it
will	be	filled	with	blessings.
Flowers	are	going	to	shower	on	you.
You	just	have	to	be	absolutely	a	non-doer,	a	nobody,	a	nothingness.
The	 great	 values	 of	 life	 --	 love,	 truth,	 compassion,	 gratitude,	 prayer,	 God,
everything	--
happen	only	in	nothingness,	in	the	heart	which	is	absolutely	silent	and	receptive.
But	the	West	is	too	rooted	in	action.	And	there	seems	to	be	perhaps	not	enough
time	left	for	it	to	learn	non-doing.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	India	never	invaded	any	country	--	and	India
was	invaded	by	almost	all	the	countries	of	the	world.	Whoever	wanted	to	invade
India,	that	was	the	easiest	thing.	It	was	not	that	there	were	no	courageous	people,
that	 they	 were	 not	 warriors,	 but	 simply	 the	 idea	 of	 invading	 somebody	 else's
territory	was	so	ugly.
It	 is	 a	 surprising	 fact	 that	 one	 Mohammedan	 conqueror,	 Mohammed	 Gauri,
invaded	India	eighteen	times,	and	he	was	thrown	back	by	a	great	warrior	king,
Prithviraj.	Mohammed	Gauri	was	driven	back,	but	Prithviraj	 never	 entered	his
territory.
Prithviraj	was	told	again	and	again,	"This	is	going	too	far.	That	man	will	gather
armies	again	in	a	few	years,	and	again	he	will	invade	the	country.	It	is	better	to
finish	him	once	and	for	all.	And	you	have	been	victorious	so	many	times	--	you
could	have	gone	a	little	further.	He	has	just	a	small	country	by	the	side	of	India;
you	could	have	taken	his	country	and...	finished!
Otherwise,	he	is	a	constant	worry."
But	Prithviraj	said,	"That	would	be	against	the	dignity	of	my	country.	We	have
never	 invaded	 anybody.	 It	 is	 enough	 that	we	 force	 him	 to	 go	 back.	And	he	 is
such	a	shameless	fellow	that	even	after	being	defeated	dozens	of	times,	he	again
comes.!"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
138
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
The	eighteenth	time	when	Mohammed	Gauri	was	defeated,	all	his	armies	were
killed,	and	he	was	hiding	in	a	cave	and	thinking,	What	to	do	now?	And	there	he
saw	 a	 spider	 making	 its	 net.	 Sitting	 there,	 he	 had	 nothing	 else	 to	 do,	 so	 he
watched	the	spider.	It	fell	again	and	again.	It	fell	exactly	eighteen	times,	but	the
nineteenth	 time	 it	 succeeded	 in	 making	 a	 net,	 and	 that	 gave	 the	 idea	 to
Mohammed	 Gauri:	 "At	 least	 one	 time	 more	 I	 should	 make	 the	 effort.	 If	 this
spider	was	not	discouraged	after	eighteen	failures,	why	should	I	be?"
He	 again	 gathered	 his	 army,	 and	 the	 nineteenth	 time	 he	 conquered	 Prithviraj.
Prithviraj	 had	 become	 old,	 and	 having	 fought	 his	 whole	 life,	 his	 armies	 were
tattered,	 ruined.	 He	 was	 taken	 prisoner,	 handcuffed,	 chained	 --	 which	 was
absolutely	against	the	Eastern	way	of	life.
When	 another	 king,	 Poras,	 was	 defeated	 by	 Alexander	 the	 Great,	 and	 was
brought	 before	 him,	 chained,	 Alexander	 asked	 him,	 "How	 should	 you	 be
treated?"
Poras	said,	"Is	that	a	question	to	be	asked?	An	emperor	should	be	treated	like	an
emperor."
There	was	a	great	 silence	 for	a	moment	 in	 the	court	of	Alexander.	 It	was	very
appropriate	for	Poras	to	say	this,	because	his	defeat	was	not	really	a	defeat;	his
defeat	was	 through	the	utter	cunningness	of	Alexander.	Alexander	had	sent	his
wife	 to	meet	Poras	 --	he	was	waiting	on	 the	other	 side	of	 the	 river.	 It	was	 the
time	when,	 in	 India,	 sisters	would	 tie	 a	 small	 thread	 around	 the	wrist	 of	 their
brothers	--	and	it	was	called	rakshabandhan,	a	bondage,	a	promise	that	"You	will
defend	me."
When	 Alexander's	 wife	 came	 she	 was	 received	 just	 like	 a	 queen	 should	 be
received.	Poras	himself	came	to	receive	her,	and	asked,	"Why	have	you	come?
You	could	have	informed	me
--	I	could	have	come	to	your	camp."
That	was	part	of	the	Eastern	tradition:	by	the	time	sun	was	down,	people	would
go	 into	 each	 other's	 camp	 --	 the	 enemy's	 camp	 --	 just	 to	 discuss	 how	 the	 day
went,	who	died,	what	 happened.	 It	was	 almost	 like	 a	 football	 game	 --	 nobody
took	it	that	seriously.
But	the	woman	said,	"I	have	come	because	I	don't	have	a	brother.	And	I	heard
about	this	tradition	here,	so	I	want	to	make	you	my	brother."
And	Poras	said,	"It	is	a	coincidence;	I	don't	have	a	sister."
So	she	tied	the	thread	and	took	the	promise	of	Poras	that	"Whatever	happens	in
the	war,	remember,	Alexander	is	my	husband;	he	is	your	brother-in-law,	and	you
should	not	want	me	to	be	a	widow.	Just	remember	that."
There	came	a	moment	when	Alexander's	horse	died	as	Poras	attacked	the	horse
with	his	spear,	and	Alexander	 fell	on	 the	ground.	Poras	 jumped	down	with	his
spear,	and	the	spear	was	just	going	to	pierce	Alexander's	chest	when	Poras	saw
his	own	wrist	with	the	thread.	He	stopped.
Alexander	said,	"Why	have	you	stopped?	This	is	the	opportunity	--	you	can	kill
me."
Poras	said,	"I	have	given	a	promise.	I	can	give	my	kingdom,	but	I	cannot	break
my	promise.	Your	wife	is	my	sister,	and	she	has	reminded	me	that	I	would	not
like	her	to	be	a	widow."	And	he	turned	back.
Even	this	kind	of	man	was	treated	by	Alexander	as	if	he	were	a	murderer.	And
Alexander	asked	Poras,
"How	should	you	be	treated?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
139
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
"You	 should	 treat	 me	 just	 as	 an	 emperor	 treats	 another	 emperor.	 Have	 you
forgotten	 that	 just	 a	 second	 more,	 and	 you	 would	 not	 have	 been	 alive?	 It	 is
because	of	your	wife	--	the	whole	credit	goes	to	her."
But	it	was	a	conspiracy.	The	East	cannot	think	of	such	things.	Mohammed	Gauri
imprisoned	Prithviraj	--	and	Prithviraj	was	the	greatest	archer	of	those	times.	The
first	thing	Mohammed	Gauri	did:	he	took	both	of	Prithviraj's	eyes	out.
Prithviraj's	 friend	was	 also	 captured	with	 him	 --	 he	was	 a	 poet.	 Prithviraj	 told
him,	"You	come	with	me	to	the	court.	Nobody	understands	our	language,	and	I
don't	need	eyes	to	hit	my	target	--	you	just	describe	how	far	he	is."
Mohammed	Gauri	was	so	afraid	of	Prithviraj	that	he	was	not	sitting	on	his	usual
throne,	he	was	sitting	on	the	balcony;	the	whole	court	was	on	the	ground	floor.
And	Chandrabardai,	the	poet,	described	exactly	how	many	feet	high,	how	many
feet	 away.	 "Mohammed	 Gauri	 was	 sitting..."	 He	 sang	 it	 in	 a	 song,	 and	 blind
Prithviraj	 killed	 Mohammed	 Gauri	 just	 through	 that	 description.	 His	 arrow
reached	exactly	to	his	heart.
But	 Chandrabardai	 was	 very	much	 puzzled,	 because	 in	 Prithviraj's	 blind	 eyes
there	were	tears.	Prithviraj	said,	"It	is	not	right	of	me,	but	he	has	forced	to	do	me
something	which	goes	against	our	whole	tradition."
The	 East	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 approach	 towards	 things.	 If	 the	 West	 learns
something	about	the	East,	the	most	important	thing	will	be	that	all	that	is	great
comes	out	of	non-doing,	non-aggressiveness	 --	because	every	act	 is	potentially
aggressive.	Only	when	you	are	 in	a	state	of	non-doing	are	you	non-aggressive.
You	 are	 receptive,	 and	 in	 that	 receptivity,	 the	 whole	 existence	 pours	 all	 its
treasures	into	you.
R.D.	Laing's	 question	 is	 perfectly	 significant.	Chidananda,	 send	my	 answer	 to
him	also.	He	has	been	reading	my	books;	he	knows	me	perfectly	well.	And	he
has	 influenced	 in	 the	 Western	 psychological	 field;	 he	 is	 perhaps	 the	 most
influential	and	most	original	figure	today.
If	 he	 makes	 it	 a	 point,	 he	 can	 spread	 --	 rather	 than	 psychological,
psychoanalytical,	 and	 psychiatric	 ideas	 --	 what	 the	 West	 needs:	 a	 deep
understanding	of	meditation,	of	non-doing	and	of	allowing	existence	to	take	its
own	course.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
140
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
14
No	time	left	for	any	device
19	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	THE	LAST	FEW	WEEKS	YOU	HAVE	BEEN	TALKING	A	LOT	ABOUT
THE
WORLD	 RUNNING	 FAST	 TOWARDS	 A	 DEAD	 END,	 WITHOUT
SHOWING	ANY
MORE	 HOPE	 THAT	 THINGS	 WILL	 EVER	 CHANGE.	 ON	 THE	 OTHER
HAND,	UP	TO
ONE	 MONTH	 AGO,	 YOU	 TALKED	 ON	 THE	 POSSIBILITY	 THAT	 THE
PRESENCE	OF
TWO	HUNDRED	ENLIGHTENED	PEOPLE,	OR	EVEN	ONE,	COULD	SAVE
THE
WORLD.	WHY	THIS	SHIFT	OF	EMPHASIS?	DID	YOU	GIVE	UP	ON	THE
OTHER
POSSIBILITY?	 DID	 SOMETHING	 HAPPEN	 WITHIN	 THE	 LAST	 FEW
WEEKS	THAT
MADE	YOUR	VISION	CHANGE?
Chidananda,	it	is	true	that	I	have	been	talking	a	lot	about	the	world	running	fast
towards	a	dead	end.	The	reason	is,	factually	it	is	running	towards	an	end.	But	it
was	 running	 towards	 its	 end	 before,	 too.	 Now	 I	 want	 it	 to	 be	 absolutely
emphasized	 on	 your	 consciousness,	 so	 that	 you	 stop	 postponing	 your	 own
transformation.	 Man's	 mind	 is	 so	 stupid	 that	 if	 there	 is	 a	 little	 possibility	 to
postpone,	then	he	will	postpone	for	tomorrow	--	unless	he	comes	to	a	dead-end
street	where	there	is	no	way	to	go	forward	and	he	has	to	take	an	absolute	about-
turn.
But	things	in	the	world	are	not	visible	to	you.	You	may	go	on	sleeping	and	the
world	may	die.	It	is	urgent	that	you	take	it	seriously	that	the	world	may	not	be
there	tomorrow.	You	don't	have	time	to	waste	for	anything	else	other	than	your
own	awakening.
I	still	know	if	there	are	two	hundred	enlightened	people	in	the	world,	the	world
can	be	saved;	but	I	have	never	told	you	that	just	one	enlightened	man	can	save
the	world.	 It	 is	 a	heavy	 load.	One	 single	enlightened	man	cannot	carry	 it;	 two
hundred	 is	 the	minimum.	But	 from	where	 to	bring	 those	 two	hundred	people?
They	have	 to	 be	born	 amongst	 you	 --	 you	have	 to	 become	 those	 two	hundred
people.	And	your	growth	is	so	slow,	there	is	every	fear	that	before	you	become
enlightened	the	world	will	be	gone.
You	are	not	putting	your	total	energy	into	meditation,	into	awareness.	It	is	one	of
the	things	that	you	are	doing,	amongst	many;	and	it	is	not	even	the	first	priority
of	your	life.	I	want	it	to	become	your	first	priority.	The	only	way	is	that	I	should
emphasize,	deeply	into	your	consciousness,	that	the	world	is	going	to	end	soon.
And	if	you	are	not	awakened	before	its	end,	you	will	be	lost	in	a	long	journey,
because	evolution	will	 start	 from	the	very	beginning	on	some	other	planet.	On
this	planet	it	took	four	billion	years	for	man	to	arrive.	His	life	began	in	the	ocean
as	a	fish.	On	another	planet,	if	this	planet	is	destroyed,	life	will	continue,	but	it
will	 have	 to	 begin	 from	 the	very	beginning	 --	 and	 after	 four	 billion	years	 you
may	be	again	a	human	being.	It	is	a	great	risk	to	take.
Nothing	has	changed	in	the	world;	everything	is	going	exactly	in	the	direction	of
death	--	a	little	faster	of	course	--	and	the	moment	of	total	annihilation	is	coming
very	close.	It	all	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
141
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
depends	on	what	your	priorities	are.	If	being	awakened	has	become	your	priority,
and	you	are	ready	to	sacrifice	everything	for	it,	then	there	is	hope.
I	have	told	you	the	ancient	story	 in	 the	Old	Testament	--	but	 that	will	not	help
today,	 the	 situation	 is	 so	different.	 In	 the	Old	Testament	 there	 is	 a	 story	 about
two	big	cities	almost	 the	 same	size	as	Hiroshima	and	Nagasaki.	The	names	of
those	two	cities	were	Sodom	and	Gomorrah.	The	people	of	those	two	cities	had
become	so	perverted,	they	were	doing	all	kinds	of	unnatural,	psychopathological
actions.	 Their	 sexuality	 had	 totally	 gone	 astray.	 Those	 two	 places	 must	 have
been	the	California	of	the	Old	Testament.
The	story	is	that	God	tried	hard	to	change	those	people.	But	to	change	anyone	is
a	difficult	task,	even	for	a	god	--	because	the	very	idea	that	somebody	is	trying	to
change	you	creates	a	resistance,	even	if	the	change	is	for	your	good,	even	if	there
is	no	vested	interest	for	the	person	who	is	trying	to	change	you.	But	the	very	idea
that	somebody	is	 trying	to	change	you	creates	an	unconscious	resistance	not	to
change.
Finally,	God	gave	up	 the	 idea	 and	decided	 to	destroy	 those	 two	cities	because
their	very	existence	was	dangerous.	They	could	spread	all	 their	diseases	 to	 the
whole	of	humanity.
Sodom	was	 so	 perverted	 that	 people	 were	making	 love	 to	 animals;	 hence	 the
word	sodomy.
Gomorrah	 had	 gone	 completely	 homosexual;	 heterosexuality	 had	 completely
stopped.
According	to	the	Old	Testament,	God	destroyed	those	two	cities	completely;	but
there	is	another	version	from	Hassid	mystics.
Judaism	 has	 produced	 one	 of	 the	most	 essential	 lines	 of	mystics,	 the	Hassids.
The	 orthodox	 Jews	 don't	 accept	 them	 --	 the	 orthodox	 can	 never	 accept	 the
religious.	But	every	organized	religion	has	produced,	on	the	margin,	a	rebellious
group	which	is	not	organized,	which	has	different	interpretations	and	a	different
style	of	life.	Hassidism	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	ways	to	find	oneself	and	to
find	the	reality	of	existence.
The	Hassids	have	a	different	version	because	they	cannot	accept	God	destroying
two	cities;	there	must	be	some	way	to	save	them.	Their	story	is	that	when	God
became	determined	to	destroy	them,	one	Hassid	approached	God	and	asked	him
one	question:	"You	are	going	to	destroy	these	two	great	cities,	but	have	you	ever
wondered	that	there	may	be,	in	both	cities,	two	hundred	good	people?	They	will
also	be	destroyed,	and	this	will	not	be	a	good	precedent.
Just	for	the	sake	of	those	two	hundred,	you	have	to	change	your	decision."
God	 thought	 for	 a	moment	 and	he	 said,	 "I	never	 looked	at	 this	 side.	Certainly
there	may	be	good	people	and	 they	will	be	destroyed	with	 the	bad.	No,	 if	you
can	prove	that	there	are	two	hundred	good	people,	I	will	not	destroy	those	two
cities."
The	Hassid	said,	"But	suppose	there	are	not	two	hundred,	but	only	twenty	--	ten
in	each	city.	Will	you	destroy	those	good	people?	Does	quantity	mean	so	much
to	you,	and	not	quality?	What	does	it	matter	whether	there	are	two	hundred	good
people	or	twenty	good	people?"
God	had	to	concede	to	 the	argument	of	 the	Hassid.	He	said,	"Of	course.	Prove
that	there	are	twenty	good	people."
The	Hassid	said,	"And	if	there	is	only	one	good	man	who	lives	six	months	in	one
city	and	 six	months	 in	another	city,	what	 is	your	 idea?	Will	you	destroy	 those
cities?	 Will	 it	 be	 a	 godly	 action?	 Ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 the	 people	 can	 be
destroyed,	if	they	are	evil,	for	the	one	percent	of	good	people;	but	one	percent	of
good	people	cannot	be	destroyed	to	save	the	ninety-nine	percent	of	evil	people."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
142
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
God	said,	"You	are	very	persuasive.	Okay,	show	me,	where	is	the	good	man?"
The	Hassid	said,	"I	am	the	good	man,	and	I	live	six	months	in	one	city	to	help
people	transform	their	ways	of	life,	and	six	months	in	another	city	for	the	same
purpose.	What	 is	 your	 decision?	Are	you	going	 to	 destroy	me	 too?	 Is	 not	 one
good	 man	 more	 valuable,	 has	 he	 not	 more	 weight	 than	 thousands	 of	 evil
people?"	And	according	to	the	Hassidic	story,	God	had	to	concede	not	to	destroy
those	 two	 cities.	 Orthodox	 Jews	 don't	 believe	 in	 the	 story	 because	 it	 is	 not
written	in	the	Old	Testament.	The	story	may	be	a	fiction,	but	I	say	unto	you,	it	is
truer	than	any	truth.	It	may	not	be	written	in	the	Old	Testament,	but	its	logic	is	so
clear	that	it	cannot	be	false.	It	may	not	be	historical,	but	it	has	a	spiritual	reality.
In	the	same	way	I	have	been	telling	you	that	two	hundred	enlightened	people	can
save	 the	 world.	 Existence	 is	 very	 generous;	 it	 cannot	 destroy	 two	 hundred
awakened	 people,	 who	 have	 reached	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 consciousness	 --
which	has	 taken	four	billion	years	of	evolution.	But	you	have	to	become	those
two	hundred	people!	To	wake	you	up,	I	have	been	insisting	that	the	end	is	very
close.	And	this	time	it	is	not	a	parable.
Jesus	 used	 it	 as	 a	 device,	 that	 the	 end	 of	 the	world	 is	 very	 close	 and	 the	 last
judgment	day	is	very	close.	His	disciples	asked	him	at	the	time	of	his	departure	-
-	before	the	enemies	got	hold	of	him	and	when	it	was	certain	that	he	would	be
crucified	 the	 next	 day,	 their	 last	 question	 was,	 "When	 will	 we	 be	 seeing	 you
again?"	He	said,	"In	this	very	life,	because	the	end	of	the	world	is	very	close	--
but	do	what	I	have	told	you."
And	even	Christians	don't	know	what	he	has	told	them.	The	last	night	before	he
was	caught	they	were	in	the	mountains	and	he	told	his	disciples,	"This	may	be
the	 last	 night	 we	 are	 together,	 and	 I	 am	 going	 to	 do	 my	 prayer.	While	 I	 am
praying	behind	the	bush	you	should	remain	awake.	It	is	absolutely	essential,	 to
support	my	prayer,	that	you	are	awake.	Don't	fall	asleep."
In	the	middle	of	his	prayer	he	came	back	--	and	almost	all	were	fast	asleep.	He
woke	 them	up	and	said,	"Have	you	not	heard	me?	I	had	 told	you,	you	have	 to
remain	awake.	Can't	you	remain	awake	just	one	night?	--	because	I	will	not	be
here	 with	 you	 again.	 Even	 my	 death	 tomorrow	 cannot	 help	 you	 to	 remain
awake?"	 They	were	 very	 sorry.	 They	 said	 they	would	 try,	 and	 he	went	 again.
This	went	on	four,	five	times	--	he	would	come	back	and	they	would	all	be	fast
asleep.
According	 to	me	 this	was	his	 last	 teaching:	 to	 remain	 awake.	But	Christianity
has	completely	forgotten	about	it.	And	I	have	not	seen	a	single	commentary	by
Christians	 on	 the	 implications	 of	 why	 Jesus	 was	 so	 insistently	 saying,	 "Be
awake!"	He	was	 trying	his	hardest	because	once	he	was	gone,	 there	was	every
possibility	they	would	all	fall	asleep,	just	as	the	whole	of	humanity	is	asleep,	and
they	would	start	doing	in	their	dreams	things	that	are	not	to	be	done.	But	things
that	are	not	to	be	done	can	be	prevented	only	when	you	are	aware,	alert.
His	 last	 teaching	was	awareness,	but	 the	disciples	 failed	him	 --	not	only	 those
twelve	intimate	disciples	failed	him,	for	two	thousand	years	all	his	disciples	have
failed	him.	The	very	word	"awareness"	has	disappeared	from	the	Christian	idea
of	 transforming	human	beings.	 Jesus	was	continually	 saying,	 "The	end	 is	very
close."	That	was	a	device	--	because	if	you	feel	 that	 there	is	enough	time,	why
not	 sleep	 a	 little	more?	What	 is	 the	 hurry?	 But	 if	 there	 is	 no	 time	 left	 at	 all,
perhaps	the	shock	of	it	may	wake	you	up.
What	was	only	a	device	to	Jesus,	to	me	is	not	a	device.	It	is	a	reality.	The	world
is	going	to	end.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
143
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
I	have	been	giving	you	hope,	because	I	have	to	do	two	things:	on	the	one	hand	I
have	to	make	it	clear	to	you	that	the	world	is	coming	to	its	final	suicide;	and	on
the	other	hand,	I	have	to	give	you	the	hope	that	still	there	is	a	possibility	at	least
for	you	to	become	awakened.
Your	 awakening	 is	 of	 tremendous	 importance;	 it	 has	 never	 been	 so	 important
before	--
neither	with	Jesus	nor	with	Gautam	Buddha	--	because	there	was	enough	time.
Time	has	run	out.	We	are	at	the	fag	end	of	time.
To	make	you	aware	of	the	reality	--	so	that	you	can	make	some	effort	to	remain
awake,	to	make	some	effort	to	be	more	conscious	and	not	to	get	lost	in	trivia	--	is
absolutely	necessary.
That's	 why	 my	 insistence	 will	 go	 on	 growing,	 because	 every	 day	 the	 end	 is
approaching	closer.
Man	is	so	asleep	he	is	almost	in	a	coma,	and	all	his	actions	are	arising	out	of	this
state	of	coma	--	otherwise,	there	is	no	necessity	for	the	world	to	end.	But	we	are
carrying	nuclear	weapons	within	our	souls.	The	end	is	going	to	come	because	of
our	own	ignorance,	our	own	deep	sleep.
I	 have	 heard...	 a	 Polack	 is	 crossing	 the	 Sahara	 desert	 on	 a	 camel.	 After	 two
months	alone	with	the	camel,	and	dreaming	of	beautiful	women,	he	starts	to	find
the	camel	attractive	and	decides	to	make	love	to	her.	But	as	soon	as	he	is	ready,
the	camel	stands	up,	walks	a	few	feet	away	and	stops.	The	Polack	tries	again,	but
again	 the	 camel	 stands	 up,	walks	 a	 few	 feet	 away	 and	 stops.	The	Polack	 tries
again	and	again	with	no	luck.
One	day	he	finds	the	remains	of	a	plane	which	has	crashed	in	the	desert,	and	just
nearby	a	young	woman,	unconscious,	but	 still	 alive.	For	days	he	 takes	care	of
her	 and	 she	 recovers	 totally.	 One	 morning	 she	 comes	 to	 him,	 looking	 her
prettiest,	hugs	him	and	tells	him	how	thankful	she	is	to	him	for	saving	her	life.
"You	have	been	so	sweet	with	me,"	she	says,	"and	I	like	you	so	much	that	I'll	do
anything	for	you."
Looking	at	her	beautiful	face,	the	man	says,	"Would	you	really?"
"Yes,"	she	says.
"Oh,	I	really	appreciate	that,"	replies	the	Polack.	"Would	you	mind	holding	that
camel	for	me	please?"
Such	is	the	situation	of	humanity.	At	least	you	have	to	come	out	of	it	--	and	you
need	a	constant	hitting	on	your	head	to	remind	you	that	the	times	are	no	longer
ordinary.	 And	 there	 have	 never	 been,	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 man,	 such
dangerous	moments	 as	 those	 through	which	 we	 are	 passing.	 It	 is	 no	 time	 for
quarreling,	 arguing	 about	 theological	 matters;	 it	 is	 not	 intelligent	 to	 console
yourself	that	some	miracle	will	happen	and	the	world	war	will	be	postponed.	It	is
not	only	the	world	war	--	the	attack	is	multidimensional.
The	ecology	of	the	earth	is	breaking	down.
There	are	thousands	of	submarines	moving	around	the	earth	in	the	ocean	--	and
each	 submarine	 is	 carrying	 nuclear	 weapons	 so	 powerful	 that	 even	 the	 whole
energy	that	was	used	in	the	second	world	war	is	nothing	compared	to	the	energy
of	 one	 submarine	 carrying	 nuclear	 missiles.	 The	 Soviet	 Union	 has	 its	 own
submarines;	America	has	 its	own	submarines.	Just	by	accident	 two	submarines
can	collide,	and	the	whole	life	on	the	planet	will	evaporate	into	smoke.	And	the
politicians	 of	 the	 world	 are	 continually	 piling	 up	 more	 and	 more	 nuclear
weapons.
The	population	of	the	world	is	growing	so	fast	that	just	the	growth	of	population
will	be	enough	to	kill	half	of	humanity	out	of	hunger	and	thirst.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
144
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
Sexual	 perversions	 have	 become	 so	 rampant	 that	 Gomorrah	 and	 Sodom	 look
very	outdated.
Ten	million	people	 around	 the	 earth	 already	have	AIDS	 --	which	has	no	 cure.
And	this	number	of	 ten	million	people	 is	not	accurate,	because	many	countries
have	not	yet	declared	how	many	people	 there	have	AIDS;	 they	don't	have	any
way	to	find	it	out.	For	example	India	is	not	aware	how	many	people	are	suffering
from	AIDS.	Mohammedan	countries	are	bound	to	have	a	very	large	number	of
people	 suffering	 from	 AIDS,	 because	 homosexuality	 has	 been	 there	 for
thousands	of	years.
Even	according	to	very	moderate	estimates,	by	the	end	of	this	century	there	will
be	 one	 hundred	million	 people	 suffering	 from	AIDS.	 And	when	 one	 hundred
million	 people	 suffer	 from	AIDS,	 that	means	 at	 least	 one	 billion	 people	must
have	been	involved	in	homosexuality.
These	are	the	multi-dimensional	ways	that	death	is	approaching	the	earth.
Because	 we	 have	 cut	 so	 many	 forests,	 a	 thick	 layer	 of	 carbon	 dioxide	 has
gathered	 on	 top	 of	 our	 atmosphere,	 miles	 away	 from	 the	 earth,	 where	 the	 air
ends.	 The	 layer	 is	 so	 thick	 that	 it	 has	 already	 increased	 the	 temperature	more
than	it	has	ever	been	on	the	earth;	and	that	rise	of	temperature	is	melting	the	ice
of	the	north	and	south	poles.	If	that	ice	goes	on	melting	--	and	there	is	no	way	to
prevent	 it	 --	all	 the	oceans	of	 the	world	will	rise	four	feet	higher.	And	all	your
big	cities	are	ports;	they	will	be	flooded	with	water,	will	become	unlivable.
If	this	carbon	dioxide	becomes	a	little	thicker,	then	the	Himalayas	and	the	Alps,
which	 have	 eternal	 snow	 which	 has	 never	 melted,	 will	 start	 melting.	 The
Himalayas	alone	have	so	much	ice	that	if	it	melts	completely,	it	will	raise	all	the
oceans	of	the	world	forty	feet	higher.
All	your	cities	will	be	drowned,	and	this	is	not	a	flood	that	is	going	to	recede.
One	of	 the	most	dangerous	 things	happening	 is	 that	carbon	dioxide	 is	going	 to
accumulate	more	and	more.	The	trees	go	on	inhaling	carbon	dioxide.	If	you	cut
the	trees	you	are	cutting	two	things:	the	supply	of	oxygen	for	your	life,	and	the
place	 for	 carbon	 dioxide	 to	 be	 absorbed.	 It	 is	 a	 double-edged	 sword	 --	 and
absolutely	unnecessary.
Man	has	been	trying	to	reach	to	the	moon	and	to	Mars,	and	before	that,	we	were
never	 aware	 that	 where	 the	 air	 ends,	miles	 above	 earth...	 all	 around	 the	 earth
there	is	a	thick	layer	of	a	certain	gas,	ozone,	O3,	which	is	a	very	protective	layer.
Because	of	that	ozone,	life	has	been	possible	on	earth.	That	ozone	has	only	one
function:	 it	does	not	allow	any	sunrays	which	are	destructive	 to	 life;	 it	 returns
them.	It	allows	only	those	rays	which	are	life-giving.
Because	of	our	 rockets	moving	 towards	 the	moon	and	 towards	Mars,	we	have
made	 holes,	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 in	 the	 layer	 of	 ozone.	 Now	 those	 holes	 are
allowing	 in	all	 the	 rays	of	 the	 sun	 towards	 the	earth	 --	and	death-rays	are	also
included.
So	when	I	say	the	end	is	not	very	far	away,	it	is	not	like	when	Jesus	says	it	--	just
a	device.
By	 the	end	of	 this	century,	you	will	see	all	 these	dimensions	bringing	death	 to
you.	 It	has	 to	be	emphasized:	unless	you	become	absolutely	clear	about	death,
you	are	not	going	to	concentrate	your	whole	energy	on	transforming	your	being.
People	change	with	difficulty;	they	find	it	easier	to	remain	as	they	are	--	just	like
stones,	 like	 rocks.	 Change	 means	 a	 determined	 effort,	 a	 commitment	 to
transform	your	energies,	to	take	your	being	in	an	absolutely	serious	manner	--	it
has	not	to	be	wasted	in	stupid	things.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
145
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
A	famous	playboy	dies,	and	his	best	friends	decide	to	celebrate	with	a	mourning
party.
Late	in	the	night	someone	suggests	calling	Hell	in	order	to	find	out	where	he	is.
"But	how	can	you	call	Hell?"	someone	asks.
"Well,"	the	man	answers,	"I	guess	it	is	just	a	long	distance	call."
So	 they	check	 the	 telephone	book	and	 find	out	 all	 about	outer	 space	calls	 and
then	dial	Hell.	A	few	seconds	 later	a	very	hoarse	voice	answers,	"This	 is	Hell.
What	do	you	want?"
Terrified	by	the	devilish	voice,	they	say,	"We	are	looking	for	a	friend."
"What	is	his	name?"
"Peter	Thompson."
"He	is	not	here."	And	the	devil	hangs	up.
Totally	 amazed	 and	 having	 dropped	 all	 reference	 to	 logic,	 they	 decide	 to	 call
Purgatory.
They	dial	Purgatory,	and	to	their	relief,	the	voice	on	the	phone	does	not	sound	so
terrible	--
more	businesslike.	They	explain	 that	 they	are	 looking	for	a	dead	friend	who	is
not	in	Hell	and	who	just	died.
"Well,"	the	voice	answers,	"he	is	not	here,	either.	Try	Heaven."
"But	he	was	a	playboy!"	his	friends	reply.
"He	has	to	be	somewhere.	Try	Heaven."
So	 they	 dial	 Heaven,	 and	 a	 heavenly	 voice	 answers	 very	 softly	 and	 slowly,
"Hello.	This	is	Heaven.	This	is	Virgin	Mary.	Can	I	help	you?"
Very	shy,	they	explain	the	whole	story.
"No,"	 says	 the	 beautiful	 voice,	 full	 of	 echo:	 "He	 is	 not	 here.	 Thank	 you	 for
calling.	Call	again."
So	every	day	they	call	Heaven,	and	every	day	they	get	the	same	answer.	So	they
call	again	and	again;	and	one	week	later,	on	Sunday	morning,	a	very	sexy,	foxy,
quick	voice	answers,
"Hey,	this	is	Mary.	What	do	you	want,	guys...?"
Looking	at	each	other	and	laughing,	the	friends	agree:	"He	has	arrived!"
Change	is	very	difficult.	A	playboy	will	be	a	playboy,	whether	he	is	in	hell	or	in
heaven;	he	will	go	on	doing	his	repetitive	style	of	life.
Being	alert	means	you	have	 to	 stop	being	 robots.	Change	your	 routines,	move
more	consciously;	let	every	act	become	an	object	of	awareness.	Then	even	these
few	 years	 that	 are	 left	 are	 enough	 --	more	 than	 enough.	 If	 you	 put	 your	 total
energy	 into	 transformation,	 the	 destruction	 of	 the	 earth	 will	 not	 be	 your
destruction.	If	you	can	die	consciously,	you	have	found	the	key	to	a	higher	life,
to	an	eternal	life,	to	a	divine	life.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THIS	UNDERCURRENT	OF	GIGGLING	IN	MY	HEART	EVERY
TIME	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 YOU	 ARE	 USING	 THE	 WHOLE	 WORLD	 AS	 A
DEVICE	FOR	OUR
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
146
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
GROWTH,	 AND	 THAT	 YOU	 ARE	 USING	 US	 AS	 A	 DEVICE	 FOR	 THE
WHOLE
WORLD?	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Sarjano,	you	will	have	 to	stop	your	giggling	 in	 the	heart.	This	 is	not	a	device.
There	 is	 no	 time	 left	 for	 any	 device	 at	 all.	 Your	 giggling	 is	 simply	 a
rationalization:	you	don't	want	to	believe	that	the	world	is	going	to	end	because
you	don't	want	to	change.	You	want	me	to	say	to	you	that	this	is	only	a	device,
so	that	you	can	relax	--	relax	in	your	fixed	pattern	of	life.	But	I	cannot	lie	to	you.
When	 I	 use	 something	 as	 a	 device,	 I	 tell	 you	 it	 is	 a	 device.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 a
device,	either	to	transform	the	world	through	you	or	to	change	you	through	the
world.	I	am	simply	stating	a	very	sad	fact.	Your	giggling	is	nothing	but	an	effort
to	erase	the	impact	which	I	am	trying	to	create.
Giggle	about	everything	else,	but	not	about	your	transformation.	That	giggling	is
your	 unconscious	 trying	 to	 deceive	 you,	 telling	 you	 something	 or	 other	 will
happen,	so	you	need	not	worry.
The	 unconscious	 does	 not	 want	 to	 disappear.	 Your	 unconscious	 is	 nine	 times
more	than	your	conscious;	it	is	nine	times	more	powerful	too.	And	you	have	to
be	 very	 alert	 not	 to	 be	 caught	 in	 the	 powerful	 unconscious;	 otherwise,	 it	 will
close	all	the	doors,	all	the	possibilities,	all	the	potentialities	of	transformation.
I	am	in	absolute	support	of	your	giggling	about	everything	in	the	world	except
the	 transformation	 that	 is	 needed	within	 you.	And	 the	 problem	 is	 that	 you	 are
very	serious	about	everything	in	the	world,	and	only	nonserious	about	your	own
interiority.
During	his	world	tour,	the	Polack	pope	arrives	in	America.	When	he	comes	out
of	the	plane,	there	is	a	big	crowd	standing	on	the	runway	waving	flags,	shouting,
"Elvis,	Elvis!"
The	pope	looks	at	them,	full	of	holiness,	kisses	the	ground	and	says	mildly,	"My
children,	look:	I	am	not	Elvis,	I	am	the	pope."
He	enters	the	airport	hall	and	notices	a	mass	of	people	standing	there,	dancing,
waving	flags	and	shouting	at	him:	"Elvis,	Elvis!"
A	little	bit	indignant,	he	blesses	the	people,	and	very	softly	he	says,	"Oh	no,	my
dear	sheep,	I	am	not	Elvis,	I	am	the	pope."
Later	 on,	 when	 he	 finally	 reaches	 his	 hotel,	 he	 can't	 believe	 his	 eyes:	 in	 the
lobby,	hundreds	of	people	are	crowded,	waving	flags,	yelling,	"Elvis,	Elvis!"
A	 little	 bit	 puzzled	 now,	 he	 puts	 his	 hands	 together,	makes	 a	 cross,	 smiles	 as
divinely	as	possible	and	announces,	"No,	my	beloved	little	lambs.	No,	I	am	not
Elvis,	I	am	the	pope."
Centered	again,	he	goes	upstairs	 to	his	suite,	opens	the	door	and	suddenly	sees
two	 beautiful	 naked	women	 are	 lying	 in	 his	 bed,	waving	 little	 flags,	 shouting
ecstatically	at	him,
"Elvis,	Elvis!"
Immediately,	jumping	out	of	his	clothes,	he	starts	singing,	"You	ain't	nothing	but
a	hound-dog..."
Your	unconscious	is	always	there,	so	powerful	that	if	it	gets	any	chance	--	pope
or	no	pope
--	the	unconscious	will	be	the	winner.	You	have	to	make	your	consciousness	so
strong	 that	 the	 unconscious	 slowly,	 slowly	 becomes	 weaker	 and	 finally	 dies.
That's	the	meaning	of	the	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
147
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
enlightened	 man:	 one	 whose	 unconsciousness	 has	 disappeared,	 whose	 whole
being	is	full	of	consciousness.
Whatever	 I	 am	 saying,	 it	 is	my	 absolutely	 clear	 vision	 that	 the	world	 is	 very
close	to	its	end.	Don't	giggle	it	away.	Don't	find	rationalizations;	they	won't	help.
There	 is	 no	 time	 to	 waste	 in	 any	 unconscious	 consolations.	 An	 immediate
transformation	is	absolutely	needed;	it	is	an	urgency	which	man	has	never	faced
before.	In	a	way,	you	are	unfortunate	that	soon	there	will	be	no	future.	In	another
way,	you	are	very	fortunate	because	 this	crisis	 is	so	big	--	perhaps	 it	may	help
you	to	wake	up.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
OFTEN,	 WHEN	 I	 COME	 TO	 SEE	 YOU	 I	 WANT	 SOME	 KIND	 OF
RECOGNITION:	A	SIGN	THAT	YOU	SEE	ME,	THAT	YOU	KNOW	I	EXIST
--	A	LOOK,	A	HAND
GESTURE,	 PERHAPS	 TO	 ANSWER	 A	 QUESTION.	 YOU	 NEVER
RESPOND	TO	THIS.
FEELING	THE	TENSION	AND	PAIN	THIS	LONGING	CAUSES	 IN	ME,	 I
CRY	AND
THEN	 RELAX.	 AN	 OPENING	 IS	 THERE	 AND	 YOU	 LOOK	 MY	 WAY.
OSHO,	MUST	I	ALWAYS	GO	THROUGH	THIS	WAY	OF	PAIN	AND	TEARS
TO	REACH	MY	INNER
BEING?	I	AM	JEWISH	BY	CONDITIONING	--	COULD	THAT	BE	PART	OF
IT?
Prem	 Indivar,	 that	 explains	 everything	 --	 that	 you	 are	 Jewish	 by	 conditioning.
But	your	question	may	be	the	question	of	many	others.
You	say,	"Often	when	I	come	to	see	You	I	want	some	kind	of	recognition."	This
is	one	of	the	sicknesses	of	our	souls.	The	whole	existence	recognizes	you	--	the
birds	by	their	songs,	the	trees	by	their	flowers,	the	sun	by	its	rays,	the	moon	by
its	 beauty	 --	 they	 are	 all	 recognizing	 you.	 Just	 you	 have	 forgotten.	 You	 want
recognition	in	a	human	way;	perhaps	in	language.
Existence	is	silent,	its	recognition	is	silent.
All	that	you	have	to	know	is	to	be	silent	to	understand	the	recognition.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	have	given	you	recognition	just	by	initiating	you	on
the	path	of	mysticism.	I	have	not	asked	whether	you	are	worthy	or	not,	whether
you	 deserve	 or	 not.	 I	 have	 recognized	 your	 potential	 spirituality	 without	 any
examination,	without	any	test.
You	 say	 "...	 a	 sign	 that	 you	 see	 me,	 that	 you	 know	 I	 exist	 --	 a	 look,	 a	 hand
gesture,	perhaps	 to	answer	a	question."	I	know	that	you	exist	 --	and	my	whole
effort	 is	 that	 you	 should	 not	 exist;	 that's	 why	 I	 go	 on	 avoiding	 seeing	 you!
Because	seeing	you	may	give	you	energy	and	nourishment	 to	exist,	and	 that	 is
not	 your	 true	 existence;	 that	 is	 your	 ego,	 you	 are	 suffering	 from	an	 inferiority
complex.	I	want	you	to	drop	this	ego	which	is	hungry	for	recognition.	And	the
moment	you	drop	it,	immediately	you	will	find	there	is	recognition.
You	say,	 "You	never	 respond	 to	 this.	Feeling	 the	 tension	and	pain	 this	 longing
causes	in	me,	I	cry	and	then	relax."	If	you	have	carefully	understood	your	own
question,	it	has	the	answer:	You	cry	and	then	relax.	"An	opening	is	there	and	you
look	my	way."
If	 you	 are	 relaxed	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 tremendously	 happy.	Not	 only	 am	 I
looking	at	you,	everything	is	 looking	at	you.	But	 the	reason	is	your	relaxation,
the	reason	is	your	crying;	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
148
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
your	tears	cleanse	you,	your	relaxation	does	not	allow	the	ego	to	form.	And	you
have	come	to	know	the	secret	--	that	I	look	your	way...
"Osho,	must	 I	always	go	 through	 this	way	of	pain	and	 tears	 to	 reach	my	 inner
being?"	It	all	depends	on	you.	If	you	love	it,	if	you	want	it	this	way	--	only	then
do	you	have	to	go	through	pain	and	tears.	Otherwise	you	can	go	through	laughter
and	 singing	 and	 dancing.	 The	 whole	 question	 is	 that	 in	 pain	 and	 tears,	 or	 in
singing	and	dancing,	the	ego	disappears	--	it	is	your	choice.
I	 have	 heard,	 a	 man	 noticed	 a	 signboard	 on	 a	 restaurant	 saying,	 "You	 are
welcome	here,	and	you	will	feel	absolutely	at	home.	Come	in;	at	least	just	give
us	one	chance	to	serve	you."
The	man	 entered.	 The	waitress	 came	 and	 he	 ordered	 four	 burnt	 chapatis.	 The
waitress	could	not	believe	what	he	was	saying	--	"Vegetable	without	any	salt,"
and	things	like	that.	She	said,	"Are	you	joking?"
He	said,	"No."	So	she	went,	burned	the	chapatis,	and	brought	the	plates,	feeling
very	weird	about	the	whole	thing	--	what	kind	of	man	is	he?	And	then	she	asked,
"Anything	more?"
He	said,	"Yes,	sit	across	from	me	and	nag."
She	said,	"You	seem	to	be	a	very	strange	fellow."	He	said,	"I	am	not	a	strange
fellow	--
just	in	front	of	your	door,	you	say	'You	will	feel	at	home,'	and	I	want	to	feel	at
home.	That's	what	happens	in	my	home:	burnt	chapatis,	vegetables	without	salt,
everything	wrong	 --	 and	 finally	my	wife	 sitting	 across	 from	me,	 nagging	me.
Because	of	her	nagging,	I	cannot	even	say	that	the	chapatis	are	burned,	that	there
is	no	salt..."
It	is	up	to	you:	both	are	possibilities.	You	can	relax	through	pain	and	tears...	but
that	 is	 not	 a	good	choice.	You	can	 relax	 through	 singing,	dancing,	 rejoicing	 --
and	relaxation	will	come.
Try	the	other	way.
You	say,	"I	am	Jewish	by	conditioning.	Could	that	be	part	of	it?"	It	certainly	is.
But	once	you	have	become	a	sannyasin,	you	are	no	longer	Jewish.	A	sannyasin	is
simply	a	human	being.	Your	conditioning	is	there,	but	rather	than	continuing	the
tears	and	pain,	start	singing	and	dancing.	Even	if	 it	feels	a	little	difficult	 in	the
beginning,	the	conditioning	can	be	changed;	you	can	be	unconditioned.
At	the	conclusion	of	the	physical	exam,	the	doctor	summoned	his	patient	into	his
office	with	a	very	grave	look	on	his	face.	"I	hate	to	be	the	one	to	break	it	to	you,
Fred,"	he	said,	"but	I'm	afraid	you	have	only	got	six	months	to	live."
"Oh	my	god!"	gasped	Fred,	turning	white.	When	the	news	had	sunk	in	his	heart
he	said,
"Listen,	Doc,	you	have	known	me	a	long	time.	Do	you	have	any	suggestions	as
to	how	I	could	make	the	most	of	my	remaining	months?"
"Have	you	ever	been	married?"	asked	the	doctor.
Fred	explained	that	he	had	been	a	bachelor	all	his	life.	"You	might	think	about
taking	a	wife,"	 the	doctor	proposed.	"After	all,	you	will	need	someone	 to	 look
after	you	in	the	final	illness."
"That's	 a	 good	 point,	Doc,"	 said	 Fred.	 "And	with	 only	 six	months	 to	 live,	 I'd
better	make	the	most	of	my	time."
"May	I	make	one	more	suggestion?"	asked	the	doctor.
When	Fred	nodded,	he	said,	"Marry	a	Jewish	girl."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
149
Chapter	14	-	No	time	left	for	any	device
"A	Jewish	girl	--	how	come?"	wondered	Fred.
The	doctor	replied,	"Then	six	months	will	seem	like	six	lives."
It	 is	 your	 choice,	 but	 my	 suggestion	 is:	 you	 have	 been	 married	 to	 Jewish
conditioning;	 now	 get	 divorced.	 Just	 be	 a	 human	 being,	 rejoicing,	 dancing,
singing.	And	 if	 tears	come	 they	have	 to	be	of	 joy,	of	blissfulness,	of	peace,	of
silence.	And	the	moment	you	feel	relaxed,	ecstasy	will	enter	within	your	being
from	all	sides.	The	whole	existence	will	recognize	you,	not	only	me.
Ecstasy	can	be	explained	in	other	words:
A	recognition	by	the	whole	existence	that	you	are	needed,	that	you	are	beautiful,
that	without	you	existence	will	be	poorer.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
150
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
15
This	is	the	last	dance
19	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHILE	 READING	 YOUR	 BOOKS	 AND	 LISTENING	 TO	 YOUR	 TAPES
WHEN	I	AM
ALONE,	 I	 BECOME	 IMMENSELY	 HAPPY	 AND	 I	 WEEP,	 CRY	 AND
DANCE	IN
ALONENESS.	BUT	I	CAN'T	EXPRESS	MY	FEELINGS	IN	THE	PRESENCE
OF
OTHERS,	 EVEN	 THOUGH	 I	 WISH	 VERY	 MUCH	 TO	 DO	 SO.	 PLEASE
TELL	ME	WHAT
TO	DO.
Kishor	 Bharti,	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 basic	 human	 problems,	 because	 our	 whole
upbringing	 creates	 a	 split	 in	 our	 very	 mind.	 You	 have	 to	 show	 a	 face	 to	 the
society,	to	the	crowd,	to	the	world	--	it	need	not	be	your	real	face;	in	fact,	it	must
not	 be	 your	 real	 face.	You	have	 to	 show	 the	 face	 that	 people	 like,	 that	 people
appreciate,	that	will	be	acceptable	to	them	--	their	ideologies,	their	traditions	--
and	you	have	to	keep	your	original	face	to	yourself.
This	 split	 becomes	 so	 unbridgeable	 because	 most	 of	 the	 time	 you	 are	 in	 the
crowd,	meeting	with	people,	 relating	with	people	 --	very	 rarely	are	you	alone.
Naturally,	 the	mask	becomes	more	and	more	part	of	you	than	your	very	nature
itself.
And	 society	 creates	 a	 fear	 in	 everybody:	 the	 fear	 of	 rejection,	 the	 fear	 of
somebody	laughing	at	you,	the	fear	of	losing	your	respectability,	the	fear	of	what
people	will	say.	You	have	to	adjust	to	all	kinds	of	blind	and	unconscious	people.
You	cannot	be	yourself.	This	is	our	basic	tradition	all	over	the	world,	up	to	now,
that	nobody	is	allowed	to	be	himself.	It	 is	because	of	 this	 that	 the	problem	has
arisen	--	it	is	everybody's	problem.
You	are	asking,	 "While	 reading	your	books	and	 listening	 to	your	 tapes	when	 I
am	alone,	I	become	immensely	happy	and	I	weep,	cry,	and	dance	in	aloneness.
But	I	can't	express	my	feelings	in	the	presence	of	others,	even	though	I	wish	very
much	to	do	so."
The	moment	 the	other	 is	 there,	you	are	 less	concerned	about	yourself;	you	are
more	concerned	about	what	his	opinion	will	be	about	you.	When	you	are	alone
in	your	bathroom,	you	become	almost	like	a	child	--	sometimes	you	make	faces
before	the	mirror.	But	if	you	become	suddenly	aware	that	even	a	small	child	is
looking	 through	 the	 keyhole,	 you	 immediately	 change:	 you	 become	 your
ordinary,	old	self	again	--	serious,	sober,	as	people	expect	you	to	be.
And	the	most	amazing	thing	is	that	you	are	afraid	of	those	people	and	they	are
afraid	of	you	--	everybody	is	afraid	of	everybody	else.	Nobody	is	allowing	his
feelings,	his	reality,	his	authenticity	--	but	everybody	wants	to	do	it,	because	it	is
a	very	suicidal	act	to	go	on	repressing	your	original	face.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
151
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
You	are	not	living;	on	the	contrary	you	are	simply	acting.	And	because	the	whole
world	 is	 watching,	 your	 centuries-long	 unconscious	 holds	 you	 back	 --	 not	 to
express,	not	 to	come	out	of	 the	mask	of	your	personality.	Everybody	 is	hiding
behind	something	false	--	it	hurts.
To	 be	 dishonest,	 to	 be	 insincere	 to	 yourself,	 is	 the	worst	 punishment	 you	 can
give	to	yourself.
And	you	are	not	going	to	do	something	harmful	to	anybody	--	you	just	want	to
cry,	and	your	tears	will	be	of	joy;	you	want	to	dance,	and	dance	is	not	a	sin,	is
not	 a	 crime.	 You	 simply	 want	 to	 share	 your	 blissfulness	 --	 you	 are	 being
generous.	 Still,	 the	 fear	 is	 that	 people	 may	 not	 accept	 your	 blissfulness.
Somebody	may	 say	 it	 is	 false,	 somebody	may	 say	 it	 is	 just	 acting,	 somebody
may	say	you	are	hypnotized.
It	is	a	strange	thing	that	if	you	are	miserable,	nobody	says	anything	to	you.	In	a
miserable	 society,	 you	 fit	 perfectly	well.	But	where	 everybody	 is	miserable,	 if
you	suddenly	start	dancing	you	fall	out	of	tune	with	the	crowd.
You	want	to	express	your	joy	but	you	are	not	courageous	enough	to	be	alone...
but	in	fact,	who	cares?	Perhaps	people	will	think,	once,	that	you	are	a	little	crazy
--	at	the	most	--	and	once	they	have	accepted	that	you	are	a	little	crazy,	then	there
is	 nothing	 to	 fear.	 And	 what	 is	 wrong	 in	 being	 called	 crazy?	 The	 world	 has
known	 such	beautiful,	 crazy	people...	 in	 fact,	 all	 the	great	people	 in	 the	world
have	been	a	little	bit	crazy	--	crazy	in	the	eyes	of	the	crowd.
Their	craziness	was	expressed	because	they	were	not	miserable,	they	were	not	in
anxiety,	they	were	not	afraid	of	death,	they	were	not	worried	about	trivia.	They
were	living	each	moment	with	totality	and	intensity,	and	because	of	this	totality
and	intensity,	their	life	became	a	beautiful	flower	--	they	were	full	of	fragrance,
love	and	life	and	laughter.
But	 this	 certainly	 hurts	 millions	 of	 people	 who	 are	 around	 you.	 They	 cannot
accept	the	idea	that	you	have	achieved	something	which	they	have	missed.	They
will	try	in	every	way	to	make	you	miserable.	Their	condemnation	is	nothing	but
an	effort	to	make	you	miserable,	to	destroy	your	dance,	to	take	away	your	joy	--
so	that	you	can	come	back	into	the	fold.
One	has	to	gather	courage.	And	if	people	say	you	are	crazy,	enjoy	the	idea.	Tell
them,
"You	are	right;	in	this	world,	only	crazy	people	can	be	happy	and	joyful.	I	have
chosen	craziness	with	 joy,	with	bliss,	with	dance;	you	have	chosen	sanity	with
misery,	 anguish	 and	 hell	 --	 our	 choices	 are	 different.	You	 be	 sane	 and	 remain
miserable;	leave	me	alone	in	my	madness.	Don't	feel	offended;	I	am	not	feeling
offended	by	you	all	 --	so	many	sane	people	 in	 the	world,	and	I	am	not	 feeling
offended."
It	is	only	a	question	of	a	very	short	time.	Soon,	once	they	have	accepted	you	as
crazy,	they	will	not	bother	you;	then	you	can	come	into	the	full	light	with	your
original	being	--	you	can	drop	all	your	falsities.
I	was	a	student	 in	 the	university...	 I	had	not	chosen	the	university	for	 itself	but
because	of	a	professor	who	was	so	alive,	so	full	of	love,	and	so	unafraid	of	the
world.	I	had	chosen	the	professor.	And	because	he	was	in	that	university	and	he
had	 invited	me	 to	 join	 the	 university	where	 he	was	 teaching...	 and	 he	 said	 he
would	make	every	kind	of	facility	possible	for	me.
He	loved	me	immensely,	because	every	year	I	used	to	go	to	that	university	for	an
inter-university	debating	competition;	 for	 four	years	continually	 I	had	been	 the
winner.	The	very	first	year,	he	was	one	of	the	judges.	He	took	me	aside	and	told
me,	"I	cannot	say	this	to	anybody	else	but	I	cannot	keep	it	to	myself	either.	I	can
only	say	it	to	you:	I	have	given	you	a	ninety-nine	percent	mark	in	the	debate,	and
I	am	sorry,	because	I	wanted	to	give	you	a	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
152
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
hundred	percent.	But	I	could	not	gather	the	courage.	Because	people	may	think
that	I	am	prejudiced,	I	am	favoring.	I	became	afraid.	But	forgive	me,	because	I
have	taken	off	one	percent	of	the	marks	which	were	yours."
Each	year	he	was	one	of	 the	 judges,	and	 the	fourth	year,	when	I	graduated,	he
invited	me	 to	 join	 the	university	 for	my	post-graduation.	 I	 said,	 "I	 am	coming
here	just	because	of	you."
He	took	me	the	very	first	day	to	the	vice-chancellor,	and	on	the	way	he	told	me,
"Don't	get	into	any	argument	--	because	this	man,	the	old	vice-chancellor,	is	very
stubborn,	and	one	has	to	be	very	diplomatic	with	him."
I	said,	"You	can	be	diplomatic	with	him;	I
will	be	simply	myself."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
I	said,	"To	be	diplomatic	means	to	be	somebody	else,	diplomacy	is	another	name
of	 hypocrisy.	 You	 be	 diplomatic	 --	 I	 will	 be	 simply	myself.	 And	 if	 the	worst
comes	 to	 the	worst,	at	 the	most	he	will	not	grant	me	 the	money	for	 two	years'
education,	and	he	may	not	grant	me	other	facilities	--	but	just	for	those	facilities,
I	cannot	be	dishonest	to	myself."
He	said,	"At	least	can	you	remain	silent?	Don't	say	anything;	I	will	talk	to	him
on	your	behalf."
I	said,	"I	cannot	promise,	because	if	he	says	something	stupid,	I	cannot	resist	the
temptation	to	tell	him	that	it	is	stupid."
He	said,	"I	had	never	realized	that	you	are	such	a	tough	person."
I	said,	"It	is	good	to	know	from	the	very	beginning.	This	is	the	first	day;	there	is
still	a	chance:	you	can	simply	tell	me	and	I	will	leave."
"No,"	he	said,	"we	will	try."	He	took	me	to	the	vice-chancellor.
I	 always	 used	 to	 live	 in	 my	 own	 way,	 and	 the	 vice-chancellor	 had	 been	 a
professor	at	Oxford,	had	lived	almost	his	whole	life	in	England,	and	had	become
almost	a	proper	Englishman.	He	said	something	about	my	beard	which	I	was	just
growing:	"Why	have	you	not	shaved	your	beard?"	My	professor	became	afraid
that	this	was	the	beginning	of	the	end.
I	 said,	 "You	 are	 asking	 a	wrong	 question;	 in	 fact,	 I	 should	 ask	why	 you	 have
shaved	your	beard	--	because	I	am	not	growing	mine;	it	is	growing	itself.	Your
question	is	nonsensical	--
you	 could	 ask	 why	 have	 I	 not	 cut	 my	 fingers,	 you	 could	 ask	 anything.	 It	 is
natural	 that	 a	man	 should	 have	 a	 beard,	 you	 are	 being	 unnatural.	You	have	 to
answer	me	--	why	have	you	been	shaving	your	beard?"
My	poor	professor,	who	was	sitting	by	my	side,	started	nudging	me.	I	had	to	tell
him,	 "You	 stop	 nudging	me.	 I	 don't	 care	 about	 all	 the	 facilities	 for	which	 you
have	brought	me	to	the	vice-chancellor.	In	this	moment,	my	only	concern	is	that
he	should	accept	that	he	has	asked	a	wrong	question."
There	was	great	 silence	 for	a	moment,	 and	 the	old	man	said,	 "In	 fact,	you	are
logically	right.	And	right	now	I	don't	have	any	answer,	because	nobody	has	ever
asked	this	in	my	life	--
I	have	never	thought	about	it."
I	said,	"It	is	your	beard,	and	you	have	been	cutting	and	cutting	and	shaving	and
shaving,	 perhaps	 for	 fifty	 years,	 without	 ever	 thinking	 about	 what	 you	 are
doing."	So	I	said,	"Okay,	you	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
153
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
can	 have	 time.	 I	 will	 be	 coming	 every	 day	 at	 eleven	 o'clock	 when	 the	 office
opens;	you	can	meet	me	in	front	of	the	office.	You	have	to	find	the	answer."
But	 my	 professor	 said,	 "We	 have	 not	 come	 here	 to	 discuss	 the	 beard!	 It	 is	 a
question	of	your	further	education,	your	post-graduation,	and	he	is	the	man	who
can	decide."
I	said,	"I	don't	care.	For	 the	present,	my	whole	concern	 is	 to	make	him	realize
that	he	has	lived	an	unconscious	life."
The	old	man	said,	"From	the	beard	you	have	reached	to	 'an	unconscious	life'?"
He	 asked	 my	 professor,	 "What	 are	 the	 requirements?	 I	 will	 grant	 him	 a
scholarship	 for	 two	 years."	 Free	 lodging,	 free	 boarding,	 he	 signed	 everything,
and	 he	 said,	 "Just	 don't	 stand	 every	 day	 in	 front	 of	 my	 door!	 If	 you	 need
anything,	 you	 simply	 come	 and	 tell	 me,	 and	 I	 promise	 that	 I	 will	 not	 ask
anything	--	it	was	my	fault."
So	 I	 said,	 "It	 is	 decided?	Once	 you	 ask	me	 a	 question,	 then	 that	 becomes	my
priority	for	that	moment;	whatever	I	have	to	sacrifice,	I	will	sacrifice."
He	said,	"I	promise,	and	your	professor	 is	 the	witness."	But	 it	was	difficult	 for
him	--	 it	would	have	been	difficult	 for	anybody,	because	I	used	to	wear	a	robe
without	any	buttons	so	my	whole	chest	was	exposed...	And	the	next	time	I	went
because	 I	 wanted	 to	 be	 allowed	 to	 take	 as	many	 books	 as	 I	 wanted	 from	 the
library	to	my	room,	the	rule	that	only	one	book	could	be	issued	at	a	time,	should
not	be	applied	to	me.
He	said,	"We	can	talk	about	that,	but	where	are	your	buttons?"
I	said,	"You	are	getting	into	trouble;	you	have	forgotten	your	promise.	In	fact,	I
should	ask	again,	that	in	a	hot	country	like	India...	and	it	is	summertime,	and	you
are	perspiring,	and	still	you	are	using	a	necktie	and	wearing	a	coat?	I	don't	use
buttons	 because	 I	 want	 my	 chest	 to	 have	 the	 fresh	 breeze.	 Is	 it	 something
wrong?"
He	said,	"It	is	not	wrong."
I	said,	"Something	immoral?	Something	against	the	rules	of	the	university?	Why
should	you	be	concerned	about	it?	It	is	my	chest,	and	I	want	it	to	have	as	much
breeze	as	possible."
He	said,	"I	 forgot	my	promise.	You	are	allowed	 to	 take	as	many	books	as	you
want.	I	will	not	even	ask	why	you	want	so	many	books	because	I	don't	want	to
get	into	any	argumentation.
One	thing	is	decided:	it	is	better	not	to	argue	with	you."
The	first	meeting	that	I	attended	in	which	he	spoke	was	the	birthday	of	Gautam
Buddha.
He	was	 a	 very	good	orator,	 and	 a	 good	 actor	 too.	When	he	was	 talking	 about
Gautam	Buddha,	tears	came	to	his	eyes,	and	he	said,	"I	have	always	felt	that	if	I
was	 in	 the	 time	of	Gautam	Buddha,	 I	would	have	gone	and	sat	at	his	 feet	and
learned	the	art	of	attaining	more	consciousness,	of	becoming	enlightened."
I	was	sitting	in	the	middle;	I	stood	up.	As	he	saw	me	standing,	he	said,	"Have	I
said	anything	wrong?"
I	said,	"You	have	not	only	said	something	wrong,	you	are	behaving	very	falsely.
At	least	before	your	students	you	should	not	be	so	insincere.	Whatever	you	have
said,	you	don't	mean;	your	tears	are	false."
All	the	professors	of	the	university	were	present;	the	whole	student	community
was	present.	They	were	 all	 shocked	 that	 I	would	 say	before	 everybody,	 to	 the
vice-chancellor,
"You	are	insincere."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
154
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
I	said,	"You	have	heard	the	name,	Raman	Maharshi?"
He	said,	"Yes,	I	have	heard	it."
"Have	you	ever	been	there	to	sit	at	his	feet?	--	because	he	is	of	the	same	calibre
and	same	consciousness	as	Gautam	Buddha.	And	 I	can	say	with	authority	 that
even	in	Gautam	Buddha's	time	you	would	not	have	gone	to	him.	This	century	is
also	not	without	enlightened	people.
You	have	to	take	your	words	back."
People	 used	 to	 think	 he	 was	 very	 stubborn...	 but	 perhaps	 he	 had	 never	 met
somebody	 so	authentically	 sincere	 that	 it	 could	bring	his	original	 face	 into	 the
public.	He	wiped	his	tears	and	he	said,	"Perhaps	you	are	right	--	I	might	not	have
gone.	 It	 was	 just	 oratory	 and	 nothing	 else;	 I	 did	 not	 mean	 it.	 In	 this	 whole
gathering,	 perhaps	 you	 are	 the	 only	 person	who	 is	 listening	 --	 not	 only	 to	 the
words,	but	also	to	the	meaning	behind	them.
"I	would	love	you	to	take	your	dinner	with	me	tonight,	because	I	would	like	to
discuss	a	 little	more.	 I	have	never	come	across	anybody	in	my	whole	 long	 life
who	 has	 brought	 my	 original	 face	 before	 the	 crowd.	 And	 something	 is	 very
strange	--	 I	don't	 feel	angry	at	you;	 I	simply	feel	a	deep	sadness	about	myself.
Why	can't	I	be	true?	But	nobody	has	ever	pointed	it	out	to	me."
Everybody	in	the	world	wants	to	be	true,	because	just	to	be	true	brings	so	much
joy	and	such	an	abundance	of	blissfulness	--	why	should	one	be	false?	You	have
to	have	the	courage	for	a	little	deeper	insight:	Why	are	you	afraid?	What	can	the
world	do	 to	you?	People	 can	 laugh	at	you;	 it	will	 do	 them	good	 --	 laughter	 is
always	a	medicine,	healthful.	People	can	think	you	are	mad...	just	because	they
think	you	are	mad,	you	don't	become	mad.
And	if	you	are	authentic	about	your	joy,	your	tears,	your	dance	--	sooner	or	later
there	will	 be	 people	who	will	 start	 understanding	 you,	 who	may	 start	 joining
your	caravan.	 I	myself	had	started	alone	on	 the	path,	and	 then	people	went	on
coming	and	it	became	a	worldwide	caravan.	And	I	have	not	invited	anybody;	I
have	simply	done	whatever	I	felt	was	coming	from	my	heart.
My	responsibility	 is	 towards	my	heart,	not	 towards	anybody	else	 in	 the	world.
So	 is	 your	 responsibility	 only	 towards	 your	 own	 being.	 Don't	 go	 against	 it,
because	going	against	it	is	committing	suicide,	is	destroying	yourself.	And	what
is	the	gain?	Even	if	people	give	you	respect,	and	people	think	that	you	are	a	very
sober,	 respectable,	 honorable	man,	 these	 things	 are	 not	 going	 to	 nourish	 your
being.	 They	 are	 not	 going	 to	 give	 you	 any	 more	 insight	 into	 life	 and	 its
tremendous	beauty.
And	moreover,	everybody	is	so	concerned	with	their	own	problems,	who	cares
whether	you	are	 laughing,	dancing?	Who	has	 time	 for	 it?	 It	 is	only	your	mind
that	is	thinking	that	the	whole	world	is	thinking	about	you.	My	own	experience
is:	everybody	 is	 so	crowded,	worried,	with	 the	 rush	of	 thoughts	about	himself,
his	life,	his	problems	--	do	you	think	he	has	time	even	to	look	at	you,	or	to	think
about	you?
One	Jewish	doctor	to	another:	"All	day	long,	I	hear	stories	of	pain	and	suffering:
'Doctor,	my	 back...	Doctor,	my	 stomach...	Doctor,	my	wife.'	 It	 is	 awful,	 I	 tell
you.	 Tell	me,	 Sam,	 how	 come	 you	 look	 so	 serene	 after	 a	 day	 listening	 to	 the
world's	troubles?"
Second	doctor:	"So,	who	listens?"
You	should	not	be	worried	at	all.	Everybody	is	so	concerned	with	his	own	world,
they	don't	have	 time,	 they	don't	have	energy	 to	bother	about	you.	And	even	 if
they	have	some	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
155
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
opinion,	 it	 is	 their	 problem.	You	are	 alone	 in	 the	world:	 alone	you	have	 come
into	the	world,	alone	you	are	here,	and	alone	you	will	leave	this	world.	All	their
opinions	 will	 be	 left	 behind;	 only	 your	 original	 feelings,	 your	 authentic
experiences	will	go	with	you	even	beyond	death.
Even	 death	 cannot	 take	 away	 your	 dance,	 your	 tears	 of	 joy,	 your	 purity	 of
aloneness,	 your	 silence,	 your	 serenity,	 your	 ecstasy.	 That	 which	 death	 cannot
take	away	from	you	is	the	only	real	treasure;	and	that	which	can	be	taken	away
by	anybody	is	not	a	treasure	--	it	is	simply	befooling	you.
How	many	millions	 of	 people	 have	 lived	 before	 you	 on	 this	 earth?	You	 don't
even	 know	 their	 names;	 whether	 they	 ever	 lived	 or	 not	 does	 not	 make	 any
difference.	There	have	been	saints	and	 there	have	been	sinners,	and	 there	have
been	very	respectable	people,	and	there	have	been	all	kinds	of	eccentrics,	crazy,
but	they	have	all	disappeared	--	not	even	a	trace	has	remained	on	the	earth.
Your	sole	concern	should	be	to	take	care	of	and	protect	those	qualities	which	you
can	 take	with	you	when	death	destroys	your	body,	your	mind	 --	because	 these
qualities	will	 be	your	 sole	 companions.	They	 are	 the	only	 real	 values,	 and	 the
people	who	attain	them	--	only	they	live;	others	only	pretend	to	live.
The	KGB	knocks	on	Yussell	Finkelstein's	door	one	dark	night.	Yussel	opens	the
door.	The	KGB	man	barks	out,	"Does	Yussel	Finkelstein	live	here?"
"No,"	replies	Yussel,	standing	there	in	his	frayed	pajamas.
"No?	So	what	is	your	name	then?"
"Yussel	Finkelstein."	The	KGB	man	knocks	him	 to	 the	ground	and	 says,	 "Did
you	just	say	that	you	did	not	live	here?"
Yussel	replies,	"You	call	this	living?"
Just	living	is	not	always	living.	Look	at	your	life.	Can	you	call	it	a	blessing?	Can
you	call	it	a	gift,	a	present	of	existence?	Would	you	like	this	life	to	be	given	to
you	again	and	again?	It	is	so	empty.	Because	of	its	emptiness,	your	prayers	are
empty.	You	cannot	fill	your	prayers	with	gratitude.	Gratitude	for	what?	You	are
doing	no	more	than	acting	parts	in	a	drama;	you	are	not	being	yourself.
I	am	reminded...	a	very	beautiful	young	woman	had	gone	to	see	the	great	painter,
Picasso.
And	 she	 saw	 there	 a	 photograph	 of	 Picasso	 hanging	 on	 the	 wall.	 She	 asked
Picasso,	"Is	that	your	photograph?	Is	that	you?"
Picasso	said,	"No."
The	 woman	 said,	 "Strange.	 It	 looks	 exactly	 like	 you.	 Do	 you	 have	 a	 twin
brother?	It	is	so	absolutely	alike."
Picasso	said,	"It	may	be	like	me	but	it	is	not	alive.	And	if	it	were	me,	it	would
have	come	out	of	the	frame	to	give	you	a	kiss.	It	is	certainly	not	me."
Are	you	really	yourself,	or	just	pretending	to	be	somebody	that	the	crowd	around
you	wanted	you	to	be?	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	a	seeker	of	truth	should	begin
by	dropping	all	that	is	false	in	him,	because	the	false	cannot	seek	the	truth.	The
false	is	the	barrier	between	you	and	the	truth.	If	all	that	is	false	is	dropped,	you
need	not	seek	the	truth	--	truth	will	come	to	you.	In	fact,	it	is	only	words	when	I
say,	"Truth	will	come	to	you."	When	all	that	is	false	is	dropped,	you	are	the	truth.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
156
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Nothing	comes;	nothing	goes.
There	is	no	journey.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
AT	THE	RISK	OF	SOUNDING	RIDICULOUS,	IN	THE	MIDST	OF	ALL	THIS
GLOOM
ABOUT	 THE	 FUTURE	OF	 THE	WORLD,	 I	 HONESTLY	DON'T	 CARE	 IF
THE	WORLD
ENDS	TOMORROW.	SO	WHAT	 IS	THE	POINT	OF	TALKING	ABOUT	 IT
AND
FUELING	THE	ALREADY	MASSIVE	FIRE	OF	DOOM	WHICH	SEEMS	TO
BURN
ETERNALLY	 IN	 THE	DEPRESSING	MIND	OF	MANKIND?	 ENOUGH	 IS
ENOUGH.	I	UNDERSTAND	THAT	IT'S	"NOW	OR	NEVER,	"SO	LET'S	DO
IT	NOW.	LET'S	DANCE!
Vimal,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 say	 "I	 do	 not	 honestly	 care	 about	 the	world,"	 but	 let	 your
heart	feel	it.
The	world	is	not	something	that	is	only	outside	you;	the	world	is	within	you	too.
You	are	the	world.
And	this	 issue	of	 the	darkness	that	 is	coming	closer	and	closer	has	to	be	given
significance,	so	that	your	choice	becomes	"now"	and	you	stop	postponing.	It	is
true	--	"Now	or	never"	--	but	there	are	so	few	people	in	the	world	who	live	now.
They	are	always	living	either	in	yesterdays	or	in	tomorrows.
Why	am	I	insisting	that	there	is,	for	the	first	time,	a	possibility	that	there	will	not
be	any	tomorrow	at	all?	There	is	an	old	proverb:	Tomorrow	never	comes.	But	the
old	proverb	has	been	only	a	proverb	and	in	spite	of	that	proverb,	tomorrow	has
kept	on	coming.	It	may	not	come	as	tomorrow;	it	will	always	come	as	today	--	in
that	sense	the	proverb	is	right.
But	today	the	situation	is	totally	different:
Tomorrow	really	may	not	come.
I	want	 it	 to	 sink	deep	 in	your	being	 that	we	have	come	 to	 the	very	end	of	 the
road	--	and	there	is	nothing	left	except	dancing	and	rejoicing.	To	make	it	NOW	,
I	am	destroying	your	tomorrow	completely.	I	am	taking	it	away	from	your	mind
--	which	is	deeply	involved	with	tomorrows.	Even	if	you	say	you	understand	that
perhaps	 tomorrow	 the	 world	 will	 end,	 deep	 down	 your	mind	 goes	 on	 saying,
"There	have	been	thousands	of	wars,	and	the	world	has	survived.	One	war	more
is	not	going	to	make	much	difference."
Mind	is	very	clever	in	finding	excuses,	that	something	or	other	will	prevent	the
destruction.	And	 I	 am	not	 saying	 that	 the	destruction	 should	not	be	prevented.
What	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 that	 in	 your	 mind,	 there	 should	 be	 no	 excuse	 left	 for
postponement	--	so	your	whole	energy	gathers	in	the	now;	it	is	not	spread	in	the
future.	And	if	 the	whole	energy	is	concentrated	in	this	point,	 then	this	moment
can	become	the	moment	of	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	is	nothing	but	your	consciousness	being	concentrated	on	a	single
point	--
now	and	here.
You	are	 saying,	 "Enough	 is	 enough."	No,	Vimal.	Looking	 at	 the	human	mind,
nothing	 is	 enough.	 People	 will	 go	 on	 living	 in	 their	 old	 unconscious	 ways	 --
hoping	against	hope	that	although	there	have	always	been	people	like	Jesus	and
Buddha	predicting	the	end	of	the	world,	the	world	is	still	there.	But	this	time	the
situation	is	totally	different.	I	am	not	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
157
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
predicting	 the	 end	 of	 the	world;	 it	 is	 simply	 becoming	 so	 certain,	 so	 logically
certain,	that	there	seems	to	be	no	possibility	to	avoid	it.
But	my	interest	is	not	in	avoiding	it	--	if	it	can	be	avoided,	it	will	be	avoided	--
my	interest	is	to	make	it	so	clear	to	you	that	it	cannot	be	avoided,	and	that	you
don't	 have	 any	 future	 to	 invest	 your	 energy	 in,	 that	 you	 have	 to	 pull	 all	 your
energy	back	to	the	present	moment.	And	the	moment	the	whole	energy	becomes
a	pool,	here	and	now,	 the	explosion	of	 light	happens	and	you	are,	 for	 the	 first
time,	 absolutely	 yourself	 --	 an	 eternal	 being,	 an	 immortal	 being,	 who	 knows
nothing	of	death,	who	has	never	come	across	any	darkness.
You	are	 saying,	 "So	 let	us	do	 it	now.	Let	us	dance."	But	your	dance	has	 to	be
total	--
because	you	can	dance	and	still	think	of	the	future;	you	can	dance	and	still	think
that	tomorrow	we	will	be	dancing	again.
Dance	as	if	this	is	the	last	dance.
Dance	with	abandon,	holding	nothing	back.
That	will	bring	transformation	to	your	being,	and	a	possibility	of	transformation
for	other	people	too.
A	politician	is	making	a	speech	and	says:	"Fellow	electors,	we	must	restore	the
status	quo."	A	man	shouts	from	the	audience,	"What	does	'status	quo'	mean?"
The	politician	replies,	in	a	rare	fit	of	honesty,	"Actually,	it	is	Latin	for	'the	mess
we	are	in.'"
On	the	surface	it	seems	everything	is	going	perfectly	well,	but	deep	down	there
is	 great	 turmoil	 in	 the	 unconscious	 layers	 of	 human	 beings.	You	 are	 not	 even
aware	of	your	own	unconscious	nightmares,	but	humanity	is	suffering	as	it	has
never	suffered	before.
It	 is	 restless	 as	 it	 has	 never	 been	 before.	 It	 has	 forgotten	 the	 language	 of
relaxation,	it	has	forgotten	the	language	of	totality,	it	has	forgotten	the	language
of	 intensity.	 And	 all	 those	 qualities	 are	 needed	 to	 make	 your	 meditation	 a
revolution	 in	 your	 being.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 morality,	 not	 a	 question	 of
character,	not	a	question	of	virtue	--	religions	have	been	concerned	with	all	those
things	 for	 thousands	 of	 years,	 and	 they	 have	 not	 been	 successful	 in	 changing
man.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	different	approach,	 a	different	dimension:	 the	dimension	of
energy	and	the	concentration	of	energy.
And	just	as	atomic	energy	is	the	explosion	of	a	small	atom	into	its	constituent	of
electrons,	protons	and	neutrons	--	it	is	not	visible	to	the	eyes,	but	the	explosion	is
so	 vast	 that	 it	 can	 destroy	 a	 great	 city	 like	 Nagasaki	 or	 Hiroshima	 --	 exactly
parallel	is	the	inner	explosion	of	the	living	cell.	The	atomic	energy	is	outside	and
destructive	--	objective	and	destructive.	The	inner	energy,	the	subjective	cell	of
your	being,	has	the	same	qualities,	the	same	tremendous	power	once	it	explodes
--	but	it	is	creative.
It	 is	 a	 chain	 reaction:	one	cell	 inside	you	explodes,	 and	 then	other	cells	 inside
you	start	exploding	in	a	chain.	The	whole	life	becomes	a	festival	of	lights.	Every
gesture	becomes	a	dance;	every	movement	becomes	sheer	joy.	My	emphasis	that
there	is	no	future	has	nothing	to	do	with	gloom;	it	has	something	to	do	with	you.
If	 you	 can	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 future	 completely,	 your	 enlightenment	 becomes
immediately	 possible.	And	 it	 is	 a	 good	 opportunity	 to	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 future
because	 the	 future	 itself	 is	 disappearing.	But	 don't	 even	 in	 any	 corner	 of	 your
mind,	 go	 on	 carrying	 the	 idea	 that	 perhaps	 this	 too	 is	 a	 device.	 These	 are	 the
strategies	of	the	mind	to	keep	you	the	same	old	zombie.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
158
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Mind	is	clever.	If	you	want	to	get	up	early	in	the	morning,	you	put	on	an	alarm
clock,	and	you	hear	the	alarm...	the	mind	is	so	clever,	it	may	start	dreaming	that
you	are	in	a	church	and	church	bells	are	ringing.	The	poor	alarm	clock	cannot	do
anything	more	than	that;	the	mind	has	created	a	dream	and	made	it	possible	for
you	to	go	on	sleeping.
The	old	religions	were	basically	insistent	on	one	thing,	and	that	was	future.	You
should	note	it:	not	only	future	in	this	life,	but	after	life;	their	whole	program	was
to	take	you	whole	energy	as	a	project	for	a	future	life,	after	death,	in	paradise	far,
far	away.	This	strategy	worked;	it	took	away	the	very	juice	of	human	life.	People
were	simply	waiting	to	live	in	paradise;	this	place,	this	earth,	became	just	like	a
waiting	room	in	a	station.
Everybody	is	waiting	for	the	train.	And	the	train	never	comes,	and	people	go	on
consulting	the	timetable.	And	they	don't	improve	the	waiting	room	because	it	is	a
waiting	room	--
particularly	 in	 India.	 I	 have	 been	 traveling	 so	 much	 --	 almost	 hundreds	 of
waiting	rooms	--	and	I	saw	why	people	behave	in	a	waiting	room	differently	than
they	behave	in	a	house.	They	go	on	eating	bananas	and	throwing	banana	peels
all	over	the	waiting	room	--	after	all,	it	is	a	waiting	room;	they	are	not	going	to
live	here.	Their	train	is	going	to	come	and	they	will	be	gone.	The	waiting	rooms
are	so	dirty,	their	bathrooms	are	so	impossible,	and	nobody	takes	any	care	not	to
make	 them	more	 dirty	 --	 because	 everybody's	 eyes	 are	 hooked	 on	 the	 future.
They	are	consulting	their	 timetables,	when	their	 train	 is	 to	come,	and	they	will
go.
All	 the	 religious	 scriptures	 say	 this	world	 is	 nothing	but	 a	waiting	 room;	your
real	 home	 is	 far	 away,	 above	 the	 clouds.	 There	 is	 real	 living;	 here	 is	 only
waiting.
I	am	trying	to	change	the	whole	pattern	of	religious	thinking.	I	am	trying	to	say
to	you:	This	is	your	home;	this	very	moment	is	your	paradise.	It	all	depends	on
you.	 You	 do	 not	 need	 to	 be	 virtuous	 to	 dance	 totally;	 you	 do	 not	 need	 to	 be
learned	to	dance	totally;	you	do	no	need	to	be	pious	to	dance	totally.	To	dance
totally,	all	 that	 is	needed	 is	 that	we	accept	 the	reality	only	of	 this	moment.	We
will	 accept	 the	 reality	 of	 the	 next	moment	when	 it	 arrives,	 but	we	will	 not	 be
waiting	for	it.
All	the	religions	have	been	teaching	you	to	wait.	I	am	teaching	to	live,	to	love,	to
dance,	to	sing	--	and	don't	wait.
It	 is	 Easter	 and	 a	 priest	 is	 getting	 cost	 estimates	 for	 the	 church	 flower
arrangements.	A	Catholic	florist	says,	"Three	hundred	dollars."
"Much	too	much,"	says	the	priest...	but	the	florist	is	one	of	the	flock.
A	 Protestant	 florist	 offers	 to	 do	 the	 arrangements	 for	 two	 hundred	 and	 fifty
dollars.
"Cheaper,"	thinks	the	priest,	"but	he	is	not	of	the	flock,	and	the	difference	is	not
that	great."
While	he	is	pondering,	Solly	Goldberg	gives	him	a	price	of	seventy-five	dollars.
"That	settles	it;	Solly	gets	the	contract."
On	Easter	morning,	the	flock	files	into	a	church	filled	with	magnificent	azaleas,
camelias,	carnations	and	roses,	and	above	the	altar,	spelled	out	in	daffodils	is	the
Easter	message:
"Christ	has	risen,	but	Goldberg's	prices	never	vary."
Okay,	Vimal?	Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
159
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
16
Love	is	always	an	emperor
20	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	SHORT	TIME	AGO	YOU	SAID	THAT	SPRING	HAS	COME	AND	MANY
SANNYASINS	 ARE	 READY	 TO	 FLOWER.	 DO	 "FLOWERING,"
"AWAKENING"	AND
"SELF-REALIZATION"	 ALL	MEAN	 ENLIGHTENMENT,	 THE	ULTIMATE
TRUTH?	OR
IS	THERE	A	DIFFERENCE?	AND	CAN	A	PERSON,	AFTER	ATTAINING,
FALL	BACK
INTO	IDENTIFICATION	WITH	THE	MIND?
Mukto,	there	is	a	difference	between	flowering,	awakening,	self-realization,	and
enlightenment.	Enlightenment	 is	 the	ultimate	 truth	 --	 the	 seeker	disappears	but
the	 truth	 is	 found.	The	pilgrim	disappears	but	God	 is	 found.	 It	 is	 important	 to
understand	the	differences...
From	enlightenment	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	 falling	back,	because	you	are	no
longer	there	to	fall	back.	As	long	as	you	are,	there	is	a	possibility.
Only	your	absence	is	the	guarantee	that	you	cannot	fall	back.
Flowering	 is	 just	 the	beginning	of	entering	within	yourself	 --	 just	as	you	enter
into	a	garden.	It	is	immensely	important,	because	without	entering	you	are	never
going	 to	 reach	 to	 the	center.	But	 in	 flowering,	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	 recognize
your	potential,	your	possibility.	In	flowering	is	the	transition	period,	from	human
to	divine.	But	one	can	fall	back,	because	the	flowering	is	so	new	and	so	fragile
and	your	past	is	so	old	and	so	strong	--	it	can	pull	you	back;	it	is	still	there.
Awakening	 is	 getting	 very	 close	 to	 your	 center.	 And	 as	 you	 get	 closer	 to	 the
center,	 falling	 back	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 difficult	 because	 your	 new
experience	is	gathering	power,	strength,	experience,	and	the	old	is	losing.	But	the
old	is	still	there;	it	has	not	disappeared.
Ordinarily	people	don't	fall	from	awakening,	but	the	possibility	remains:	one	can
fall.
Self-realization	 is	 reaching	 to	 your	 center.	 Many	 religions	 have	 believed	 that
self-realization	 is	 the	 end	 --	 for	 example,	 Jainism	 --	 you	 have	 come	 to	 your
ultimate	truth.	It	is	not	true.	Self-realization	is	only	a	dewdrop	which	has	become
aware,	alert,	contented,	 fulfilled.	 It	 is	almost	 impossible	 to	 fall	back	from	self-
realization	 --	 but	 I	 am	 saying	 almost	 impossible,	 not	 absolutely	 impossible,
because	the	self	can	deceive	you;	it	can	bring	your	ego	back.
The	self	and	the	ego	are	very	similar.	The	self	is	the	natural	thing	and	the	ego	is
the	synthetic,	so	it	happens	sometimes	that	a	self-realized	man	becomes	a	pious
egoist.	His	 egoism	 is	 not	 going	 to	 harm	 anyone,	 but	 it	 certainly	 prevents	 him
from	dropping	into	the	ocean	and	disappearing	completely.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
160
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Enlightenment	is	the	dewdrop	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	vast,	infinite
ocean.
Once	the	dewdrop	has	fallen	into	the	ocean,	now	there	is	no	way	even	to	find	it.
The	question	of	turning	back	does	not	arise.
Enlightenment,	hence,	is	the	ultimate	truth.	What	begins	as	flowering	moves	on
the	path	of	awakening,	reaches	to	self-realization.	Then	one	quantum	leap	more	-
-	disappearing	into	the	eternal,	into	the	infinite.
You	are	no	more,	only	existence	is.
I	 have	 told	 you	 about	Kabir,	 India's	 greatest	mystic.	When	 he	was	 young,	 he
became	self-realized	and	he	wrote	a	small	couplet:
HERAT,	HERAT	HE	SAKHI
RAHYA,	KABIR,	HERAI
"Searching	 and	 searching	 and	 searching,	 oh	 my	 friend,	 the	 searcher	 is	 lost.
Seeking	and	seeking	and	seeking,	the	seeker	is	lost."
BUND	SAMANI	SAMUND	MEIN
SOKAT	HERIJAI
"The	dewdrop	has	slipped	into	the	ocean;	now	there	is	no	way	to	get	it	back."
But	it	was	too	early	to	say	that.	The	dewdrop	was	still	there,	slipping	towards	the
ocean,	but	it	had	not	yet	fallen	into	the	ocean.
When	Kabir	was	dying,	he	became	enlightened.	He	called	his	son	Kamaal	and
told	him,	"I	have	written	something	wrong.	At	that	moment,	that	was	my	feeling
--	that	I	had	come	to	the	ultimate.	Before	I	die,	you	write	this	down,	and	change
it."
The	change	 is	very	small	 in	words,	but	 in	experience	 it	 is	 tremendous.	He	has
used	again	the	same	words:
HERAT,	HERAT	HE	SAKHI
"Oh	beloved,	seeking	and	searching,	the	seeker	is	lost."
SAMUND	SAMUND	BUND	MEIN
SOKAT	HERIJAI
"And	the	ocean	has	fallen	into	the	dewdrop;	now	it	is	impossible	to	find	it."
Just	a	little	difference	in	the	words...	"The	dewdrop	has	fallen	into	the	ocean"	--
something	 of	 the	 self	 has	 remained	 in	 it.	 But	 "the	 ocean	 has	 fallen	 into	 the
dewdrop"...	 that	 is	 the	 tremendous	experience	and	explosion	of	 enlightenment.
The	 first	 statement	 was	 about	 self-realization;	 the	 second	 statement	 is	 about
enlightenment.
From	 enlightenment,	 falling	 is	 simply	 impossible.	 You	 are	 gone	 --	 and	 gone
forever;	not	even	a	shadow	or	a	trace	of	you	is	left	behind.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
161
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Up	 to	 self-realization	 the	possibility	 remains	 --	 it	becomes	 less	and	 less,	but	 it
remains.
You	can	start	being	egoistic	about	your	self-realization:	"I	have	known,	I	am	a
realized	person.
I	am	a	saint,	I	have	encountered	God"	--	but	that	"I"	is	there,	howsoever	pious.
Even	its	shadow	is	dangerous;	it	can	pull	you	back.
I	have	heard	a	very	beautiful	story	about	Jesus...
Jesus	was	walking	through	Jerusalem	when	he	saw	an	angry	crowd	shouting	and
screaming	at	a	woman.	He	came	closer	and	heard	the	mob	accusing	the	woman
of	adultery.
Jesus	strode	to	the	front	of	the	mob,	held	up	his	arms	and	said,	"Let	him	who	is
without	sin	cast	the	first	stone."
The	crowd	fell	silent,	but	one	little	old	lady	pushed	to	the	front,	picked	up	a	huge
rock,	and	hurled	it	at	the	sobbing	woman.	Jesus	gently	took	the	old	lady	by	the
arm	and	said	quietly,
"Mother,	why	do	you	always	embarrass	me?"
Jesus'	mother!	She	is	a	virtuous	woman	--	so	virtuous	that	she	has	given	birth	to
Jesus	without	 any	 contact	 with	 another	 human	 being.	 She	 stands	 alone	 in	 the
whole	of	history	with	 the	claim	--	even	after	 the	birth	of	 the	 son,	of	being	 the
VIRGIN	Mary.	That	 idea	must	have	got	 into	 the	old	woman's	mind	 too	much.
Her	 virtue,	 her	 piousness	 --	God	has	 chosen	 her	 to	 be	 the	mother	 of	His	 only
begotten	son	--	has	become	a	subtle	ego	in	her.	The	others	were	not	pious.	The
moment	Jesus	said,	"The	first	stone	has	to	be	hurled	by	one	who	is	virtuous,"	the
mob	stopped.	They	were	all	in	the	same	boat.
And	you	can	see	it	in	your	saints...	a	strange	but	very	subtle	ego.	Spirituality	has
become	their	achievement.	Somebody	has	all	the	riches	of	the	world,	somebody
is	 the	most	 beautiful	 person,	 somebody	 is	 the	 strongest,	 and	 somebody	 is	 the
most	pious.	The	question	is	not	what	it	is	by	which	the	ego	can	get	nourished	--
any	idea	can	make	you	fall.
One	has	not	to	stop	until	he	has	reached	the	point	when	he	is	not:	when	there	is
no	claimer,	when	one	has	moved	the	full	circle	and	has	come	back	to	the	world,
just	nobody.	Perhaps	people	may	not	recognize	him	as	a	great	saint...	and	this	is
my	 understanding,	 that	 the	 greatest	 of	 saints	 have	 remained	 unrecognized,
because	you	understand	only	the	language	of	the	ego.
You	don't	understand	the	language	of	egolessness.
The	greatest	sage	will	appear	to	you	just	an	ordinary	man,	nothing	special,	with
no	claim	 for	any	 talent,	 for	 any	possession,	 for	 any	power,	 for	 any	genius,	 for
any	knowledge	--	no	claim	at	all.	He	has	become	absolutely	a	zero.	But	the	zero
is	not	negative,	it	is	full	of	godliness,	overflowing	with	godliness.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THOUGH	YOUR	EMPHASIS	HAS	BEEN	FOR	US,	AS	INDIVIDUALS,	TO
GO
WITHIN	TO	SAVE	OURSELVES,	 I	GUESS	 I	AM	STILL	NAIVE	ENOUGH
TO	FEEL
THAT	OUR	LOVE,	OUR	DANCING,	OUR	JOY	COULD	STILL	SAVE	THIS
BEAUTIFUL
PLANET.	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS?
Devaprem,	the	question	is	meaningful,	but	very	complex	to	understand.	You	are
asking,
"Though	 your	 emphasis	 has	 been	 for	 us,	 as	 individuals,	 to	 go	 within	 to	 save
ourselves,	I	guess	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
162
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
I	am	still	naive	enough	to	feel	that	our	love,	our	dancing,	our	joy,	could	still	save
this	beautiful	planet."
It	may	save	 the	beautiful	planet,	but	you	should	not	carry	 the	 idea	within	you;
otherwise	 it	will	destroy	your	 love	and	your	dance	and	your	 joy.	 If	deep	down
you	are	guessing	that	"my	love,	my	dancing,	my	joy	can	save	the	whole	planet,"
it	 is	 the	 strategy	of	 the	 ego.	You	are	becoming	 a	 savior.	You	 are	becoming	 so
great	 that	 you	 can	 save	 the	 whole	 planet,	 just	 by	 your	 love	 and	 just	 by	 your
dancing,	just	by	your	joy.
Try	 to	understand	 the	complexity.	 It	 is	possible,	 if	 individuals	 are	 full	of	 love,
full	of	joy,	and	their	life	is	not	a	drag,	but	a	dance...	as	a	by-product	it	is	possible
the	planet	may	be	saved.
But	as	a	by-product	--	you	cannot	take	the	credit	for	saving	the	world.
This	is	the	trouble:	if	you	start	thinking	that	you	are	dancing	to	save	the	world,
your	 dance	 is	 destroyed.	 Then	 you	 are	 not	 dancing	 totally,	 then	 you	 are	 not
dancing	here	and	now;	then	your	dancing	has	become	a	means	to	save	the	world.
Then	your	love	is	not	pure	love	--	it	is	just	another	means,	but	the	end	is	to	save
the	world.	It	will	be	easy	for	you	to	understand	if	I	tell	you	a	Sufi	story...
One	 Sufi	mystic	was	 so	 full	 of	 love,	 and	 so	 full	 of	 joy	 --	 his	whole	 life	was
laughter,	music,	dancing.	And	the	story	says	God	became	very	interested	in	him
because	he	never	asked	anything,	he	never	prayed.	His	whole	life	was	a	prayer,
there	was	no	need	to	pray.
He	never	went	to	the	mosque,	he	never	even	uttered	the	name	of	God;	his	whole
existence	 was	 the	 argument	 for	 the	 presence	 of	 God.	 If	 anybody	 asked	 him
whether	God	exists	or	not	he	simply	laughed	--	but	his	laughter	was	neither	yes
nor	no.
God	 himself	 became	 intrigued	 with	 that	 strange	 mystic	 and	 he	 came	 to	 the
mystic	and	said,
"I	am	immensely	happy	because	that's	how	I	want	people	to	be	--	not	that	they
should	pray	for	one	hour	and	do	everything	against	it	for	twenty-three	hours.	Not
that	they	should	become	very	pious	when	they	enter	the	mosque,	and	when	they
go	out	they	leave	their	piousness	in	the	mosque	and	they	are	just	their	old	selves:
angry,	jealous,	full	of	anxiety,	full	of	violence.
"I	have	watched	you	and	I	have	loved	you.	This	is	the	way:	you	have	become	the
prayer.
You	 are,	 right	 now,	my	 only	 argument	 in	 the	world	 that	 something	more	 than
man	exists	--
although	you	have	never	argued,	you	have	not	even	uttered	my	name.	Those	are
superfluous	things...	but	you	live,	you	love,	you	are	so	full	of	joy	that	there	is	no
need	 for	 any	 language;	 your	 very	 presence	 becomes	 the	 argument	 for	 my
existence.	I	want	to	give	you	a	blessing.	You	can	ask	for	anything."
The	sage	said,	"But	I	don't	need	anything.	I	am	so	joyous,	and	I	cannot	conceive
there	can	be	anything	more.	Forgive	me,	I	cannot	ask	because	I	really	don't	need
anything.	You	are	generous,	you	are	loving,	you	are	compassionate;	but	I	am	so
over-full,	there	is	no	space	within	me	for	anything	else.	You	will	have	to	forgive
me,	I	cannot	ask."
God	said,	"I	had	thought	that	you	would	not	ask,	so	don't	ask	for	yourself	--	but
you	can	ask	for	others,	because	there	are	millions	of	people	who	are	miserable,
sick,	have	never	known	anything	for	which	they	can	be	grateful.	I	can	give	you
powers	to	do	miracles,	and	you	can	change	the	lives	of	all	these	people."
The	 sage	 said,	 "If	 you	 are	 insistent,	 then	 with	 a	 condition	 I	 can	 accept	 your
gifts."
God	said,	"With	a	condition?	You	really	are	strange.	What	is	the	condition?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
163
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
He	said,	"My	condition	is	that	I	should	not	become	aware	of	what	is	happening
through	me,	by	you.	It	should	happen	behind	my	back;	it	should	happen	through
my	 shadow,	 not	 through	me.	 I	may	 be	 passing	 and	my	 shadow	may	 fall	 on	 a
dead	tree,	and	the	tree	may	become	alive	again	--	again	lush	green,	again	heavy
with	flowers	and	fruits	--	but	I	should	not	know	it,	because	I	don't	want	to	fall
back.
"If	 I	 know	 it	 --	 that	 I	 have	 done	 it,	 or	 even	 that	 God	 has	 chosen	 me	 as	 the
instrument	to	do	it	--	it	is	dangerous.	So	my	condition	is:	a	blind	man	may	start
seeing,	but	neither	should	he	know	that	it	 is	because	of	me,	nor	should	I	know
that	it	is	because	of	me.	My	shadow	behind	my	back	will	do	all	the	miracles.
"If	you	can	accept	my	condition,	and	remember	that	I	should	not	know	at	all...
because	 I	am	so	 full	of	 joy,	 so	blissful.	Don't	drag	me	back	 into	 the	miserable
world.	Don't	drag	me	back	to	become	again	an	'I.'"
And	 it	 is	 said	 that	God	said	 to	him,	"You	are	not	only	strange,	you	are	unique
and	rare.
And	this	will	be	so:	you	will	never	know	what	things	are	happening	around	you.
Miracles	will	be	happening	around	you	 --	wherever	you	will	go,	miracles	will
happen.	Neither	those	people	will	know	that	you	have	done	those	miracles,	nor
you	 will	 know	 that	 you	 have	 done	 those	 miracles.	 I	 will	 remember	 the
condition."
Devaprem,	 there	 is	 a	 possibility:	 the	 individual	 coming	 to	 enlightenment	 and
celebration	is	bound	to	affect	the	whole	destiny	of	humanity.	But	it	is	going	to	be
a	by-product.	It	is	going	to	happen	behind	your	back,	through	your	shadow	--	not
by	you.	Even	guessing	is	dangerous,	because	that	guessing	can	give	you	the	ego
and	can	destroy	your	joy,	can	destroy	your	dance.
And	 if	your	 joy	and	your	 love	and	your	dance	are	destroyed,	 then	 there	 is	not
going	to	be	any	by-product	to	save	the	planet.
None	 of	 my	 sannyasins	 are	 to	 become	 saviors.	 The	 world	 has	 known	 many
saviors,	and	the	world	is	not	saved.	And	the	reason	is	that	they	were	not	as	alert
as	 the	 Sufi	 mystic;	 they	 started	 bragging	 about	 their	 miracles,	 they	 started
nursing	 their	 egos	 through	 their	 miracles.	 Then	 their	 miracles	 became	 only
magic,	just	tricks	practiced	well.	There	is	nothing	like	a	miraculous	in	it.
The	greatest	miracle	in	the	world	is	that	you	should	dance	and	disappear	in	the
dance	--
then	let	the	dance	do	whatever	it	can	do.	That	you	should	love	and	disappear	in
the	love	--
then	let	the	love	do	whatever	it	can	do.	You	cannot	claim	that	you	are	doing	it	--
you	have	already	disappeared.
In	 your	 disappearance	 is	 the	whole	 possibility	 of	 some	miracle	 happening.	 So
please	don't	guess;	otherwise	deep	 inside	your	 love	will	 remain	half-hearted	 --
you	are	doing	 it	 for	some	purpose.	And	when	 love	becomes	a	purpose	 it	 is	no
longer	love.	Your	joy	will	become	phony,	because	if	you	are	joyful	so	something
can	happen	in	the	world,	you	are	not	really	joyful	--
you	 are	 using	 joy.	And	 if	 your	 dance	 is	 a	means	 towards	 an	 end,	 it	 cannot	 be
total.	Unless	 your	 dance	 is	 an	 end	 in	 itself,	 there	 is	 no	possibility	 of	 its	 being
total.
And	 only	 a	 total	 dance,	 an	 authentic	 love,	 a	 whole-hearted	 joy,	 perhaps	 may
create	 some	miracles	 around	 you.	 But	 you	will	 not	 be	 the	 one	who	 has	 done
them;	you	will	not	be	the	one	who	can	brag	about	them.	They	will	happen	only
when	you	are	not.
God	happens	only	when	you	have	moved	out	of	the	way	and	left	yourself	totally
empty,	spacious.	It	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon:	The	guest	only	comes	inside
the	house	when	the	host	disappears.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
164
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMETIMES	 AFTER	 MOMENTS	 OF	 CLARITY	 AND	 LIGHTNESS,	 IT
SEEMS	OLD
INTIMATES	LIKE	VIOLENT	FEELINGS,	JEALOUSY,	FEELING	FURIOUS,
ETCETERA,	 COME	 BACK	 EVEN	 STRONGER	 THAN	 BEFORE,	 AS	 IF
THEY	WERE	JUST	WAITING
AROUND	THE	CORNER	TO	HAVE	THEIR	CHANCE	AGAIN.	CAN	YOU
SAY
SOMETHING?
Devam	Kranti,	I	can	say	something,	but	those	feelings	of	violence	and	jealousy
and	furiousness	will	still	be	waiting	by	the	corner.	Just	by	my	saying	something,
they	are	not	going	to	disappear	--	because	without	knowing,	you	are	nourishing
them;	without	knowing,	your	desire	to	get	free	of	them	is	very	superficial.
You	 are	 not	 doing	 exactly	what	 I	 have	 been	 emphasizing	 continually;	 you	 are
doing	 just	 the	 opposite.	 You	 are	 fighting	 with	 the	 darkness,	 and	 you	 are	 not
bringing	 the	 light	 in.	You	can	go	on	 fighting	with	 the	darkness	as	 long	as	you
want	--	you	are	not	going	to	be	victorious.
That	does	not	mean	that	you	are	weaker	than	darkness,	it	simply	means	that	what
you	are	doing	is	irrelevant	to	darkness.
Darkness	is	only	an	absence.
You	cannot	do	anything	directly	to	it	--	just	bring	light	in.
And	it	is	not	that	when	you	bring	light	in,	darkness	will	rush	outside	through	all
the	doors.
Darkness	is	an	absence	--	light	comes...	there	is	no	question	of	absence	anymore.
Darkness	does	not	go	anywhere,	it	has	no	existence	of	its	own.
I	will	read	your	question:	"Sometimes	after	moments	of	clarity	and	lightness,	it
seems	 old	 intimates	 like	 violent	 feelings,	 jealousy,	 feeling	 furious,	 etcetera
etcetera,	 come	 back	 even	 stronger	 than	 before,	 as	 if	 they	 were	 just	 waiting
around	the	corner	to	have	their	chance	again."
Your	clarity	and	your	lightness	are	only	momentary.	If	you	bring	in	the	light	for
a	moment	and	then	blow	out	the	candle,	the	darkness	will	be	back	again	--	not
that	it	was	waiting	by	the	corner;	you	have	again	created	the	absence	of	light.
Your	torch	of	consciousness	should	be	burning	continuously;	then	there	will	not
be	any	darkness.
These	feelings	that	you	think	are	very	dangerous	are	almost	impotent.	Violence
is	there	because	you	have	not	grown	your	potential	for	love	--	it	is	the	absence	of
love.	 And	 people	 go	 on	 doing	 stupid	 things.	 They	 try	 to	 be	 nonviolent:	 they
repress	the	violence,	they	make	tremendous	efforts	to	be	nonviolent.
But	there	is	no	need	for	anybody	to	be	nonviolent	because	you	are	moving	in	a
wrong	 direction.	 Violence	 is	 a	 negative	 thing,	 and	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 destroy
violence	 and	 become	 nonviolent.	 I	 would	 say,	 forget	 about	 violence.	 It	 is	 the
absence	 of	 love	 --	 be	 more	 loving.	 All	 the	 energy	 that	 you	 are	 putting	 into
repressing	violence	and	becoming	nonviolent	--	pour	it	into	being	love.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
165
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
It	 was	 unfortunate	 that	 Mahavira	 and	 Gautam	 Buddha	 both	 used	 the	 word
nonviolence.	I	can	understand	their	difficulty.	Their	difficulty	was	that	by	"love"
people	 understand	 biological	 love;	 to	 avoid	 that	misunderstanding	 they	 used	 a
negative	term:	nonviolence.	It	gives	the	appearance	that	violence	is	the	positive
thing	and	nonviolence	is	the	negative	thing.
In	 fact,	 violence	 is	 the	 negative	 thing	 and	 love	 is	 the	 positive	 thing,	 but	 they
were	all	afraid	of	using	the	word	love.
And	because	of	 their	 fear	 that	 "love"	may	create	 in	people's	minds	 the	 idea	of
ordinary	love,	they	used	an	unfortunate	word	--	nonviolence	--	and	for	twenty	--
five	 centuries,	 that	 nonviolence	 has	 been	 practiced.	But	 have	 you	 seen	 in	 any
follower	 of	Gautam	Buddha	 or	Mahavira,	 the	 quality	 of	 love,	 the	 presence	 of
love	around	him?	--	he	is	practicing	nonviolence,	and	there	is	where	he	has	gone
wrong.	You	will	find	them	shrunken	and	dead:	their	intelligence	does	not	seem
to	have	blossomed,	 their	consciousness	does	not	seem	to	have	blossomed.	Just
the	mistake	of	using	a	wrong	word	has	created	twenty-five	centuries	of	immense
torture,	in	thousands	of	people.
I	want	you	to	know	that	love	is	the	positive	thing,	and	love	does	not	mean	only
biological	love.	And	you	also	understand	it:	you	love	your	mother,	you	love	your
brother,	you	love	your	friend,	you	love	your	master;	there	is	no	biology	involved.
These	 are	 ordinarily	 available	 experiences	 of	 non-biological	 love.	 You	 love	 a
roseflower	--	is	there	any	biology	involved?
You	love	a	beautiful	moon	you	love	music,	you	love	poetry,	you	love	sculpture	--
is	 there	 any	biology	 involved?	And	 I	 am	 taking	 these	 examples	 from	ordinary
life,	just	to	show	you	that	love	has	many,	many	dimensions.
There	is	a	love	which	is	between	two	bodies;	then	it	is	biological.	There	is	a	love
between	two	minds;	 then	 it	 is	 the	 love	of	 two	friends.	There	 is	a	 love	between
two	hearts	 --	 then	 it	 is	 the	 love	between	 the	disciple	and	 the	master.	And	 then
there	is	the	love	between	two	beings.
Then	it	is	the	love	between	the	devotee	and	the	master.
Love	 has	 these	 four	 dimensions,	 and	 each	 dimension	 has	 many,	 many
possibilities.
So	 rather	 than	having	 just	moments	of	clarity	and	 lightness,	be	more	 loving	 --
loving	to	the	trees,	loving	to	the	flowers,	loving	to	music,	loving	to	people.	Let
all	 kinds	 of	 love	 enrich	 your	 life,	 and	 violence	will	 disappear.	A	man	 of	 love
cannot	 hurt	 anybody.	 There	 have	 been	 even	 very	 rare	 and	 unique	 examples...
One	of	the	Sufi	mystics,	Sarmad,	had	in	his	chest	a	wound	--
the	orthodox	Mohammedans	had	tried	to	kill	him.	They	could	not	kill	him,	but
they	wounded	him	very	badly,	and	the	wound	became	so	dangerous...	there	were
small	but	visible	parasites	in	the	wound,	who	were	sucking	his	blood.
Mohammedans,	when	they	do	their	nimaj,	 their	prayer,	bow	down	to	the	earth,
get	up,	and	then	bow	down	again	many	times.	So	those	parasites	would	fall	from
Sarmad's	wound,	and	he	would	take	them	up	and	put	 them	back	in	the	wound.
People	said,	"Are	you	mad	or	something?"
He	 said,	 "My	body	 is	 going	 to	die	 anyway,	 the	poison	has	 spread	 all	 over	 the
body.	These	poor	parasites,	why	should	 they	die	as	 long	as	 I	can	help	 them	 to
live?	And	 anyway	 they	 are	 parasites	 of	my	wound	 --	 I	 am	 not	 the	 body.	 It	 is
going	 to	 be	 the	 food	 of	 animals.	 So	 while	 I	 am	 alive,	 it	 hurts	 me	 that	 some
parasite	is	going	to	die.	At	least	as	long	as	I	am	alive	I	will	continue	to	put	them
back.	 "And	 finally	 he	 stopped	 praying.	He	 said,	 "Prayer	 I	 can	 do	without	 the
ritual,	but	I	cannot	hurt	these	creatures."
But	strangely	enough,	he	did	not	die	from	the	poison	that	was	spreading	through
his	body
--	perhaps	his	tremendous	love	became	an	antidote	--	and	the	Mohammedans	had
to	cut	off	his	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
166
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
head	 on	 the	 steps	 of	 Jamma	Masjid	 in	New	Delhi.	And	 his	 only	 crime	was...
Mohammedans	have	 a	prayer	which	 consists	 of	 a	 simple	 sentence:	 "One	God;
one	 holy	 book,	 KORAN;	 one	messenger	 of	 God,	 Hazrat	Mohammed."	 These
three	names	come	into	that	prayer.
But	Sufis	 simply	 repeat	 the	 part	which	 talks	 about	 one	God.	They	 don't	 bring
"one	holy	KORAN"	and	"one	messenger	of	God"	into	their	prayer.	They	say	that
there	have	been	other	messengers,	it	is	not	a	monopoly;	and	there	are	other	holy
statements,	the	KORAN	cannot	be	the	only	one.	And	in	the	future	there	will	be
other	messengers	and	there	will	be	other	holy	statements.	All	that	we	can	say	is:
Existence	is	one	God.
That	 was	 their	 crime,	 and	 the	 orthodox	 Mohammedans	 forced	 Sarmad:	 "You
have	to	say	the	whole	prayer;	this	is	sacrilegious	to	pray	only	half	the	prayer."
He	said,	"You	cannot	force	me.	As	far	as	prayer	is	concerned	it	is	my	freedom,	it
is	my	individual	concern	with	God.	If	I	am	answerable,	I	am	answerable	to	God,
not	 to	you.	 I	am	not	praying	 to	you,	 I	am	praying	 to	God,	and	 if	 I	am	praying
wrongly,	 it	 is	 a	matter	 to	be	 settled	between	me	and	God.	Who	are	you?"	But
they	were	powerful	--	the	king	was	Mohammedan	--
and	they	were	all	angry,	and	they	cut	off	his	head.
There	are	many	steps	in	the	mosque	in	New	Delhi...	and	when	they	cut	his	head
he	laughed,	and	his	head	rolled	down	the	steps.	And	a	strange	phenomenon	was
witnessed	by	thousands	of	people,	because	thousands	of	people	had	gathered	to
see:	the	head	was	coming	down	the	steps...	the	blood	was	flowing	from	the	head,
and	the	body	was	standing	on	top	of	the	steps	--	and	the	head	was	still	repeating
the	half-prayer.
That	does	not	seem	to	be	historical;	it	seems	to	be	a	mythology,	but	there	are	so
many	contemporary	reports	about	it	--	from	people	who	were	not	Mohammedans
--	that	they	have	seen	it	and	they	have	heard	it...
Perhaps	love	can	speak	even	without	 the	body.	Perhaps	love	does	not	need	the
body	 as	 a	 necessary	medium.	Whether	 it	 is	 historical	 or	 not	 is	 insignificant	 to
me;	 to	me,	what	 is	 significant	 is	 that	although	he	was	killed	by	cutting	off	his
head,	there	was	no	anger,	no	complaint,	no	ill-will,	no	curse.
And	he	was	absolutely	 innocent;	 to	pray	 is	absolutely	an	 individual	affair.	But
even	 while	 his	 head	 is	 rolling	 down	 the	 steps,	 there	 is	 only	 prayer,	 the	 half-
prayer.
Love	knows	how	to	forgive.
Love	cannot	hurt	and	cannot	be	violent.
Devam	Kranti,	 these	 violent	 feelings	will	 not	 disappear	 unless	 their	 energy	 is
transformed	 into	 love.	And	 the	 true	 love	knows	nothing	of	 jealousy.	Any	 love
that	is	followed	by	jealousy	is	certainly	not	the	true	love,	it	is	biological	instinct.
The	higher	you	move	--	from	body	to	mind,	from	heart	to	being	--	all	these	crude
feelings	disappear.	Love	from	being	to	being	knows	no	jealousy.
And	how	are	you	going	to	find	such	love?
It	is	a	radiation	of	your	silence,	of	your	peace,	of	your	inner	well-being,	of	your
blissfulness.	You	are	so	blissful	that	you	want	to	share	it	--	that	sharing	is	love.
Love	is	not	a	beggar.
It	never	asks,	"give	me	love."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
167
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Love	is	always	an	emperor.
It	only	knows	to	give.	It	never	even	imagines,	expects,	anything	in	return.
Be	more	meditative,	become	more	conscious	of	your	being.	Let	your	inner	world
become	more	silent,	and	love	will	be	flowing	through	you.	People	have	all	these
problems.	The	problems	are	different	--	violence,	jealousy,	misery,	anxiety	--	but
the	medicine	for	all	these	illnesses	is	only	one,	and	it	is	meditation.
And	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 be	 reminded	 that	 the	 word	 medicine	 and	 the	 word
meditation	come	from	the	same	root.	Medicine	means	something	 that	can	cure
your	body,	and	meditation	means	something	that	can	cure	your	soul.
Meditation	 is	 meditation	 only	 because	 it	 is	 a	 medicine	 for	 your	 innermost
illnesses.
A	man	selling	Vaseline	Petroleum	Jelly	had	gone	around	a	number	of	houses	in
town	 a	 week	 before	 and	 had	 left	 some	 samples,	 asking	 people	 to	 see	 if	 they
could	 find	 an	 ingenious	 use	 for	 it.	 Now	 he	 went	 around	 to	 the	 same	 houses,
asking	people	what	uses	they	had	found	for	Vaseline.
The	man	 in	 the	 first	 house,	 a	wealthy	 city	 gent,	 said,	 "I	 used	 it	 for	medicinal
purposes.
Whenever	my	children	scraped	their	elbows	or	knees,	I	would	rub	it	on."
The	man	 in	 the	second	house	said,	"I	used	 it	 for	mechanical	purposes,	such	as
greasing	the	bearings	of	my	bicycle	and	lawnmower."
The	man	 in	 the	 third	house,	a	 scruffy,	unshaven,	working-class	 fellow,	 said,	 "I
used	it	for	sexual	purposes."
In	a	shocked	voice	the	salesman	asked,	"What	do	you	mean?"
"Well,"	 said	 the	 scruffy	 man,	 "I	 put	 a	 whole	 lot	 of	 it	 on	 the	 handle	 of	 my
bedroom	door	to	keep	the	kids	out!"
You	 can	 give	 the	 same	 thing	 to	 different	 people	 and	 they	will	 come	 out	with
different	 uses,	 according	 to	 their	 own	 unconsciousness.	 But	 if	 they	 are
conscious,	they	will	find	only	one	use.
A	man,	an	archbishop	in	Japan,	went	to	one	very	great	master,	Nan	In,	with	the
New	Testament.	He	was	certain	 that	by	 listening	 to	 the	beautiful	 statements	of
Jesus,	particularly	on	the	sermon	on	the	mountain,	Nan	In	would	be	converted	to
Christianity.
The	archbishop	was	received	with	great	love	and	he	said,	"I	have	come	with	my
holy	book,	and	I	want	to	read	a	few	sentences...	perhaps	they	will	change	your
whole	life."
Nan	In	said,	"You	have	come	a	little	late,	because	I	am	changed	completely,	the
transformation	has	happened.	But	still,	you	have	come	a	long	way	--	you	can	at
least	read	a	few	sentences."
So	he	read	a	few	sentences,	and	just	after	two,	or	three	sentences,	Nan	In	said,
"That's	enough.	Whoever	has	written	 these	sentences	will	become	a	buddha	 in
some	future	life	."
The	archbishop	was	very	much	shocked	--	he	 is	saying,	"In	some	future	 life	--
this	man	shows	a	potentiality	--	he	will	become	a	buddha."	He	said,	"But	he	is
the	only	son	of	God!"
Nan	In	laughed.	He	said,	"That	is	the	trouble.	That's	what	is	preventing	him	from
becoming	a	buddha.	Unless	he	drops	such	nonsense	ideas,	he	will	not	blossom	to
his	whole	potentiality.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
168
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
"He	has	beautiful	ideas	but	side	by	side,	he	has	some	stupid	ideas	too.	There	is
no	God,	so	the	question	of	being	the	only	begotten	son	does	not	arise.	In	some
future	life	--	you	don't	be	worried	--	he	will	drop	them;	he	seems	to	be	a	man	of
intelligence,	and	he	has	suffered	enough	 for	his	 stupid	 ideas.	He	got	crucified;
that	was	enough	punishment.	But	you	should	not	cling	to	the	stupid	part	of	his
statements."
The	archbishop	said,	"But	they	are	our	basis,	the	foundation	of	our	religion,	that
Jesus	is	the	only	begotten	son	of	God,	that	there	is	a	God	who	created	the	world,
that	Jesus	was	born	of	a	virgin	girl."
Nan	 In	 laughed	 and	 he	 said,	 "This	 poor	 fellow,	 if	 he	 could	 drop	 these	 small
fictitious	 things,	 he	 would	 have	 already	 become	 a	 buddha.	 If	 you	 find	 him
somewhere,	 bring	 him	 here,	 and	 I	 will	 put	 him	 right.	 There	 was	 no	 need	 to
crucify	him	--	all	 that	he	needed	was	a	 right	master,	 someone	who	could	have
introduced	him	into	the	mysteries	of	meditation."
Meditation	is	perhaps	the	master	key	for	all	our	problems.	So	rather	than	fighting
with	problems	separately...	which	will	take	lives	and	still	you	will	not	be	out	of
their	 grip.	 They	 will	 stand	 by	 the	 corner,	 waiting	 for	 their	 chance	 --	 and
naturally,	 if	 they	 had	 to	 wait	 too	 long,	 they	 will	 take	 as	 much	 revenge	 as
possible.
Meditation	is	not	doing	anything	directly	to	your	violence,	not	doing	anything	to
your	 jealousy,	 to	 your	 hate.	 It	 is	 simply	brining	 light	 into	your	 house,	 and	 the
darkness	disappears.
(A	 DUCK	 APPEARS	 IN	 THE	 GARDEN	 OUTSIDE	 THE	 HALL,	 AND
QUACKS	LONG
AND	LOUDLY.)
It	is	just	the	reincarnation	of	the	Japanese	archbishop.	And	it	is	natural	that	he	is
protesting
--	this	is	what	happens	to	archbishops;	I	have	again	provoked	him...
Should	I	provoke	him	again?
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
169
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
17
Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
20	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	IT	POSSIBLE	THAT	THINGS	ARE	HAPPENING	INSIDE	ME	THAT	I	AM
NOT
AWARE	OF?	IS	IT	POSSIBLE	FOR	GROWTH	TO	HAPPEN	IN	THIS	WAY?	I
HAVE
HEARD	 YOU	 SAY,	 "I'VE	 BEEN	 WATCHING	 YOU"	 TO	 PEOPLE.	 HAVE
YOU	BEEN
WATCHING	 ME?	 HOW	 AM	 I	 DOING?	 AM	 I	 MISSING	 SOMETHING?
SHOULD	I	BE
DOING	SOMETHING	THAT	I'M	NOT	ALREADY	DOING?
Veet	Niten,	it	is	possible	that	things	may	be	happening	within	you	of	which	you
are	not	aware,	because	your	awareness	is	very	small,	and	you	are	very	big.	Your
whole	consciousness	is	ten	times	bigger	than	your	awareness,	and	that	ten-times-
bigger	 consciousness	 is	 absolutely	 in	 darkness.	 Much	 continues	 to	 happen	 in
your	dark	 inside.	You	become	aware	only	when	 it	 surfaces	and	comes	 into	 the
area	of	your	awareness	--	which	is	very	small.
In	 fact,	 it	 is	part	of	your	biology,	physiology,	 that	you	 should	not	be	aware	of
most	 things	 when	 they	 are	 happening	 because	 your	 awareness	 can	 become	 a
hindrance	to	their	happening.
You	eat	 food,	but	do	you	know	how	 it	 is	 digested?	When	 it	 is	 digested,	when
your	food	becomes	your	blood	and	your	bones?
Up	to	three	hundred	years	ago,	for	centuries	man	had	thought	that	blood	is	static
in	 the	body.	The	 idea	of	 the	 circulation	of	blood	was	non-existent	 all	 over	 the
world.	 Just	 three	 hundred	 years	 ago,	 physicians	 became	 aware	 that	 blood	 is
constantly	moving	at	a	fast	speed	--
the	blood	 that	 is	 in	your	 feet,	within	seconds	will	be	 in	your	head,	and	 it	goes
round	 and	 round.	 Its	 circulation	 is	 absolutely	 necessary	 to	 clean	 all	 dead	 cells
from	your	body,	to	take	them	away,	to	bring	new	oxygen	to	your	cells,	because
each	cell	needs	oxygen	for	its	life.
But	you	are	not	aware	of	it	all,	and	in	fact	if	you	were	aware,	you	would	go	mad.
So	much	is	happening	inside	you	that	it	would	be	impossible	for	you	to	maintain
your	sanity.
The	child	 in	 the	mother's	womb	sleeps	 twenty-four	hours	a	day,	 for	 the	simple
reason	 that	 in	 those	 nine	 months	 more	 things	 happen	 in	 his	 body	 than	 will
happen	 in	 the	 seventy	years	which	 are	 to	 follow	after	 his	birth.	Much	more	 is
happening	in	those	nine	months	than	is	going	to	happen	in	the	body	between	his
birth	and	death.	Hence,	he	has	to	remain	constantly	asleep	--	no	awareness	at	all.
When	you	are	tired,	when	you	feel	spent,	you	need	a	good	sleep	--	have	you	ever
thought	why?	You	need	a	good	sleep	so	that	your	awareness	does	not	 interfere
with	the	rejuvenating	of	your	body.	In	the	morning	you	feel	fresh,	again	ready	to
work.	 What	 a	 miracle	 sleep	 has	 done	 to	 you!	 On	 a	 greater	 scale,	 when	 it
becomes	 almost	 impossible	 for	 the	 body	 to	 rejuvenate	 itself,	 death	 happens.
Death	is	nothing	but	a	long	sleep,	a	deep	sleep,	so	that	your	soul	can	move	into
another	 body,	 into	 some	womb.	 But	 your	 awareness	 can	 be	 a	 disturbance,	 so
your	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
170
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
death	 almost	 always	 happens	 in	 a	 deep	 sleep.	Before	 you	die,	 you	 fall	 asleep;
you	lose	all	consciousness,	all	awareness	--	it	is	the	greatest	surgery	that	nature
does.
What	 is	 true	about	 the	body	and	about	your	physiology	is	also	 true	about	your
psychology
--	much	is	happening	of	which	you	are	not	aware.	You	become	aware	only	when
a	certain	situation	arises:	you	are	a	peaceful	man,	but	somebody	insults	you	and
anger	 arises	 in	 you,	 of	 which	 you	 were	 not	 aware.	 It	 has	 always	 been	 there,
hiding	 in	 the	 darkness	 of	 your	 unconscious,	 but	 if	 somebody	 insults	 you,
immediately	it	is	ready	to	react.
I	am	reminded	of	one	of	the	most	beautiful	stories,	historical.	A	great	Japanese
emperor	wanted	to	see	Nan	In,	a	Zen	master.	Because	he	was	the	ruler	over	all
Japan,	he	thought	that	Nan	In	could	be	ordered	to	come	to	the	court.
His	prime	minister	advised	him,	"Don't	be	foolish.	You	may	be	the	emperor	of
the	whole	of	 Japan,	but	 there	are	a	 few	people	 in	 the	country	who	are	beyond
your	domination	--	or	anybody's	domination.	You	cannot	order	Nan	In;	you	can
kill	him,	but	you	cannot	force	him	to	do	anything	against	his	will.	And	he	has
not	left	his	monastery	for	thirty	years.	If	you	want	to	see	him,	you	will	have	to
go	to	the	mountains	to	his	monastery."
The	emperor	said,	"If	that	is	the	situation,	then	I	will	go.	I	don't	want	to	kill	him.
I	have	a	question,	and	many	people	have	suggested	to	me	that	there	is	only	one
man,	Nan	In,	who	can	answer	the	question."
He	went	 to	Nan	 In;	he	was	sitting	 just	 in	 front	of	his	house,	on	 the	 lawn.	The
emperor	bowed	down,	sat	in	front	of	Nan	In,	and	asked	him,	"I	have	come	to	get
an	answer:	What	is	hell	and	what	is	heaven?	I	have	asked	many	people,	but	all
that	 they	 give	 as	 an	 answer	 is	 not	 their	 own	 experience.	 They	 are	 not
eyewitnesses,	 they	 are	 only	 scholars	 --	 they	 have	 read	 about	 it.	 That	 I	 can	 do
myself,	but	how	can	I	know	hell	really	exists?	or	heaven?"
At	that	very	moment	Nan	In	said,	"You	are	such	an	idiot	--	who	made	you	the
emperor	of	the	country?"
The	emperor	could	not	believe	it!	He	had	never	expected,	never	dreamt	that	he
would	be	received	with	such	rudeness.	And	he	has	not	done	anything	wrong	--
just	asked	a	question.	He	was	a	warrior.	He	pulled	his	sword	out	of	 its	sheath,
and	was	going	to	kill	Nan	In,	then	and	there.	When	the	sword	was	just	hanging
over	the	head	of	Nan	In,	Nan	In	said,	"This	is	hell.
You	are	standing	exactly	at	the	door	of	it."
Suddenly,	a	great	realization...	and	all	anger	settled;	a	silence	descended.	He	put
back	his	sword,	and	Nan	In	said,	"You	have	turned	your	back	towards	hell,	and
in	front	of	you	is	the	gate	of	heaven.	This	is	my	answer."
The	emperor	had	never	thought	that	answers	can	be	given	through	situations	too;
in	 fact,	 real	 answers	 can	 only	 be	 given	 through	 situations.	 But	 he	 became
perfectly	aware	that	anger,	violence,	rage,	jealousy	and	the	whole	gang	of	these
kinds	of	qualities	what	constitutes	hell.
And	love,	silence,	blissfulness,	compassion,	joy...	a	moment-to-moment	living	in
gratefulness	towards	existence,	is	what	heaven	is	constituted	of.
He	touched	the	feet	of	Nan	In	and	he	said,	"You	have	answered	me	--	and	this	is
not	 the	 answer	 of	 a	 scholar,	 this	 is	 the	 answer	 of	 a	 man	 who	 knows.	 I	 am
immensely	grateful.	But	you	really	shocked	me,	I	am	still	trembling!	You	are	a
dangerous	man;	I	had	come	for	a	philosophical	discussion."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
171
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
Nan	 In	 said,	 "We	 are	 not	 concerned	 with	 philosophy,	 we	 are	 concerned	 with
reality.
Philosophy	is	a	game,	children's	play;	reality	is	a	risk,	an	adventure.	Only	those
who	are	courageous	enough	travel	on	the	razor's	edge	to	find	the	truth."
In	your	psychology	also,	much	 is	continuously	happening.	Even	when	you	are
asleep,	 your	 mind	 goes	 on	 working.	 Only	 a	 man	 who	 enters	 into	 meditation,
slowly,	 slowly	 becomes	 aware	 of	 things	which	 are	 happening	 in	 the	mind,	 of
which	he	was	never	before	aware.	And	the	miracle	of	meditation	is	that	as	you
become	aware	of	things,	that	which	is	wrong	disappears	and	that	which	is	right
becomes	 tremendously	 strong.	 There	 is	 only	 one	 criterion,	 according	 to	 me,
which	decides	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong:	that	is	your	depth	of	meditation.
If	 you	 are	 going	 deeper	 into	 silence	 and	 something	 disappears	 --	 you	 saw	 it
receding,	evaporating	into	the	air	--	you	can	be	certain	it	was	wrong,	because	the
false	 cannot	 face	 you;	 it	 has	 not	 the	 guts.	 It	 cannot	 come	 in	 front	 of	 you,	 it
cannot	encounter	you.	And	that	which	is	real,	good,	becomes	stronger,	becomes
more	a	part	of	your	actions,	of	your	thoughts,	of	your	being.
A	moment	comes	in	the	life	of	the	meditator	when	his	meditation	has	reached	the
point	where	his	whole	mind	is	silent	and	there	is	not	even	a	fragment	of	darkness
anywhere	inside	him	--	all	is	light.	Then,	whatever	that	person	does	is	right,	and
whatever	that	person	does	not	do	is	wrong.	In	that	state,	one	never	thinks	about
what	 to	 do;	what	 is	 right,	what	 is	wrong	 are	 no	 longer	 alternatives.	 The	 right
becomes	spontaneous	action,	and	the	wrong	simply	becomes	impossible	--	even
if	you	want	to	do	it,	you	cannot.
Veet	Niten,	you	are	asking,	 "Is	 it	possible	 that	 things	are	happening	 inside	me
that	I	am	not	aware	of?"	Yes,	things	are	happening	within	you	and	you	have	to
make	 your	 awareness	 more	 sharp,	 more	 deep,	 more	 clear	 --	 so	 that	 you	 can
become	 aware.	 Otherwise,	 all	 your	 actions	 come	 out	 of	 an	 unconscious	 state;
you	don't	know	exactly	why	you	are	doing	it,	why	there	is	such	a	deep	urge	to	do
it,	because	the	urge	comes	from	the	unconscious	where	never	a	ray	of	light	has
entered.
In	psychoanalysis	you	have	to	drop	completely	whatever	you	say	in	your	waking
hours	 --	 it	 is	 not	 trustworthy.	 Psychoanalysis	 trusts	 your	 dreams	more	 than	 it
trusts	you,	because	your	consciousness	is	so	small	and	it	is	not	aware	of	all	that
is	 happening	 underneath.	 But	 when	 this	 consciousness	 goes	 to	 sleep,	 in	 your
dreams	 the	 unconscious	 starts	 coming	onto	 the	 screen	 of	 your	mind.	To	know
about	 your	 dreams	 is	 to	 know	much	more	 about	 you	 than	you	know	yourself.
Your	dreams	are	more	reliable	because	in	your	dreams	you	don't	deceive;	there	is
no	 question.	 Your	 dreams	 are	 so	 private,	 nobody	 is	 going	 to	 know	 --	 why
deceive?
In	your	waking	hours,	you	have	a	certain	personality	 to	maintain	 to	 live	 in	 the
society	--	a	certain	morality,	a	certain	code	of	conduct.	In	your	dreams,	all	codes
of	 conduct,	 all	 moralities,	 all	 principles	 disappear	 --	 you	 are	 simply	 natural.
Whatever	is	within	you	comes	in	its	reality,	as	it	is.
The	only	problem	with	dreams	is	that	the	unconscious	knows	no	language;	it	is
still	the	mind	of	the	child.	The	child	thinks	in	pictures	--	his	language	is	pictorial,
not	alphabetical	--
so	you	dream	in	pictures.	And	that	has	created	a	great	problem:	who	is	going	to
interpret	 those	 pictures?	 What	 do	 they	 mean?	 --	 because	 there	 are	 many
interpreters,	many	schools	of	psychoanalysis	with	different	explanations,	and	all
their	explanations	seem	to	have	some	truth.
The	East	has	never	 tried	anything	 like	psychoanalysis,	 and	 the	West	has	never
tried	 anything	 like	 meditation.	 The	 East	 has	 been	 working	 for	 almost	 ten
thousand	 years,	 single-pointedly,	 on	 meditation.	 And	 meditation	 means	 going
beyond	the	mind	--	not	getting	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
172
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
involved	in	the	mind,	not	being	bothered	by	the	mind,	not	being	interested	in	its
dreams	--
simply	transcending	it,	simply	becoming	a	watcher.
The	West	has	become	 too	 involved	 in	 the	games	 that	mind	goes	on	playing	 --
and	those	games	are	very	complicated,	and	they	are	endless.	There	is	not	a	single
man	alive	in	the	world	who	is	completely	psychoanalyzed,	and	there	are	people
who	have	been	in	psychoanalysis	for	fifteen,	twenty	years,	working	hard	to	bring
out	 their	 dreams	 to	 the	 psychoanalyst.	 Whichever	 dream	 is	 psychoanalyzed,
disappears,	but	other	dreams	go	on	coming	--	it	seems	an	unending	process.
Perhaps	somewhere	far	away	in	the	past,	of	which	no	record	exists,	the	East	may
have	 encountered	 something	 like	 psychoanalysis	 and	 found	 that	 it	 is	 a	 futile
exercise.	You	explain	one	dream,	another	dream	arises.	You	go	on,	and	dreams
go	 on	 arising.	 The	 East	 drops	 the	 whole	 mind	 with	 all	 its	 dreams,	 all	 its
activities.	They	change	their	focus	completely	to	a	new	area,	a	new	space.	Just
be	a	watcher;	don't	interpret.
Sigmund	 Freud's	 whole	 contribution	 is	 interpretation	 of	 dreams,	 analysis	 of
dreams.	And	the	Eastern	experience,	which	is	very	long,	says,	don't	get	involved
in	analysis	or	 interpretation	--	 just	watch.	Don't	 judge,	and	don't	 try	to	find	the
meaning	 of	 it.	 Don't	 condemn	 either,	 don't	 appreciate	 --	 just	 be	 absolutely
indifferent,	 a	 pure	 witness	 who	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 it.	 If	 you	 become	 a
witness,	 you	will	 become	aware	 that	 the	mind	 starts	 functioning	 less	 and	 less;
dreams	 start	disappearing,	 thoughts	 are	no	 longer	 so	much,	 the	crowd	goes	on
becoming	less	and	less.	A	moment	comes	when	you	are	there,	just	a	witness	--
and	 there	 is	nothing	 to	be	witnessed.	The	mind	 is	utterly	silent:	all	dreams,	all
thoughts,	all	feelings,	are	gone.
This	is	the	moment	when	you	will	become	absolutely	aware	of	who	you	are.
Retrospectively,	you	will	be	able	to	see	what	you	have	been	doing,	and	what	has
been	happening	 inside	you.	But	you	are	out	of	 it;	 it	 is	 just	 a	 fading	memory...
slowly,	slowly	it	fades	away.
To	live	in	silence,	in	serenity,	is	a	totally	different	dimension	of	life	where	joy	is
simply	 natural;	 where	 life	 is	 in	 its	 absolute	 beauty,	 in	 its	 utter	 purity	 and
aliveness;	where	 love	 is	so	abundant	 that	 it	goes	on	overflowing	--	you	cannot
contain	it,	it	is	a	bigger	reality	than	you	are.	Life	becomes	a	smaller	phenomenon
than	 love,	and	 love	becomes	a	smaller	phenomenon	 than	 light.	These	 three	L's
contain	the	whole	discipline	of	inner	revolution.
Veet	Niten,	just	being	here,	things	are	bound	to	happen	within	you	of	which	you
may	not	be	aware,	because	you	have	not	yet	learned	the	art	of	watchfulness.
You	 are	 asking,	 "Is	 it	 possible	 for	 growth	 to	 happen	 in	 this	 way?"	 Yes	 it	 is
possible,	but	only	up	 to	a	point.	 It	 cannot	happen	 the	whole	way	without	your
becoming	a	watcher,	so	be	concerned	about	that.
Instead	of	 that	 you	 are	 asking	me,	 "I	 have	 heard	You	 say,	 'I've	 been	watching
you'	 to	people.	Have	You	been	watching	me?	How	am	I	doing?	Am	I	missing
something?"	 Rather	 than	 being	 concerned	whether	 I	 am	watching	 you	 or	 not,
your	concern	should	be:	are	you	watching	yourself?
I	am	certainly	watching.	The	moment	I	see	you,	I	see	you	in	your	totality.	To	me
you	are	transparent	--	I	even	see	that	which	you	may	not	be	aware	is	within	you.
And	 I	 am	 continuously	 watching	 my	 people,	 how	 they	 are	 growing	 or	 not
growing.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
173
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
You	are	doing	perfectly	well,	but	something	is	certainly	missing.	And	the	thing
that	 is	missing	 is	 that	 you	 are	 not	 getting	 into	 the	 space	of	watching	yourself.
You	cannot	depend	on	me	forever.	In	the	beginning	it	is	good,	in	the	beginning	it
is	helpful,	but	if	it	becomes	a	dependence,	then	it	is	dangerous.	And	I	don't	want
anybody	to	be	dependent	on	me,	so	my	whole	effort	is	to	push	you	--	as	quickly
as	possible	--	into	watching,	into	witnessing,	into	being	a	free	individual,	a	free
seeker,	a	searcher	with	total	freedom.
All	the	religions	of	the	world	have	been	committing	one	of	the	great	crimes:	they
want	 people	 to	 be	 dependent	 on	 them.	 They	 never	 want	 people	 to	 become
independent,	because	that	means	losing	customers.	You	are	not	my	customers;	to
teach	you	is	not	my	profession,	it	is	simply	my	joy.	I	don't	want	any	reward	for
it;	just	that	you	allowed	me	to	share	my	heart	with	you	is	reward	unto	itself.
But	 the	 conditioning	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 so	 old,	 the	 conditioning	 that	 you	 go	 on
hoping	 that	 somebody	 is	 going	 to	 save	 you:	 some	 savior,	 some	messenger	 of
God,	but	it	is	somebody	else's	business.	You	want	to	throw	the	responsibility	on
somebody	else.	Veet	Niten,	that	will	not	be	the	right	thing	--	at	least	here	in	this
place	with	me.
A	young	 Irish	girl	was	 talking	 to	 the	Reverend	Mother	 about	her	 ambitions	 in
life.	"When	I	grow	up,"	she	announced,	"I	want	to	be	a	prostitute."
The	Reverend	Mother	gasped	and	threw	up	her	hands	in	horror.	"Did	I	hear	you
rightly?
What	was	it	you	said	you	wanted	to	be?"
"A	prostitute."
The	 Reverend	 Mother	 sighed	 with	 relief,	 "Oh,	 praise	 the	 Lord,"	 she	 said.	 "I
thought	you	said	a	Protestant."
That	 has	 been	 the	 attitude	 of	 all	 the	 religions.	 Here,	 I	 want	 you	 to	 be	 just
yourself.	 And	 that	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 become	 a	 watcher.	 The	 deeper	 and
sharper	your	watching,	the	greater	is	your	individuality,	the	more	is	your	human
dignity.
Tremendous	is	the	splendor	of	a	person	who	has	come	to	know	everything	that
goes	on	within	him,	because	by	being	aware,	all	that	is	false	disappears	and	all
that	is	real	is	nourished.
Except	this,	there	is	no	radical	transformation	possible.
No	religion	can	give	it	to	you,	no	messiah	can	give	it	to	you.
It	is	a	gift	that	you	have	to	give	to	yourself.
But	 the	unconscious	creates	difficulties.	Not	 that	 they	cannot	be	dissolved,	but
you	need	a	little	patience,	a	little	trust	in	existence.	Difficulties	will	be	there	but
don't	 take	 them	as	difficulties,	only	as	challenges.	 It	 is	a	great	adventure	 to	go
into	your	own	being,	 to	 the	very	center	of	your	existence	--	because	that	 is	 the
center	of	the	whole	of	existence	too.
Mrs.	Rappaport	advertised	a	new	Cadillac	for	fifty	dollars.	Goldstein	answered
the	ad	and	the	first	thing	he	asked	was,	"What	is	wrong	with	the	car?"
"Nothing,"	she	replied.	"If	you	don't	want	it,	please	don't	waste	my	time."
Goldstein	 asked	 for	 the	 keys	 and	 went	 to	 the	 garage.	 He	 backed	 the	 car	 out,
parked	 in	 front	 of	 the	 house,	 counted	 out	 fifty	 dollars,	 and	 handed	 it	 to	 the
owner.	"Now	you	have	your	money,	what	is	the	catch?"
"My	husband	just	died,"	she	said,	"and	in	his	will	he	instructed	that	the	Cadillac
be	sold	and	the	proceeds	be	given	to	his	secretary."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
174
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
You	will	find	mind	playing	many	games.	It	has	been	with	you	for	so	long,	it	will
not	be	easy	for	it.	If	you	simply	drop	it	without	giving	a	second	thought,	it	will
struggle	to	cling	to	you.	But	the	secret	is	in	watching.	Don't	fight	with	it,	don't
try	to	throw	it	away,	don't	condemn	it.	Just	watch,	like	a	mirror,	with	no	opinion
about	it	--	that	is	the	greatest	weapon	in	your	hands.	If	you	can	remain	just	like	a
mirror,	 your	 mind	 soon	 disappears,	 and	 the	 whole	 sky	 of	 your	 inner	 world
becomes	so	silent...	and	the	silence	is	not	dead,	it	 is	alive.	It	has	a	music	of	its
own.	It	blossoms,	it	has	a	fragrance	of	its	own.	It	is	radiant	with	light	--	it	has	a
light	of	its	own.
And	 it	 is	 part	 of	 the	 eternal	 source	 from	 where	 everything	 has	 come,	 and	 to
where	everything	has	to	return.
Once	knowing	it,	you	are	no	longer	the	same	old	man.	Your	whole	life	will	have
a	 new	 dance,	 a	 new	 song,	 a	 new	 freshness,	 a	 new	 youthfulness,	 a	 new
playfulness,	a	new	laughter.
But	my	watching	you	will	not	help;	you	have	to	do	it	yourself.	Whatever	you	are
doing	 is	 perfectly	 good,	 but	 not	 enough	 --	 because	 one	 of	 the	 most	 essential
things	is	missing.	And	that	is,	you	have	not	yet	started	on	the	path	of	a	watcher.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THESE	MORNINGS,	SITTING	IN	FRONT	OF	YOU,	WHEN	YOU	LOOK	AT
ME	 I	 FEEL	 SO	 COMPLETELY	 SEEN,	 SO	 UNDERSTOOD	 AND
ACCEPTED.	AND	YET
WHEN	I	LOOK	AT	YOU,	ALL	I	AM	AWARE	OF	IS	MY	BLINDNESS,	MY
FEAR	AND
IGNORANCE.	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Prem	 Vasumati,	 the	 observation	 in	 your	 question	 is	 very	 accurate.	 You	 say,
"These	 mornings	 sitting	 in	 front	 of	 you,	 when	 you	 look	 at	 me	 I	 feel	 so
completely	seen	--	so	understood	and	accepted.	And	yet	when	I	look	at	you,	all	I
am	aware	of	is	my	blindness,	my	fear	and	ignorance."	It	is	immensely	significant
to	 see	 your	 blindness,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 getting	 out	 of	 it.	 The
moment	a	madman	knows	he	is	mad,	he	is	no	longer	mad.
You	can	go	into	madhouses	and	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	not	a	single
madman	 accepts	 that	 he	 is	mad.	He	may	 condemn	 the	whole	world	 for	 being
mad,	but	he	is	not	mad.
The	moment	he	accepts,	even	suspects	"Perhaps	I	am	mad,"	the	madness	starts
melting,	because	it	is	a	quality	of	sanity,	of	intelligence.	Madness	cannot	accept
that	"I	am	mad"	--	that	will	be	a	contradiction.	The	mad	person	tries	to	prove	in
every	possible	way	that	he	is	absolutely	sane.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 man	 who	 had	 gone	 mad	 --	 and	 not	 an	 ordinarily	 mad
person;	his	madness	was	unique.	He	started	thinking	that	he	was	dead.	He	would
not	go	to	the	office...	his	family	would	tell	him,	"Go	to	the	office;	otherwise	how
are	we	going	to	survive?"	But	he	would	say,	"Have	you	ever	heard	of	any	dead
man	 going	 to	 the	 office?	 Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 of	 any	 dead	 man	 helping	 his
relatives,	his	family,	his	friends	to	survive?	I	am	absolutely	helpless,	what	can	I
do?	Nobody	has	any	control	over	death;	I	am	dead."
People	 tried	 in	 every	 way:	 "You	 are	 talking	 and	 you	 are	 eating	 and	 you	 are
sleeping	and	you	are	walking	--	and	still	you	go	on	insisting	that	you	are	dead?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
175
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
He	 said,	 "I	 know	 more	 about	 myself...	 I	 don't	 need	 anybody's	 advice.	 I	 feel
absolutely	certain	that	I	am	dead,	and	if	a	dead	man	feels	hungry	--	he	eats.	What
is	wrong	with	it?"
Finally	 they	 took	 him	 to	 a	 psychiatrist,	 and	 the	 psychiatrist	 said,	 "I	will	 settle
him.	He	is	a	little	rare;	I	have	never	come	across...	There	have	been	many	kinds
of	people,	but	he	surpasses	them	all."
He	talked	with	the	dead	man,	and	the	dead	man's	arguments	to	prove	that	he	was
dead	 were	 perfectly	 rational.	 Not	 only	 that:	 when	 his	 family	 left	 and	 he	 was
alone	with	the	psychiatrist,	he	pulled	his	chair	close	to	him	and	told	him,	"You
are	 also	 dead.	 I	 did	 not	 say	 it	 in	 front	 of	 those	 people;	 otherwise	 your	whole
profession	would	be	disturbed.	We	are	in	the	same	boat;	just	as	I	died,	you	died."
The	psychiatrist	said,	"This	is	too	much.	You	are	trying	to	convince	me."
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 conviction:	 once	 dead,	 dead	 forever.	Do	 you
think	 somebody	 convinced	 me?	 I	 discovered	 myself	 that	 I	 am	 dead	 --	 and
because	I	know	how	to	discover	it,	I	have	discovered	that	you	are	dead	too.	It	is
good	that	they	brought	me	here;	otherwise	you	would	have	lived	with	the	wrong
conception	--	that	you	are	alive."
The	 psychiatrist	 thought,	 "What	 to	 do	with	 this	man?"	He	 took	 out	 his	 paper
knife,	to	cut	the	man	on	his	hand.	Before	cutting	the	man	--	just	to	bring	a	little
blood	--	he	said,	"Have	you	ever	heard	that	dead	men	don't	bleed?"
The	man	said,	"Yes,	when	I	used	to	be	alive,	I	heard	 the	saying	that	dead	men
don't	bleed."
The	psychiatrist	 said,	 "Okay,	now	 this	will	 be	decisive."	He	 cut	 a	 little	 on	 the
man's	hand	and	blood	came	out,	and	he	said,	"What	do	you	say	now?"
The	man	said,	 "What	 is	 there	 to	be	 said?	 It	means	 the	proverb	 is	wrong:	dead
men	do	bleed.	Now	just	give	me	the	paper	knife	and	I	will	show	you."	He	cut	the
hand	of	 the	psychiatrist	 and	blood	came	out,	 and	he	 said,	 "Look!	There	 is	not
only	one	piece	of	evidence;	now	we	are	both	proofs	that	the	proverb	is	wrong.	It
seems	nobody	has	ever	checked,	and	some	idiot	must	have	spread	the	idea	that
dead	men	don't	bleed.	Why	shouldn't	they	bleed?
They	have	every	right	to	bleed;	it	is	not	the	monopoly	only	of	the	living	ones."
The	 psychiatrist	 said,	 "You	 take	 your	 fees	 back	 and	 you	 go	 home	 before	 I
become	convinced,	because	I	have	a	wife	and	two	small	kids,	and	I	have	to	take
care	 of	 them.	 And	 you	 are	 so	 logically	 convincing	 that	 once	 in	 a	 while	 the
suspicion	arises	 in	my	mind	 too:	Who	knows?	perhaps	he	 is	 right.	What	proof
have	I	got	that	I	am	alive	--	except	that	I	have	never	thought	about	it.	You	are	a
great	thinker,	but	go	--	before	it	is	too	late!"
Vasumati,	if	you	see	your	blindness,	that	is	good	news:	it	means	you	are	starting
to	see.
The	 blindness	 will	 disappear.	 If	 you	 see	 your	 ignorance,	 that	 brings	 an
alchemical	change.	The	moment	you	see	your	ignorance	it	becomes	innocence	--
it	is	ignorance	only	while	you	remain	unaware	of	it.	The	moment	you	understand
that	 "I	 don't	 know,"	 the	 doors	 of	 knowing	 have	 opened;	 if	 you	 see	 your	 fear,
that's	a	good	sign.	All	these	things	have	to	be	brought	before	your	consciousness.
Fear	exists	in	darkness,	and	seeing	your	fear	means	it	is	coming	into	light
--	in	the	light	it	cannot	exist.
So	remain	alert	about	your	blindness,	about	your	fear,	about	your	ignorance,	and
just	 your	 alertness	 will	 dispel	 the	 whole	 darkness	 of	 blindness,	 of	 fear,	 of
ignorance.	 They	 are	 not	 separate	 things;	 they	 are	 separate	 aspects	 of	 a	 single
unconscious	mind	--	they	all	exist	together	and	they	all	disappear	together.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
176
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
It	is	a	good	beginning.	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	my	acceptance	of	everybody	is
total.
Whoever	you	are,	whatever	you	are,	wherever	you	are,	 I	don't	want	 to	 impose
any	ideal	on	you	that	you	should	be	something	else.	If	you	grow	into	something
else,	that	is	another	thing,	but	I	don't	want	to	give	you	any	"shoulds"	--	that	you
must	be	this,	that	you	should	be	this,	that
"unless	you	achieve	this	ideal	you	are	unworthy	of	being	called	human."	No,	as
you	are,	you	are	perfectly	worthy.	Existence	accepts	you,	life	accepts	you	--	and
I	 am	not	 against	 life,	 I	 am	 not	 against	 existence;	 I	 simply	 follow	 the	way	 the
river	of	life	moves.	If	life	accepts	you,	I	accept	you.
People	have	conditions	when	they	accept...
I	have	heard	about	two	lovers	sitting	on	the	sea	beach	on	a	fullmoon	night,	and
they	were	discussing	marriage.
The	woman	asked,	"Will	you	always	love	me	--	always?"
The	man	 said,	 "I	 have	 told	you	 a	 thousand	 and	one	 times	 that	 I	will	 love	you
always,	 always	 --	 but	 because	 of	 your	 question,	 a	 question	 has	 arisen	 in	 my
mind.	In	your	old	age,	will	you	look	like	your	mother?	Then	I	cannot	love	you.
If	 you	 are	 determined	 to	 become	 like	 your	 mother,	 then	 forget	 all	 about
marriage."
In	 old	 age,	 far	 away	 in	 the	 future...	 nobody	 can	 predict	 how	 that	woman	will
look	--	like	the	mother	or	like	the	father,	or	like	the	chauffeur	--	nobody	knows!
But	even	that	far	away	there	is	a	condition,	and	that	future	condition	can	disturb
even	 the	present.	 In	 the	present,	people	are	continually	 looking	at	you	with	all
kinds	 of	 prejudices,	 judgments:	 how	 you	 should	 be,	 how	 you	 should	 behave,
your	etiquette,	your	manners,	your	morality.
Small	 things	 are	 enough	 to	 create	 barriers,	 and	 we	 are	 all	 living	 with	 our
defenses	 so	 that	 others	 cannot	 know	 exactly	 what	 we	 are.	We	 allow	 them	 to
know	only	that	part	of	our	being	which	is	acceptable	to	them.	This	is	one	of	the
foundations	of	our	misery.	People	are	different,	and	we	should	enjoy	and	rejoice
in	 their	 differences,	 in	 their	 variety.	 Your	 judgment	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change
anybody;	perhaps	your	judgment	may	create	a	stubbornness	in	the	other	person
not	to	change.	Who	are	you	to	change	the	person?
These	 are	 the	 secrets	 of	 life.	 If	 you	 accept	 somebody	 with	 totality,	 he	 starts
changing,	because	you	give	him	total	freedom	to	be	himself.	And	a	person	who
gives	you	total	freedom	to	be	yourself	--	you	would	like	that	person	to	be	happy;
as	 far	 as	 you	 are	 concerned,	 he	 has	 given	 you	 the	 dignity	 and	 the	 honor	 of
accepting	you.	It	 is	very	natural	 that	 if	you	see	something	 in	yourself	which	 is
not	right	--	although	the	other	person	accepts	you	as	you	are	--
you	would	like	to	be	even	better,	just	for	him;	to	be	softer,	to	be	more	loving,	to
be	more	tender,	just	for	him.
I	accept	you	as	you	are.	I	don't	have	any	expectations	of	you;	I	don't	want	you	to
be	molded	 into	a	 certain	 idea,	 into	a	 certain	 ideal.	 I	don't	want	 to	make	you	a
dead	statue.	I	want	you	to	be	alive,	more	alive,	and	you	can	be	alive	only	if	your
totality	is	accepted	--	not	only	accepted,	but	respected.
I	have	a	deep	reverence	for	everything	that	is	alive,	a	reverence	for	life	itself.
If	my	reverence	changes	you,	 that	 is	another	 thing;	I	am	not	responsible	for	 it.
And	it	 is	going	to	change	you	--	I	warn	you	beforehand;	you	cannot	blame	me
later	on.
You	are	 fortunate,	Vasumati,	 that	you	 feel	 completely	 seen,	 so	understood	and
accepted.	 If	we	could	accept	people	with	whom	we	are	 in	some	way	related	--
friends	or	lovers	--	and	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
177
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
understand	 them,	 and	 allow	 them	 not	 to	 have	 any	 defenses	 so	 they	 can	 be
completely	 natural,	 the	 world	 would	 be	 so	 beautiful	 and	 people	 would	 be	 so
happy.	But	up	 to	now	we	have	 lived	under	very	wrong	conceptions,	and	 those
wrong	conceptions	have	to	be	dropped.
Two	disciples	of	a	famous	rabbi	came	to	visit	him,	and	while	they	were	waiting
to	be	ushered	into	his	presence,	the	rabbi's	wife	brought	them	two	cups	of	lemon
tea	and	a	plate	with	two	cakes	on	it	--	one	small,	one	big.
"After	you,"	said	one	disciple	to	the	other,	offering	him	the	plate.
"No,	after	you."
"No,	no,	I	insist.	After	you."
"No,	you	take	first."
Eventually	one	of	 the	 two	helped	himself	 first	 --	 to	 the	bigger	cake.	The	other
was	outraged:	"What!	You	helped	yourself	first,	and	took	the	bigger	cake!"
"So?"	 said	 the	 other.	 "If	 you	 had	 chosen	 first,	 which	 cake	 would	 you	 have
taken?"
"Why,	the	smaller	one,	of	course!"
"Well,	what	are	you	complaining	about?	You	have	got	the	smaller	one!"
All	our	manners,	all	our	etiquette	is	so	phony	--	we	don't	mean	what	we	say,	we
don't	mean	what	we	show.	The	whole	of	humanity	has	become	part	of	a	single
ideology,	and	 that	 is	hypocrisy.	One	may	be	Christian,	one	may	be	Hindu,	one
may	be	Jaina,	one	may	be	Buddhist
--	it	does	not	matter;	they	are	all	hypocrites.
I	want	my	people	to	be	simply	themselves,	absolutely	natural...	and	allowing	the
other	also	 to	be	natural,	accepting	each	other,	 trying	 to	understand	each	other's
mystery	 and	 helping	 in	 every	 way	 so	 the	 other	 can	 become	 more	 and	 more
authentic.
Only	authentic	human	beings	can	create	a	society	which	will	be	joyous,	ecstatic,
and	in	the	real	sense,	human.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 SAY,	 FIRST	 JUMP	 AND	 THEN	 THINK.	 BUT	 THIS	 IS	 WHAT
MANKIND	IS
DOING.	 FIRST	 GOING	 TO	 THE	MOON,	 AND	 THEN	 REALIZING	 THAT
ROCKETS
HAVE	 MADE	 HOLES	 IN	 THE	 OZONE	 LAYER,	 FOR	 INSTANCE.
SOMETIMES	IT	CAN
BE	TOO	LATE	TO	THINK.	ON	THE	OTHER	HAND,	IF	ONE	THINKS	TOO
MUCH,	ONE
WILL	 NEVER	 JUMP	 --	 JUMPING	 IMPLIES	 RISK	 AND	 UNKNOWN
CONSEQUENCES.	I	AM	CONFUSED:	CAN	JUMPING	AND	AWARENESS
GO	TOGETHER,	AND	HOW?
Anand	Prema,	my	statement,	"Jump	before	you	think,"	was	not	concerned	with
outer	reality,	it	was	concerned	with	your	inner	space.	This	is	how	your	mind	can
change	the	context	and	then	create	unnecessary	problems.
As	 far	 as	 the	 outside	 is	 concerned,	 think	 first,	 think	 twice	 --	 only	 then	 jump.
Even	if	the	risk	is	that	too	much	thinking	may	not	allow	you	to	jump	at	all,	this
is	perfectly	acceptable	to	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
178
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
you	because	in	the	outside	world,	what	is	there	to	lose?	Doing	anything	without
thinking	in	the	outside	world	is	simply	stupidity.
But	the	laws	of	the	outer	and	the	inner	are	opposite.	In	the	inner	world,	if	you	go
on	thinking	you	will	never	 jump,	because	 the	 inner	 is	absolutely	unknown.	On
the	outside	you	are	not	alone;	there	are	thousands	of	others.	The	outer	world	is
objective,	visible,	and	if	you	are	not	going	to	jump,	somebody	else	will	jump.
Albert	Einstein	was	 asked,	 "If	 you	 had	 not	 discovered	 the	 theory	 of	 relativity,
what	do	you	think	--	would	it	have	ever	been	discovered?"
Albert	 Einstein	 said,	 "At	 the	 most	 three	 months	 later...	 most	 probably	 three
weeks	later"	--
because	 all	 the	 facts	were	 there,	 and	 thousands	 of	 scientists	 around	 the	world
were	working	on	 those	 facts.	 It	was	only	 a	question	of	who	 solved	 the	puzzle
first.	And	later	on	it	was	discovered	that	a	German	scientist	had	discovered	the
theory	of	relativity	BEFORE	Albert	Einstein,	but	he	had	not	published	his	paper.
He	was	just	going	to	publish	it,	but	because	it	was	so	outrageously	against	all	the
old	scientific	findings,	he	went	on	thinking	about	whether	to	publish	it	or	not...
"I	 may	 become	 a	 laughingstock,	 I	 am	 going	 to	 say	 something	 absolutely
contradicting	the	whole	of	scientific	progress."
Albert	Einstein's	 theory	of	 relativity	goes	against	 the	 logic	of	Aristotle;	 it	goes
against	 the	 geometry	 of	 Euclid,	 which	was	well	 established	 for	 two	 thousand
years.	And	it	goes	against	so	many	things	which	have	been	accepted	by	scientists
as	facts	--	who	ever	doubted	that	two	plus	two	is	equal	to	four?	Even	a	man	like
Bertrand	Russell,	who	wrote	one	of	 the	greatest	 treatises	on	mathematics,	 took
nearabout	two	hundred	and	thirty-five	pages	to	prove	that	two	plus	two	is	really
four.	But	against	all	these	comes	the	theory	of	relativity.	It	says	two	plus	two	can
be	anything	--	but	never	four.
Albert	Einstein	took	the	risk,	and	jumped	ahead.	But	he	was	aware	that	if	he	did
not	 take	 the	 jump,	 somebody	 else,	 within	 three	 weeks	 or	 at	 the	 most	 three
months...	how	long	can	you	prevent	it?
In	the	outside	world,	there	are	millions	of	people,	and	everything	is	objective.	In
the	 inside	world,	 you	 are	 alone	 --	 you	 cannot	 take	 anybody	 as	 your	 guide,	 as
your	friend;	no	map	exists,	no	guidebook	exists.	If	you	go	on	thinking,	perhaps
you	will	never	enter	into	it.
My	statement	was	about	the	inner	world.	Against	the	old	proverb,	"Think	before
you	jump,"	I	had	said,	"Jump	before	you	think."	What	is	the	worry?	You	will	be
inside;	you	can	go	on	 thinking	 later	on	--	 first	 jump.	And	you	are	not	 jumping
from	a	 hilltop,	 you	 are	 jumping	 inside	 yourself.	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 there	 is	 any
possibility	of	having	fractures,	or	falling	into	an	abysmal	ditch,	or	falling	so	deep
that	you	cannot	come	out	--	it	has	not	happened	up	to	now.
Thousands	of	people	have	 jumped	 in,	 and	 they	all	have	come	out	 in	 far	better
shape	than	they	have	ever	been.
There	 is	 no	 risk.	 The	 inner	 journey	 is	 really	 the	 safest	 journey	 --	 absolutely
insured	--
because	not	a	single	case	exists	in	the	whole	of	history	when	somebody	jumped
inside	and	came	out	having	multiple	fractures.	Those	who	have	jumped	in,	have
come	out	with	such	tremendous	joy,	with	such	deep	sensibility,	with	such	great
understanding...	they	have	found	the	greatest	treasure	which	exists	in	existence.
Mr.	Cohen	comes	home	one	night	and	starts	to	pack	his	bags.	"So,	where	are	you
going?"
asks	his	wife.
"To	Tahiti."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
179
Chapter	17	-	Watchfulness...	your	gift	to	yourself
"Tahiti?	Why	Tahiti?"
"Simple.	Every	time	you	make	love	there,	they	give	you	five	dollars."
Then	Mrs.	Cohen	starts	packing	her	bags.
"So	where	are	you	going?"	asks	Mr.	Cohen.
"I'm	going	to	Tahiti."
"Why?"
"I	want	to	see	how	you're	going	to	live	on	ten	dollars	a	year."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
180
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
18
Inside	you	god	is	hidden
21	March	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	ULTIMATE	DEATH	OF	THIS	WORLD,
I	GOT
SUDDENLY	 IN	 TOUCH	 WITH	 DEEP	 ALONENESS,	 AND	 THIS	 VOICE
INSIDE	ME
SAID,	"REMEMBER:	EACH	SINGLE	MOMENT,	REMEMBER	THAT	YOU
ARE
ALONE.	 "MY	 BELOVED	 MASTER,	 AFTER	 OUR	 DEATH	 WILL	 YOU
STILL	BE,	IN
SOME	MYSTERIOUS	WAY,	WITH	OUR	WANDERING	CONSCIOUSNESS?
Prem	Amiyo,	aloneness	is	the	ultimate	reality.	One	comes	alone,	one	goes	alone;
and	 between	 these	 two	 alonenesses	 we	 create	 all	 kinds	 of	 relationships	 and
fighting,	 just	 to	deceive	ourselves	--	because	in	life	also,	we	remain	alone.	But
aloneness	is	not	something	to	be	sad	about;	it	 is	something	to	rejoice	in.	There
are	 two	 words	 --	 the	 dictionary	 will	 say	 they	 have	 the	 same	 meaning,	 but
existence	gives	them	totally	opposite	meanings.	One	word	is	loneliness	and	the
other	word	is	aloneness.	They	are	not	synonymous.
Loneliness	is	a	negative	state,	like	darkness.	Loneliness	means	you	are	missing
someone;	you	are	empty,	and	you	are	afraid	in	this	vast	universe.	Aloneness	has
a	 totally	different	meaning:	 it	 does	not	mean	 that	you	are	missing	 someone,	 it
means	that	you	have	found	yourself.	It	is	absolutely	positive.
Finding	oneself,	one	finds	the	meaning	of	life,	the	significance	of	life,	the	joy	of
life,	the	splendor	of	life.	Finding	oneself	is	the	greatest	finding	in	man's	life,	and
this	finding	is	possible	only	when	you	are	alone.	When	your	consciousness	is	not
crowded	by	anything,	by	anybody,	when	your	consciousness	is	utterly	empty	--
in	that	emptiness,	in	that	nothingness,	a	miracle	happens.	And	that	miracle	is	the
foundation	of	all	religions.
The	 miracle	 is:	 when	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 for	 your	 consciousness	 to	 be
conscious	of,	the	consciousness	turns	upon	itself.	It	becomes	a	circle.	Finding	no
obstacle,	 finding	 no	 object,	 it	 comes	 back	 to	 the	 source.	And	 the	moment	 the
circle	 is	 complete,	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 just	 an	 ordinary	 human	 being;	 you	 have
become	 part	 of	 the	 godliness	 that	 surrounds	 existence.	 You	 are	 no	 longer
yourself;	you	have	become	part	of	 the	whole	universe	--	your	heartbeat	 is	now
the	heartbeat	of	the	universe	itself.
This	 is	 the	 experience	 which	 mystics	 have	 been	 searching	 for	 all	 their	 lives,
down	the	ages.
There	 is	 no	 other	 experience	 which	 is	 more	 ecstatic,	 more	 blissful.	 This
experience	transforms	your	whole	outlook:	where	there	used	to	be	darkness,	now
there	is	light;	where	there	used	to	be	misery,	there	is	bliss;	where	there	used	to	be
anger,	hate,	possessiveness,	jealousy,	there	is	only	a	beautiful	flower	of	love.
The	 whole	 energy	 that	 was	 being	 wasted	 in	 negative	 emotions	 is	 no	 longer
wasted;	it	takes	a	positive	and	creative	turn.	On	the	one	hand	you	are	no	longer
your	old	self;	on	the	other	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
181
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
hand	you	are,	for	the	first	time,	your	authentic	self.	The	old	is	gone,	the	new	has
arrived.	The	old	was	dead;	the	new	belongs	to	the	eternal,	the	new	belongs	to	the
immortal.
It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 experience	 that	 the	 seers	 of	 the	 UPANISHADS	 have
declared	man	as	amritasya	putrah	--	"sons	and	daughters	of	immortality."
Unless	you	know	yourself	as	eternal	beings,	part	of	the	whole,	you	will	remain
afraid	of	death.	The	fear	of	death	 is	simply	because	you	are	not	aware	of	your
eternal	source	of	life.
Once	 the	 eternity	 of	 your	 being	 is	 realized,	 death	 becomes	 the	 greatest	 lie	 in
existence.
Death	 has	 never	 happened,	 never	 happens,	 never	 will	 happen,	 because	 that
which	is,	remains	always	--	in	different	forms,	on	different	levels,	but	there	is	no
discontinuity.
Eternity	in	the	past	and	eternity	in	the	future	both	belong	to	you.	And	the	present
moment	becomes	a	meeting	point	of	two	eternities:	one	going	towards	the	past,
one	going	towards	the	future.
Amiyo,	you	are	asking,	"When	You	talked	about	the	ultimate	death	of	this	world,
I	 got	 suddenly	 in	 touch	 with	 deep	 aloneness,	 and	 this	 voice	 inside	 me	 said,
'Remember:	 each	 single	 moment,	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 alone.'"	 The
remembrance	 has	 not	 to	 be	 only	 of	 the	mind;	 your	 every	 fiber	 of	 being,	 your
every	cell	of	the	body	should	remember	it	--	not	as	a	word,	but	as	a	deep	feeling.
The	English	word	sin	has	been	corrupted	by	Christianity	--	they	have	given	it	a
wrong	meaning.	Its	original	meaning	is	forgetfulness.	Forgetfulness	of	yourself
is	the	only	sin	there	is,	and	to	remember	yourself	is	the	only	virtue.
Gautam	 Buddha	 emphasized	 one	 single	 word	 continually	 for	 forty-two	 years,
morning	and	evening;	 the	word	 is	 sammasati	 --	 it	means	 "right	 remembering."
You	remember	many	things
--	you	can	become	an	ENCYCLOPEDIA	BRITANNICA;	your	mind	is	capable
of	 remembering	 all	 the	 libraries	 of	 the	 world	 --	 but	 that	 is	 not	 the	 right
remembering.
There	is	only	one	right	remembering	--	the	moment	you	remember	yourself.
Gautam	Buddha	 used	 to	 illustrate	 his	 point	with	 the	 ancient	 story	 of	 a	 lioness
who	 was	 jumping	 from	 one	 hillock	 to	 another	 hillock,	 and	 between	 the	 two
hillocks	a	big	 flock	of	sheep	was	moving.	The	 lioness	was	pregnant,	and	gave
birth	while	she	was	jumping.	Her	cub	fell	into	the	flock	of	sheep,	was	brought	up
by	the	sheep,	and	naturally,	he	believed	himself	also	to	be	a	sheep.	It	was	a	little
strange	because	he	was	so	big,	so	different	--	but	perhaps	he	was	just	a	freak	of
nature...	He	was	vegetarian.
He	grew	up,	and	one	day	an	old	lion	who	was	in	search	of	food	came	close	to	the
flock	of	 sheep	 --	 and	he	could	not	believe	his	 eyes.	 In	 the	midst	of	 the	 sheep,
there	was	a	young	lion	in	its	full	glory,	and	the	sheep	were	not	afraid.	He	forgot
about	his	food;	he	ran	after	the	flock	of	sheep...	and	it	was	becoming	more	and
more	puzzling,	because	 the	young	 lion	was	also	 running	away	with	 the	 sheep.
Finally	he	got	hold	of	the	young	lion.	He	was	crying	and	weeping	and	saying	to
the	old	lion,	"Please,	let	me	go	with	my	people!"
But	the	old	lion	dragged	him	to	a	nearby	lake	--	a	silent	lake	without	any	ripples,
it	was	just	like	a	pure	mirror	--	and	the	old	lion	forced	him	to	see	his	reflection	in
the	 lake,	 and	 also	 the	 reflection	 of	 the	 old	 lion.	 There	 was	 a	 sudden
transformation.	The	moment	the	young	lion	saw	who	he	was,	there	was	a	great
roar	--	the	whole	valley	echoed	the	roar	of	the	young	lion.
He	had	never	roared	before	because	he	had	never	thought	that	he	was	anybody
other	than	a	sheep.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
182
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
The	old	 lion	 said,	 "My	work	 is	done;	now	 it	 is	up	 to	you.	Do	you	want	 to	go
back	to	your	own	flock?"
The	young	lion	laughed.	He	said,	"Forgive	me,	I	had	completely	forgotten	who	I
am.	And	I	am	immensely	grateful	to	you	that	you	helped	me	to	remember."
Gautam	Buddha	 used	 to	 say,	 "The	master's	 function	 is	 to	 help	 you	 remember
who	you	are."	You	are	not	part	of	this	mundane	world;	your	home	is	the	home	of
the	divine.	You	are	lost	in	forgetfulness;	you	have	forgotten	that	inside	you	God
is	hidden.	You	never	look	inside
--	because	everybody	looks	outside,	you	also	go	on	looking	outside.
To	be	alone	is	a	great	opportunity,	a	blessing,	because	in	your	aloneness	you	are
bound	to	stumble	upon	yourself	and	for	the	first	time	remember	who	you	are.	To
know	that	you	are	part	of	the	divine	existence	is	to	be	free	from	death,	free	from
misery,	 free	 from	 anxiety;	 free	 from	 all	 that	 has	 been	 a	 nightmare	 to	 you	 for
many	many	lives.
Amiyo,	 it	 was	 good	 that	 you	 became	 aware	 of	 a	 deep	 aloneness	 --	 don't	 lose
track	of	it;	become	more	centered	in	your	deep	aloneness.	That's	what	meditation
is:	becoming	centered	in	one's	own	aloneness.	The	aloneness	has	to	be	so	pure
that	 not	 even	 a	 thought,	 not	 even	 a	 feeling,	 disturbs	 it.	 The	 moment	 your
aloneness	 is	 complete,	 your	 experience	 of	 it	 will	 become	 your	 enlightenment.
Enlightenment	 is	 not	 something	 that	 comes	 from	 outside;	 it	 is	 something	 that
grows	within	you.
To	forget	your	self	is	the	only	sin.	And	to	remember	your	self,	in	its	utter	beauty,
is	the	only	virtue,	the	only	religion.	You	need	not	be	a	Hindu,	you	need	not	be	a
Mohammedan,	you	need	not	be	a	Christian	--	all	that	you	need	to	be	religious	is
to	be	yourself.
It	has	been	immensely	good	that	your	whole	being	resounded	with	these	words:
"Remember:	 each	 single	moment,	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 alone."	You	are	 also
asking,	"My	beloved	Master,	after	our	death	will	you	still	be,	in	some	mysterious
way,	with	our	wandering	consciousness?"
We	are	not	separate,	even	now	--	nobody	is	separate;	the	whole	existence	is	one
organic	unity.	The	idea	of	separation	is	because	of	our	forgetfulness.	It	is	almost
as	 if	 every	 leaf	 of	 the	 tree	 started	 thinking	 it	 is	 separate,	 separate	 from	 other
leaves...	but	deep	down	they	are	nourished	by	the	same	roots.	It	is	one	tree;	the
leaves	may	be	many.	It	is	one	existence;	the	manifestations	may	be	many.
I	am	with	you	right	now.	I	have	been	with	you	forever,	and	I	will	be	with	you	for
eternity
--	 there	is	no	other	way.	Knowing	oneself,	one	thing	becomes	absolutely	clear:
no	man	is	an	island	--	we	are	a	continent,	a	vast	continent,	an	infinite	existence
without	any	boundaries.	The	same	life	runs	through	all,	the	same	love	fills	every
heart,	the	same	joy	dances	in	every	being.
Just	because	of	our	misunderstanding,	we	think	we	are	separate.
The	idea	of	separation	is	our	illusion.
The	idea	of	oneness	will	be	our	experience	of	the	ultimate	truth.
I	have	heard...	 there	are	six	people	on	an	aircraft:	 the	pilot,	Gorbachev,	Ronald
Reagan,	Rajiv	Gandhi,	the	Catholic	pope,	and	a	young	hippie.	When	something
goes	wrong	with	the	plane,	the	pilot	announces	that	he	is	taking	one	of	the	five
parachutes	 and	 that	 they	 must	 decide	 among	 themselves	 who	 will	 take	 the
remaining	four.
Gorbachev	declares	that	since	he	is	the	only	hope	for	the	spread	of	communism,
he	must	 jump,	 and	 taking	 a	 parachute	 jumps	 out	 of	 the	 plane.	Ronald	Reagan
declares	that	he	is	the	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
183
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
only	hope	 for	 the	defense	of	 the	 free	world	against	 the	 spread	of	communism,
and	he	too	takes	a	parachute	and	jumps.
Then	 Rajiv	 Gandhi	 gets	 up.	 "I	 am	 the	 leader	 of	 the	 greatest	 nation	 and	 the
greatest	 democracy	 of	 the	 world,	 India,	 and	 I	 am	 the	 most	 intelligent	 and
youngest	world	leader;	I	must	jump."	And	he	too	jumps	out	of	the	plane.
Then	 the	pope	rises	and	says	 to	 the	young	man,	 the	hippie,	"My	son,	 I	am	old
and	have	 lived	my	 lifetime.	Take	 the	 last	parachute	and	 jump."	But	 the	young
hippie	protests,	"Father,	hurry	up.	There	are	two	parachutes	left,	one	for	each	of
us.	Put	on	one	of	them	and	jump."
"But	how	is	that?"	asks	the	pope.	The	young	man	replies,	"That	guy	who	said	he
is	the	most	intelligent	and	youngest	world	leader	--	he	took	my	sleeping	bag!"
Just	a	little	more	intelligence	is	needed	and	you	can	come	out	of	the	gloom,	the
misery,	the	hell	in	which	the	whole	humanity	is	living.	The	secret	of	coming	out
of	this	hell	is	to	remember	yourself.	And	this	remembrance	will	become	possible
if	you	understand	the	idea	that	you	are	alone.
You	may	have	 lived	with	your	wife	or	with	your	husband	 for	 fifty	years;	 still,
you	are	two.
Your	wife	is	alone,	you	are	alone.	You	have	been	trying	to	create	a	facade	that
"We	are	not	alone,"	that	"We	are	a	family,"	that	"We	are	a	society,"	that	"We	are
a	civilization,"	that	"We	are	a	culture,"	that	"We	are	an	organized	religion,"	that
"We	are	an	organized	political	party."
But	all	these	illusions	are	not	going	to	help.
You	have	to	recognize,	howsoever	painful	it	appears	in	the	beginning,	that	"I	am
alone	 and	 in	 a	 strange	 land."	This	 recognition,	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 is	 painful.	 It
takes	away	all	our	illusions
--	which	were	great	consolations.	But	once	you	have	dared	to	accept	the	reality,
the	pain	disappears.	And	just	hidden	behind	the	pain	is	 the	greatest	blessing	of
the	world:	You	come	to	know	yourself.
You	are	the	intelligence	of	existence;	you	are	the	consciousness	of	existence;	you
are	the	soul	of	existence.	You	are	part	of	this	immense	godliness	that	manifests
in	 thousands	 of	 forms:	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	 birds,	 in	 the	 animals,	 in	 human
beings...	but	it	is	the	same	consciousness	in	different	stages	of	evolution.	And	the
man	who	recognizes	himself	and	feels	that	the	god	he	was	searching	and	looking
for	all	over	the	world	resides	within	his	own	heart,	comes	to	the	highest	point	of
evolution.	There	is	nothing	higher	than	that.
It	makes	your	 life	 for	 the	 first	 time	meaningful,	 significant,	 religious.	But	you
will	not	be	a	Hindu,	and	you	will	not	be	a	Christian,	and	you	will	not	be	a	Jew;
you	 will	 be	 simply	 religious.	 By	 being	 a	 Hindu,	 or	 a	 Mohammedan,	 or	 a
Christian,	or	a	Jaina,	or	a	Buddhist,	you	are	destroying	the	purity	of	religiousness
--	it	needs	no	adjectives.
Love	 is	 love	 --	 have	 you	 ever	 heard	 about	 Hindu	 love?	Mohammedan	 love?
Consciousness	 is	 consciousness	 --	 have	 you	 ever	 thought	 about	 Indian
consciousness	 or	 Chinese	 consciousness?	 Enlightenment	 is	 enlightenment:
whether	it	happens	in	the	white	body	or	in	the	black	body,	whether	it	happens	in
the	young	man	or	in	the	old	man,	whether	it	happens	in	a	man	or	in	a	woman,	it
does	not	make	any	difference.	It	is	the	same	experience,	the	same	taste,	the	same
sweetness,	the	same	fragrance.
The	only	person	who	is	not	intelligent	is	one	who	is	running	around	all	over	the
world	 in	 search	 of	 something,	 not	 knowing	 exactly	 what;	 sometimes	 thinking
perhaps	it	is	money,	sometimes	thinking	perhaps	it	is	power,	sometimes	thinking
perhaps	it	is	prestige,	sometimes	thinking	perhaps	it	is	respectability.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
184
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
The	intelligent	man	first	searches	his	own	being	before	he	starts	a	journey	in	the
outer	world.	That	seems	to	be	simple	and	logical	--	at	least	first	look	inside	your
own	 house	 before	 you	 go	 searching	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 And	 those	 who	 have
looked	within	themselves	have	found	it,	without	any	exception.
Gautam	 Buddha	 is	 not	 a	 Buddhist.	 The	 word	 buddha	 simply	 means	 the
awakened	one,	who	has	come	out	of	sleep.	Mahavira,	 the	Jaina,	 is	not	a	Jaina.
The	word	jaina	simply	means	one	who	has	conquered	--	conquered	himself.
The	 world	 needs	 a	 great	 revolution	 where	 each	 individual	 finds	 his	 religion
within	himself.
The	moment	religions	become	organized,	they	become	dangerous;	they	become
really	 politics	with	 a	 false	 face	 of	 religion.	That's	why	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the
world	go	on	 trying	 to	convert	more	and	more	people	 to	 their	 religion.	 It	 is	 the
politics	of	numbers;	whoever	has	more	numbers	will	be	more	powerful.
But	 nobody	 seems	 to	 be	 interested	 in	 bringing	millions	 of	 individuals	 to	 their
own	selves.
My	 work	 here	 consists	 of	 taking	 you	 out	 of	 any	 kind	 of	 organized	 effort	 --
because	truth	can	never	be	organized.	You	have	to	go	alone	on	the	pilgrimage,
because	the	pilgrimage	is	going	to	be	inside.	You	cannot	take	anybody	with	you.
And	you	have	to	drop	everything	that	you	have	learned	from	others,	because	all
those	prejudices	will	distort	your	vision	--	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	the	naked
reality	of	your	being.	The	naked	reality	of	your	being	is	the	only	hope	of	finding
God.
God	is	your	naked	reality	--	undecorated,	without	any	adjective.
It	is	not	confined	by	your	body,	not	confined	by	your	birth,	not	confined	by	your
color,	not	confined	by	your	sex,	not	confined	by	your	country.	 It	 is	simply	not
confined	by	anything.	And	it	is	available,	so	close:
Just	one	step	inside	and	you	have	arrived.
You	have	been	told	for	thousands	of	years	that	the	journey	to	God	is	very	long.
The	 journey	 is	not	 long,	God	is	not	 far	away.	God	is	 in	your	breath,	God	is	 in
your	 heartbeat,	God	 is	 in	 your	 blood,	 in	 your	 bones,	 in	 your	marrow	 --	 just	 a
single	step	of	closing	your	eyes	and	entering	within	yourself.
It	may	take	a	little	time	because	old	habits	die	hard:	even	if	you	close	your	eyes,
thoughts	will	go	on	crowding	you.	Those	thoughts	are	from	the	outside,	and	the
simple	method	which	has	been	followed	by	all	the	great	seers	of	the	world	is	just
to	watch	your	thoughts,	just	to	be	a	witness.	Don't	condemn	them,	don't	justify
them,	don't	 rationalize	 them.	Remain	aloof,	 remain	 indifferent,	 let	 them	pass	--
they	will	be	gone.
And	the	day	your	mind	is	absolutely	silent,	with	no	disturbance,	you	have	taken
the	first	step	that	takes	you	to	the	temple	of	God.
The	temple	of	God	is	made	of	your	consciousness.
You	cannot	go	there	with	your	friends,	with	your	children,	with	your	wife,	with
your	parents.
Everybody	has	to	go	there	alone.
Amiyo,	 don't	 forget	 the	 experience	 that	 has	 happened	 to	 you	 --	 the	 feeling	 of
deep	 aloneness	 and	 a	 voice	 inside	 saying	 to	 you,	 "Remember:	 each	 single
moment,	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 alone."	The	day	of	your	glory	will	 not	 be	 far
away.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
185
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 SHOWER	 ME	 WITH	 LOVE	 AND	 I	 AM	 SO	 ASHAMED,	 I	 CAN'T
LOOK	AT
YOU	SOMETIMES.	INSIDE	I	KNOW	I	DON'T	HAVE	ANYTHING	TO	GIVE
YOU,	AND
WHAT	 LITTLE	 THERE	 IS	 FEELS	 SO	 INADEQUATE.	 MASTER,	 MY
HEART	IS
BROKEN.	PLEASE	HELP	ME.
Milarepa,	your	question	surprises	me,	because	you	give	so	much	love	to	me.	You
have	given	yourself	to	me	--	your	music,	your	poetry,	your	dance.	What	can	be
more	valuable?	You	have	trusted	me	--	a	stranger.	What	more	can	there	be	that
you	should	feel	ashamed?	You	should	rejoice,	because	all	that	you	had,	you	have
given	to	me,	without	holding	anything	back.
You	have	given	your	heart.
But	perhaps	you	don't	think	that	your	songs,	your	music,	your	dance,	your	love,
your	 trust,	have	any	value.	They	certainly	are	of	 the	greatest	value	 --	although
they	don't	have	any	price.
You	are	not	poor.	Just	not	to	have	money	does	not	make	a	man	poor;	not	to	have
power,	not	 to	be	a	president	or	a	prime	minister	of	a	country,	does	not	make	a
man	poor.	What	makes	a	man	poor	is	not	to	have	a	soul.	And	your	soul	is	so	full
of	 songs,	 so	 full	 of	 dance,	 so	 full	 of	 laughter	 --	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 your
feeling	ashamed.	You	have	given	 to	me	 the	 richest	gifts	 that	 anyone	can	give.
But	perhaps	you	have	not	thought	of	it	in	this	way.
There	are	some	of	the	richest	people	in	the	world	who	are	so	poor	inside	that	all
their	 money	 cannot	 make	 any	 difference.	 Their	 money	 is	 outside,	 and	 their
poverty	is	inside	--
anything	from	the	outside	cannot	destroy	the	inner	poverty.	The	inner	poverty	is
destroyed	only	by	inner	values:	love,	compassion,	silence,	prayer,	meditation	--
these	are	the	things	that	make	a	person	really	rich.	He	may	be	just	a	beggar	on
the	street,	it	does	not	matter,	but	even	emperors	will	find	themselves	jealous	of
him.
You	are	misunderstanding.	Put	things	right.
I	have	heard	that	Adolf	Hitler	dies	and	goes	to	heaven.	He	behaves	so	well	that
St.	 Peter	 tells	 him	 he	 can	 go	 back	 to	 earth	 again	 for	 a	week	 as	 a	 treat.	 After
twenty-four	hours,	he	is	back,	hammering	at	the	pearly	gates	to	get	in.
"What	is	the	matter,	Adolf?"	asked	St.	Peter,	"you	have	got	six	more	days."
"Let	me	in,	let	me	in!"	cries	Hitler.	So	St.	Peter	unlocks	the	gate,	lets	him	in	and
asks	him,
"Adolf,	what	is	the	matter?	Didn't	you	enjoy	it?"
"Enjoy	 it?"	 says	Hitler.	 "Enjoy	 it?	Everyone	has	gone	mad	down	 there	 since	 I
left.	I	come	back,	and	what	do	I	find?	The	Jews	are	fighting,	and	the	Germans
are	making	money!"
Certainly	Adolf	Hitler	must	 have	 been	 shocked.	His	 old	 idea,	 that	 Jews	make
money	and	Germans	fight,	 is	no	longer	relevant.	Now	Jews	are	having	a	tough
fight	and	Germans	are	making	more	money	than	anybody	else	in	Europe.
Milarepa,	you	also	have	the	old	idea	that	the	man	of	possessions	is	rich,	and	the
man	who	 does	 not	 possess	 anything	 is	 poor.	 It	 is	 not	 true.	 The	man	 of	 inner
possessions	is	the	real	rich	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
186
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
man,	 and	 the	man	 of	 outer	 possessions	 is	 simply	 deceiving	 himself	 that	 he	 is
rich,	but	deep	down	he	knows	he	is	a	pauper.
I	have	known	the	richest	people,	and	when	 they	expose	 their	hearts,	 their	eyes
are	full	of	tears	--	because	they	have	all	the	money	the	world	can	afford...	but	the
money	 cannot	 purchase	 love,	 the	 money	 cannot	 purchase	 peace,	 the	 money
cannot	purchase	 silence,	 the	money	cannot	purchase	prayer,	 the	money	cannot
purchase	God.	So	what	is	the	use	of	it?	Their	inner	being	remains	dark,	empty.
And	 it	 is	 the	 inner	 being	 that	 counts	 finally,	 because	 death	 will	 take	 away
everything	 else	 and	 leave	 you	 only	with	 that	which	 is	 inner.	Death	 should	 be
accepted	 as	 the	 only	 criterion	 to	 decide	what	 is	 richness	 and	what	 is	 poverty.
That	which	death	can	take	away	is	not	richness;	that	which	death	cannot	destroy
is	the	real	richness.
And	Milarepa,	you	are	a	rich	man.	You	can	become	even	richer.	There	is	no	end
to	it	until	you	become	enlightened,	until	you	have	reached	to	the	highest	peak	of
the	Himalayas	of	consciousness.	That	should	be	the	goal	for	every	human	being
who	has	any	intelligence.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	SO-CALLED
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS	 AND	 SELF-AWARENESS?	 IS	 SELF-
CONSCIOUSNESS	 A	 FORM	 OF	 UNAWARENESS,	 OR	 IS	 THERE
SOMETHING	OF	AWARENESS	IN	IT?
Prem	Anudeva,	self-consciousness	is	a	disease,	it	is	sickness.	Self-awareness	is
health	--	it	is	wholeness.	Both	words	appear	to	be	the	same,	but	in	fact,	because
language	 is	 created	 by	 unconscious	 people,	 they	 cannot	 make	 the	 fine
demarcations.
Self-consciousness	 simply	means	 ego	 consciousness	 and	 self-awareness	means
soul	consciousness.	Your	ego	is	a	false	entity.	Because	you	have	so	much	money,
because	 you	 have	 so	 much	 power,	 because	 you	 are	 born	 in	 a	 very	 respected
family...	your	education,	your	position	 in	 life	--	all	 these	 things	constitute	your
ego.	But	your	soul	comes	with	you	when	you	are	born,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
anything.	Whether	you	are	educated	or	uneducated	 --	Kabir	was	not	 educated;
Jesus	was	not	educated	 --	whether	you	come	from	a	 respectable	 family	or	not,
does	not	matter.
It	is	not	known	whether	Kabir	was	born	from	a	Hindu	family	or	a	Mohammedan
family.
He	was	found	on	the	bank	of	the	Ganges	by	a	sannyasin,	Swami	Ramananda;	a
small	 child	whose	parents	had	 left	him	 there.	Perhaps	he	was	 illegitimate.	But
Kabir	became	one	of	the	richest	human	beings	the	world	has	known.	No	family,
no	 certainty	 of	 what	 religion	 he	 belonged	 to,	 no	 education,	 no	 riches	 --	 he
remained	a	weaver	his	whole	life.	He	would	weave	and	go	every	market	day	into
the	market	to	sell	his	clothes,	and	that	was	his	whole	earnings;	it	was	enough	for
seven	days.
But	 you	 cannot	 find	 a	 richer	man;	 so	 full	 of	 bliss	 that	 each	 of	 his	 songs	 still
carries	something	alive	in	it.	After	centuries	have	passed,	just	the	words	of	Kabir
can	echo	 something	within	you	 --	 as	 if	Kabir	were	present.	He	has	poured	his
heart	in	his	words;	those	words	are	of	gold.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
187
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Jesus	 was	 a	 carpenter's	 son	 --	 very	 poor,	 absolutely	 uneducated,	 had	 no	 idea
about	 scriptures,	 learning,	 scholarship	 --	 but	 still	 he	 had	 a	 richness,	 a
consciousness,	so	that	even	on	the	cross	he	did	not	forget	to	pray	to	God.	His	last
words	on	 the	earth	were:	 "Father,	 forgive	 these	people	who	are	crucifying	me,
because	they	know	not	what	they	are	doing;	they	are	unconscious	people."
Such	 compassion	 comes	 out	 of	 self-awareness.	 And	 self-awareness	 does	 not
depend	on	anything	outside	you,	it	depends	only	on	you.	The	soul	is	there;	you
have	just	to	wake	it	up.	It	is	an	awakening.
Avoid	self-consciousness	--	that	is	sickness	of	the	soul;	and	go	deeper	into	self-
awareness
--	that	is	your	authentic	reality.
One	morning	a	young	woman	got	out	of	bed,	 slipped	 into	her	 robe,	 raised	 the
shade,	 uncovered	 the	 parrot,	 put	 on	 the	 coffee	 pot,	 answered	 the	 phone,	 and
heard	 a	 masculine	 voice	 say,	 "Hello,	 honey.	 My	 ship	 just	 hit	 port	 and	 I	 am
coming	right	over."	So	the	young	lady	took	the	coffee	pot	off	the	stove,	covered
up	the	parrot,	pulled	down	the	shade,	took	off	her	robe,	got	into	bed,	and	heard
the	parrot	mumble,	"Christ,	what	a	short	day	that	was!"
Man	is	not	even	that	much	alert.	You	go	on	living	like	a	zombie	--	a	routine	life,
every	day	repeating	the	same	--	without	ever	thinking	that	you	have	not	yet	done
the	 most	 important	 thing:	 you	 have	 not	 encountered	 yourself.	 You	 have	 not
attained	 to	 self-awareness;	 you	 are	 engaged	 in	 making	 your	 ego	 as	 big	 as
possible.
But	the	ego	is	your	enemy,	not	your	friend.	It	is	the	ego	that	gives	you	wounds
and	hurts	you.	It	is	the	ego	that	makes	you	violent,	angry,	jealous,	competitive.	It
is	the	ego	that	is	continuously	comparing	and	feeling	miserable.
Self-awareness	 is	awareness	of	your	 inner	world,	 the	kingdom	of	God.	As	you
become	aware	of	the	tremendous	beauty	of	your	own	being	--	its	joy,	its	light,	its
eternal	life,	its	richness,	its	overflowing	love	--	you	feel	so	blessed	that	you	can
bless	the	whole	world	without	any	discrimination.
Kill	the	ego,	because	that	is	hiding	your	authentic	soul.	And	discover	your	soul;
that	will	be	your	self-awareness.
Self-awareness,	 Anudeva,	 is	 the	 way	 to	 your	 kingdom,	 which	 is	 also	 the
kingdom	of	God.
It	is	within	you.
You	are	not	to	go	anywhere;	you	have	to	come	back	home.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
188
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
19
At	the	maximum	you	disappear
22	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	I	WALK	TO	DISCOURSE	EACH	MORNING,	THIS	THOUGHT	COMES
BEFORE
ME:	WHAT	HAVE	 I	DONE	TO	DESERVE	THIS	BLISSFUL	EXPERIENCE
OF	SITTING
AT	 YOUR	 FEET?	 JOYFULLY,	 SOMETIMES	 TEARFULLY,	 AWAITING
YOUR
GLANCE	 UPON	 ME	 AND	 THEN	 LONGING	 FOR	 THE	 NEXT	 DAY	 TO
DAWN	AND
BRING	WITH	 IT	YET	ONE	MORE	OPPORTUNITY	OF	BEING	 IN	YOUR
PRESENCE...
BELOVED	MASTER,	IS	THIS	NOT	ALSO	A	TYPE	OF	GREED?
Zareen,	existence	is	so	generous,	life	is	so	bountiful	that	one	need	not	deserve,
need	not	be	worthy	to	receive	its	gifts.	On	the	contrary,	one	has	to	be	absolutely
humble,	a	nobody	--
receptive,	available,	with	all	the	doors	of	the	heart	open,	trusting	--	and	existence
showers	on	him	flowers,	like	rain.	The	experience	deepens	one's	humbleness	and
creates	a	new	quality	in	one's	being,	of	which	one	is	generally	not	aware	--	that
of	gratefulness,	gratefulness	to	all,	gratefulness	to	the	whole.
Do	we	deserve	life?	Do	we	deserve	love?	The	very	idea	of	deserving	has	been
implanted	 in	us	by	 the	marketplace.	What	do	 these	 trees	deserve?	But	 the	 sun
comes	every	day	and	the	stars	come	every	night,	and	the	trees	are	constantly	in
silent	meditation.	They	are	also	waiting.
And	waiting	 is	not	greed,	waiting	 is	simply	our	nature,	waiting	means	 that	our
doors	are	open	and	we	are	ready	to	welcome	the	guest	whenever	he	comes.
A	beautiful	poem	by	Rabindranath	Tagore,	"The	King	of	the	Night"...	There	used
to	be	a	very	huge	temple,	so	huge	that	there	were	one	hundred	priests	to	worship
the	 statues	 of	 gods	 in	 the	 temple.	 One	 night	 the	 chief	 priest	 dreamt,	 and	 the
dream	was	such	that	it	made	him	wake	up	--	he	could	not	believe	it,	but	he	could
not	disbelieve	it	either.
In	 the	 dream	 he	 saw	God	 himself	 saying	 to	 him,	 "Tomorrow	 is	 the	 fullmoon
night.	 Clean	 the	 whole	 temple,	 get	 ready	 --	 I	 may	 come	 any	 moment.	 For
thousands	of	years	this	temple	has	been	calling	me,	but	the	call	was	professional;
hence	it	was	not	heard.	Your	call	is	not	professional.	You	are	the	first	chief	priest
in	this	temple	whose	heart	is	full	of	longing,	full	of	prayer,	full	of	waiting.	You
are	 not	 simply	 doing	 the	 rituals,	 your	 whole	 life	 is	 in	 it.	 So	 don't	 forget:
tomorrow	 I	 am	 coming	 and	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 an	 advance	 notice,	 so	 that	 the
temple	is	ready	to	receive	the	guest	for	which	it	was	made	many,	many	centuries
before."
It	was	difficult	to	believe	that	God	would	speak	to	him	--	he	is	nobody,	he	does
not	 deserve	 it.	On	 the	 contrary,	 he	 has	 so	many	weaknesses,	 so	many	 frailties
which	every	human	being	is	prone	to...	but	on	the	other	hand,	how	to	disbelieve?
The	dream	was	truer	than	our	so-called	true	life.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
189
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
He	was	worried	about	what	he	was	going	to	say	to	the	other	priests,	because	they
will	make	him	a	laughingstock.	The	temple	has	been	there	for	centuries	and	God
has	never	come.
But	 even	 if	 it	 looks	 awkward,	 embarrassing,	 he	 has	 to	 tell	 them,	 because	 he
alone	cannot	clean	the	whole	temple;	it	is	so	big,	so	huge...
He	woke	up	all	the	priests	and	said,	"Forgive	me	for	disturbing	your	sleep.	I	am
in	a	dilemma:	I	have	seen	 this	dream..."	And	all	 the	priests	 laughed	--	because
priests	are	the	only	people	who	don't	believe	in	God.	They	know	perfectly	well
that	God	is	a	strategy	to	exploit	people.
They	said,	"It	was	just	a	dream,	go	back	to	sleep."	But	the	chief	priest	could	not
sleep.	In	the	morning	he	said,	"It	may	have	been	just	a	dream,	but	who	knows?	If
God	comes	and	finds	us	unprepared,	it	will	be	such	a	shame.	So	I	order	you,	as
the	 chief	priest,	 to	 clean	 the	 temple,	 to	decorate	 the	 temple	with	 flowers,	with
candles.	Make	 it	 fragrant	with	 incense,	 and	 let	 us	wait.	 Even	 if	 it	was	 only	 a
dream,	and	God	does	not	turn	up,	there	is	no	harm.	The	temple	needs	cleaning,
and	it	is	a	good	opportunity."
The	whole	day	the	temple	was	cleaned,	decorated.	Delicious	food	was	made	for
God,	but	the	whole	day	passed	and	there	was	no	sign.	And	the	chief	priest	was
standing	at	the	door,	looking	far	away	where	the	sky	seems	to	meet	the	earth	--
the	 temple	was	 in	a	very	 lonely	place	 --	but	 the	 road	remained	empty;	nobody
came.
The	 day	 disappeared	 into	 night.	 They	 were	 all	 hungry	 because	 they	 were
waiting:	first	God	should	be	served.	And	then	all	the	other	priests	said,	"We	had
told	 you,	 a	 dream	 is	 just	 a	 dream.	Who	 has	 ever	 heard	 of	God	 coming	 to	 the
temples?	You	are	very	naive,	very	simple,	very	 innocent.	Now	let	us	eat	 --	we
are	feeling	hungry	and	tired	--	and	go	to	sleep."
So	 they	 closed	 the	 doors,	 and	 ate	 the	 food	 that	 they	 had	made	 for	 God.	 And
because	 they	 were	 tired	 from	 the	 whole	 day's	 cleaning	 and	 decoration	 and
preparation,	they	immediately	fell	asleep.
In	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 a	 golden	 chariot	 came	 on	 the	 road	 leading	 to	 the
temple.	The	sound	of	 the	chariot	coming...	and	the	chief	priest	was	deep	down
still	feeling	that	God	cannot	be	so	deceptive,	particularly	to	a	man	who	has	never
done	 any	 harm	 to	 him.	 He	 heard	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 chariot.	 He	 woke	 up	 the
priests,	and	he	said,	"He	is	coming!	I	have	 just	heard	 the	sound	of	 the	chariot,
listen."
And	they	were	half	asleep	and	they	said,	"Just	go	to	sleep!	You	are	going	mad,
just	because	of	a	dream.	This	is	not	a	chariot,	this	is	just	the	clouds	thundering."
He	was	alone.
They	silenced	him.
The	chariot	came	to	the	door.	God	stepped	onto	the	long	steps	reaching	up	to	the
temple.
He	 knocked	 on	 the	 door.	Again	 the	 chief	 priest	 said,	 "I	 have	 heard	 somebody
knocking	 on	 the	 door!	 Perhaps	 God	 has	 come."	 And	 now	 it	 was	 too	 much.
Annoying	them	in	the	middle	of	 the	night...	utterly	 tired	and	exhausted	priests.
Somebody	 shouted	 at	 him	 and	 said,	 "You	 shut	 up	 and	 just	 go	 to	 sleep!	 It	 is
nothing	but	 the	breeze	hitting	 the	doors.	No	God	has	come	and	no	chariot	has
come;	it	has	never	happened."	They	again	silenced	him.
In	the	morning	when	the	chief	priest...	he	could	not	sleep;	the	waiting	kept	him
awake,	the	longing	kept	him	awake.	He	got	up	early	and	opened	the	door	--	"My
god!"	he	said,	"He	has	come"	--	because	on	the	road	there	were	signs	of	a	chariot
coming	 up	 to	 the	 door,	 and	 on	 the	 steps	 he	 could	 see	 the	 signs	 of	 someone
reaching	the	door.	He	looked	carefully...	because	dust	had	gathered	on	the	steps
and	there	were	perfect	 impressions	of	 the	feet.	It	was	no	one	other	Osho	-	The
Hidden	Splendor
190
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
than	God,	because	the	impressions	in	the	dust	were	exactly	the	same	as	had	been
described	in	the	ancient	scriptures;	exactly	how	the	feet	of	God	would	make	an
impression.
With	 tears	 in	his	eyes,	he	ran	 inside	and	made	all	 the	priests	wake	up.	And	he
said	"You	did	not	listen	to	me	--	it	was	not	clouds	thundering	in	the	sky,	it	was
the	chariot	of	God.	And	 it	was	not	 the	wind	knocking	at	 the	doors	 it	was	God
himself	who	knocked.	But	now	it	is	too	late."
This	 beautiful	 poem	 has	 immense	 significance.	 God	 comes	 to	 every	 heart	 --
because	that	is	the	temple,	the	only	temple	--	and	knocks	on	the	heart.	But	you
go	on	rationalizing,	and	your	doors	are	closed.
Zareen,	 you	 are	 asking,	 "As	 I	 walk	 to	 discourse	 each	 morning,	 this	 thought
comes	before	me	--	what	have	I	done	to	deserve	this	blissful	experience	of	sitting
at	your	feet?"	Just	to	be,	and	just	to	be	nobody	is	all	that	one	needs,	to	deserve.
No	other	virtues,	no	other	qualities	but	just	a	simple	and	loving	heart	--	a	heart
that	is	open	and	ready	to	receive	the	guest.
"...	 Joyfully,	 sometimes	 tearfully,	 awaiting	 your	 glance	 upon	 me,	 and	 then
longing	for	the	next	day	to	dawn	and	bring	with	it	yet	one	more	opportunity	of
being	in	your	presence...
Beloved	Master,	is	this	not	also	a	type	of	greed?"	No.	Greed	is	violent,	greed	is
demanding.
It	is	simply	a	loving,	longing,	waiting.	And	how	can	one	avoid	the	waiting	and
longing?
The	difference	between	greed	and	 longing	 is	very	clear:	greed	 is	aggressive,	 it
has	to	be	so;	it	is	a	demand	and	an	expectation,	and	then	it	becomes	ugly.	But	if
your	heart	is	simply	waiting,	with	no	demand,	then	there	is	no	question	of	greed.
The	people	who	know	the	secret	of	 the	open	heart,	 the	secret	of	being	nobody,
are	 the	most	 deserving	 of	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful,	 of	 all	 that	 is	 divine,	 of	 all	 that
transcends	our	mundane	existence.	Nothing	else	is	needed...	just	that	you	should
be	absent,	a	pure	space,	and	you	are	ready	to	receive	the	guest.
But	man	has	believed	in	God	in	as	ugly	a	way	as	possible,	because	his	God	is
nothing	but	all	his	desires,	all	his	demands.	It	is	not	a	humble	prayer,	a	humble
invitation.
A	man	is	sight-seeing	in	the	mountains	and	is	marveling	at	the	wondrous	beauty
of	nature.
At	one	point	he	gets	so	absorbed	in	the	beautiful	view	of	the	mountains	that	he
forgets	 what	 he	 is	 doing	 and	walks	 over	 the	 cliff.	 As	 he	 is	 falling,	 he	 sees	 a
branch	 sticking	 out	 from	 the	wall	 of	 the	 cliff.	He	 reaches	 out	 and	manages	 to
grab	the	branch.	As	he	hangs	there	he	begins	to	pray,	"Oh,	Lord,	please	help	me.
I'm	losing	my	strength	and	I	can't	hold	on	much	longer.
Please	God,	save	me."
Suddenly	the	heavens	part,	and	a	voice	comes	booming	down,	"I	am	the	Lord!"
"Oh	Lord,"	cries	the	man,	"please	save	me!"
"I	will	save	you,"	booms	the	voice.	"All	you	have	to	do	is	prove	your	faith	in	me
by	letting	go	of	the	branch."
The	 man	 looks	 down	 at	 the	 two-hundred-foot	 drop	 below	 him,	 thinks	 for	 a
moment,	then	says,	"Is	there	anybody	else	up	there	I	can	talk	to?"
Our	so-called	 idea	of	God	 is	 just	a	means	 to	 serve	us.	You	may	not	have	ever
thought	about	it,	that	your	God	is	nothing	but	a	servant.	He	has	to	do	this,	he	has
to	do	that.	The	true	religious	man	is	a	servant	to	God;	he	has	no	demand.	He	has
only	one	longing:	that	God	may	use	him	for	His	purposes.	He	wants	to	become
nothing	but	a	hollow	bamboo	flute,	so	God	can	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
191
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
sing	 His	 song	 through	 him.	 He	 simply	 wants	 not	 to	 obstruct	 but	 to	 remain
absolutely	empty,	so	God	can	make	of	his	emptiness	whatsoever	He	wants.
This	is	trust.
And	there	is	no	value	higher	than	trust,	because	trust	is	the	purest	form	of	love.
Zareen,	 your	 tears	 are	 tears	 of	 love,	 and	 your	 waiting	 for	 tomorrow	 is	 just	 a
longing	of	the	heart	--	but	not	desire,	because	there	is	no	demand.
Just	 become	more	 and	more	 humble,	more	 and	more	 nobody,	more	 and	more
spacious	--
because	when	I	see	you,	I	am	not	there;	I	have	departed	from	myself	long	ago.	I
have	 allowed	 God	 to	 take	 possession	 of	 me.	 I	 have	 allowed	 him	 to	 do
whatsoever	he	wants	 to	do	with	me.	 I	 don't	 know	even	what	 the	next	word	 is
going	to	be,	because	it	is	not	coming	from	me	--	it	is	coming	only	through	me.
Just	look	at	my	eyes...	somebody	else	is	looking	through	my	eyes.
Look	at	my	gestures...	they	are	not	mine.
Look	at	my	signatures...	they	are	not	mine.
I	have	lost	track	of	myself	so	long	ago	that	even	if	I	meet	myself,	I	don't	think	I
will	 be	 able	 to	 recognize	 him.	 And	 just	 being	 a	 vehicle	 of	 God,	 a	 vehicle	 of
existence,	has	been	such	a	 fulfillment,	such	a	contentment,	such	a	benediction,
that	I	don't	think	there	can	be	anything	more,	deeper,	higher.
I	am	absolutely	blessed.
I	was	also	not	the	deserving	one.
I	 have	 never	 practiced	 any	 religion,	 I	 have	 never	 been	 part	 of	 any	 religious
organization,	 I	 have	 never	 entered	 temples,	 churches,	 or	 mosques.	 One	 thing
from	 the	 very	 beginning	was	 clear	 to	me:	 that	 there	 is	 no	way	 for	me	 to	 find
God,	 because	 I	 don't	 know	 his	 address,	 I	 don't	 know	 his	 home.	 In	 this	 vast
universe,	where	am	I	going	to	find	him?	All	that	I	can	do	is	create	a	longing,	a
thirst,	in	every	cell	of	my	body	and	being,	and	wait.
If	God	wants	to	find	me,	he	will	find	me.
Only	he	can	find	me;	I	cannot	find	him.
And	now,	I	can	say	it	with	absolute	authority	--	that	whenever	God	has	happened
to	 anybody,	 it	was	not	 the	person's	 search	 for	God;	 it	was	 simply	 the	person's
waiting	and	longing.	And	when	the	thirst	became	so	much	that	it	was	impossible
for	God	to	go	on	hiding...
this	 is	 the	only	quality	 that	makes	 a	 really	 religious	person	deserving.	He	 is	 a
silent	waiting,	a	silent	prayer,	and	a	peaceful	spaciousness.	God	comes.
Just	don't	rationalize	when	he	comes,	that	it	may	be	the	thunder	of	the	clouds,	or
it	may	be	the	wind	striking	against	 the	doors.	Keep	the	doors	open.	Keep	your
eyes	open,	 keep	your	heart	 open.	He	 comes.	He	 comes	 surely,	 because	he	has
been	coming	to	thousands	of	people	in	the	whole	history	of	humanity.
And	I	don't	remember	a	single	mystic	saying,	"I	found	God	because	I	deserved."
The	very	idea	of	deserving	is	of	the	ego.	All	the	mystics	are	agreed	on	the	point
that	God	found	them,	because	they	cried	too	much,	they	longed	too	much.
Their	longing	was	heard;	their	tears	reached	God.
Prayers	may	not	reach,	but	tears	certainly	reach.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
192
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER	MY	ENERGY	IS	OVERFLOWING,	WHICH	HAPPENS	VERY
OFTEN,	 MOST	 OF	 THE	 TIME	 PEOPLE	 GIVE	 ME	 THE	 FEELING	 OF
BEING	TOO	MUCH.	THEN
I	FEEL	GUILTY	AND	THE	GERMAN	HEAVINESS	COMES	BACK.	COULD
YOU
PLEASE	COMMENT?
Prem	Bhagvato,	there	is	no	possibility	that	the	feeling	of	being	can	be	too	much.
The	being	is	so	infinite...	your	being	is	not	your	being,	your	being	is	the	being	of
the	whole	universe.	So	your	feeling	of	it	is	always	too	little;	it	can	never	be	too
much.
Can	you	love	too	much?	Can	you	be	blissful	too	much?	Can	your	ecstasy	be	too
much?
Those	words	--	love,	ecstasy,	blissfulness	--	are	just	aspects	of	your	being,	and	it
has	many	more	aspects	to	it.
You	 cannot	 feel	 it	 too	 much;	 that	 is	 a	 misunderstanding.	 You	 are	 asking,
"Whenever	my	 energy	 is	 overflowing,	which	 happens	 very	 often,	most	 of	 the
time	 people	 give	 me	 the	 feeling	 of	 being	 too	 much."	 Who	 are	 the	 people?
Perhaps	it	appears	to	them	too	much	because	they	have	not	even	experienced	as
much	as	you	are	experiencing.
You	must	have	heard	the	old	parable	of	Aesop.	A	frog	from	the	ocean	was	on	a
religious	pilgrimage.	On	the	way	he	came	near	a	well	--	he	was	feeling	thirsty.
He	 looked	 inside	 the	well;	 there	was	 another	 frog	 inside.	He	 said,	 "I	 am	very
thirsty,	can	I	come	in?"
He	was	allowed.	The	frog	in	the	well	asked	the	stranger,	"From	where	are	you
coming?"
The	stranger	said,	"It	will	be	very	difficult	for	you	to	conceive	from	where	I	am
coming."
The	frog	of	the	well	laughed,	and	he	said,	"You	have	some	nerve.	Is	your	place
bigger	than	this	well?"	He	hopped	across	one	third	of	 the	well	and	he	said,	"Is
your	place	this	much?"
The	 frog	 from	 the	ocean	was	 in	 immense	difficulty	 --	what	 to	 say	 to	 this	poor
frog?	He	said,	"No,	it	is	bigger."
He	 jumped	 two	 thirds	 and	 said,	 "This	 much?"	 The	 frog	 from	 the	 ocean	 said,
"Forgive	me,	it	is	very	big."
The	frog	of	 the	well	 jumped	across	 the	whole	well,	 from	one	side	 to	 the	other
side,	and	he	said,	"What	do	you	say	now?	Is	it	still	bigger?"	The	stranger	said,	"I
am	sorry	to	offend	you,	but	your	well	cannot	be	a	means	of	measuring	the	place
from	where	I	am	coming.	It	is	too	big."
And	 the	 frog	who	 had	 never	 left	 his	well	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "You	 seem	 to	 be
mad!	Just	get	out	of	here.	I	have	seen	many	frogs,	but	I	have	never	seen	such	a
mad	one.	They	come	to	the	well	--	and	I	am	always	happy	to	have	a	visitor,	just
to	 have	 news	 about	 the	 world.	 I	 have	 been	 so	 generous	 to	 you,	 and	 you	 are
behaving	so	uncourteously."
The	stranger	said,	"You	just	forgive	me,	perhaps	I	am	mad.	But	I	 invite	you	to
my	place,	because	that	is	the	only	way	you	can	be	convinced.	Unless	you	see	the
ocean,	you	cannot	believe...	and	I	can	understand	why	you	are	annoyed	with	me
and	 thinking	 that	 I	 am	mad.	 I	must	 look	mad	 to	you;	 I	 can	 think	of	myself	 in
your	place."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
193
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
So	the	people	you	must	be	meeting,	Prem	Bhagvato,	don't	have	energy	as	such.
Or	maybe	they	have	their	energy	at	the	minimum,	so	when	you	start	overflowing
with	 energy,	 they	 start	 feeling	 afraid.	 And	 their	 saying	 to	 you	 that	 you	 are
sometimes	"too	much"	is	a	condemnation.
They	are	annoyed	with	you;	you	have	touched	their	weakest	point.
They	are	living	just	as	survival,	and	my	people	are	making	every	effort	to	live	at
the	maximum.
Why	 live	 at	 the	minimum?	When	 life	 gives	 you	 the	 opportunity	 to	 live	 at	 the
maximum,	then	sing	and	dance	with	total	abandon.
Still,	I	say	to	you:	whatever	you	do,	it	is	never	"the	feeling	of	being	too	much."
That	is	simply	not	possible.	Your	well	can	become	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger,
but	 still,	 it	 can	never	become	 the	ocean.	And	unless	you	become	oceanic,	you
don't	know	what	it	means	to	be	too	much.
But	 the	problem	is,	 the	moment	you	become	oceanic,	you	are	no	more	 --	only
pure	energy,	vibrating	all	over	the	existence.
As	long	as	you	are,	you	are	always	falling	short	of	your	maximum.
At	the	maximum,	you	disappear.
Then	it	is	only	a	pure	dance	of	energy.
And	 the	 pure	 dance	 of	 energy	 brings	 all	 your	 potentialities	 to	 their	 fullest
expression.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 say	 the	 spring	 has	 come,	 because	 you	 are
blossoming	in	every	dimension	of	your	being.
So	don't	be	bothered	by	the	people	who	say	that	your	energy,	your	being,	your
feeling	 is	 too	much.	 It	 is	 comparative.	 Just	 tell	 them,	 "You	 are	 poor,	 you	 are
living	at	the	survival	level.
You	 have	 not	 known	 love	 and	 you	 have	 not	 known	 dance	 and	 you	 have	 not
known	celebration.	You	have	not	known	life	as	such;	you	are	simply	vegetating,
from	cradle	to	grave,	just	dragging	yourself	somehow."
A	teacher,	standing	in	front	of	her	class,	asks,	"Children,	what	part	of	the	human
anatomy	expands	twelve	times	when	it	is	directly	stimulated?"
Little	Susie,	 in	 the	 front	 row,	 starts	 giggling	 and	 laughing,	 trying	 to	 cover	 her
mouth	with	her	hand.	In	the	back	row,	Johnny	raises	his	hand.	The	teacher	says,
"Yes,	Johnny?"
Johnny	stands	up	and	says,	"Teacher,	the	iris	of	the	human	eye	expands	twelve
times	when	it	is	directly	stimulated	by	light."
The	teacher	says,	"Very	good,	Johnny.	That	is	the	correct	answer.	And	Susie,	you
have	a	very	dirty	 little	mind,	and	when	you	grow	up	you	are	going	 to	be	very
disappointed."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
EIGHT	YEARS	AGO	I	SAW	YOU	ON	TV.	THERE	WAS	A	REPORT	ABOUT
THE
POONA	 ASHRAM.	 I	 SAW	 YOU	 DOING	 THE	 ENERGY	 DARSHAN,
PUTTING	YOUR
FINGER	ON	TO	THE	THIRD	EYE	OF	 SOME	PEOPLE,	CAUSING	THEM
TO	FALL
DOWN.	 AT	 THAT	 MOMENT	 I	 RECOGNIZED	 YOU.	 IT	 TOOK	 ME	 SIX
YEARS	TO	SIT
IN	 FRONT	 OF	 YOU.	 THE	 FIRST	 TIME	 YOU	 LOOKED	 AT	 ME,	 I	 FELL
DOWN,	AND
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
194
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
THERE	 WAS	 A	 FLASH	 IN	 MY	 BRAIN.	 NOW,	 SITTING	 IN	 FRONT	 OF
YOU,	CLOSING
MY	 EYES,	 I	 SEE	 A	 BIG,	 BLACK	 SPOT.	 INSIDE	 THIS	 BLACK	 SPOT
THERE	 IS	 A	 WHITE	 ONE.	 THIS	 WHITE	 SPOT	 COMES	 NEARER	 AND
NEARER,	 WHIRLING	 IN	 A	 CIRCLE.	 BUT	 JUST	 BEFORE	 THE	 BLACK
SPOT	DISAPPEARS	TOTALLY,	I	OPEN	MY
EYES.	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	WHAT	IS	GOING	ON.
Deva	 Jagat,	 what	 happened	 to	 you	 was	 tremendously	 significant,	 rare	 and
unique.	It	is	one	of	the	contributions	of	the	East	to	the	world:	the	understanding
that	between	these	two	eyes,	there	is	a	third	eye	inside	which	normally	remains
dormant.	One	has	to	work	hard,	bring	his	whole	sexual	energy	upwards,	against
gravitation,	and	when	the	energy	reaches	the	third	eye,	it	opens.	Many	methods
have	been	 tried,	 to	do	 that,	because	when	 it	opens	 there	 is	 suddenly	a	 flash	of
light	and	things	which	have	never	been	clear	to	you	suddenly	become	clear.
For	example,	yoga	has	tried	shirshasana,	the	headstand,	standing	on	your	head.
The	basic	purpose	was	to	use	gravitation	to	bring	your	energy	to	the	third	eye.
Perhaps	even	the	so-called	yoga	teachers	of	today	are	not	aware	of	it,	because	it
is	not	written	in	any	scripture.	It	was	given	as	one	of	the	secrets	from	the	master
to	the	disciple,	whispered	in	his	ear.
There	have	been	other	methods.	When	I	emphasize	watching,	witnessing...	that
is	 the	finest	method	to	bring	the	third	eye	into	action,	because	that	watching	is
inside.	These	two	eyes	cannot	be	used,	they	can	only	look	outward.	They	have	to
be	 closed.	 And	 when	 you	 try	 to	 watch	 inside,	 that	 certainly	 means	 there	 is
something	like	an	eye	which	sees.	Who	sees	your	thoughts?	Not	these	eyes.	Who
sees	that	anger	is	arising	in	you?	That	place	of	seeing	is	called	symbolically	"the
third	eye."
Witnessing	is	the	most	refined	method,	because	depending	on	the	gravitation	of
the	earth	can	prove	dangerous.	If	the	energy	comes	flowing	too	much,	as	a	flood,
it	can	destroy	the	very	small	nerves	in	your	brain.	And	they	are	so	delicate	that
even	to	imagine	their	delicacy	is	difficult.	In	your	small	skull	there	are	millions
of	nerves,	not	visible	to	the	eyes,	and	they	are	so	delicate,	so	sensitive	that	if	a
flood	of	energy	comes,	many	of	them	will	be	washed	away,	broken.
One	day	science	is	going	to	enter	into	this	field.	They	have	already	begun	work
to	 discover	why	 animals	 have	 not	 developed	 the	 brain.	 The	 reason	 is	 that	 the
animal's	body	is	horizontal	to	the	earth,	so	the	animal's	energy	flows	all	over	his
body	in	the	same	proportion.	Those	delicate	brain	cells	cannot	evolve.
It	was	all	due	to	man	standing	on	his	two	feet,	because	his	brain	is	not	so	much
affected	 by	 gravitation,	 and	 very	 little	 energy	 reaches	 there.	 It	 became	 the
opportunity	 for	 the	 delicate	 cells	 to	 improve.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 it	 in	 your	 so-
called	yogis:	you	will	never	find	a	very	sharp,	intelligent	man.	They	may	be	able
to	do	many	distortions	of	the	body,	but	you	will	not	see	in	their	faces	the	aura	of
intelligence.	They	have	not	contributed	to	human	consciousness	in	any	way.
What	has	happened	to	them?	They	themselves	are	not	aware.	Each	person	has	to
find	out	the	right	time,	how	long	he	can	stand	on	his	head	without	destroying	his
brain	system.
According	to	my	findings,	three	seconds	is	more	than	enough.	Less	will	be	better
--	just	a	little	rush	and	you	are	back	on	your	feet.	Just	a	little	rush	will	nourish
your	brain,	will	not	destroy	the	delicate	structure	and	will	help	to	open	your	third
eye.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
195
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
But	it	is	dangerous.	You	know	perfectly	well:	in	the	night	when	you	go	to	sleep
you	need	a	pillow.	Have	you	ever	thought	why?	It	is	a	protection	for	your	brain,
because	if	you	lie	down	without	a	pillow,	the	energy	flow	will	be	horizontal,	like
the	 animals,	 and	 in	 eight	 hours	 of	 sleeping	 it	 can	 destroy	 your	 brain	 system
completely.	Even	three	seconds	can	be	too	much,	 it	depends	on	how	delicate	a
system	you	have.	The	 idiot	 can	 stand	on	his	 head	 for	 three	hours	 and	nothing
will	happen,	because	there	is	nothing	to	destroy.
The	more	 intelligent	 you	 are,	 the	 less	 time	 is	 needed.	 For	 a	 genius	 it	 is	 very
dangerous	to	stand	on	the	head,	even	for	a	single	second.	That's	why	I	say	I	don't
use	that	method.
Witnessing	is	the	best:	you	close	your	eyes	and	you	start	watching.	In	that	very
watching,	your	third	eye	starts	opening.
I	used	 to	 touch	people's	 third	eyes	with	my	fingers,	but	 I	had	 to	stop	 it	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	I	became	aware	that	stimulating	the	third	eye	from	the	outside
is	good	if	 the	person	continues	 to	meditate,	continues	 to	watch	--	 then	the	first
experience	coming	from	the	outside	will	soon	become	his	inside	experience.	But
such	is	 the	stupidity	of	man	that	when	I	can	stimulate	your	 third	eye,	you	stop
meditating.	You	rather	start	asking	more	and	more	for	energy	meetings	with	me,
because	you	have	not	to	do	anything.
I	 also	 became	 aware	 that	 for	 different	 people,	 a	 different	 kind	 and	 different
quantity	of	energy	is	needed	from	the	outside	--	which	is	very	difficult	to	decide.
Sometimes	somebody	falls	completely	into	a	coma;	the	shock	is	too	much.	And
sometimes	the	man	is	so	retarded	that	nothing	happens.
Because	you	had	seen	on	TV	that	by	touching	them	with	my	finger	on	the	third
eye,	people	were	going	into	some	inner	space,	for	these	six	years	you	must	have
been	thinking	to	know	that	inner	space	yourself.	So	when	you	came	here	and	I
saw	you	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 the	experience	happened	without	my	even	 touching
your	third	eye.	You	were	almost	ready,	just	on	the	verge	of	it.
To	see	you	is	also	a	way	of	touching	you.	It	is	a	remote	way	of	touching.
Psychologists	have	 found	 through	many,	many	experiments	 that	 if	 you	 look	at
someone	for	three	seconds	it	 is	not	offensive.	It	 is	casual	--	you	are	passing	on
the	 road,	 you	 look	 at	 someone.	 But	 more	 than	 three	 seconds	 and	 it	 becomes
offensive	because	your	eyes	start	--
without	your	knowing,	and	without	the	knowledge	of	the	other	--	stimulating	his
third	eye.
And	if	he	has	no	idea	of	it,	it	feels	as	if	something	crazy	is	going	on.
In	 Hindi,	 words	 are	 very	 significant	 because	 they	 have	 been	 coined	 very
consciously.	 In	 Hindi,	 eyes	 are	 called	 lochan	 and	 the	 man	 who	 looks	 at
somebody	for	more	than	three	seconds	is	called	luchcha	--	that	is	from	lochan.	A
man	who	looks	at	a	thing	critically	is	called	aalochak;	that	is	also	from	the	same
root,	 lochan.	So	it	may	have	just	been	a	coincidence:	for	six	years	it	was	lying
like	a	seed,	in	your	unconscious,	and	when	you	came	here	and	I	looked	at	you,
suddenly	there	was	a	flash	and	you	fell	down.	But	it	is	a	tremendously	fortunate
state;	it	means	your	third	eye	can	function	very	easily.
Just	try	to	watch	with	your	eyes	closed,	and	the	third	eye	will	become	more	and
more	 active.	 And	 the	 experiences	 of	 the	 third	 eye	 are	 the	 door	 to	 higher
spirituality.
The	third	eye	is	the	sixth	center,	the	seventh	is	the	highest.	Six	is	very	close	to
the	highest	center	of	your	experience;	it	prepares	the	ground	for	the	seventh.	At
the	 seventh	 center	 you	 become	 not	 only	 a	 flash	 of	 light,	 but	 just	 light	 itself.
That's	why	 the	person	who	reaches	 the	seventh	center...	his	experience	we	call
"enlightenment."	 His	 whole	 being	 becomes	 just	 pure	 Osho	 -	 The	 Hidden
Splendor
196
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
light,	with	no	fuel	--	because	any	light	that	needs	fuel	cannot	be	immortal.	There
is	no	fuel;	hence	the	light	has	an	eternity.	It	is	the	experience	of	your	very	being
and	the	being	of	the	universe.
The	second	thing	you	say:	"Now	sitting	in	front	of	you,	closing	my	eyes	I	see	a
big,	black	spot.	Inside	this	black	spot	there	is	a	white	one.	This	white	spot	comes
nearer	and	nearer,	whirling	in	a	circle,	but	just	before	the	black	spot	disappears
totally,	I	open	my	eyes."
Why	do	you	do	that?	Are	you	asking	me,	or	should	I	ask	you?	That	is	the	point
when	you	should	not	open	your	eyes.
But	sometimes	it	happens	in	spite	of	you.	I	have	told	my	people	to	meditate	with
a	blindfold	on	your	eyes,	so	when	in	spite	of	you,	your	eyes	want	to	open,	they
cannot	open.
Let	the	black	spot	disappear	completely,	and	you	would	have	moved	into	a	new
consciousness,	into	a	fresh	space.
Deva	Jagat,	everything	is	going	perfectly	good,	only	you	should	not	open	your
eyes.
Perhaps	you	become	afraid:	"My	god,	all	darkness	 is	disappearing!	Just	 let	me
see,	by	opening	eyes,	what	is	happening."	But	by	opening	the	eyes,	you	destroy
the	whole	 experience.	That	 is	 the	moment	 to	 resist	 the	 temptation	of	 knowing
what	 is	 happening.	 Let	 it	 happen,	 because	 you	 will	 know	 only	 when	 it	 has
happened.
And	once	you	have	known	the	black	spot	disappearing...	 that	black	spot	is	you
and	 that	white	 spot	 is	your	consciousness.	The	black	spot	 is	your	ego,	and	 the
white	spot	is	your	being.
Allow	the	being	to	spread	and	let	the	ego	disappear.
Just	a	 little	courage...	 it	may	look	like	death,	because	you	have	been	 identified
with	 the	black	spot	and	 it	 is	disappearing.	And	you	have	never	been	 identified
with	the	white	spot,	so	something	unfamiliar,	unknown,	is	taking	possession	of
you.	These	are	the	reasons	why	you	open	your	eyes.	Don't	open	your	eyes.
Your	mind	may	give	 any	 rationalization	 --	 don't	 listen	 to	 the	mind.	When	you
have	come	to	me,	give	me	a	chance;	listen	to	what	I	am	saying	to	you.
If	your	mind	comes	in	between,	put	it	aside.
Your	mind	is	your	misery,	your	mind	is	your	bondage.
An	 old	 retired	 Jewish	 widow	 is	 strolling	 on	 the	 beach	 in	 Miami	 when	 she
suddenly	spies	an	old	Jewish	man	lying	alone	in	the	sun.	Excitedly	she	trots	over
in	his	direction,	stops	 in	 front	of	him	and	says,	"I	have	never	seen	you	around
here	before.	What	is	your	name?"
"Max,"	he	replies,	"and	you	don't	see	me	because	I'm	rarely	around	anywhere!"
"Why,	what	do	you	mean?"	asks	the	widow.
"Because	I	just	got	out	of	jail	--	that's	what	I	mean!"	he	replies.	"I	was	in	for	a
year."
"Jail!"	The	old	widow	steps	back	a	pace	and	surveys	him	critically.	"What	did
you	go	to	jail	for?"
"Oh,	just	petty	theft,"	the	old	man	says,	and	shrugs.
"Ah,	I	see."	The	woman	takes	a	step	back	to	him.	"That's	a	small	crime,	no	big
deal.	All	the	same,	you	should	be	ashamed."
"Not	nearly	as	ashamed	as	I	was	when	I	got	the	ten-year	jail	sentence,"	the	old
man	sighs.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
197
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
"Ten	years!"	the	widow,	in	alarm,	stumbles	back	a	few	more	paces.	"God!	what
did	you	do	to	get	ten	years?"
"Oh	 --	 just	 armed	 robbery."	 The	 old	 man	 shrugs	 and	 rolls	 over	 on	 his	 beach
towel.
"Armed	robbery!	--	that	is	serious.	I	hope	to	God	you	are	sorry	for	such	a	thing,"
the	widow	scolds	him,	while	at	 the	 same	 time	 returning	a	 little	 closer	 to	get	 a
better	look	at	him.
"I	was	sorry	alright	--	I'd	just	finished	twenty	years	in	the	slammer	when	I	picked
up	that	sentence.	I	had	hardly	seen	the	light	of	day!"	The	old	man	sighs	heavily
in	remembrance.
"Twenty	years!	What	kind	of	man	are	you?"	The	widow,	panicking,	leaps	several
yards	 away	 from	him,	 ready	 to	 run.	 "What	 on	 earth	 did	 you	 do	 to	 get	 twenty
years	in	jail?"
"I	murdered	my	wife,"	the	old	man	replies.
"You	are	single?"	she	says,	as	she	unrolls	her	beach	towel	beside	him.
Just	 a	 little	 courage...	 the	moment	 you	 see	 the	 black	 disappearing	 completely,
just	 a	 little	 courage.	 Keep	 your	 eyes	 closed,	 and	 it	 may	 bring	 you	 a	 great
transformation	that	comes	to	people	after	lives	of	effort.	That	it	is	coming	to	you
so	easily	can	mean	only	one	thing:	in	your	past	lives	you	must	have	worked.	But
the	work	has	remained	incomplete.	This	time,	don't	leave	it	incomplete.	Let	this
life	be	your	last	life	in	the	body.
When	the	whole	universe	can	become	our	body,	why	should	we	be	confined	to
the	small	body?	It	is	imprisonment.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
198
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
20
Your	longing	is	the	seed
22	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	MORNING,	AGAIN	YOU	CAME	TO	ME	AND	I	WONDER:	I	KNOW
HOW
THE	SUN	TOUCHES	ME,	HOW	YOUR	FACE	ENTERS	MY	EYES,	YOUR
VOICE	MY
EARS.	I	KNOW	THOSE	FIVE	DOORS	TO	THE	WORLD.	BUT	I	WONDER
WHAT	THIS
SIXTH	 SENSE	 IS	 THAT	 FEELS	 YOU.	WHAT	 DOOR	 DO	 YOU	 PASS	 TO
REACH	ME	SO
DEEPLY,	 AND	 WHY	 IS	 IT	 ALWAYS	 IN	 THE	 MORNING	 THAT	 YOU
TOUCH	ME	THE
MOST?	 IS	 OPENNESS	 RELATED	 TO	 THE	 RHYTHM	 OF	 THE	 DAY?
WOULD	YOU
PLEASE	SPEAK	ON	SENSES	AND	OPENNESS?
Atit	Parampara,	we	are	part	of	a	tremendously	huge,	organic	unity	of	existence.
Everything	 in	 us	 is	 related	 to	 the	 grass,	 to	 the	 trees,	 to	 the	 stars.	 Nothing	 is
unrelated.	The	sunrise	 is	not	only	something	that	happens	outside	--	something
happens	within	you	too.	As	the	sun	rises,	there	is	a	rhythmic	awareness	all	over
the	planet:	the	trees	wake	up,	the	flowers	blossom,	the	lotuses	open	their	petals,
the	birds	suddenly	start	singing.	Something	within	you	also	starts	awakening.
The	night	is	over:	a	part	of	your	consciousness	which	was	asleep	again	becomes
awake,	fresh,	rejuvenated,	cleaner,	younger,	after	the	rest.	Hence,	it	is	easy	in	the
morning	to	be	open	and	to	be	available.	It	is	a	little	more	difficult	in	the	evening.
As	the	night	deepens,	it	becomes	more	and	more	difficult.	Most	of	the	children
are	born	in	the	morning,	just	before	sunrise	or	just	after	sunrise.
But	once	you	become	capable	of	being	open	and	available	and	receptive,	it	is	not
impossible	to	be	receptive	in	the	evening	or	even	in	the	middle	of	the	night.
It	is	because	of	this	reason	that	Sufis	have	chosen	the	middle	of	the	night	as	the
time	for	meditation,	because	if	you	can	meditate	in	the	middle	of	the	night	then
the	whole	 day,	 any	 time,	morning,	 afternoon,	 evening,	will	 become	very	 easy.
They	start	 from	 the	hardest	point.	 It	 takes	a	 little	 longer	but	 their	 arithmetic	 is
correct:	the	person	who	can	meditate	in	the	middle	of	the	night	when	the	whole
existence	is	falling	deep	into	sleep...	and	he	remains	awake,	just	like	an	island	in
the	 ocean.	 In	 the	 beginning	 it	 may	 be	 difficult,	 but	 later	 on	 he	will	 find	 it	 is
immensely	 rewarding	 because	 then	 at	 any	 time,	 any	 hour,	 meditation	 is
absolutely	simple.
But	most	of	 the	religions	have	chosen	 the	morning	--	 just	before	 the	sunrise	 is
the	best	time	because	the	whole	of	nature	is	supporting	you.	You	are	not	in	any
conflict	with	existence.
The	whole	of	nature	is	awakening,	and	you	can	simply	flow	with	its	awakening
energy.
Except	the	Sufis,	all	 the	religions	have	chosen	the	morning	to	begin	with.	That
too	is	correct.
Why	not	begin	from	the	simplest	and	then	slowly,	move	towards	the	harder?
So	you	are	right,	that	"it	always	happens	in	the	morning	that	You	touch	me	the
most."	I	am	touching	you	all	the	time.	It	is	just	that	in	the	morning	you	feel	me
the	most.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
199
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
The	 sun	may	 have	 risen	 but	 if	 you	 keep	 your	 doors	 closed,	 for	 you	 it	 is	 still
night.	It	may	be	that	the	whole	world	is	full	of	light...	but	you	can	keep	your	eyes
closed	and	remain	in	darkness.	So	remember,	everything	depends	on	you.	I	am
available	twenty-four	hours,	exactly	the	same.
You	are	saying,	"This	morning	again	you	came	to	me	and	I	wonder:	I	know	how
the	sun	touches	me,	how	your	face	enters	my	eyes,	your	voice	my	ears.	I	know
those	five	doors	to	the	world	but	I	wonder	what	this	sixth	sense	is	that	feels	you.
What	door	do	you	pass	to	reach	me	so	deeply?"
In	fact,	in	the	East,	we	have	always	thought	about	the	sixth	sense.	There	are	five
senses	 to	go	out	of	yourself,	 to	go	to	 the	world,	 to	 the	objective	reality	around
you.	The	sixth	sense,	which	has	been	called	in	other	words	the	third	eye,	is	to	go
inwards.	If	you	feel	me	deeply,	it	means	your	third	eye	receives	me	--	that	is	the
door	about	which	you	are	wondering.	It	is	exactly	between	the	two	eyebrows	and
has	been	known	for	at	least	ten	thousand	years	in	the	East.
You	will	be	surprised...	and	the	Indians	will	be	shocked:	we	have	used,	for	 the
women	when	they	are	married,	a	red	mark	on	the	third	eye	center	--	nobody	has
ever	bothered	why	--
and	that	red	mark	which	is	used	for	a	married	woman	is	removed	if	she	becomes
a	widow.
That	red	mark	is	to	prevent	the	woman	from	coming	in	contact	with	the	divine.
Her	God	is	her	husband.	And	if	she	comes	in	contact	with	the	divine,	 then	her
husband	is	almost	meaningless.
Man	has	used	every	kind	of	strategy	against	women.	He	has	used	even	spiritual
discoveries	to	enslave	the	woman.
The	red	color	is	significant.	The	psychology	of	color	and	the	science	of	color	is
that	 whichever	 color	 you	 see	 --	 if	 you	 see	 something	 red,	 then	 one	 thing	 is
certain,	that	that	thing	is	not	red;	it	appears	red.	The	sun	rays	have	all	the	seven
colors	of	the	rainbow,	and	when	the	sun	rays	fall	on	anything,	if	all	the	rays	are
absorbed	 then	you	see	 the	 thing	as	black.	 If	all	 the	 rays	are	 reflected	back	and
nothing	is	absorbed,	then	you	see	the	thing	as	white.	It	is	because	of	this	reason
that	 black	 has	 some	 connotation	 with	 the	 devil,	 with	 death,	 and	 white	 has
become	symbolic	of	renunciation,	of	simplicity,	of	purity.
If	the	red	ray	is	reflected	back,	is	not	absorbed,	if	the	other	rays	are	absorbed	and
only	the	red	is	not	absorbed,	then	you	see	the	thing	as	red.	If	blue	is	not	absorbed
then	 you	 see	 the	 thing	 as	 blue	 because	 the	 returned	 ray	 falls	 on	 your	 eye	 and
makes	the	thing	appear	of	a	particular	color.
Why	has	the	red	mark	been	used	for	women?	It	is	a	simple	science:	the	red	ray	is
the	most	powerful	in	awakening	that	which	is	asleep.	It	is	the	most	powerful	ray;
it	hits	deeply	and	wakes	the	dormant	energy.	It	can	open	the	third	eye.	Using	a
red	 mark	 on	 the	 third	 eye	 is	 preventing	 the	 red	 ray,	 so	 the	 woman	 remains
unrelated	to	the	divine.	This	door	to	the	beyond	is	closed.
This	 is	 sheer	 male	 chauvinistic	 attitude.	 The	 moment	 a	 woman	 becomes	 a
widow,	immediately	the	first	thing	to	be	removed	is	her	red	mark	because	now
the	idea	is	that	the	woman	should	not	come	in	contact	with	another	man.	And	the
best	way	 to	prevent	her	 is	 to	bring	her	 in	 contact	with	godliness	because	 then
there	will	be	no	interest	for	the	lower	kinds	of	love	relationship;	she	will	know
the	higher	quality	of	love,	prayer,	trust.
The	widow	in	India	is	not	allowed	to	use	any	other	color	of	clothes	--	only	white,
as	a	symbol	that	she	has	renounced	the	world.	Although	living,	she	is	no	longer
part	of	life.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
200
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
When	the	master	initiates	the	disciple,	he	touches	the	disciple's	third	eye	with	his
fingers.
The	fingers	are	the	most	significant	parts	as	far	as	energy	is	concerned.	Energy
cannot	move	from	anything	that	is	round	--	for	example,	energy	cannot	move	out
of	your	head.	In	the	whole	body,	energy	can	either	move	through	the	toes	of	the
feet	or	through	the	fingers	of	the	hand.
Energy	needs	finger-like,	pointed	instruments	to	move	out.
The	 disciple	 touches	 the	 master's	 feet	 --	 that	 is	 one	 of	 the	 places	 where	 the
master's	energy	is	available.	And	the	master	touches,	with	his	hand,	the	disciple's
head.	In	this	way,	the	bioenergy	of	the	master	and	the	disciple	becomes	a	circle.
And	 this	 circle	has	 a	 tremendous	 feeling	of	blissfulness,	 of	 sweetness;	 of	 love
that	is	not	biological,	that	is	spiritual.
The	West	 has	missed	 it	 completely.	Now	 it	 is	 recognized,	 at	 least	 by	Western
science,	that	human	energy	is	also	a	special	kind	of	electricity.	It	is	bioelectricity;
its	specialty	is	that	the	electricity	you	see	outside	is	material,	and	the	electricity
that	moves	in	your	body	is	spiritual.
It	is	alive,	it	is	a	living	energy;	hence	they	have	given	it	a	name:	bioelectricity,
living	electricity.
It	 is	 your	 third	 eye...	 and	 the	 morning	 is	 the	 most	 potential	 time	 for	 it	 to	 be
receptive.	You	should	be	more	alert	now	when	it	happens.	Close	both	your	eyes
so	 that	 no	 energy	moves	 out,	 and	 the	 whole	 energy	 becomes	 available	 to	 the
third	eye.	And	when	it	is	happening,	allow	it	without	any	fear,	because	it	cannot
do	any	harm	to	you.	It	has	never	done	any	harm	to	anyone,	ever.
If	 you	 give	 your	 whole	 support,	 the	 third	 eye	 can	make	 you	 related	 with	 the
whole	existence.	Your	center	of	being	will	come,	for	the	first	time,	in	touch	with
the	center	of	the	universe.	It	is	a	great	ecstatic	experience.
At	first	it	will	happen	only	in	the	morning.	Then	slowly,	slowly,	as	you	become
accustomed	to	it,	it	may	happen	at	other	times.	But	whenever	it	happens,	allow	it
without	any	reluctance,	without	any	resistance,	because	just	a	little	fear	and	the
door	will	be	closed.	Be	loving	and	be	trusting	and	the	door	will	remain	open.
And	 you	 have	 to	 bring	 this	 experience	 to	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night.	When	 you
reach	 the	 same	 experience	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night,	 as	 it	 happens	 in	 the
morning,	you	have	conquered	almost	a	new	world,	 a	new	space.	Now	 twenty-
four	hours	a	day,	you	will	remain	available	to	that	which	is	beyond	you.
A	subtle	current	of	freshness,	of	music,	of	dance,	will	go	on	moving	within	you.
A	 joy	will	pervade	your	 twenty-four	hours.	Even	 in	sleep	 it	will	be	 there.	You
will	go	to	sleep	full	of	joy	and	you	will	wake	up	with	the	same	fullness	of	joy.
A	simple	secret	has	to	be	remembered:	your	last	thought	in	the	night	when	you
go	to	sleep	is	always	your	first	thought	in	the	morning	when	you	wake	up.	You
can	watch	it	and	you	will	be	surprised	--	why	is	it	so?	You	have	been	asleep	for
six	hours,	seven	hours	or	eight	hours.
The	last	thought,	whatever	it	was,	the	last	mood,	the	last	feeling	is	always	going
to	 be	 the	 first	 feeling	 in	 the	morning.	You	may	 be	 asleep,	 but	 that	which	 you
have	 left	while	you	fell	asleep	 remains	standing	at	your	door.	When	you	wake
up,	that	visitor	is	still	there;	it	has	not	gone.
It	is	because	of	this	reason	that	many	religions	have	chosen	a	time	for	prayer	just
before	 you	 are	 going	 to	 fall	 asleep.	 Because	 if	 you	 can	 fall	 asleep	 with	 a
prayerful	mood,	peaceful,	silent,	that	mood	will	pervade	your	night.	Your	whole
night	 will	 become	 prayerful.	 If	 you	 fall	 asleep	 meditating,	 your	 whole	 night
becomes	a	meditation.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
201
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
People	 have	 been	 telling	 me	 that	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 time	 to	 meditate.	 And
whenever	anybody	has	told	me	that,	I	have	suggested	to	him,	"You	can	meditate
at	least	eight	hours	every	day."	And	he	will	look	at	me	shocked:	"What	are	you
saying,	eight	hours?	I	don't	even	have	eight	minutes."	And	I	have	to	explain	to
him,	"I	don't	mean	in	the	day:	start	your	meditation	while	you	go	into	your	bed
and,	 meditating,	 slowly	 slowly	 fall	 asleep.	 But	 meditation	 should	 be	 the	 last
thing	when	 you	 drown	 in	 sleep.	 Then	 in	 the	morning,	 the	 first	 thing	 you	will
remember	 will	 be	 a	 deep	 meditative	 state."	 And	 to	 remain	 eight	 hours	 in
meditation	is	of	tremendous	importance.	It	will	transform	your	whole	life.
The	 pope	 and	 a	 famous	 Jewish	 rabbi	 die	 and	 come	 to	 the	Pearly	Gates	 at	 the
same	time.
Saint	Peter	greets	them,	hands	the	pope	a	ticket,	and	sends	him	to	stand	in	line
for	a	motel	room.
With	 the	 pope	 watching	 in	 astonishment,	 Saint	 Peter	 then	 escorts	 the	 Jewish
rabbi	 to	 a	 waiting	 chauffeur-driven	 limousine	 which	 drives	 the	 man	 to	 an
exclusive	luxury	villa.
After	 a	 few	 days,	 the	 pope	 can't	 take	 it	 anymore	 and	 goes	 to	 Saint	 Peter	 to
complain.	 "Hey,	 Pete.	 I	 have	 been	 your	 faithful,	 celibate	 servant	 all	my	 life.	 I
finally	get	to	heaven	and	you	send	me	to	a	queue	for	a	motel	room	which	I	end
up	having	to	share	with	Mother	Teresa.	But	you	send	this	crooked	Jewish	rabbi
in	a	limousine,	to	a	villa	with	air-conditioning,	beautiful	young	girls	serving	him
all	day.	How	come?"
"Look,	Polack,"	says	Peter.	"You	don't	understand.	We	have	never	had	a	Jewish
rabbi	here	before.	This	is	for	the	first	time;	that's	why	he's	being	given	a	special
welcome."
Heaven	 is	so	close	by	 that	you	can	step	 into	 it	 right	now.	But	very	few	people
will	ever	be	able	to	make	it,	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	don't	know	the	door.
All	the	religions	that	have	developed	outside	India	have	no	idea	of	the	third	eye.
In	 their	 scriptures	 there	 is	 not	 a	 single	 mention.	 And	 without	 the	 third	 eye
opening,	your	doors	to	paradise	are	closed	--	because	the	paradise	is	in	your	very
being.	You	can	be	very	learned,	a	great	rabbi;	you	can	be	a	pope,	very	respected.
Millions	follow	you.	But	you	don't	know	that	exactly	the	paradise	you	have	been
seeking	is	not	outside	you.
It	is	something	within	you.
And	my	effort	here	is	to	knock	on	your	third	eye.	It	is	just	knocking	on	the	right
door,	and	once	you	become	aware	that	this	is	the	door	from	where	you	can	get
connected	with	 the	whole...	or	you	can	call	 it	 "God"	but	with	 the	door	closed,
God	may	be	standing	at	your	door	and	still	you	will	not	be	connected.
I	have	my	own	ways	to	go	on	knocking	on	your	third	eye;	I	have	my	own	subtle
ways.	And	it	is	a	very	accurate	observation	on	your	part,	Atit	Parampara	--	what
door	am	I	using	to	enter	in	you?	You	say,	"I	know	how	the	sun	touches	me,	how
your	 face	enters	my	eyes,	your	voice,	my	ears.	 I	know	 those	 five	doors	 to	 the
world	but	I	wonder	what	this	sixth	sense	is	that	feels	you?"
It	is	just	between	your	two	eyebrows.	Next	time	when	you	feel	me	touching	you,
watch	 carefully:	 you	will	 feel	 something	 opening	 between	 your	 two	 eyes	 --	 a
sensation	that	goes	on	deepening	inwards	and	finally	reaches	to	your	very	being.
And	once	 this	 door	 starts	 opening	 again	 and	 again,	 from	 the	 same	door	many
other	things	will	start	entering	you.	You	have	seen	the	rose	with	your	outer	eyes
but	you	have	not	seen	it	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
202
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
from	the	door	of	your	third	eye.	From	your	third	eye,	the	rose	is	psychedelic;	it
has	rays	all	around	you,	it	radiates.	It	is	so	alive	that	you	cannot	think	that	you
have	ever	seen	it	before.
The	green	of	the	trees	becomes	so	much	greener	that	one	is	simply	surprised	at
everything,	 feels	 full	of	wonder	all	around.	Ordinary	colored	stones	on	 the	sea
beach	look	like	diamonds	and	rubies	and	emeralds	because	they	are	all	radiating;
it	is	just	that	we	have	to	see	them	from	the	right	sense.
The	 sixth	 sense	 is	 the	 sense	 which	 has	 made	 man	 aware	 of	 the	 existence	 of
godliness	 in	 the	 world.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 only	 sense	 which	 makes	 a	 disciple
graduate	into	a	devotee.	That	is	the	sense	which	allows	the	master	to	enter	in	the
innermost	core	of	the	disciple;	that	is	the	center	which	makes	the	master	and	the
devotee	one	soul	between	two	bodies.
And	 that	 is	 the	 center	which	makes	you	 finally	 aware	 that	 your	being	 and	 the
being	of	existence	are	not	separate	--	they	are	one.	You	have	come	back	home.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
LATELY,	 I	 HAVE	 BEGUN	 TO	 REALIZE	 HOW	 EVEN	 MY	 LOVER	 IS	 A
STRANGER
TO	ME.	STILL,	THERE	IS	AN	INTENSE	LONGING	TO	OVERCOME	THE
SEPARATION	BETWEEN	US.	 IT	ALMOST	FEELS	AS	 IF	WE	ARE	LINES
RUNNING
PARALLEL	 TO	 EACH	 OTHER	 BUT	 DESTINED	 NEVER	 TO	 MEET.
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 IS	 THE	 WORLD	 OF	 CONSCIOUSNESS	 LIKE	 THE
WORLD	OF	GEOMETRY	--	OR	IS
THERE	A	CHANCE	THAT	PARALLELS	CAN	MEET?
Dhyan	Amiyo,	it	is	one	of	the	great	miseries	that	every	lover	has	to	face:	there	is
no	way	for	lovers	to	drop	their	strangeness,	unfamiliarity,	separation.	In	fact,	the
whole	 functioning	of	 love	 is	 that	 lovers	 should	be	polar	opposites.	The	 farther
away	they	are,	the	more	attractive.
Their	separation	is	their	attraction.	They	come	close,	they	come	very	close,	but
they	never	become	one.
They	 come	 so	 close	 that	 it	 almost	 feels	 like	 just	 one	 step	more	 and	 they	will
become	one.
But	that	step	has	never	been	taken,	cannot	be	taken	out	of	sheer	necessity,	out	of
a	natural	law.
On	 the	 contrary,	 when	 they	 are	 very	 close,	 immediately	 they	 start	 becoming
separate	 again,	 going	 farther	 away.	 Because	 when	 they	 are	 very	 close,	 their
attraction	 is	 lost;	 they	 start	 fighting,	 nagging,	 being	 bitchy.	 These	 are	ways	 to
create	 the	 distance	 again.	And	 as	 the	 distance	 is	 there,	 immediately	 they	 start
feeling	 attracted.	 So	 this	 goes	 on	 like	 a	 rhythm:	 coming	 closer,	 going	 away;
coming	closer,	going	away.
There	 is	a	 longing	 to	be	one	 --	but	on	 the	 level	of	biology,	on	 the	 level	of	 the
body,	becoming	one	is	not	possible.	Even	while	making	love	you	are	not	one;	the
separation	on	the	physical	level	is	inevitable.
You	are	saying	"Lately,	I	have	begun	to	realize	how	even	my	lover	is	a	stranger
to	me."
This	is	good.	This	is	part	of	a	growing	understanding.	Only	childish	people	think
that	they	know	each	other.	You	don't	know	even	yourself,	how	can	you	conceive
that	you	know	your	lover?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
203
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Neither	the	lover	knows	himself	nor	you	know	yourself.	Two	unknown	beings,
two	 strangers	 who	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 themselves	 are	 trying	 to	 know
each	other	--	it	is	an	exercise	in	futility.	It	is	bound	to	be	a	frustration,	a	failure.
And	that's	why	all	lovers	are	angry	at	each	other.	They	think	perhaps	the	other	is
not	allowing	an	entry	 into	his	private	world:	"He	is	keeping	me	separate,	he	 is
keeping	me	a	little	far	away."	And	both	go	on	thinking	in	the	same	way.	But	it	is
not	true,	all	complaints	are	false.	It	is	simply	that	they	don't	understand	the	law
of	nature.
On	the	level	of	body,	you	can	come	close	but	you	cannot	become	one.	Only	on
the	 level	 of	 the	 heart,	 can	 you	 become	 one	 --	 but	 only	 momentarily,	 not
permanently.
At	the	level	of	being,	you	are	one.	There	is	no	need	to	become	one;	it	has	only	to
be	discovered.
Amiyo,	 you	 are	 saying,	 "Still	 there	 is	 an	 intense	 longing	 to	 overcome	 the
separation	between	us."	If	you	go	on	trying	on	the	physical	level,	you	will	go	on
failing.	The	 longing	simply	shows	 that	 love	needs	 to	go	beyond	 the	body,	 that
love	wants	 something	 higher	 than	 the	 body,	 something	 greater	 than	 the	 body,
something	deeper	than	the	body.
Even	the	heart-to-heart	meeting	--	although	sweet,	although	immensely	joyful	--
is	 still	 insufficient,	 because	 it	 happens	 only	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 again
strangers	are	strangers.
Unless	 you	 discover	 the	 world	 of	 being,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 fulfill	 your
longing	of	becoming	one.	And	the	strange	fact	is:	the	day	you	become	one	with
your	lover,	you	will	become	one	with	the	whole	existence,	too.
You	are	saying,	"It	almost	feels	as	if	we	are	lines	running	parallel	to	each	other
but	 destined	 never	 to	 meet."	 Perhaps,	 Amiyo,	 you	 don't	 know	 non-Euclidean
geometry	because	it	 is	still	not	 taught	 in	our	educational	 institutes.	We	are	still
taught,	in	the	universities,	Euclidean	geometry	which	is	two	thousand	years	old.
In	Euclidian	geometry,	 parallel	 lines	 never	meet.	But	 it	 has	 been	 found	 that	 if
you	go	on	and	on	and	on	they	meet.	The	latest	finding	is	that	there	are	no	parallel
lines;	that's	why	they	meet.	You	cannot	create	two	parallel	lines.
New	 findings	 are	 very	 strange:	 you	 cannot	 even	 create	 a	 line,	 a	 straight	 line,
because	 the	 earth	 is	 round	 --	 if	 you	 create	 a	 straight	 line	 here,	 if	 you	 go	 on
drawing	it	from	both	the	ends	and	go	on	and	go	on,	finally	you	will	find	it	has
become	a	circle.	And	if	a	straight	line	drawn	to	the	ultimate	becomes	a	circle,	it
was	not	a	straight	line	in	the	first	place;	it	was	only	part	of	a	very	big	circle,	and
a	part	of	a	big	circle	is	an	arc,	not	a	line.	Lines	have	disappeared	in	the	new,	non-
Euclidean	 geometry	 and	 when	 there	 are	 no	 lines,	 what	 to	 say	 about	 parallel
lines?
There	are	no	parallel	lines,	either.
So	if	it	were	a	question	of	parallel	lines,	there	is	a	chance	that	lovers	could	meet
somewhere	 --	 perhaps	 in	 old	 age	when	 they	 cannot	 fight,	 they	 don't	 have	 any
energy	left;	or	they	have	become	so	accustomed...	what	is	the	point?	The	same
arguments	 they	have	had,	 the	 same	problems	 they	have	been	having,	 the	 same
conflicts;	they	both	are	bored	of	each	other.
In	 the	 long	 run,	 lovers	 stop	 even	 speaking	 to	 each	 other.	 What	 is	 the	 point?
Because	 to	 start	 speaking	 means	 to	 start	 an	 argument,	 and	 it	 is	 the	 same
argument;	it	is	not	going	to	change.	And	they	have	argued	it	so	many	times	and
it	 comes	 to	 the	 same	 end.	 But	 even	 then,	 parallel	 lines	 as	 far	 as	 lovers	 are
concerned...	 in	geometry	 they	may	 start	meeting,	but	 in	 love	 there	 is	no	hope;
they	cannot	meet.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
204
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
And	it	is	good	that	they	cannot	meet	because	if	lovers	could	satisfy	their	longing
of	becoming	one	at	the	level	of	physical	body,	they	would	never	look	upwards.
They	would	never	 try	 to	find	 that	 there	was	much	more	hidden	 in	 the	physical
body	--	the	consciousness,	the	soul,	the	god.
It	 is	good	that	 love	fails,	because	 the	failure	of	 love	 is	bound	 to	 take	you	on	a
new	 pilgrimage.	 The	 longing	will	 haunt	 you	 until	 it	 brings	 you	 to	 the	 temple
where	the	meeting	happens	--	but	the	meeting	always	happens	with	the	whole...
in	which	your	lover	will	be,	but	in	which	the	trees	will	also	be,	and	the	rivers	and
the	mountains	and	the	stars.
In	that	meeting,	only	two	things	will	not	be	there:	your	ego	will	not	be	there,	and
your	 lover's	 ego	 will	 not	 be	 there.	 Other	 than	 these	 two	 things,	 the	 whole
existence	will	be	there.
And	these	two	egos	were	really	the	problem,	were	what	was	making	them	two
parallel	lines.
It	is	not	love	that	is	creating	the	trouble,	it	is	the	ego.	But	the	longing	will	not	be
satisfied.
Birth	after	birth,	life	after	life,	the	longing	will	remain	there	unless	you	discover
the	right	door	to	go	beyond	the	body	and	to	enter	the	temple.
An	old	couple	of	ninety-three	and	ninety-five	go	to	their	lawyer	and	say	that	they
want	a	divorce.	"A	divorce!"	exclaims	the	lawyer.	"At	your	age?	But	surely	you
need	 each	 other	more	 than	 ever	 now,	 and	 anyway,	 you	 have	 been	married	 so
long,	what	is	the	point?"
"Well,"	says	 the	husband,	"We	have	been	wanting	a	divorce	 for	years	now	but
we	thought	we	would	wait	until	the	children	are	dead."	They	really	waited!	And
all	the	children	are	dead;	now	there	is	no	problem,	they	can	have	the	divorce	--
still	no	meeting,	but	divorce.
Just	keep	your	longing	burning,	aflame;	don't	lose	heart.
Your	longing	is	the	seed	of	your	spirituality.
Your	longing	is	the	beginning	of	the	ultimate	union	with	existence.	Your	lover	is
just	an	excuse.
Dhyan	Amiyo,	don't	be	sad	but	be	happy.	Rejoice	that	there	is	no	possibility	of
meeting	 on	 the	 physical	 level.	 Otherwise,	 lovers	 will	 not	 have	 any	 way	 of
transformation.	They	will	get	stuck	with	each	other,	they	will	destroy	each	other.
And	there	is	no	harm	in	loving	a	stranger.
In	fact,	it	is	more	exciting	to	love	a	stranger.
When	you	were	not	together,	there	was	great	attraction.	The	more	you	have	been
together,	 the	more	 the	attraction	has	become	dull.	The	more	you	have	become
known	to	each	other,	superficially,	the	less	is	the	excitement.	Life	becomes	very
soon	a	routine.
People	go	on	repeating	the	same	thing,	again	and	again.	If	you	look	at	the	faces
of	people	 in	 the	world,	you	will	be	surprised:	why	do	all	 these	people	 look	so
sad?	Why	do	their	eyes	look	as	if	they	have	lost	all	hope?	The	reason	is	simple;
the	reason	is	repetition.	Man	is	intelligent;	repetition	creates	boredom.	Boredom
brings	a	sadness	because	one	knows	what	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow,	and	the
day	after	tomorrow...	until	one	goes	into	the	grave,	it	will	be	the	same,	the	same
story.
A	Jewish	man	and	a	Polack	are	sitting	in	a	bar	watching	the	news	on	television.
On	 the	 news,	 they	 are	 showing	 a	 woman	 standing	 on	 a	 ledge,	 threatening	 to
jump.	The	Jewish	man	says	to	the	Polack,	"I	will	tell	you	what.	I	will	make	a	bet
with	 you:	 If	 she	 jumps,	 I	 get	 twenty	 dollars.	 If	 she	 does	 not,	 you	 get	 twenty
dollars.	Okay?"
"Fair	enough,"	says	the	Polack.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
205
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
A	few	minutes	later	 the	woman	jumps	off	 the	ledge	and	kills	herself.	The	Pole
gets	out	his	wallet	and	hands	twenty	dollars	to	the	Jewish	guy.
A	few	minutes	later	the	Jewish	guy	turns	to	the	Polack	and	says,	"Look,	here	I
can't	take	this	twenty	dollars	from	you.	I	have	a	confession	to	make:	I	saw	this
on	the	news	earlier	this	afternoon.	This	was	a	repeat."
"No,	no,	"says	the	Polack,"	You	keep	the	money,	you	won	it	fair	and	square.	You
see,	I	saw	this	on	TV	earlier	in	the	day,	too."
"You	did?"	 says	 the	 Jewish	 guy.	 "Well,	 then	why	 did	 you	 bet	 that	 the	woman
would	not	jump?"
"Well,"	 says	 the	 Polack.	 "I	 didn't	 think	 she	 would	 be	 stupid	 enough	 to	 do	 it
twice!"
But	life	is	such...
This	sadness	in	the	world,	this	boredom	and	this	misery	can	be	changed	if	people
know	that	they	are	asking	for	the	impossible.
Don't	ask	for	the	impossible.
Find	the	law	of	existence	and	follow	it.
Your	 longing	to	be	one,	 is	your	spiritual	desire,	 is	your	very	essential	religious
nature.	It	is	just	that	you	are	focusing	yourself	on	the	wrong	spot.
Your	 lover	 is	only	an	excuse.	Let	your	 lover	be	 just	an	experience	of	a	greater
love	--	the	love	for	the	whole	existence.
Let	 your	 longing	 be	 a	 search	 of	 your	 own	 inner	 being;	 there,	 the	 meeting	 is
already	happening,	there,	we	are	already	one.
There,	nobody	has	ever	separated.
The	 longing	 is	 perfectly	 right;	 only	 the	 object	 of	 longing	 is	 not	 right.	 That	 is
creating	the	suffering	and	the	hell.	Just	change	the	object	and	your	life	becomes
a	paradise.
Okay	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
206
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
21
The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
23	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	 ANOTHER	 OF	 YOUR	 COMMUNES	 TAKES	 OFF	 THE	 GROUND,	 I
STRONGLY
DEVELOP	SYMPTOMS	OF	A	MISFIT.	INDIA,	AND	EVEN	A	COMMUNE,
JUST	DOES
NOT	 SEEM	 TO	 BE	 THE	 PLACE	 WHERE	 I	 FEEL	 COMFORTABLE.	 IS
THERE	SUCH	A	STATE	AS	"DOING	YOUR	OWN	THING,	CONTENT	AND
FULL	OF	GRATITUDE"
THAT	IS	NOT	JUST	AN	EGO	TRIP?
Prem	Leeladhar,	I	myself	am	an	unfit.	And	this	place	here	has	gone	far	beyond
being	a	commune.	The	commune	was	an	alternative	society.	But	it	has	its	own
organization,	its	own	rules,	regulations.	Seeing	that	for	misfits	it	will	be	difficult
to	be	part	of	even	a	commune,	I	have	dropped	the	idea	of	a	commune	too.
Here,	now	only	individuals	are	living	together.	Nobody	here	is	expected	to	be	a
permanent	resident;	whenever	he	feels,	he	can	be	here	and	whenever	he	feels,	he
can	move.	We	are	trying	to	give	every	misfit	all	the	space	that	is	possible.	One	of
my	sannyasins	--	Veeresh,	in	Europe
--	is	creating	"Rajneesh	Misfit	Cities."
I	 think	 you	 have	 carried	 the	 idea	 from	 the	American	 commune.	 It	must	 have
been	difficult	for	you	there,	because	whenever	thousands	of	people	live	together,
they	have	to	follow	certain	rules.	Otherwise	it	will	become	impossible	to	live.
Here	there	is	no	permanent	residentship.	As	long	as	you	feel	good,	you	can	be
here.	The	moment	you	feel	uncomfortable,	the	whole	world	is	available	to	you;
wherever	you	want,	you	can	go	and	be	comfortable.	But	I	want	to	remind	you:	if
you	 cannot	 feel	 comfortable	 here,	 you	 cannot	 feel	 comfortable	 anywhere	 else
either.
I	will	read	your	question.	"As	another	of	your	communes	takes	off	the	ground..."
That	 is	not	 right.	No	commune	 is	 taking	off	 the	ground.	 I	have	 tried	hard	and
found	 it	 impossible...	 if	 the	 commune	 has	 to	 exist,	 the	 individual	 has	 to
compromise.	That's	absolutely	natural	and	necessary.	And	I	am	so	much	in	favor
of	 the	misfit	 people,	 that	 rather	 than	 dropping	 the	misfits,	 I	 have	 dropped	 the
idea	of	the	commune	itself.	Now	there	are	only	misfit	people	here.
The	misfit	people	obviously	understand	each	other's	needs.	The	need	is	just	to	be
yourself,	and	doing	your	own	thing.	That's	why	we	are	not	developing	any	kind
of	productive	activity	here.	Neither	roads	have	to	be	made,	nor	houses	have	to	be
made.	Because	if	you	have	to	make	roads	and	you	have	to	make	houses	and	you
have	 to	 do	 farming,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 have	 milk	 products	 of	 your	 own,	 then
naturally	a	certain	organization	becomes	necessary.
Leeladhar	 is	 a	 plastic	 surgeon.	Here	we	 are	 not	 going	 to	 have	 even	 a	medical
center.	 There	was	 in	 the	 old	 days	 before	 the	American	 commune	 happened,	 a
medical	center,	but	that	needs	organization.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
207
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
Now	 I	want	 this	 place	 just	 to	 be	 a	 paradise	 --	 a	 holiday	 resort	where	 you	 can
relax,	have	a	massage...	soon	there	will	be	swimming	pools,	larger	gardens	and
lawns.	You	can	play	on	your	instruments	whenever	you	want,	at	whatever	time
you	want.	You	can	do	your	own	thing.
Just	remember	that	your	thing	should	not	be	an	interference	in	somebody	else's
life	structure,	because	he	also	wants	to	be	independent,	just	as	you	do.	That	is	the
only	agreement:	that	everybody	is	free	to	the	limit	that	he	does	not	interfere	with
anybody	else.	This	much	of	a	limit	is	absolutely	necessary.
Just	 think	 --	 you	 are	 sleeping	 and	 few	misfits	 come	 and	 start	 doing	 dynamic
meditation	in	your	room.	They	are	doing	their	thing;	they	are	not	telling	you	to
do	the	dynamic	meditation.
And	 by	 the	 time	 they	 have	 left,	 other	misfits	 come	 and	 start	 playing	 on	 their
musical	 instruments.	 Nobody	 is	 bothering	 you;	 you	 can	 go	 on	 sleeping	 or
whatever	you	want	to	do!
"So	this	line	has	to	be	remembered...
Otherwise	there	is	no	interference	at	all.	Work	I	have	dropped	completely,	unless
you	want	to	do	it,	unless	it	is	your	thing.	In	the	commune,	work	was	absolutely
necessary	to	survive.
Here,	you	come	whenever	you	can	manage	 financially,	 for	 as	 long	as	you	can
manage	to	live	here,	but	there	is	no	question	of	any	work	being	imposed	on	you.
You	can	choose	if	you	want	to	do	something	or	you	simply	want	to	rest,	swim,
do	a	few	groups,	meditate	--	or	not	 to	do	any	group,	not	 to	do	any	meditation,
just	to	be.
You	are	saying,	"I	strongly	develop	symptoms	of	misfit."	Again	you	are	wrong:
Leeladhar,	you	are	a	born	misfit.	It	 is	not	something	that	you	are	developing.	I
know	you	perfectly	well.
It	was	I	who	was	forcing	you	to	remain	in	the	hospital	unit	in	the	commune,	in
spite	of	yourself.	Because	 I	wanted	you	 to	 remain	 in	 the	unit,	you	remained	--
but	you	are	a	misfit.
The	misfit	has	to	accept	one	thing:	that	he	will	not	be	respected	by	the	ordinary
society.	 He	will	 not	 get	 recommendations	 and	 honors	 and	 awards	 for	 being	 a
misfit.	I	am	certainly	thinking	to	create	an	award,	a	world	award	each	year,	to	be
given	to	the	greatest	misfit	in	the	world.	And	Leeladhar,	your	name	is	the	first	on
my	list.
But	 the	discomfort	 is	not	coming	from	the	outside,	because	outside	 I	don't	 see
that	you	are	expected	to	do	anything.	You	are	feeling	uncomfortable	as	an	inner
tension;	you	don't	want	to	be	a	misfit,	and	you	are.	You	have	not	accepted	your
misfitness	with	total	love	and	joy.
There	is	nothing	wrong	in	it;	the	society	needs	a	few	misfit	people.	They	are	the
people	 who	 carry	 the	 torch	 of	 freedom	 and	 consciousness	 from	 generation	 to
generation.
Do	you	think	Gautam	Buddha	was	not	a	misfit?	Or	Mahavira	was	not	a	misfit?
The	 son	 of	 a	 king	 goes	 naked	 --	 his	 father	 was	 ashamed,	 his	 family	 was
ashamed.	They	were	willing	--
"You	can	renounce	the	world...	but	what	is	the	need	to	go	naked?"	But	Mahavira
never	felt	uncomfortable;	he	accepted	himself	as	he	was.
The	misfitness	does	not	 come	alone;	 it	will	 bring	disrespect	 from	people.	You
have	to	accept	it.
The	 society	 is	made	 by	 the	 people	who	 are	 square,	 absolutely	 fit	 people.	Any
misfit	 is	a	disturbance.	That	society	creates	 in	every	child	 the	 idea:	never	be	a
misfit,	otherwise	you	will	be	dishonored,	disrespected,	rejected.	And	those	ideas
are	 still	 in	 your	mind.	Misfitness	 is	 your	 nature,	 and	 the	 discomfort	 is	 arising
because	 the	 ideas	 that	society	gives	 to	everybody,	 it	has	given	 to	you	 too.	You
are	not	together;	there	is	a	split.	Deep	down	you	don't	want	to	be	a	misfit.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
208
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
I	 would	 like	 to	 suggest,	 drop	 those	 ideas.	 All	 respectability,	 all	 honor	 is
meaningless	if	it	drives	you	against	your	nature.	What	can	you	do	if	you	are	not
a	lotus	flower,	but	just	a	marigold?	Enjoy	being	a	marigold.
Existence	has	no	disrespect	for	misfit	people.	The	sun	makes	no	difference,	the
moon	 does	 not	 discriminate;	 the	whole	 existence	 accepts	 you	 as	 you	 are.	 But
deep	down	within	you	 there	 is	a	 rejection,	 so	you	are	 in	a	 split,	 in	a	dilemma.
With	 this	 dilemma,	 wherever	 you	 go	 you	 will	 feel	 uncomfortable	 --	 more
uncomfortable	 than	 you	 are	 feeling	 here,	 because	 here	 nobody	 is	 interested	 in
condemning,	 in	 judging.	 Nobody	 will	 say,	 "Leeladhar,	 you	 are	 not	 what	 you
should	be."	There	is	no	"should"	here.
In	 the	American	 commune,	 you	were	 not	willing	 to	 remain	 a	 plastic	 surgeon.
Now	is	the	chance	--	nobody	is	telling	you	to	be	a	plastic	surgeon;	even	if	you
want	to	be,	nobody	is	interested	in	plastic	surgery	here.	If	somebody's	nose	is	a
little	long,	nobody	objects.	Or	a	little	smaller...	a	nose	is	just	functional.	With	the
long	nose	or	the	small	nose,	if	breathing	is	going	well,	there	is	no	problem.	Here
nobody	is	interested	in	changing	from	a	man	into	a	woman,	or	from	woman	into
a	man.
This	 is	not	a	commune,	 this	 is	simply	a	gathering	of	all	kinds	of	misfit	people
who	cannot	 fit	anywhere	else.	Here	 they	can	celebrate	 their	misfitness	without
losing	respect	and	honor	and	dignity.
You	say,	"India,	and	even	a	commune,	just	does	not	seem	to	be	the	place	where	I
feel	comfortable."
India	 is	 the	 oldest	 country	which	 has	 allowed	 all	 kinds	 of	misfit	 people.	 It	 is
unbelievable	 that	 Indian	society	down	the	ages	has	never	crucified	a	Jesus	and
there	 have	 been	many	who	were	 claiming	 "Ambram	Hasmi"	 "I	 am	 a	 god"	 --
Jesus	was	only	saying	"I	am	the	only	begotten	son	of	God"	--	and	nobody	has
objected.	If	they	are	enjoying	and	feeling	blissful,	they	are	not	doing	any	harm	to
anybody.
Gautam	Buddha	did	not	believe	 in	God.	Mahavira	absolutely	 rejected	 the	very
idea	of	God.	But	they	were	not	crucified,	they	were	loved	as	they	were.
And	even	before	them,	a	long	passage	of	ten	thousand	years...	you	will	find	all
kinds	of	people.	Somebody	is	standing	on	his	head;	nobody	even	takes	any	note
of	it,	nobody	says	that	you	are	mad	or	something.	Somebody	has	been	standing
for	years,	has	been	sleeping	standing,	with	the	support	of	a	wooden	structure;	--
he	is	keeping	his	hands	on	the	structure	and	fast	asleep	--	and	people	always	give
the	freedom:	if	he	decides	to	be	this	way,	this	is	his	business.
It	is	between	him	and	God;	who	we	are	to	interfere?
I	have	seen	a	man	who	has	been	standing	for	so	many	years	that	the	upper	side
of	his	body	has	become	thin,	and	all	the	blood	has	gone	into	the	legs.	In	medical
science	it	is	called	elephantiasis;	it	is	a	certain	disease.	Now	even	if	he	wants	to
sit,	 he	 cannot	 sit.	 Those	 legs	 are	 so	 thick,	 and	 they	 have	 lost	 the	 quality	 of
elasticity;	 they	 have	 become	 almost	 solid.	But	 nobody	 condemns	 him.	On	 the
contrary,	 people	 bring	 sweets	 to	 him,	 somebody	 brings	 flowers	 to	 him...	 poor
fellow	 is	doing	 something	great,	 suffering	 too	much,	unnecessarily.	But	 if	 it	 is
natural	to	him,	then	it	is	perfectly	okay.
No	 Socrates	was	 ever	 poisoned	 in	 India,	 and	 India	 has	 known	more	 Socrates'
than	any	other	country	--	thousands	of	them,	of	the	same	caliber,	with	the	same
logic;	 sometimes	 even	 a	 more	 subtle	 logic,	 very	 destructive	 to	 people's
prejudices.	But	people	have	enjoyed	them.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
209
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
Whether	you	agree	with	them	or	not,	that's	one	thing,	but	you	have	to	appreciate
their	sharpness,	their	intelligence.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 Ramakrishna.	 He	 was	 uneducated,	 and	 you	 will	 not	 find
another	 misfit	 like	 him.	 Yet	 this	 country	 has	 accepted	 him	 as	 one	 of	 the
incarnations	of	God.
When	he	was	nine	years	old	he	had	an	experience	of	deep	meditation.	He	was
not	looking	for	it.	He	was	just	a	boy	coming	back	from	the	field	to	his	home,	and
just	on	the	way	there	was	a	 lake,	a	beautiful	 lake.	It	was	sunset	 time	and	there
were	black	clouds	in	the	sky.	The	rains	were	just	to	come.	And	as	he	came	by	the
side	of	the	lake,	a	line	of	white	cranes,	who	must	have	been	sitting	on	the	bank
of	the	lake,	were	disturbed	by	his	coming.	They	flew	across	the	black	clouds.
The	white	 crane	 is	 snow	white,	 and	 twelve	or	 fifteen	cranes	 in	 a	 line,	moving
across	the	black	clouds...	and	the	sunset	on	the	lake,	spreading	gold	all	over.	The
beauty	of	 the	moment	was	 such	 that	Ramakrishna	could	not	 contain	 it;	 he	 fell
into	unconsciousness.	It	was	too	much	for	his	conscious	mind,	just	to	say	that	"It
is	beautiful"	and	go	home.
When	he	was	not	home,	people	went	in	search.	His	father	said,	"He	left	the	field
before	me."	They	looked	around	the	lake	and	they	found	him	unconscious	--	but
with	such	a	joy	on	his	face.	When	he	came	back	to	consciousness,	the	first	words
he	 said	 were,	 "I	 have	 known	 life	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 Up	 to	 now	 I	 have	 been
unconscious;	these	few	hours	I	was	CONSCIOUS."
The	parents	became	afraid	--	any	parents	would	have	become	afraid	--	that	this
boy	was	showing	symptoms	which	could	 lead	him	 to	becoming	a	sannyasin,	a
seeker.	And	for	centuries	parents	have	thought,	and	thought	rightly,	that	it	would
be	good	to	arrange	a	marriage.	The	woman	will	put	him	right.
They	were	afraid:	perhaps	he	will	say	no.	But	when	his	father	asked,	"Would	you
like	to	be	married?"	he	said,	"Great!	I	have	seen	many	marriages	in	town;	it	 is
such	a	joy,	riding	on	the	horse	like	a	king."
The	 father	 thought,	 "He	 does	 not	 understand	what	marriage	 is,	 he	 has	 simply
seen	the	marriage	processions.	But	it	is	good	he	is	ready."
So	they	found	a	beautiful	girl	in	a	nearby	place,	and	when	he	was	going	there	--
it	was	summertime	--	 to	see	the	girl,	his	mother	put	three	rupees	in	his	pocket,
she	told	him,	"If	you	need,	you	use	them,	but	there	is	no	need	to	waste	them.	We
are	poor	people."
And	 this	 is	 the	way	 in	 India,	which	still	persists	over	almost	ninety	percent	of
India:	you	can	see	the	girl	only	as	a	glimpse.	She	will	come	and	serve	tea	--	and
that	is	the	moment	when	you	see	her	for	few	seconds	--	and	she	is	gone.
Sharda,	who	was	going	to	become	his	wife,	came	to	put	some	sweets	in	his	plate
when	they	were	taking	their	breakfast.	He	said	to	his	father,	"My	god,	the	girl	is
so	beautiful!"	He	took	out	the	three	rupees	and	put	them	at	her	feet,	and	touched
her	feet	and	said,	"Mother,	you	are	one	in	millions.	I	am	going	to	marry	you."
The	father	said,	"Idiot!	First	you	call	her	'mother,'	touch	her	feet...	and	you	have
put	your	offering	also,	three	rupees.	And	you	are	going	to	marry	her?"
Even	the	girl's	parents	became	a	little	afraid,	because	this	boy	seems	to	be	a	little
crazy.
But	Ramakrishna	said,	"I	don't	see	any	problem	in	it.	She	is	so	beautiful,	 that's
why	I	touched	her	feet.	Beauty	should	be	respected.	And	she	is	so	motherly;	you
can	see	it	even	from	her	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
210
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
face.	That's	why	I	called	her	'mother'.	Every	girl	is	going	to	be	a	mother,	so	why
you	are	 freaking	out?	And	 I	have	decided	 that	 if	 I	 am	going	 to	marry	anyone,
this	girl	is	the	one;	otherwise	I	will	remain	unmarried."
Both	the	families	managed,	convinced	each	other	that	he	is	not	mad	or	anything,
just	a	little	off,	land	a	little	eccentric,	but	he	is	not	harmful.	He	does	things	which
should	not	be	done,	but	he	never	harms	anybody.
They	were	married	and	the	first	night	Ramakrishna	said	to	Sharda,	"It	is	private,
don't	say	it	to	anybody;	I	have	accepted	you	as	my	mother.	Let	the	whole	world
think	you	are	my	wife.	I	know	you	are	my	mother,	you	know	I	am	your	son.	And
this	is	going	to	be	our	relationship."
And	 this	 remained	 their	 relationship	 their	 whole	 life.	 But	 rather	 than	 being
criticized	 he	 is	 being	 respected	 for	 this	 strange	 relationship.	 His	 wife	 is	 his
mother,	and	there	was	never	any	husband	and	wife	relationship	between	them.
There	are	so	many	stories	of	unfitness...	One	sudra	queen	--	she	was	a	queen,	but
by	 the	 Hindu	 caste	 system	 she	 was	 the	 lowest	 untouchable	 --	 made	 a	 very
beautiful	 temple	 on	 the	 banks	 of	Ganges	 near	Calcutta,	 in	Dakshineshwar.	No
brahmin	was	ready	to	be	a	priest	in	her	temple.	The	temple	made	by	a	sudra,	by
an	 untouchable,	 had	 also	 become	 untouchable;	 and	 the	 god	 inside	 had	 also
become	untouchable.	In	the	whole	of	Bengal,	only	Ramakrishna,	when	he	heard
it,	said,	"This	is	a	perfectly	good	chance."	He	went	to	the	queen	and	said,	"I	am
ready	to	be	the	priest"	--	and	he	was	a	high	caste	brahmin.
She	said,	"Have	you	thought	about	it?	Your	society	may	discard	you,	expel	you."
He	said,	"I	don't	have	any	society.	And	what	does	it	matter	if	they	expel	me,	if
they	make	me	an	outcast?	I	am	not	dependent	on	anyone.	I	am	going	to	be	the
priest	in	this	temple."	And	he	was	expelled,	condemned.
People	tried	to	persuade	him,	"If	you	leave	this	job	we	can	give	you	a	better	job
in	a	high-caste	Hindu	temple.	You	will	get	more	money."	But	he	said,	"It	is	not	a
question	 of	 money.	 I	 love	 the	 temple,	 I	 love	 the	 place,	 I	 love	 the	 silence
surrounding	it,	the	trees...	and	I	love	the	goddess	inside	the	temple."
He	was	expelled,	but	he	never	cared	about	 it.	Even	his	 family	stopped	visiting
him	--
because	they	would	be	expelled	--	and	they	told	him	that	he	could	not	come	back
home.	He	said,	"It	is	perfectly	okay."
And	his	worshiping	was	so	strange:	sometimes	he	would	worship	from	morning
till	 evening,	 dancing	 and	 singing	 madly.	 People	 would	 come	 and	 go,	 and
sometimes	he	would	lock	the	temple	and	would	not	open	it	for	a	few	days.	It	was
reported	to	Rashmani,	the	queen:
"What	kind	of	priest	have	you	found?	Every	priest	worships	for	half	an	hour	at
the	most.	This	man	seems	to	be	mad:	when	he	worships,	then	time	stops;	then	he
goes	on	dancing	and	singing	from	morning	till	evening.	And	sometimes,	which
is	absolutely	sacrilegious,	he	locks	the	temple.	Neither	does	he	worship,	nor	does
he	allow	anybody	else	to	enter!"
The	queen	called	him	and	said,	"Ramakrishna,	what	kind	of	worship	is	this?"
He	 said,	 "Who	 says	 it	 is	worship?	 It	 is	 a	 love	 affair.	And	 in	 a	 love	 affair	 it	 is
natural:	sometimes	I	get	angry,	sometimes	she	gets	angry."	He	 is	 talking	about
the	goddess	of	the	temple.	"And	when	I	get	angry	I	lock	the	door	and	I	say,	'Now
live	for	three	days,	four	days,	without	food,	without	worship,	and	you	will	come
to	your	senses.'"
Rashmani	said,	"But	we	have	never	heard	of	this	kind	of	worship!"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
211
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
Ramakrishna	said,	"There	has	never	been	a	priest	like	Ramakrishna."
In	 the	 temples,	 when	 priests	 worship,	 the	 food	 is	 presented	 to	 the	 god	 or	 the
goddess	and	then	it	 is	distributed.	And	Ramakrishna	would	spoil	 it	completely.
First	 he	 would	 taste	 everything	 inside	 the	 temple.	 Before	 offering	 it	 to	 the
goddess,	 he	 would	 taste	 everything,	 and	 then	 he	 will	 offer	 it.	 Again	 he	 was
called:	"You	are	doing	something	very	wrong.	It	has	never	been	done."
He	said,	"I	am	not	concerned	whether	it	has	been	done	or	not.	I	know	only	one
thing:	my	mother	used	to	taste	everything,	and	then	she	would	give	it	to	me.	If	it
was	 really	delicious,	 she	would	give;	 if	 it	was	not	 she	would	prepare	 it	 again.
And	 if	my	mother	 can	do	 that	 for	me...	 I	 cannot	give	 anything	 to	 the	goddess
without	knowing	whether	it	is	worth	eating	or	not."
Rashmani	must	have	been	a	very	intelligent	woman	to	tolerate	this	misfit	man.
Instead	 of	 condemning	 him,	 people	 started	 coming	 to	 pay	 respect	 to	 him.	His
love	 for	 the	 goddess	 was	 so	 genuine,	 although	 it	 was	 not	 ritualistic.	 And
anything	genuine	cannot	be	a	ritual.
One	of	the	great	logicians	of	Bengal,	Keshav	Chandra,	heard	about	thousands	of
people	going	to	Ramakrishna.	He	was	an	atheist	and	a	great	philosopher,	and	a
very	sharp	logician.
He	challenged	Ramakrishna:	"I	am	coming	on	a	certain	day	 to	discuss	matters
with	you."
All	 the	 followers	 of	Ramakrishna	were	 very	much	 afraid,	 afraid	 because	 they
knew	 that	Ramakrishna	 knows	 nothing,	 no	 scripture;	 he	makes	 his	 own	 songs
that	he	sings	in	the	temple.	He	is	uneducated,	he	has	never	heard	anything	about
logic,	philosophy.	It	is	not	a	question	of	mind	to	him.
They	 were	 afraid:	 "It	 will	 be	 very	 embarrassing	 to	 us	 all,	 because	 Keshav
Chandra	can	defeat	Ramakrishna	within	seconds."
And	Keshav	Chandra	came	with	his	own	disciples.	He	had	his	own	society,	and
he	was	a	very	egoistic	man.	Ramakrishna	jumped	up	from	where	he	was	sitting
under	a	tree,	hugged	Keshav	Chandra,	and	said,	"I	am	feeling	so	happy	that	you
also	have	come	to	me."
Keshav	Chandra	said,	"I	have	come	here	to	defeat	you."
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "It	 does	 not	matter	whether	 you	defeat	me	or	 I	 defeat	 you.
From	this	moment	our	love	will	remain.	You	start	defeating	--	I	am	ready."
Keshav	 Chandra	 said,	 "Start	 defeating?	 First	 you	 have	 to	 propose	 your
philosophy."
Ramakrishna	said,	"I	don't	know	anything	about	philosophy.	You	will	have	to	do
both	things	yourself	--	propose	my	philosophy	and	defeat	it."
Instead	 of	Ramakrishna	 looking	 embarrassed,	Keshav	Chandra	 started	 looking
embarrassed	--	where	have	I	come?	But	something	had	 to	be	done,	so	he	said,
"Okay,	do	you	believe	in	God?"
So	 Ramakrishna	 said,	 "Believe?	 I	 know	 him.	 Why	 should	 I	 believe?	 Only
ignorant	 people	 believe."	 Now	 what	 to	 do	 with	 this	 man?	 A	 belief	 can	 be
criticized,	but	the	man	says	he	knows!
Still,	 Keshav	 Chandra	 made	 great	 arguments	 against	 God;	 he	 said	 "It	 is	 all
hallucination,	 illusion,	 imagination,	 that	 you	 think	 you	 know	God."	And	 each
time	he	would	make	a	good	argument	Ramakrishna	would	stand	up	and	hug	him
again	and	say,	"You	are	so	beautiful,	Keshav	Chandra;	I	love	the	way	you	talk,
although	it	does	not	change	anything.	In	fact,	your	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
212
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
intelligence	is	a	proof	to	me	that	God	exists,	because	your	intelligence	is	derived
from	existence.	 It	cannot	come	from	nowhere,	and	all	 that	we	mean	by	God	is
that	the	universe	is	intelligent.	I	am	a	poor	fellow,	uneducated.	I	am	not	a	proof
for	God,	but	you	are."
The	authority	and	the	authenticity	and	the	sincerity...	for	the	first	time	in	his	life,
Keshav	Chandra	felt	defeated,	although	the	man	has	not	argued.	He	touched	the
feet	 of	 Ramakrishna	 and	 said,	 "Accept	 me	 also	 as	 your	 disciple.	 Seeing	 you,
seeing	your	behavior,	seeing	your	joy,	is	enough	to	prove	that	dry	arguments	are
not	going	to	transform	me.	But	you	are	a	transformed	man.	Most	probably	you
are	right	and	I	am	wrong.	I	can	prove	myself	right	--	but	to	prove	oneself	right	is
one	thing,	and	to	be	right	is	another	thing.	Your	presence	is	the	argument."
This	country	has	accepted	and	loved	all	kinds	of	unfit	people,	and	if	you	feel	that
India	is	making	you	uncomfortable,	you	have	to	be	here	a	little	longer	to	feel	the
atmosphere.
I	have	been	around	the	world.	No	country	has	such	a	groovy	atmosphere.	They
are	 scientifically	 developed,	 technologically	 very	 progressive.	 They	 are	 rich,
they	are	educated.
This	 country	 is	poor,	hungry,	with	no	 science,	no	 technology.	But	 this	 country
has	a	certain	vibe	which	has	been	created	by	thousands	of	mystics.
You	need	to	be	here,	Leeladhar,	for	a	 little	 longer,	so	that	you	can	start	feeling
the	subtle	vibe.
My	experience	 is...	 in	America	we	created	 the	 commune,	but	 in	 the	American
atmosphere	the	commune	was,	as	a	whole,	out	of	place.	There	was	no	supporting
nourishment	 as	 far	 as	 atmosphere	 is	 concerned.	And	 then	 I	moved	 around	 the
world.	I	have	been	talking	in	every	country,	and	the	strangest	fact	is	that	I	was
talking	 with	 my	 own	 sannyasins,	 with	 whom	 I	 talk	 here,	 but	 something	 was
missing.	 I	 was	 there,	 my	 people	 were	 there,	 but	 in	 the	 air,	 something	 was
missing.
Back	 to	 India,	 the	 same	 people...	 but	 nothing	 is	 missing.	 A	 subtle	 juice
surrounds,	a	certain	noosphere,	a	very	deep	and	ancient	flavor	of	mysticism,	an
inner	richness.	Communication	is	easier.
To	adapt	to	the	Indian	atmosphere	it	takes	a	little	time,	and	perhaps	that	also	is
making	you	uncomfortable.	 It	 is	 just	as	 if	you	are	coming	from	a	desert	 into	a
garden.	It	will	take	a	little	time	to	feel	the	greenness,	to	feel	the	fragrance	of	the
flowers.	The	contrast	is	so	big.
And	 you	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 in	 the	West.	Your	whole	make-up	 is	 that	 of	 a
scientist,	and	this	country	knows	nothing	of	science.	This	is	the	most	unscientific
country	in	the	world.	But	it	is	the	most	religious,	mystic,	heartful	land.	It	has	its
own	juice.	Give	it	a	chance.
Certainly	you	are	not	a	bigger	misfit	than	I	am.
In	India	 I	 feel	at	ease.	The	Western	 tension	 is	not	 there;	neither	 is	 the	Western
speed.	I	am	reminded	when,	for	the	first	time,	the	British	Empire	was	laying	rails
for	railway	trains.
A	British	 officer	was	 looking	 at	 an	 Indian	 sannyasin	who	used	 to	 come	 every
day,	 sit	 under	 a	 tree	 or	 lie	 down	 under	 a	 tree,	 and	watch	 the	 people	working,
putting	down	the	rails,	making	the	arrangements.	He	had	never	seen	such	a	lazy
man:	he	never	did	anything,	he	just	rested	there.
One	day	the	officer	approached	him.	He	had	learned	a	little	bit	of	Hindi	because
of	working	with	Indian	workers,	laborers,	for	years.	So	he	asked	the	man,	"You
come	every	day.
Before	 we	 come	 you	 are	 here,	 and	 when	 we	 go,	 then	 you	 go.	Why	 are	 you
wasting	time	just	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
213
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
lying	down	under	the	tree,	lazy?	You	can	earn	money,	you	can	become	a	laborer.
We	are	in	shortage	of	laborers.	I	can	give	you	a	good	job."
The	man	was	not	even	bothering	to	sit	up.	He	was	lying	down	and	talking	with
the	officer.
He	said,	"The	idea	is	good,	but	I	don't	need	money.	I	get	food	two	times	a	day.
My	other	brothers	work	on	the	farm.	I	have	been	always	this	way.	And	even	if	I
earn	money,	what	I	am	going	to	do	with	it?"
The	officer	said,	"When	you	earn	enough	money,	then	you	can	retire	and	rest."
And	the	man	said,	"This	is	strange,	I	am	already	retired,	and	I	am	resting!	Why
take	this	unnecessarily	long	route?	First	earn	money,	then	get	retired,	then	rest	--
I	 am	 retired	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.	 And	 I	 am	 resting;	 I	 don't	 do	 anything
except	rest."
There	 is	 no	 speed	 in	 the	 Indian	 atmosphere.	 Things	 move	 very	 slowly.	 You
cannot	even	see	the	movement,	they	move	so	slowly.	Centuries	pass...
If	a	man	in	Europe	wakes	up	from	his	grave	after	two	thousand	years,	he	will	not
be	able	to	understand	what	is	happening,	because	in	two	thousand	years	the	West
has	changed	so	much.	But	 if	an	Indian	comes	 to	visit	 India	after	 two	thousand
years,	he	will	be	perfectly	at	home.	Almost	nothing	has	changed!
Leeladhar,	 your	 discomfort	 is	 coming	 from	 your	 own	 conditioning,	 one	 thing.
Second,	 you	 have	 not	 accepted	 your	 unfitness	 in	 its	 totality;	 otherwise	 why
should	one	be	uncomfortable?
And	you	can	be	free	to	do	anything	you	want,	anywhere.	For	example,	I	have	not
been	uncomfortable	anywhere	around	the	world.	I	was	not	uncomfortable	in	the
American	jails.	I	was	not	uncomfortable	in	different	cultures,	different	countries,
different	religions.	I	accept	my	unfitness	with	absolute	joy.
The	first	 three	days	 in	 the	American	jail	and	the	sheriff	of	 the	 jail	came	to	see
me.	He	wondered	what	kind	of	man	I	am,	because	the	inmates	had	become	my
disciples!	I	was	talking	to	 them	about	meditation.	The	nurses	and	the	doctor	--
because	I	was	in	the	hospital	section	--
had	also	joined.	Finally,	the	sheriff	brought	his	wife	and	his	children	also:	"We
may	not	be	able	to	see	this	man	again,	and	what	he	is	saying	makes	sense."
And	the	doctor	--	a	woman,	very	beautiful	woman	--	used	to	come	to	the	hospital
section	only	one	time	in	seven	days;	otherwise	she	was	engaged	in	other	parts	of
the	 jail.	 It	 has	 seven	hundred	 inmates.	But	 for	 those	 three	 days,	 all	 the	 nurses
were	 there,	 the	doctor	was	 there,	 the	whole	staff	was	 there.	The	doctor	 said	 to
me,	 "It	 has	 never	 happened.	 You	 have	 turned	 my	 office	 into	 your	 class!
Otherwise	my	office	is	always	empty."
Because	my	cell	was	very	small...	it	was	meant	only	for	two	persons.	And	there
were	 twelve	 inmates	 in	 the	hospital	 section.	They	all	wanted	 to	be	with	me	as
much	as	possible	--
six	nurses,	four	staff	people,	the	sheriff,	the	assistant	sheriff,	the	doctor	--	so	they
moved	 me	 to	 the	 doctor's	 room.	 And	 she	 told	 me,	 "You	 need	 not	 use	 the
bathroom	that	is	meant	for	the	prisoners.	My	bathroom	is	for	you	as	long	as	you
are	here."
Nirupa	is	here,	David	is	here.	They	were	staying	in	town	to	take	care	of	me,	to
bring	new	clothes,	or	anything	I	needed.	The	sheriff	told	me	in	front	of	them,	"I
would	 like	 to	 come	 to	 see	 your	 commune	where	 such	 silent,	 beautiful	 young
people	--	intelligent,	loving	--	are	living	with	you	and	growing	with	you."
He	 said	 to	 me,	 "Just	 David	 and	 Nirupa	 are	 enough	 proof	 that	 man	 can	 be
transformed."
Otherwise,	American	kids	--	even	the	primary	school	kids	--	are	taking	drugs...
thirteen	and	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
214
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
fourteen	 year-old	 young	 boys	 have	 been	 found	 committing	 murders,	 rape,
suicide.	That	is	the	American	atmosphere.
The	 jails	 are	 so	 full	 that	 the	 magistrate	 has	 to	 think	 before	 he	 sends	 another
prisoner	 to	 the	 jail,	because	some	old	prisoner	has	 to	be	released.	The	 jails	are
packed.	You	can	bring	a	new	prisoner,	but	you	have	to	release	an	old	prisoner.
My	attorneys	who	used	to	come	there	--	Niren	was	my	chief	attorney;	he	is	here
--	they	could	not	believe	I	was	looking	so	happy	and	so	at	ease	and	at	home.	I
said,	"I	have	never	been	able	to	rest	so	much.	The	inmates	are	taking	care,	 the
nurses	are	 taking	care,	 the	doctor	 is	 taking	care.	And	 they	are	all	 interested	 in
only	one	thing:	the	moment	I	am	released	and	I	go	back	to	the	commune,	they	all
want	to	stay	in	the	commune	for	a	few	days."
The	first	day,	the	sheriff	received	a	phone	call	from	Germany	asking	about	me,
and	saying	that	"You	must	be	surprised,	because	this	may	be	the	first	 time	that
you	have	a	man	like	Osho	in	your	jail."	He	was	not	acquainted	with	me.	He	said,
"No,	but	we	have	had	cabinet	ministers,	great	politicians,	so	it	is	not	new	to	us."
But	on	the	third	day	he	came	with	tears	in	his	eyes	when	I	was	leaving	and	he
said,	"I	don't	know	who	has	phoned,	but	I	want	to	apologize,	because	I	gave	him
the	wrong	answer.	In	these	three	days	so	many	flowers	have	come	that	we	don't
have	any	space	to	keep	them;	so	many	telegrams,	so	many	phone	calls	that	we
have	to	keep	two	extra	phone	receivers.
"If	you	find	the	man	just	ask	him	for	me,	to	forgive	me.	The	great	politicians	and
cabinet	ministers	don't	matter.	I	never	in	my	whole	life	had	a	prisoner	like	you	--
and	I	don't	think	I	ever	will	have,	in	my	remaining	years	in	the	service	--	for	the
simple	reason	that	you	have	changed	the	whole	atmosphere	of	my	jail.
"If	 you	 are	 allowed	 to	 be	 here	 for	 three	 or	 four	 months	 this	 will	 be	 your
commune.	 You	 are	 really	 dangerous	 because	 all	 the	 people	 of	 my	 staff	 are
coming	with	their	wives	and	with	their	children	to	have	a	photograph	taken	with
you."
The	poor	prisoners	could	not	manage.	They	were	coming	with	photographs	cut
from	newspapers	 just	 to	get	my	signature:	"We	will	 remember	our	whole	 lives
that	for	three	days	we	were	with	you,	and	in	three	days	we	have	felt	a	change."
People	were	not	making	noise.
Everybody	was	saying,	"Don't	make	noise,	he	will	be	disturbed."
I	have	never	felt	uncomfortable	anywhere.
The	question,	basically	is	to	accept	yourself.	It	is	a	inner	feeling,	nothing	to	do
with	 anything	 outside	 you.	And	 I	 repeat:	 if	 you	 cannot	 feel	 comfortable	 here,
Leeladhar,	you	will	not	find	another	place	in	the	whole	earth	to	be	comfortable.
Nowhere	 else	 is	 the	 uniqueness	 of	 individual	 respected;	 nowhere	 else	 are	 you
loved	as	you	are.	You	have	to	prove,	you	have	to	deserve.
Here	you	don't	have	to	prove	anything,	and	you	don't	have	to	deserve	anything.
You	don't	have	to	be	worthy	of	anything.	This	is	the	way	you	are	and	everybody
is	in	a	tremendous,	accepting,	awareness.	Just	give	it	a	little	time.
"Is	there	such	a	state	as	doing	your	own	thing,	content	and	full	of	gratitude?"
Yes.	That's	my	whole	approach	towards	life:	"doing	your	own	thing	content	and
full	 of	 gratitude..."	 It	 is	 not	 an	 ego	 trip.	 It	 is	 your	 nature	 wanting	 to	 be	 left
undisturbed.
And	here	we	are	not	engaged	in	any	kind	of	work	which	has	to	be	forced	on	you.
This	 place	 has	 to	 leave	 in	 you	 a	 memory	 of	 sheer	 enjoyment,	 of	 silence	 and
beauty.	And	people	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
215
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
who	 are	 non-interfering	 with	 you,	 are	 happy	 in	 your	 happiness.	 Nobody	 is
jealous,	nobody	is	competitive.	Nobody	is	even	comparing.
But	it	all	depends	on	you.
I	have	created	the	space	here.
Now	how	you	use	it,	is	up	to	you.
During	 the	 second	 world	 war,	 at	 the	 Russian	 front,	 an	 Italian	 and	 a	 German
general	 are	 preparing	 an	 attack.	When	 all	 the	 preparations	 are	 ready,	 and	 the
attack	 is	 ready	 to	 be	 launched,	 the	 German	 general	 calls	 his	 servant:	 "Heinz,
bring	me	my	red	coat."
"What,	a	red	coat?"	says	the	Italian	general	surprised.	"How	come?"
"Well,	during	the	battle	I	may	be	hurt;	blood	may	be	flowing,	and	my	soldiers,
seeing	blood,	might	get	demoralized.	So	I	always	wear	a	red	coat	during	battle."
"What	a	great	idea,"	says	the	Italian	general	and	calls	his	servant.
"Giuseppe,	quick,	bring	my	brown	trousers!"
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	BLEW	IT	TODAY.	ONE	MOMENT	OF	UNAWARENESS	FEELS	LIKE	IT
WIPES
OUT	THOSE	MOMENTS	OF	AWARENESS.	WHILE	 PRUNING	 IN	YOUR
GARDEN	I	CUT	DEEPLY	INTO	A	LIVING	TREE	THAT	I	THOUGHT	WAS
DEAD.	THE	VERY
MOMENT	 THE	 AXE	 MADE	 ITS	 DEATH	 BLOW	 I	 KNEW,	 YOU	 KNEW,
EXISTENCE
KNEW,	 I	 HAD	 TAKEN	 LIFE.	 FEELING	 GUILT,	 FEAR,	 STUPIDITY,	 I
FINISHED
CUTTING	THE	TREE,	CARRYING	IT	OUT	OF	YOUR	GARDEN.	OSHO,	I
HAVE	CUT
THOUSANDS	OF	TREES	AND	KILLED	MANY,	MANY	ANIMALS	IN	MY
LIFE,	BUT
NEVER	BEFORE	FELT	HURT	AS	MUCH	AS	I	DID,	AND	DO,	ABOUT	THIS
TREE.
MUKTA	 IS	 AFRAID	YOU'LL	 CUT	OFF	 HER	HEAD.	 SPARE	HER	HEAD
AND	CUT
MINE,	ALONG	WITH	MY	UNAWARENESS.	I'M	SORRY.
Anand	Vibhavan,	it	is	something	tremendously	beautiful	that	reverence	for	life	is
arising	in	you.	But	don't	feel	any	guilt,	neither	fear	nor	stupidity,	because	these
are	parasites.	 Just	do	one	 thing:	become	more	alert	 and	 remember:	before	you
cut	another	tree,	make	sure	that	it	is	dead.
There	is	no	hurry.	It	is	simply	unconsciousness;	otherwise	you	would	have	found
that	it	was	alive.	Perhaps	the	leaves	had	fallen	and	the	tree	was	waiting	for	new
leaves	 to	come.	And	you	could	have	waited	and	watched...	but	guilt	 is	not	 the
right	thing.
You	hurt	the	tree;	now	you	are	hurting	yourself.
Reverence	for	life	does	not	mean	reverence	only	for	others'	life.
It	also	includes	reverence	for	your	own	life	too.
Guilt	is	not	reverence.	Neither	you	are	stupid	--	because	you	became	aware;	not
only	 aware,	 but	 you	 felt	 hurt	 that	 a	 life	 is	 unnecessarily	 destroyed.	 It	 shows
intelligence.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
216
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
And	as	far	as	fear	is	concerned,	don't	be	worried	about	Mukta.	I	have	chopped
her	head	long	ago	--	she	believes	she	has	a	head	--	and	I	will	chop	your	head	too.
But	my	surgery	 is	not	painful.	 It	brings	more	blissfulness	 to	you	 than	you	had
ever	 experienced.	So	 there	 is	no	need	 to	have	 fear.	 Just	have	 awareness,	more
alertness,	more	consciousness.
This	garden	is	not	just	an	ordinary	garden.	These	trees	have	heard	me	as	much	as
you	have	heard	me,	and	 these	 trees	have	 loved	me	as	much	as	you	have	 loved
me.	These	trees	are	as	much	my	disciples	as	you	are.	So	be	respectful	with	them.
With	loving	care,	with	sensitive	alertness,	you	will	not	only	be	a	good	gardener,
you	will	also	become	a	higher	consciousness
--	more	human,	more	divine.
Shower	 on	 these	 trees	 all	 your	 love.	 They	 cannot	 speak,	 but	 they	 are	 very
sensitive.
The	 latest	 experiments	 about	 trees	 are	 so	 revealing	 --	 they	can	even	 read	your
thoughts.
Their	sensitivity	is	far	greater	than	man's	sensitivity.
Scientists	have	developed	certain	instruments	like	the	cardiogram.	They	put	the
cardiogram	on	a	certain	 tree	and	 the	cardiogram	starts	making	a	graph	of	how
the	 tree	 is	 feeling.	 The	 graph	 is	 symmetrical,	 and	 then	 suddenly	 they	 bring	 a
woodcutter	with	an	axe,	and	the	moment	the	tree	sees	the	woodcutter	the	graph
changes.	It	goes	berserk,	the	symmetry	is	lost.	Nothing	has	been	done	to	the	tree,
it	is	just	that	the	woodcutter	has	come	with	the	idea	to	cut	it.	That	idea	is	being
caught	by	the	sensitiveness	of	the	tree,	and	now,	there	are	scientific	ways	to	find
it	out.
The	strangest	thing	is	that	if	 the	woodcutter	is	 just	passing	without	any	idea	of
cutting	the	tree,	the	graph	does	not	change.	It	depends	on	his	idea	--	his	thought
creates	a	certain	wave.
Every	thought	is	being	broadcasted	from	your	mind,	creating	waves	around	you,
and	 those	waves	 are	 picked	up	by	 the	 sensitiveness	 of	 the	 tree.	They	 are	 very
much	alive.
It	is	good	that	you	have	become	aware	of	it.	Don't	lose	this	awareness,	because	it
will	not	only	help	the	trees,	it	will	help	you	too.	It	will	become	your	meditation.
Everything	that	is	being	done	here	has	to	become	your	meditation.
This	 is	 a	 temple,	 and	 we	 are	 here	 just	 for	 a	 single	 reason:	 to	 transcend	 our
darkness	and	our	unconsciousness.
A	man	 goes	 into	 a	men's	 toilet,	 holding	 his	 hands	 outstretched,	 as	 if	 they	 are
paralyzed.	In	the	urinals,	he	taps	another	man	on	the	elbow.
"Excuse	me,	I	wonder	if	you	could	help	me.	I	have	a	problem	with	my	hands	and
need	assistance	in	using	the	urinal.	Would	you	be	so	kind	as	to	open	my	zipper?"
The	other	man	is	very	embarrassed,	but	obliges.	The	first	man	says,	"Thank	you
very	much.	Now	 I	 have	 another	 favor	 to	 ask.	Would	 you	mind	 helping	me	 to
aim?"
The	second	man	blushes,	but	helps	him	aim.	After	he	has	relieved	himself,	 the
first	man	says,	"You	don't	know	how	grateful	 I	am.	Now	please	 just	do	me	up
again."	Nearly	at	the	end	of	his	patience,	the	second	man	does	so.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
217
Chapter	21	-	The	greatest	misfit	in	the	world
The	 first	 man	 turns	 to	 leave,	 and	 looking	 at	 his	 awkwardly-held	 hands,	 says,
"Good.	I	think	my	nail	polish	is	dry	now."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
218
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
22
What	more	do	you	want?
23	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	A	CHILD,	ONE	OF	MY	FAVORITE	GAMES	WAS	TO	IMAGINE	I	WAS
GOING
TO	 DIE	 IN	 THE	 NEXT	 MINUTE.	 I	 ENJOYED	 FEELING	 THE	 TENSION
BUILD	UP
UNTIL	IT	REACHED	A	PEAK	AND	THEN	SLIPPED	INTO	RELAXATION,
AND	I	FELT
AS	 IF	 I	 WAS	 BUBBLING	WITH	 HAPPINESS.	 LATER,	 WHEN	 I	 WAS	 A
TEENAGER,	FOR	A	PERIOD	OF	SIX	MONTHS,	I	WOULD	FREQUENTLY
BE	 AWOKEN	 BY	 A	 FEELING	 OF	 PANIC	 AND	 FEAR,	 A	 SENSE	 OF
IMPENDING	DEATH.	I	WOULD
STRUGGLE	 TO	 PREVENT	 MY	 DYING	 BY	 HANGING	 ON	 TO	 THE
THOUGHT	OF
SOMEBODY	 OR	 SOMETHING	 I	 WANTED	 TO	 LIVE	 FOR.	 THEN	 THE
PANIC	WOULD
SUBSIDE	AND	THE	FEAR	WOULD	GRADUALLY	GO.	THE	LAST	TIME
THIS
HAPPENED	TO	ME	AS	A	TEENAGER,	I	WOKE	FEELING	THE	FEAR	OF
DEATH	THE
STRONGEST	I	EVER	HAD.	BUT	THIS	TIME,	 INSTEAD	OF	PANICKING,
WITHOUT
ANY	CONSCIOUS	DECISION,	 I	 FOUND	MYSELF	ACCEPTING	DEATH,
AND
RELAXING.	 IMMEDIATELY,	 THERE	 WAS	 AN	 EXPLOSION	 OF	 LIGHT
AND	A	SENSE
OF	 BEING	 UPLIFTED	 BY	 BLISS.	 IT	 WAS	 NOT	 UNTIL	 SOME	 YEARS
LATER,	WHEN	 I	 TOOK	 SANNYAS	 AND	 ONE	 DAY	WAS	MEDITATING
ALONE,	THAT	THE	FEAR	OF
DEATH	RETURNED.	I	WAS	OVERWHELMED	BY	THE	INTENSITY	OF	IT,
AND
COULD	 DO	 NOTHING	 TO	 TRANSFORM	 IT	 OR	 EVEN	 REPRESS	 IT:	 I
JUMPED	UP	IN
A	PANIC	AND	TRIED	TO	SHAKE	IT	OFF.	WHY	HAS	THIS	FEAR	BEEN	A
CONSTANT
COMPANION	 THROUGHOUT	 MY	 LIFE,	 AND	 WHAT	 IS	 ITS
SIGNIFICANCE	FOR	ME?
Dhyan	Amiyo,	meditation	and	death	are	very	similar	experiences.	In	death,	your
ego	disappears;	only	your	pure	being	remains.	The	same	happens	in	meditation
too:	the	disappearance	of	the	ego	and	the	presence	only	of	pure	isness,	of	your
being.	The	similarity	is	so	deep	that	just	as	people	are	afraid	of	death,	they	are
also	afraid	of	meditation.	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	are	not	afraid	of	meditation,
you	will	not	be	afraid	of	death	either.
Meditation	prepares	you	for	death.
Our	whole	education	is	only	for	life.	That	is	only	half	an	education,	and	the	other
half	--
which	 is	 far	 more	 important,	 which	 comes	 as	 the	 crescendo	 of	 life	 --	 is
completely	missing	from	all	systems	of	education	that	have	existed	before	or	are
now	in	existence.
Meditation	prepares	you	for	 the	other	half;	 it	helps	you	 to	know	death	without
dying.	And	 once	 you	 have	 known	 death	without	 dying,	 the	 fear	 of	 death	will
disappear	 forever.	 Even	 when	 death	 comes,	 you	 will	 be	 silently	 watching	 it,
knowing	absolutely	that	it	cannot	even	make	a	small	scratch	on	your	being.	It	is
going	to	take	away	your	body,	your	mind,	but	not	you.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
219
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
You	belong	to	the	immortal	life.	Your	experience	was	good;	you	are	saying,	"As
a	child,	one	of	my	favorite	games	was	to	imagine	I	was	going	to	die	in	the	next
minute.	 I	enjoyed	 feeling	 the	 tension	build	up	until	 it	 reached	a	peak	and	 then
slipped	into	relaxation,	and	I	felt	as	if	I	was	bubbling	with	happiness."
Unknowingly,	 you	 were	 doing	 a	 simple	 exercise	 of	 meditation.	 Perhaps	 from
your	 past	 life,	 you	 may	 have	 carried	 the	 knowledge,	 the	 experience	 of	 the
meditation,	but	it	is	one	meditation	amongst	hundreds	of	methods	--	this	is	one
of	 the	methods.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 only	 you,	 Dhyan	 Amiyo;	 many	 children	 go	 on
playing	things	which	are	of	immense	importance.	But	they	cannot	understand	the
importance,	they	can	only	play	them	as	a	game.
For	example,	all	over	the	world,	children	like	to	twirl,	to	whirl,	and	naturally	the
parents	will	stop	them:	"Don't	do	that,	you	may	get	dizzy.	You	may	fall,	you	may
hurt	yourself."	But	all	over	the	world,	children	enjoy	it.	And	it	was	from	seeing
children	enjoying	whirling	that	Jalaluddin	Rumi	got	the	idea	that	there	must	be
something...	 because	 whenever	 you	 see	 a	 child	 whirling,	 his	 face	 changes.	 A
strange	grace	comes	to	his	face;	he	starts	radiating	a	certain	aura,	and	when	he
stops	he	is	so	full	of	joy...
Jalaluddin	Rumi	tried	--	in	the	forest,	so	nobody	makes	a	laughingstock	of	him	--
just	 to	 know	 what	 these	 children	 find	 in	 twirling.	 And	 he	 was	 amazed:	 he
discovered	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	methods	 of	meditation,	 and	 for	 twelve	 hundred
years	 after	 him,	 his	 school	 has	 been	 a	 living	 school.	 His	 school	 is	 called	 the
Whirling	Dervishes;	in	their	temple,	that	is	their	prayer,	that	is	their	meditation.
That	is	their	whole	religion.	They	go	on	twirling	for	hours	together.
Jalaluddin	 himself	 became	 enlightened	 after	 thirty-six	 hours	 of	 continuous,
nonstop	twirling.	And	when	he	was	asked,	"There	is	no	scripture	describing	this
meditation;	how	have	you	found	it?"	He	said,	"Just	by	looking	at	children.	I	tried
it	myself,	and	I	was	amazed	because	the	more	you	twirl,	the	faster	you	go,	soon
you	 become	 aware	 that	 something	 deep	 inside	 you	 is	 absolutely	 still	 and
unmoving.	The	whole	body	 is	moving	and	 the	 faster	 it	moves,	 the	more	 is	 the
contrast	 between	 the	 unmoving	 and	 the	 moving.	 And	 the	 unmoving
consciousness	within	is	my	soul.	That	is	the	center	of	the	cyclone."
Man	 has	 much	 to	 learn	 from	 children	 --	 but	 who	 cares	 about	 children?
Everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 teach	 them	without	 ever	 thinking	about	 a	 simple	 thing:
they	 are	 coming	 out	 of	 life's	 source,	 fresh.	 They	must	 be	 carrying	 something
which	we	have	forgotten.
If	you	go	backwards	and	remember,	you	cannot	go	farther	back	than	your	fourth
year,	or	at	the	most	your	third	year.	Suddenly	there	comes	a	wall;	your	memory
cannot	penetrate	farther	back.	What	happened?	You	lived	those	four	years	--	and
in	 fact,	 those	 four	 years	 were	 the	 happiest	 that	 you	 had	 known.	 But	 your
experience	somehow	has	been	blocked	by	the	society.
It	 is	dangerous	for	 the	society	 that	people	should	be	so	 innocent,	 like	children.
Your	parents,	your	teachers,	your	leaders	--	with	all	the	good	intentions	in	their
hearts	--	are	doing	immense	harm.	They	repress	the	child	in	you,	and	the	child	in
you	is	closer	to	God	than	anything	else.
This	is	why	so	many	mystics	have	insisted:	"Unless	you	are	born	again,	unless
you	become	childlike	again,	you	will	not	know	the	truth	and	you	will	not	know
the	beauty	and	you	will	not	know	the	mystery	of	existence."
You	 can	 go	 backwards,	 remembering,	 and	 then	 suddenly	 comes	 a	China	wall:
that	 is	 the	 time	 when	 your	 parents	 and	 your	 teachers	 started	 destroying	 your
childhood,	making	you	civilized,	making	you	social,	teaching	you	manners	and
etiquette,	sending	you	to	school,	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
220
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
teaching	you	language	and	all	other	worldly	ways.	And	making	every	effort	that
you	forget	completely	your	innocent	days,	your	days	of	paradise.
Everybody	 forgets,	 but	 somewhere	 deep	 down	 in	 the	 unconscious,	 the
experience	of	those	days	goes	on	echoing.	It	is	this	echoing	of	those	experiences
that	sends	you	in	search,	because	you	cannot	accept	your	miserable	life	--	full	of
anxiety	and	tension	and	psychological	sickness
--	as	the	meaning	of	your	being	here.	Vaguely,	somewhere,	you	know	that	there
have	 been	 golden	 moments	 also.	 You	 cannot	 exactly	 remember,	 but	 an
undercurrent	in	your	unconscious	goes	on	creating	a	longing	in	you	to	find	those
lost	moments	again.
Religion	is	basically	the	search	for	childhood:	the	same	innocence,	the	same	joy
in	things,	the	same	fearlessness...	those	magical	eyes,	that	heart	which	was	able
to	dance	with	the	trees,	the	heart	that	was	enchanted	with	the	moon	and	the	stars.
That	space	in	which	existence	was	nothing	but	sheer	glory,	pure	splendor...
Dhyan	Amiyo,	either	accidentally	or	out	of	some	experience	from	the	past	life,
you	were	doing	a	method	of	meditation.	And	 that's	why,	as	 the	 tension	grew...
there	 is	a	 limit,	and	 the	next	moment	 is	going	 to	be	 the	moment	of	death.	You
became	 totally	 concentrated.	 And	 from	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 your	 tension,
suddenly	comes	relaxation.	In	that	relaxation,	you	found	yourself	bubbling	with
happiness.
If	you	had	continued	to	do	that,	your	life	would	have	been	immensely	rich.	You
would	not	have	known	sadness,	unhappiness.	You	would	not	have	known	anger,
jealousy.	You	would	have	known	only	love,	silence,	joy	--	and	for	no	reason	at
all.	It	is	our	natural	state.
Tension	is	not	our	natural	state.	That's	why,	after	a	certain	moment,	tension	has
to	disappear.	For	example,	you	can	keep	your	hand	open	for	as	long	as	you	want,
it	is	its	natural	state.	But	if	you	make	a	fist,	and	the	harder	you	make	your	fist,
how	long	can	you	keep	it?	It	is	a	state	of	tension.	Soon	you	will	find	it	is	tiring,
exhausting	and	in	spite	of	you,	your	fist	will	open.	There	is	a	certain	energy	that
is	exhausted.
The	open	hand	is	relaxed;	no	energy	is	being	spent.	Tension	is	just	like	a	fist	--
too	much	energy	 is	being	spent.	Soon,	you	will	 find	yourself	utterly	exhausted
and	the	tension	will	disappear.	And	in	its	wake,	there	will	be	deep	relaxation.
This	relaxation	is	the	space	in	which	happiness	grows,	and	again	I	repeat:	for	no
reason	at	all.	It	is	not	that	you	are	happy	because	of	something.	You	are	simply
happy.
Happiness	is	your	nature.
Unhappiness	 is	 something	 nurtured,	 you	 have	 learned	 it.	 Every	 credit	 goes	 to
you	 for	 all	 your	 misery,	 but	 for	 happiness,	 you	 cannot	 have	 any	 credit.	 It	 is
natural.	You	were	born	happy.
You	were	happy	in	your	mother's	womb...
Sigmund	Freud	has	a	great	insight;	what	he	says	comes	very	close	to	the	truth.
But	he	was	only	 a	 thinker	 and	not	 a	meditator;	 that's	why	although	he	 is	 very
close	to	the	truth,	he	misses	the	experience	of	truth	himself.
It	 is	 his	 observation,	 objective	 observation,	 that	 the	 search	 for	 religion,	 the
search	 for	 God,	 or	 the	 search	 for	 paradise	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 search	 for	 the
mother's	 womb	 --	 because	 those	 nine	 months	 were	 sheer	 silence,	 utter	 joy,	 a
peace	 that	 passeth	 understanding.	And	 to	 us	 those	 are	 nine	months,	 but	 to	 the
child	 it	 is	 eternity,	 because	 the	 child	 knows	 no	 dates,	 no	 days,	 no	 weeks,	 no
months,	no	calendar.
Each	moment	is	so	full	of	joy,	and	nine	months...	it	is	almost	an	eternity	to	the
child.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
221
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
That	 experience	 also	 remains	 with	 you,	 deep	 in	 your	 unconscious.	 And	 even
after	the	birth,	that	experience	continues	for	at	least	three	to	four	years	--	in	the
girls,	three	years;	in	the	boys,	four	years.	It	is	strange	but	about	everything,	girls
are	always	one	year	ahead.	They	become	sexually	mature	at	the	age	of	thirteen.
Boys	become	sexually	mature	at	the	age	of	fourteen.	In	life,	too,	the	girls	learn
better;	they	learn	with	more	concentration.
You	 can	 see	 in	 the	 schools,	 in	 the	 colleges,	 in	 the	 universities	 --	 the	 boys	 are
scattered	all	over,	 their	minds	are	always	 in	 fragments.	They	want	 to	do	many
things.	The	girls	are	more	together	and	more	concentrated	in	whatever	they	are
doing.	They	 learn	 better,	 they	 learn	 early,	 and	 it	 is	 a	 historical	 fact	 that	 in	 the
past,	there	used	to	be	wise	women	who	were	more	deeply	experienced	about	life.
Christianity	 destroyed	 thousands	of	wise	women,	 burned	 them	alive.	Even	 the
name
"witch"	 --	 which	 means	 "a	 wise	 woman"	 and	 nothing	 else	 --	 became	 so
condemnatory...	and	the	same	happened	in	the	East.	All	the	religions	prohibited
women,	and	I	can	see	that	 the	reason	is	a	great	fear	that	 if	women	are	allowed
the	same	opportunity	as	is	given	to	men,	they	will	be	far	ahead	in	the	experience
of	God.	And	that	is	against	the	ego	of	man.
The	male	ego	has	done	such	great	harm.	Half	of	humanity	has	been	completely
prevented	even	from	entering	the	area	of	religion.	This	was	done	out	of	fear.	So
you	have	Gautam	Buddha	and	you	have	Jesus	and	you	have	Mahavira	and	you
have	Lao	Tzu,	but	you	don't	have	women	of	parallel	height,	because	all	chances
were	taken	away,	all	possibilities	were	destroyed.
My	own	 experience	 is	 that	women	 can	 enter	 into	meditation	more	 easily	 than
men.	Man	has	a	better	head	--	logically,	intellectually,	he	can	go	far	in	search	in
the	outer	world	--	but	the	woman	has	a	better	heart.	She's	more	introvert;	she	can
go	easily,	very	easily,	to	the	innermost	center	of	her	being.
Self-knowledge,	enlightenment,	will	be	 far	easier	 to	a	woman.	For	a	man,	 it	 is
easier	to	become	Alexander	the	Great,	Adolf	Hitler,	Genghis	Khan,	Nadir	Shah.
These	 thousands	of	wars	would	have	been	avoided	 if	 the	woman	had	not	been
completely	 ignored,	 repressed,	 forced	 to	 live	 like	 a	 slave.	And	 she	 constitutes
half	of	humanity.
I	want	 to	say	 to	 the	women	of	 the	whole	world	 that	your	 liberation	movement
has	not	done	anything,	because	it	is	in	the	hands	of	very	stupid	women.	They	are
reactionaries,	not	revolutionaries.	Otherwise,	the	simple	and	the	most	important
thing,	the	first	priority,	is	that	the	women	should	demand	a	separate	vote,	so	that
women	can	only	vote	for	women	and	men	can	only	vote	for	men.	Just	a	simple
and	 single	 step,	 and	 all	 the	 parliaments	 of	 the	 world	 will	 be	 half	 filled	 with
women.	And	the	women	will	be	naturally	in	power	because	man	by	nature	has	a
tendency	to	fight.	He	will	create	parties,	political	parties,	religious	ideologies	--
on	small,	minor,	trivial	things.
So	 if	 the	women	 in	a	parliament	 are	one	 single	whole,	 the	other	half,	 of	men,
will	be	divided	into	at	least	eight	or	ten	parties.	The	whole	world	can	move	into
the	hands	of	women.
And	 women	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 wars,	 women	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 nuclear
weapons,	women	are	not	interested	in	communism	or	capitalism.
All	 these	 "isms"	 are	 from	 the	 head.	Women	 are	 interested	 in	 being	 joyful,	 in
small	things	of	life:	a	beautiful	house,	a	garden,	a	swimming	pool.	Life	can	be	a
paradise,	 but	 it	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 a	 hell	 unless	man	 is	 removed	 from	 power
altogether.
And	he	can	be	removed	so	easily.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
222
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
I	have	so	many	women	sannyasins	--	more	than	men.	And	the	strangest	thing	is
that	 once	 a	 woman	 becomes	 a	 sannyasin,	 she	 remains	 a	 sannyasin.	 Once	 she
starts	meditating,	it	becomes	her	devotion,	a	part	of	her	heart	--	it	is	not	so	with
the	man;	 it	 remains	 only	 an	 intellectual	 search.	There	 are	 exceptions,	 but	 as	 a
rule...
I	have	seen	men	betraying	me	but	not	women.	And	the	reason	is	that	the	man	is
intellectually	convinced.	He	is	with	me...	but	I	am	still	alive,	I	am	not	dead.	So
tomorrow,	I	may	say	something	with	which	his	mind	does	not	agree.	And	just	a
small	disagreement	in	his	mind,	and	his	path	separates	from	mine.	He	is	with	me
only	 to	 the	 extent	 that	 his	 intellect	 is	 nourished	 by	 what	 I	 am	 saying.	 The
moment	he	feels	something	I	am	saying	is	not	rational,	he	is	no	more	with	me.
All	connections	have	dropped.	And	my	problem	is,	that	my	work	is	not	to	feed
your	 intellect.	 If	 I	 talk	 intellectually,	 that	 is	 simply	 to	 persuade	 you	 towards
something	that	goes	beyond	intellect,	that	goes	beyond	reason.
For	the	woman	the	problem	is	not	the	same.	She	is	with	me	not	because	she	is
intellectually	 convinced	 by	me;	 she	 is	with	me	 because	 she	 is	 nourished	 on	 a
deeper	level	than	intellect.	Her	heart	sings	with	me,	beats	with	me,	dances	with
me.	 Her	 connection	 is	 not	 superficial:	 it	 is	 that	 of	 trust,	 not	 of	 intellectual
conviction.	Hence,	 in	 the	whole	of	 history	you	will	 find	 a	 Judas	 around	 every
great	mystic	 and	great	 teacher,	 but	 you	will	 not	 find	 a	 single	woman	who	has
been	a	Judas.	It	is	strange,	in	a	long	history...
Mahavira	 has	 his	 own	 Judas;	 his	 own	 son-in-law	 remained	with	him	 just	with
that	male	 ego,	 hoping	 that	 he	would	be	 the	 successor	 of	Mahavira	because	he
was	his	son-in-law.
Mahavira	had	only	one	daughter,	and	the	daughter	and	the	son-in-law	both	had
become	sannyasins.	For	 twenty	years,	 they	 remained	with	him,	but	 the	 son-in-
law	 was	 insisting	 again	 and	 again:	 "You	 are	 getting	 old.	 Before	 anything
unfortunate	 happens,	 you	 should	make	 it	 known	 to	 your	millions	 of	 disciples
who	is	going	to	be	your	successor."
Mahavira	said,	"Whoever	is	capable	will	succeed	me.	I	don't	have	to	declare	his
name.
Who	 am	 I?	 I	 am	 not	 a	 king;	 my	 treasure	 is	 not	 of	 this	 world.	 Whoever	 is
enlightened	 will	 be	 recognized	 by	 the	 people	 as	 my	 successor,	 you	 need	 not
worry	about	 it."	Frustrated,	he	went	against	Mahavira	and	 took	away	with	him
five	hundred	followers.	And	he	made	many	attempts	on	Mahavira's	life.	Gautam
Buddha	had	his	own	Judas,	and	the	same	story	is	repeated	again	and	again.
As	 far	 as	women	are	concerned,	 the	 situation	 is	 just	 the	opposite.	When	 Jesus
was	crucified,	all	the	twelve	apostles	escaped.	They	were	afraid	that	somebody
in	 the	 crowd	 might	 recognize	 them	 because	 they	 were	 always	 moving	 with
Jesus,	and	everybody	knew	them:
"And	 now	 there	 is	 no	 point	 in	 being	 here,	 unnecessarily	 getting	 caught.	 You
could	be	in	trouble.	Your	master	is	being	crucified;	they	might	at	least	give	you	a
good	beating."	But	three	women	remained	just	at	the	foot	of	the	cross,	not	even
hiding	 in	 the	 crowd	 --	 and	 one	 of	 them	was	 a	 prostitute,	Mary	Magdalene;	 a
prostitute	rises	higher	than	your	twelve	apostles.	They	have	become	great	saints,
but	Mary	Magdalene	is	not	remembered,	is	not	counted	amongst	the	apostles.
The	 second	 was	 another	 woman,	 Martha.	 And	 the	 third	 woman	 was	 Jesus'
mother,	Mariam,	whom	even	Jesus	had	been	insulting	because	she	was	a	woman.
In	a	crowd,	Jesus	was	speaking	and	his	mother	was	standing	outside	the	crowd.
Somebody	 shouted,	 "Jesus,	 your	mother	 is	 here	 and	 she	 has	 not	 seen	 you	 for
years;	you	have	been	traveling	all	over	the	place.
Tell	the	people	to	make	way	for	her	to	come	in.	She	just	wants	to	see	you."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
223
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
And	the	answer	that	Jesus	gave	is	ugly.	He	said,	"Tell	that	woman"	--	he	could
not	even	say	"tell	my	mother"	 --	 "Tell	 that	woman	 that	my	father	 is	 in	heaven
and	except	my	father	in	heaven,	I	don't	have	any	relation	with	anybody	else."
This	 is	 the	man	who	is	 talking	about	 love.	This	 is	 the	man	who	is	even	saying
"Love	your	enemy."	But	don't	love	your	mother.
Dhyan	Amiyo,	you	should	start	your	childhood's	accidental	meditation,	because
it	 will	 suit	 you	 immediately.	 And	 it	 has	 happened	 here	 also:	 "One	 day	 I	 was
meditating	 alone	 and	 the	 fear	 of	 death	 returned.	 I	 was	 overwhelmed	 by	 the
intensity	of	it	and	could	do	nothing	to	transform	or	even	repress	it.	I	jumped	up
in	panic	and	tried	to	shake	it	off."
You	missed	a	great	opportunity.	Again,	the	same	space	was	opening	up	but	you
behaved	 like	 a	 grown-up,	 not	 like	 a	 child.	 A	 child	 is	 not	 afraid.	 He	 knows
nothing	 about	 death:	 he	 is	 so	 close	 to	 life	 that	 death	 is	 a	 faraway	 thing,
inconceivable	to	him.
You	also	remember	that	"The	last	time	this	happened	to	me	as	a	teenager,	I	woke
feeling	 the	 fear	 of	 death	 the	 strongest	 I	 ever	 had.	 But	 this	 time,	 instead	 of
panicking	without	 any	conscious	decision,	 I	 found	myself	 accepting	death	 and
relaxing.	 Immediately	 there	 was	 an	 explosion	 of	 light	 and	 a	 sense	 of	 being
uplifted	by	bliss."
You	know	the	secret:	you	have	to	accept	the	fear.	In	acceptance,	it	disappears.	In
rejecting	it,	in	escaping	from	it,	you	are	nourishing	it.	You	are	feeding	it.
There	 is	 no	 fear,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 death.	 Death	 is	 a	 fiction	 and	 fear	 is	 the
shadow	of	the	shadow.	And	you	have	experienced	it	accidentally,	without	doing
meditation	you	have	known,	that	if	you	remained	in	the	space	that	was	opening
up,	without	 fear	 and	without	 panicking	 but	 accepting	 it,	 accepting	 even	 death
and	relaxing	--	immediately	there	was	"an	explosion	of	light	and	a	sense	of	being
uplifted	by	bliss."
You	 need	 not	 be	 told;	 you	 know	 already	 what	 has	 to	 be	 done.	 So	 when
meditating,	 if	 you	 come	 close	 to	 the	 same	 space	 again	 and	 fear	 arises,	 rejoice
that	you	are	close	to	the	death	of	the	ego.	The	death	of	the	ego	is	another	name
of	relaxation,	because	the	ego	is	your	tension.
The	ego	is	your	anxiety,	the	ego	is	your	anguish.	The	ego	is	your	angst.
The	 moment	 you	 are	 relaxed,	 you	 are	 not.	 There	 is	 simply	 relaxation	 --	 an
immense	peace	and	joy.	And	if	it	happens	in	meditation,	consciously,	and	if	you
have	 to	go	 through	 it	 again	and	again	 --	because	 such	an	experience	has	 to	be
lived	again	and	again;	that's	the	only	way	to	deepen	it	--	soon	you	will	find	there
is	no	fear,	there	is	nothing	to	panic	about.	On	the	contrary,	you	are	entering	into
the	most	blissful	experience	ever.	You	are	entering	into	your	childhood	again,	in
deep	 innocence,	 a	 freshness	 and	 a	 joy,	 and	 a	 music	 that	 is	 absolutely	 silent,
without	any	sound.
If	this	experience	goes	on	growing,	it	will	become	your	enlightenment	one	day.
You	will	be	uplifted	to	your	highest	potential.	All	darkness	will	disappear;	there
will	 be	 only	 light	 and	 there	 will	 be	 only	 ecstasy.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
meditate.	 Then	 it	 becomes	 your	 natural	 state,	 just	 like	 breathing,	 just	 like
heartbeats.
Amiyo,	you	are	 fortunate	because	 it	 rarely	happens	on	 its	own.	But	we	are	 so
unconscious
--	do	you	see	your	unconsciousness?	You	passed	through	everything	--	you	knew
fear,	you	accepted	fear,	you	experienced	great	relaxation,	you	experienced	bliss,
you	experienced	being	uplifted	by	light	--	and	still	you	are	afraid	to	go	into	the
same	space.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
224
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
But	such	is	our	unconsciousness.	We	are	behaving	like	drunkards,	not	knowing
what	we	are	doing,	not	knowing	what	is	happening	to	us,	why	it	is	happening	to
us.	And	even	when	we	are	very	close	to	something	great	--	we	go	on	missing.
Just	be	a	little	more	alert,	a	little	more	aware.	You	have	the	key	and	that	key	will
work	to	open	all	the	doors	of	the	mysteries	of	your	inner	being.
A	 nervous	 young	 priest,	 about	 to	 deliver	 his	 first	 sermon,	 asks	 an	 older	 priest
how	he	might	calm	down	a	bit.	He	advises	the	young	priest	to	fill	his	water	jug
with	martinis.
Well,	the	new	priest	preaches	up	a	storm	and	afterwards,	he	asks	the	older	priest
what	he	thought.
"You	 did	 very	 well,	 but	 I	 have	 just	 a	 few	 criticisms:	 there	 are	 ten
commandments,	 not	 twelve;	 there	 are	 twelve	 apostles,	 not	 ten.	 David	 slew
Goliath,	 he	 did	 not	 kick	 the	 shit	 out	 of	Goliath.	Next	week,	 there	 is	 a	 toffee-
pulling	contest	at	St.	Peters,	not	a	peter-pull	at	St.
Toffee's.	The	Holy	Cross	 is	 not	 to	 be	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 'Big	T'.	 Please	 do	 not
refer	 to	 our	 savior	 Jesus	 Christ	 and	 the	 apostles	 as	 'J.C.	 and	 the	 boys'.	 And
restrain	yourself	from	calling	the	father,	the	son,	and	the	holy	ghost,	'Big	daddy,
junior	 and	 the	 spook.'	And	 lastly,	 kindly	 do	 not	 call	 the	Blessed	Virgin	Mary,
'Mary	with	the	cherry.'"
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO
THERE	 IS	 IMMENSE	 TRUST	 INSIDE	 ME	 THAT	 BEING	 WITH	 YOU
EVERYTHING
HAPPENS	SO	RIGHT	THAT	THERE	IS	NOTHING	MORE	TO	DO	BUT	LET
IT	HAPPEN.
SO	 I'M	NOT	FORCING	ANYTHING	AND	MORE	AND	MORE	THERE	 IS
ONLY	THIS
SWEET,	 PAINFUL	 LOVE	 FOR	 YOU	 AND	MORE	 SILENCE	 AND	MORE
LAUGHTER
AND	 MORE	 LOVE.	 YET	 SOMETIMES	 WHEN	 YOU	 SPEAK	 ABOUT
"DOING
EVERYTHING	FOR	ENLIGHTENMENT,"	A	DOUBT	ARISES	IN	ME	THAT
MAYBE	I'M
CHEATING	MYSELF:	AM	I	NOT	DOING	ENOUGH?
Shantam	 Shivano,	 your	 question	 is	 "There	 is	 immense	 trust	 inside	 me."	 But
immense	 trust	 does	 not	 mean	 absolute	 trust.	 Howsoever	 immense	 it	 may	 be,
there	 is	 space	 enough	 for	doubts.	So	 first	 you	have	 to	understand:	 just	 trust	 is
enough.	Don't	make	it	immense.
Just	trust	is	absolute.
And	remember,	trust	is	not	belief.	Belief	is	in	ideas,	in	ideologies,	in	doctrines,
in	theologies,	in	philosophies.	Trust	is	just	the	purest	form	of	love;	it	has	nothing
to	do	with	any	ideology.	Doubt	can	arise	if	you	have	a	belief	--	these	are	subtle
connections	 --	 doubt	 is	 connected	with	 the	 belief.	Doubt	 has	 no	 possibility	 in
trust.
In	fact,	belief	is	nothing	but	a	method	of	repressing	doubt,	and	when	you	repress
a	doubt	then	there	is	always	a	possibility:	any	weak	moment,	and	the	repressed
will	spring	up	with	great	vengeance	and	destroy	your	whole	belief	system.	But
trust	is	not	repressing	any	doubt.
Trust	has	no	connection	with	any	kind	of	belief	system.
Trust	 is	 falling	 in	 love	 --	 not	 the	 biological	 love,	 but	 the	 love	 that	 can	 exist
between	two	beings,	two	souls,	two	consciousnesses.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
225
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
You	say,	"Being	with	you,	everything	happens	so	right	that	there	is	nothing	more
to	 do	 but	 let	 it	 happen."	 So	 I	 am	 not	 forcing	 anything;	 that's	 perfectly	 right.
Forcing	 is	 violence,	 forcing	 is	 repression,	 forcing	 is	 dangerous.	Whatever	 you
force	will	take	its	revenge.
My	whole	 teaching	 can	 be	 reduced	 into	 two	words:	 Let	Go.	 Just	 go	with	 the
stream	and	you	are	doing	perfectly	well.
"And	more	 and	more	 there	 is	 only	 this	 sweet	 painful	 love	 for	You,	 and	more
silence	and	more	laughter	and	more	love.	Yet,	sometimes	when	You	speak	about
'doing	 everything	 for	 enlightenment,'	 a	 doubt	 arises	 in	 me	 that	 maybe	 I	 am
cheating	myself:	Am	I	not	doing	enough?"
This	 doubt	 arises	 only	 because	 there	 is	 some	 space	 left	 empty,	 not	 filled	with
trust.
"Immense"	is	your	trust,	but	immense	does	not	mean	total.	And	less	than	total	is
going	to	have,	once	in	a	while,	this	doubt,	that	doubt.
Otherwise,	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 doubt.	 You	 are	 growing	 in	 silence,	 you	 are
growing	in	love,	you	are	feeling	more	and	more	laughter	--	these	are	the	signals
that	you	are	on	the	right	path.
And	when	 I	 speak	 of	 doing	 everything	 for	 enlightenment,	 you	 and	 everybody
have	to	remember	that	I	am	speaking	to	so	many	people	--	not	only	to	those	who
are	present	here,	but	also	to	those	who	are	spread	all	over	the	world.	If	you	take
every	statement	personally,	you	will	be	unnecessarily	getting	into	trouble.
I	have	to	take	care	of	so	many	people	who	are	so	different	from	each	other,	and	I
am	 answering	 different	 people	 in	 different	 stages,	 in	 different	 situations.	 You
have	 to	 remember	 always,	 to	 look	 at	 your	 own	 growth:	 if	 it	 is	 going	 towards
love,	 compassion,	 silence,	 blissfulness,	 joy,	 laughter,	 celebration,	 and	 silence,
then	 remember	 that	 I	 must	 have	 answered	 somebody	 else.	 You	 are	 doing
perfectly	well.	And	sometimes	these	kinds	of	doubts	can	disturb	your	growth.
Whenever	 I	 had	 said,	 "Do	 everything	 for	 enlightenment,"	 I	 must	 have	 been
answering	some	--	and	there	are	many	--	who	are	so	lazy,	that	what	to	say	about
everything,	they	are	not	even	ready	to	do	anything.	They	are	simply	waiting	for
me	to	do	something.	If	it	were	possible,	if	nature	allowed,	I	would	have	done	it,
but	it	is	against	the	law	of	nature	itself.
You	have	to	find	your	truth	yourself.	And	for	that,	you	have	to	risk	everything.
Truth	cannot	be	anything	else	but	your	 first	priority.	 It	 cannot	be	one	amongst
many	desires.	It	is	not	a	desire,	it	is	a	wholehearted	longing,	as	if	you	are	lost	in
a	desert	and	for	days	you	have	not	been	able	to	find	water.	Now,	thirst	is	not	a
desire;	now	every	cell	of	your	body	is	crying
"thirst."	There	are	not	even	words	to	say,	it	is	just	an	experience:	you	are	burning
with	thirst,	you	are	on	fire.
Enlightenment	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience	 in	 human	 life.	Certainly	 you	 have	 to
leave	 your	 trivial	 engagements	 --	 but	 remember	 that	 I	 am	 talking	 to	 so	many
people	that	everything	is	not	for	you.	You	have	to	choose.
One	 thing	 you	 have	 always	 to	 remember:	 if	 symptoms	 of	 love	 and	 joy	 and
laughter	are	growing	in	you,	then	there	is	no	need	to	worry.	And	there	is	no	need
to	be	in	a	hurry,	either.	It	is	better	to	go	at	your	pace,	slowly	but	very	centered
and	grounded,	so	that	you	don't	have	to	take	any	step	backwards.	You	don't	have
even	to	look	backwards.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
226
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Drop	your	doubt.	And	remember,	I	am	saying	drop,	I'm	not	saying	repress.	I	am
not	 saying	 fight	with	 it.	 I	 am	not	 saying	 that	 you	have	 to	do	 anything	with	 it.
Simply	drop	it.	It	has	no	business	in	your	beautiful,	slow	growth.
Remember	one	thing:	there	are	seasonal	flowers;	within	six	weeks	they	are	there
but	 within	 six	 weeks	 they	 are	 gone,	 too.	 And	 there	 are	 trees	 like	 Cedars	 of
Lebanon,	four	thousand	years	old,	two	hundred	feet	high.	They	don't	grow	in	six
weeks.	Their	growth	is	very	slow.
But	 their	 beauty,	 their	 longing	 to	 touch	 the	 stars,	 is	 almost	 like	 the	 human
longing	to	find	the	divine	in	existence.
Drop	the	doubt	and	always	remember	that	I	am	talking	to	so	many	people...	their
needs	are	different,	 their	sicknesses	are	different,	 they	need	different	medicines
and	different	treatment.
Whenever	you	have	any	problem,	you	can	ask.	 It	 is	good	 that	you	have	asked
rather	 than	 carrying	 it	 within	 your	 heart.	 Doubt	 is	 as	 dangerous	 to	 spiritual
growth	as	cancer	is	to	the	body.
Abie	made	a	small	fortune	in	California	in	the	wholesale	clothing	business.	After
he	provided	for	his	 family,	he	gave	all	his	wealth	 to	 the	 local	 temple.	He	slept
well	at	night	knowing	that	his	family	was	secure	and	that	God	was	looking	after
him,	so	he	had	not	a	care	in	the	world.
Imagine	 how	 surprised	 Abie	 felt	 when	 his	 Malibu	 beachfront	 home	 was
endangered	by	an	oncoming	hurricane.	First,	the	local	fire	department	came	and
evacuated	Abie's	family.	But	Abie	told	the	fire	chief:	"I	will	not	leave	my	home.
You	cannot	help	me,	only	God	can	save	me."	The	waves	began	to	crash	against
the	 shore.	 The	 road	 around	Abie's	 home	was	 engulfed	 in	water.	Without	 fear,
Abie	decided	to	wait	out	the	storm.
The	Navy	sent	 in	a	Coast	Guard	cutter	 to	rescue	Abie,	as	 the	waves	were	now
crashing	against	his	huge	front	window.	The	captain	ordered,	"Abie,	please!"
But	Abie	insisted,	"You	cannot	help	me,	only	God	can	save	me."
Now	 Abie	 was	 alone	 on	 the	 roof.	 In	 the	 distance,	 a	 tidal	 wave	 was	 fast
approaching	 the	 shore.	A	US	Air	Force	helicopter	 hovered	 above	Abie's	 head.
But	Abie	 refused	help,	 such	was	Abie's	 faith	 in	 his	 lord	 and	master.	Well,	 the
tidal	wave	did	its	thing,	and	Abie	looked	up	at	the	Pearly	Gates,	soaking	wet	and
totally	pissed	off	at	God.
"But	 Abie,"	 the	 gatekeeper	 said,	 "God	 wants	 to	 see	 you	 right	 away."	 Abie's
response	was,
"Tell	God	to	go	to	hell."
The	 gatekeeper	 suggested	 to	 Abie	 that	 God	 is	 not	 a	 saint	 and	 to	 give	 God	 a
second	chance.
Abie	 relented	and	was	 shown	 into	God's	 room.	God	was	 so	pleased	 to	 see	his
beloved	Abie.
"Abie,	why	are	you	so	mad	at	me?"
Abie	said,	in	a	cool,	distant	voice,	"Because	when	I	needed	you	the	most	down
on	earth,	you	did	not	lift	a	finger	to	help	me."
God	said,	 "You've	got	 to	be	kidding,	Abie.	 I	 sent	 the	 fire	department,	The	US
Navy,	and	the	US	Air	Force.	What	more	do	you	want?"
You	have	to	remember	that	trust	does	not	mean	that	you	are	not	supposed	to	do
anything.
Trust	simply	means	that	whatever	you	are	doing	is	in	the	right	direction,	because
the	man	you	trust	in	cannot	take	you	in	a	wrong	direction.	But	you	have	to	do	the
walking.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
227
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
I	 can	 only	 show	 you	 the	 path,	 I	 cannot	walk	 for	 you.	And	 there	 are	 so	many
paths	and	there	are	so	many	different	people	who	need	different	paths,	so	each
one	of	you	has	to	remember:	all	that	I	am	saying	is	not	for	you.
You	have	to	be	very	alert:	whatever	helps	to	strengthen	your	progress	is	for	you.
Whatever	 weakens	 your	 progress	 is	 not	 for	 you;	 it	 must	 have	 been	 said	 to
somebody	else.	On	some	other	path	it	may	be	helpful.	To	somebody	else,	it	may
be	immensely	needed.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
228
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	23
Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being
24	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THE	OTHER	DAY	THAT	YOU	WANT	NO	PART	OF
ANY
RELATIONSHIP	 WE	 MIGHT	 IMAGINE	 WE	 HAVE	 WITH	 YOU	 --
CERTAINLY	NOT
OUR	HATE,	BUT	NOT	EVEN	OUR	LOVE.	AND	 I	 CAN'T	 SAY	 I	 BLAME
YOU.
NEVERTHELESS,	WHEN	YOU	 STAND	BEFORE	US,	 DANCING,	 I	 FEEL
LIKE	 A	 FOUNTAIN	 THAT	 LEAPS	 INTO	 LIFE	 AT	 THE	 SIGHT	 OF	 YOU,
AND	TUMBLES	TO
YOUR	FEET	AS	IF	 IT	KNOWS	THAT	IS	WHERE	IT	BELONGS.	 I	KNOW
MY	LOVE	IS
RIDDLED	 WITH	 ALL	 SORTS	 OF	 UNDESIRABLE	 THINGS;	 BUT	 IT
RUSHES
TOWARDS	YOU	WITHOUT	EVEN	STOPPING	TO	ASK	MY	PERMISSION.
OSHO,	PLEASE	EXCUSE	THE	MESS,	BUT	I	CAN'T	HELP	IT.
Maneesha,	 the	word	 "love"	 can	 have	 two	 absolutely	 different	meanings	 --	 not
only	different,	but	diametrically	opposite.	One	meaning	 is	 love	as	 relationship;
the	other	meaning	is	love	as	a	state	of	being.
When	 I	 said	 I	 don't	want	 any	 relationship	 --	 at	 least	 from	my	 side,	 because	 I
cannot	interfere	with	you,	so	I	cannot	say	anything	from	your	side;	that	you	have
to	understand	yourself	--	I	was	denying	love	as	relationship.
The	moment	love	becomes	a	relationship,	 it	becomes	a	bondage,	because	there
are	expectations	and	there	are	demands	and	there	are	frustrations,	and	an	effort
from	both	sides	to	dominate.	It	becomes	a	struggle	for	power.
Relationship	is	not	the	right	thing,	at	least	for	my	people.	But	love	as	a	state	of
being	 is	 a	 totally	 different	word.	 It	means	 you	 are	 simply	 loving;	 you	 are	 not
creating	a	relationship	out	of	it.	Your	love	is	just	like	the	fragrance	of	a	flower.	It
does	not	create	a	relationship;	it	does	not	ask	you	to	be	a	certain	way,	to	behave
in	a	certain	way,	 to	act	 in	a	certain	way.	 It	demands	nothing.	 It	 simply	shares.
And	 in	sharing	also	 there	 is	no	desire	 for	any	 reward.	The	sharing	 itself	 is	 the
reward.
When	love	becomes	like	a	fragrance	to	you,	then	it	has	tremendous	beauty.	And
something	 that	 is	 far	 above	 the	 so-called	 humanity	 --	 it	 has	 something	 of	 the
divine.
You	are	saying,	"I	cannot	help..."	Neither	can	I.	When	love	is	a	state,	you	cannot
do	anything	about	it.	It	will	radiate,	but	it	will	not	create	any	imprisonments	for
anybody,	nor	will	it	allow	you	to	be	imprisoned	by	anybody	else.
Your	question	is	significant.	I	will	go	into	it	point	by	point.	You	say,	"I	heard	you
say..."
This	 is	 to	be	remembered:	whenever	you	state	anything	 that	 I	have	said,	never
say,	"You	said	it."	Say	it	exactly	the	way	Maneesha	is	doing.	She	has	learned	in
many	 years'	 time	 that	 it	 is	 not	 necessarily	 the	 same,	what	 I	 say	 and	what	 you
hear.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
229
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	You	hear	according	to
your	own	prejudices,	according	 to	your	own	mind.	You	 interpret	and	 then	you
project	that	meaning,	as	if	I	have	said	it.	The	right	way	is,	"I	heard	you	say..."	All
the	 Buddhist	 scriptures	 start	 with	 the	 same	 sentence:	 "I	 have	 heard	 Gautam
Buddha	say..."
I	 asked	 one	 very	 respected	 Buddhist	 monk	 --	 world	 famous	 because	 of	 his
writings	about	Gautam	Buddha	--	why	every	scripture	begins	with,	"I	have	heard
Gautam	Buddha	say..."
He	 said,	 "You	bring	 strange	questions.	 I	 have	been	 translating	 these	 scriptures
my	whole	life	but	I	never	thought	about	it.	Do	you	think	it	has	any	meaning?"
I	 said,	 "It	 has	 not	 only	 meaning,	 it	 has	 tremendous	 meaning.	 Whoever	 was
writing	 it	was	absolutely	aware	 that,	 at	 the	most,	he	could	 say,	 'I	have	heard...
perhaps	Buddha	was	saying	something	else.	Perhaps	he	was	saying	what	I	have
heard,	but	I	cannot	impose	my	meaning,	my	projection	on	him.	I	can	be	wrong.'"
And	this	is	true,	because	as	Gautam	Buddha	died...	He	never	wrote	anything,	and
he	never	allowed	in	his	life	that	anything	he	said	be	written,	for	a	simple	reason:
If	you	are	listening,	there	is	no	need	to	make	any	notes.	And	if	you	are	making
notes,	 you	 are	 not	 listening;	 your	 whole	 mind	 is	 concerned	 with	 writing	 the
notes.	 You	 are	 behaving	 like	 the	 modern	 tourist,	 who	 is	 a	 cartoon	 character,
rushing	from	one	place	to	another	place	with	a	camera	hanging	on	one	shoulder,
a	 telescope	hanging	on	another	 shoulder,	many	kinds	of	 lenses	 in	 a	bag.	Even
standing	before	the	Taj	Mahal,	he	is	not	seeing	it.	He	is	photographing	it.	Back
home	when	the	album	is	ready,	he	will	look	at	it	with	great	joy	from	the	golden
memories	of	his	tour.	But	he	has	never	really	seen	--	his	being	was	diverted	by
the	camera.
When	I	was	a	teacher	in	the	university,	I	never	allowed	any	student	to	take	notes
--	because	the	moment	you	start	taking	notes,	you	stop	hearing.	You	know	that
later	on	you	can	read	your	notes,	so	there	is	no	need	to	be	in	the	present.	That
psychological	 truth	 is	 the	 reason	why	Buddha	 did	 not	 allow	 anybody	 to	write
down	what	he	was	saying.	He	said,	"When	I	am	dead	you	can	write	anything	you
want."
And	the	first	thing	that	his	disciples	did	was	collect	forty-two	years'	discourses,
morning	 and	 evening,	 personal	 interviews	 given	 to	 emperors,	 to	 kings	 and	 to
disciples.	And	you	will	be	surprised	 to	know	that	 there	were	 thirty-six	schools
immediately,	 saying	 that	he	has	 said	 this,	not	 this.	Their	only	difference	was...
They	were	all	devoted	to	Gautam	Buddha,	but	they	were	saying	that	he	has	said
this	--	and	there	were	thirty-six	versions.
So	 there	 are	 thirty-six	 versions	 of	 Buddhist	 scriptures.	 They	 are	 not	 reporting
Buddha,	 they	 are	 reporting	 what	 they	 have	 heard	 --	 according	 to	 their
consciousness,	according	to	their	intelligence,	according	to	their	presence.
So	it	 is	not	 just	 in	beginning	the	question;	 it	has	 to	be	a	deep	understanding	in
you:	 always	 remember	 to	make	 it	 clear	 that	 you	 are	 reporting	what	 you	 have
heard.	It	is	not	necessarily	synonymous	with	what	I	have	said.
Maneesha	is	saying,	"I	heard	You	say"	--	and	I	appreciate	her	understanding	in
using	 the	 words	 "I	 heard	 --	 the	 other	 day	 that	 you	 want	 no	 part	 of	 any
relationship	we	might	imagine	we	have	with	you."
You	 have	 heard	 rightly,	Maneesha.	 I	 don't	 want	 any	 part	 of	 any	 relationship,
imagined	 or	 not	 imagined.	 It	 may	 be	 very	 real	 to	 you	 --	 it	 may	 not	 be	 your
imagination,	it	may	be	factual.
You	 are	 accustomed	 to	 creating	 relationships,	 from	 your	 very	 childhood.	 A
strange	man,	and	you	have	to	create	a	relationship	with	him	as	your	father.	You
cannot	ever	be	certain	that	he	is	your	father...
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
230
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	I	have	heard	about	one
palmist	who	used	to	read	people's	hands.	An	atheist,	a	young	man	who	does	not
believe	 in	 God	 and	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 any	 kind	 of	 bullshit	 --	 palmistry,
astrology	--	went	 to	 the	palmist	and	said,	"If	your	science	is	 true,	 just	read	my
hand	and	tell	me	where	my	father	is	right	now."
The	 palmist	 looked	 at	 his	 hand	 and	 said,	 "Your	 father	 has	 gone	 fishing."	 The
atheist	 laughed.	He	 said,	 "That's	what	 I	 say:	 it	 is	 all	 nonsense.	My	 father	 has
been	dead	for	three	years;	how	can	he	go	fishing	today?"
The	palmist	 said,	 "That	 is	not	my	business,	but	 the	 truth	 is,	 the	man	who	died
was	not	your	father.	Your	real	father	is	fishing.	You	go	to	your	mother	and	ask.	If
she	is	sincere	and	honest,	she	will	tell	you	that	the	man	who	died	was	not	your
father	--	although	you	had	created	a	relationship	because	you	were	told	that	he	is
your	father."
Your	whole	life	is	surrounded	by	many	kinds	of	relationships.	I	don't	want	any
kind	of	relationship.	Relationship	as	such,	real	or	imaginary,	is	a	very	subtle	kind
of	 psychological	 slavery.	 Either	 you	 enslave	 the	 other,	 or	 you	 become	 a	 slave
yourself.
Another	 point	 to	 be	 noted	 is	 that	 you	 cannot	 enslave	 somebody	 without
becoming	 a	 slave	 yourself.	 Slavery	 is	 a	 double-edged	 sword.	 One	 may	 be
stronger,	one	may	be	weaker,	but	in	every	relationship	you	become	the	jailer	and
the	other	becomes	 the	prisoner.	From	his	 side,	 he	 is	 the	 jailer	 and	you	are	 the
prisoner.	And	this	 is	one	of	 the	fundamental	causes	of	humanity	 living	 in	such
sadness,	in	such	a	sorrowful	state.
You	 have	 heard	 me	 rightly:	 I	 don't	 want	 any	 part	 of	 any	 relationship,	 "...
certainly	not	our	hate,	but	not	even	our	love."	From	my	side,	I	will	not	allow	any
relationship;	I	will	not	nourish	any	relationship.	But	you	are	free	to	suffer	--	that
is	your	birthright.
How	can	I	prevent	you,	if	you	start	having	a	relationship	of	hate	with	me?	And
hate	 is	much	 stronger	 a	 relationship	 than	your	 love,	because	your	 love	 is	very
superficial.	 Your	 hate	 is	 very	 deep.	 Your	 hate	 is	 your	 whole	 animal	 heritage.
Your	love	is	only	a	potential	for	the	future;	it	is	not	an	actuality,	but	only	a	seed.
But	 your	 hate	 is	 full-fledged,	 fully	 grown	 --	 thousands	 of	 years	 of	 your	 past
moving	through	different	life	forms.	It	has	had	time	and	space	to	grow.	It	is	only
in	man	that	the	change	starts	happening.
I	cannot	prevent	anybody	from	hating	me,	so	how	can	I	prevent	anybody	from
loving	me?
All	that	I	can	do	is	to	explain	that	the	moment	hate	or	love	or	anything	becomes
a	relationship,	it	loses	its	purity.
Let	your	love	be	your	state	of	being.	Not	that	you	fall	in	love,	but	just	that	you
are	loving.
It	is	simply	your	nature.	Love,	to	you,	is	just	the	fragrance	of	your	being.	Even	if
you	are	 alone	you	are	 surrounded	by	 loving	 energy.	Even	 if	 you	 touch	 a	dead
thing,	like	the	chair,	your	hand	is	showering	love	--	it	does	not	matter	to	whom.
The	loving	state	is	unaddressed.	And	I	am	not	preventing	you	from	being	in	the
state	of	love,	but	you	can	be	in	the	state	of	love	only	if	you	drop	the	old	mind
pattern	of	relationships.
Love	is	not	a	relationship.
Two	persons	can	be	very	loving	together.	The	more	loving	they	are,	 the	 less	 is
the	possibility	of	any	relationship.	The	more	loving	they	are,	the	more	freedom
exists	between	them.	The	more	loving	they	are,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	any
demand,	any	domination,	any	expectation.	And	naturally,	there	is	no	question	of
any	frustration.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
231
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	You	say,	"And	I	can't
say	I	blame	You."	You	understand	it	rightly.	I	have	allowed	people	to	have	their
real	or	imaginary	love	relationship	with	me	--	for	the	simple	reason	that	unless
they	are	with	me,	there	is	no	possibility	of	transforming	their	relationship	into	a
state	of	being
--	knowing	perfectly	well	that	their	relationship	is	not	reliable.	No	relationship	is
reliable,	and	particularly	with	a	man	with	whom	the	relationship	is	one-sided.	It
is	like	a	bridge	which	is	supported	only	by	one	bank	of	the	river,	and	the	other
bank	does	not	support	it.	It	is	hanging	in	the	air;	it	is	going	to	fall.
And	 I	 have	 burned	 my	 fingers	 thousands	 of	 times,	 because	 the	 people	 who
thought	they	loved	me...	I	have	seen	them	change	to	hating	me,	for	some	trivial
reason.
Love	is	beyond	reason.
Relationship	is	part	of	 the	business	world.	Just	a	slight	change	in	 the	situation,
and	it	evaporates.	It	has	no	solidity.
I	have	showered	my	love	without	any	conditions,	and	yet	there	have	been	many
people	 who	 have	 taken	 advantage	 of	 it,	 in	 many	 ways.	 And	 because	 of	 their
loving	imagination,	they	were	expecting	something	from	me.	Man	is	so	blind,	he
cannot	see	it.	When	I	don't	expect	anything	from	you,	at	least	remember	that	you
cannot	expect	anything	from	me	either.
And	when	 their	 expectations	 are	 not	 fulfilled	 --	 and	 they	 are	 not	 going	 to	 be
fulfilled	--
then	 immediately	 love	 turns	 into	 hate.	 And	 it	 has	 left	 wounds	 in	 my	 heart,
because	I	have	simply	given	love,	never	expected	anything	from	them,	and	they
have	 turned	 into	 enemies	 because	 of	 their	 expectations	 --	 in	which	 I	 have	 no
part.	I	have	never	promised	them	anything.
Expectations	 are	 there,	 frustrations	 are	 there	 --	 but	 first	 they	 were	 projecting
expectations;	 now	 they	 are	 projecting	 frustrations.	 Neither	 could	 they	 see	 last
time,	nor	are	they	able	to	see	this	time,	that	they	are	surrounded	with	their	own
unconscious	ideas.	And	they	are	suffering.
And,	 just	 as	 when	 they	 were	 imagining	 love,	 they	 were	 appreciating	me,	 not
knowing	me	at	all,	now	they	are	condemning	me.	And	to	condemn	me	they	are
creating	lies	--	and	perhaps	in	absolute	unawareness.	Just	as	they	believed	their
imagination	before,	the	same	game	continues;	still	they	go	on	believing	in	their
lies.	I	have	been	asked	to	refute	them.	That	 is	not	possible.	I	have	loved	them;
they	have	been	my	disciples.	 It	 is	below	me	 to	criticize	 their	 lies	or	 to	expose
their	lies.
That's	why	I	want	you	to	remember:	don't	have	any	expectations.	Love	because
love	is	your	own	inner	growth.	Being	loving,	you	are	calling	your	spring	closer.
Your	love	will	help	you	to	grow	towards	more	light,	towards	more	truth,	towards
more	freedom.	But	don't	create	a	relationship.
"Nevertheless,	 when	 you	 stand	 before	 us,	 dancing,	 I	 feel	 like	 a	 fountain	 that
leaps	into	life	at	the	sight	of	you,	and	tumbles	to	your	feet	as	if	it	knows	that	is
where	it	belongs."
I	have	not	been	prohibiting	you.	If	love	comes	as	a	spontaneity,	suddenly,	like	a
fountain,	asking	nothing	in	return,	then	it	is	one	of	the	greatest	treasures.
"I	 know	my	 love	 is	 riddled	 with	 all	 sorts	 of	 undesirable	 things,	 but	 it	 rushes
towards	you	without	even	stopping	to	ask	my	permission."
Love	 is	 a	 fire.	 The	more	 pure	 it	 is...	 all	 the	 riddles,	 all	 the	 problems	 will	 be
burned.	 It	 is	 love	 as	 relationship	 which	 will	 go	 on	 creating	 more	 problems,
"riddled	with	all	sorts	of	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
232
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	undesirable	things."
But	a	spontaneous	love	is	a	totally	different	thing.	We	don't	have	another	word,
that	is	the	difficulty.
"Osho,	please	excuse	the	mess.	But	I	just	can't	help	it."
There	is	no	need	to	be	worried	about	the	mess.	Just	remember	one	thing:	love	is
capable	of	destroying	everything	else,	 just	don't	 let	 it	 become	a	 relationship	 --
then	love	will	disappear,	and	in	the	name	of	love,	domination,	politics	will	take
place.	Then	problems	will	go	on	increasing.
I	 am	 against	 all	 kinds	 of	 relationships.	 For	 example,	 I	 don't	 like	 the	 word
"friendship,"	but	I	love	the	word	"friendliness."	Friendliness	is	a	quality	in	you,
friendship	again	becomes	a	relationship.
Maneesha,	there	is	nothing	wrong	with	love.	In	fact,	without	love	everything	is
wrong.	 But	 love	 is	 so	 valuable	 that	 it	 should	 be	 protected	 from	 any	 kind	 of
pollution,	contamination,	any	kind	of	poisoning.	Relationship	poisons	it.	I	want
the	world	to	consist	of	individuals.	Even	to	use	the	word	"couple"	hurts	me.	You
have	destroyed	two	individuals,	and	a	couple	is	not	a	thing	of	beauty.
Let	 the	 world	 be	 only	 of	 individuals,	 and	 whenever	 love	 spontaneously
blossoms,	sing	it,	dance	it,	live	it;	don't	create	chains	out	of	it.	Neither	try	to	hold
somebody	in	bondage,	nor	allow	anybody	to	hold	you	in	bondage.
A	world	consisting	only	of	free	individuals	will	be	a	truly	free	world.
It	is	one	of	the	greatest	needs	of	man	to	be	needed.	Hence	I	cannot	conceive	of
any	time	when	love	will	not	be	in	existence.	As	long	as	there	are	human	beings,
love	 will	 remain	 their	 most	 cherished	 experience.	 And	 it	 is	 something	 that	 is
available	on	the	earth,	but	does	not	belong	to	the	earth.	It	gives	you	wings	to	fly
like	an	eagle	across	the	sun.
Without	love	you	are	without	wings.
But	 because	 it	 is	 such	 a	 nourishment	 and	 such	 a	 need,	 all	 the	 problems	 have
arisen	 around	 it.	 You	want	 your	 lover	 or	 your	 beloved	 to	 be	 available	 to	 you
tomorrow	too.	It	has	been	beautiful	today,	and	you	are	worried	about	tomorrow.
Hence	marriage	 came	 into	 existence.	 It	 is	 just	 the	 fear	 that	 perhaps	 tomorrow
your	lover	or	your	beloved	may	leave	you	--	so	make	it	a	contract	before	society
and	before	 the	 law.	But	 it	 is	 ugly	 --	 it	 is	 absolutely	 ugly,	 disgusting.	To	make
love	a	contract	means	you	are	putting	law	above	love;	it	means	you	are	putting
the	collective	mass	above	your	 individuality	and	you	are	 taking	 the	 support	of
the	 courts,	 of	 the	 armies,	 of	 the	 police,	 of	 the	 judges,	 to	make	 your	 bondage
absolutely	certain	and	safe.
Tomorrow	morning...	one	never	knows.	Love	comes	like	a	breeze	--	it	may	come
again,	 it	may	not	come.	And	when	 it	does	not	come,	 then	 just	because	of	 law,
because	of	marriage,	because	of	 social	 respectability,	 almost	 all	 the	 couples	 in
the	world	are	reduced	to	prostitution.
Living	with	a	woman	that	you	don't	love,	living	with	a	man	that	you	don't	love,
living	 for	 safety,	 living	 for	 security,	 living	 for	 financial	 support,	 living	 for	any
reason	except	love,	makes	it	nothing	but	prostitution.
I	 would	 like	 prostitution	 to	 disappear	 completely	 from	 the	 world.	 All	 the
religions	have	been	wanting	that	--	that	there	should	be	no	prostitution.	But	this
is	 how	 human	 stupidity	 is:	 these	 same	 religions	 that	 want	 there	 to	 be	 no
prostitution	are	the	causes	of	prostitution,	because	on	the	one	hand	they	support
marriage,	and	on	the	other	hand	they	are	against	prostitution.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
233
Chapter	23	 -	Love...	not	a	 relationship	but	a	 state	of	being	Marriage	 itself	 is	a
prostitution.	 If	 I	 trust	 my	 love,	 why	 should	 I	 get	 married?	 The	 very	 idea	 of
getting	married	is	a	distrust.	And	something	that	is	coming	out	of	distrust	is	not
going	to	help	your	love	grow	deeper	and	higher.	It	is	going	to	destroy	it.
Maneesha,	I	am	not	preventing	you	from	being	loving.	In	fact,	that's	my	whole
religion:	 to	 love,	but	not	 to	destroy	 love	by	something	fake	 --	marriage	or	any
other	kind	of	relationship.
Love	is	authentic	only	when	it	gives	freedom.	Let	this	be	the	criterion.
Love	is	true	only	when	it	does	not	interfere	in	the	privacy	of	the	other	person.	It
respects	 his	 individuality,	 his	 privacy.	 But	 the	 lovers	 that	 you	 see	 around	 the
world,	their	whole	effort	is	that	nothing	should	be	private;	all	secrets	should	be
told	 to	 them.	 They	 are	 afraid	 of	 individuality;	 they	 destroy	 each	 other's
individuality,	 and	 they	 hope	 that	 by	 destroying	 each	 other,	 their	 lives	 will
become	 a	 contentment,	 a	 fulfillment.	 They	 simply	 become	 more	 and	 more
miserable.
Be	 loving,	 and	 remember:	 anything	 real	 is	 always	 changing.	 You	 have	 been
given	wrong	notions	that	a	true	love	remains	forever.	A	true	roseflower	does	not
remain	forever.	A	living	being	himself	has	to	die	one	day.
Existence	 is	 a	 constant	 change.	 But	 the	 notion,	 the	 idea	 that	 love	 should	 be
permanent	if	it	is	true...	and	if	love	disappears	one	day,	then	the	natural	corollary
is	that	it	was	not	true.
I	want	 you	 to	 know;	 love	 came	 suddenly;	 it	was	 not	 because	 of	 any	 effort	 on
your	part.	It	came	as	a	gift	of	nature.	At	that	time	you	would	not	have	accepted	it
if	you	had	been	worried	about	its	going	suddenly	one	day.	The	way	it	comes,	it
goes.
But	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 worried,	 because	 if	 one	 flower	 has	 faded,	 other
flowers	will	be	coming.	Flowers	are	going	to	come	forever,	but	don't	cling	to	one
flower.	Otherwise	soon	you	will	be	clinging	to	a	dead	flower,	and	that's	what	the
reality	is:	people	are	clinging	to	a	dead	love	that	once	was	alive.	Now	it	is	only	a
memory	and	a	pain	and	you	are	stuck	because	of	respectability,	because	of	law.
Karl	Marx	had	 the	 idea,	 the	 right	 idea,	 that	 in	 communism	 there	would	be	no
marriages.
And	when	revolution	happened	in	Russia,	in	the	first	four,	five	years,	they	tried
to	make	love	a	freedom.	But	then	they	became	aware	of	practical	difficulties	of
which	Marx	was	not	aware	--
he	 was	 only	 thinking	 --	 and	 the	 greatest	 difficulty	 was	 that	 if	 there	 is	 no
marriage,	 family	disappears,	 and	 family	 is	 the	backbone,	 the	very	 spine	of	 the
society,	of	the	nation.	If	the	family	disappears,	then	the	nation	cannot	last	long.
And	after	 just	five	years	of	revolution	the	Communist	party	of	Russia	changed
the	whole	 idea.	Marriage	was	 again	 supported;	 divorce	was	 allowed,	 but	 very
reluctantly	 --	 every	 obstacle	 was	 created	 for	 divorce,	 so	 that	 the	 family	 unit
remains,	 because	 now	 they	 were	 interested	 in	 having	 the	 nation.	Without	 the
nation	there	would	be	no	politicians,	there	would	be	no	government.
And	since	then	they	have	never	talked	about	it	--	that	one	of	Marx's	fundamental
ideas	was	that	marriage	came	into	existence	because	of	private	property,	so	when
private	property	disappears,	marriage	has	to	disappear.	Nobody	talks	about	it.	I
have	been	talking	to	communists,	but	they	have	fallen	into	the	same	trap	as	all
religions.	Karl	Marx'	DAS
KAPITAL	has	become	their	HOLY	BIBLE,	holy	KORAN;:	you	cannot	change
anything	in	it.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
234
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	I	said,	"That's	true,	I
am	not	saying	to	change	anything	in	it	--	but	follow	it!"	They	are	not	following	it
either.	 They	 have	 started	 worshiping	 it.	 That	 is	 the	 whole	 strategy	 of	 man	 to
avoid	any	authentic	revolution	in	the	world:	worship.
I	don't	want	the	family	to	exist,	I	don't	want	the	nations	to	exist	--	I	don't	want
the	world	to	be	divided	into	parts.	I	want	one	world	consisting	of	free	individuals
living	 in	 spontaneous	 love,	 living	 in	 silence,	 playfulness,	 without	 any
condemnation	of	 pleasure,	without	 any	 fear	 of	 hell	 and	without	 any	desire	 for
reward	in	heaven	--	because	we	can	create	the	paradise	here.
We	have	every	potential	to	create	it,	but	we	are	not	using	it.	On	the	contrary,	we
are	creating	every	hindrance:	the	earth	should	not	become	a	paradise.
I	 am	not	 against	 love.	 I	 am	 so	much	 in	 favor	of	 love;	 that's	why	 I	 am	against
relationships,	 against	marriages.	 It	 is	 possible	 that	 two	 persons	may	 live	 their
whole	lives	together.	Nobody	is	saying	that	you	have	to	separate,	but	this	living
together	will	be	only	out	of	 love,	without	 interfering	and	 trespassing	 into	each
other's	individuality,	into	each	other's	private	soul.	That	is	his	dignity.
You	can	be	loving,	you	can	be	love,	so	don't	feel	worried	about	it.	But	if	you	are
simply	loving,	if	you	are	simply	love,	then	there	is	no	possibility	of	you	turning
into	hate.	Because	there	is	no	expectation,	you	cannot	be	frustrated.
But	I	am	talking	about	love	as	a	spiritual	phenomenon,	not	as	biology.	Biology	is
not	love,	it	is	lust.	Biology	is	interested	in	continuing	all	the	species;	the	idea	of
love	is	just	a	biological	bribe.	The	moment	you	have	made	love	to	a	woman	or	to
a	man,	suddenly	you	find	you	are	no	 longer	 interested,	at	 least	 for	 twenty-four
hours.	And	 it	 depends	 on	 your	 age	 --	 as	 you	 become	 older,	 forty-eight	 hours,
seventy-two	hours...
There	 is	 a	 new	 commander	 of	 a	 base	 of	 the	 French	 Foreign	 Legion,	 and	 the
captain	is	showing	him	around	all	the	buildings.	After	he	has	made	the	rounds,
the	commander	looks	at	the	captain	and	says,	"Wait	a	minute.	You	haven't	shown
me	that	small	blue	building	over	there.	What's	that	used	for?"
The	captain	says,	"Well,	sir,	you	see,	that	is	where	we	keep	the	camel.	Whenever
the	men	feel	the	need	for	a	woman..."
"Enough!"	says	the	commander	in	disgust.
Well,	two	weeks	later,	the	commander	himself	starts	to	feel	in	need	of	a	woman.
He	 goes	 to	 the	 captain	 and	 says,	 "Tell	 me	 something,	 captain."	 Lowering	 his
voice	and	glancing	furtively	around,	he	asks,	"Is	the	camel	free	anytime	soon?"
The	captain	says,	"Well,	let	me	see."	He	opens	up	his	book.	"Why,	yes,	sir,	the
camel	is	free	tomorrow	afternoon	at	two	o'clock."
The	commander	says,	"Put	me	down."
So	the	next	day	at	two	o'clock	the	commander	goes	to	the	little	blue	building	and
opens	the	door.	Inside	he	finds	the	cutest	camel	he	has	ever	seen.	He	closes	the
door.
The	captain	hears	a	great	 roaring	and	screaming,	so	he	runs	up	and	bursts	 into
the	hut.	He	finds	the	commander	naked,	covered	in	camel	hair	and	mud.
"Ahem,	begging	your	pardon,	sir,"	says	the	captain,	"but	wouldn't	it	be	wiser	to
do	as	all	the	other	men	do	--	ride	the	camel	into	town	and	find	a	woman?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
235
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
DOES	JOY	ARISE	OUT	OF	THE	HEART	OR	OUT	OF	THE	BEING?	 IF	 IT
COMES
OUT	OF	THE	HEART,	DOES	IT	DROP	AWAY	WHEN	ONE	REACHES	THE
BEING?	IF
SO,	HOW	COME	YOU	ARE	RADIATING	SO	MUCH	JOY?	OSHO,	I	AM	SO
ATTACHED	TO	JOY	AND	GRACE.	DO	I	EVEN	NEED	TO	DROP	THEM?
Satyam	Prema,	it	is	a	beautiful	question.	"Does	joy	arise	out	of	the	heart	or	out
of	the	being?"	Joy	arises	out	of	the	being,	but	passes	through	the	heart.
The	heart	is	the	first	to	receive	the	joy	of	the	being.	And	the	heart	is	the	vehicle
to	express	the	joy	to	the	outside	world;	hence	the	misunderstanding	can	be	there,
that	perhaps	joy	arises	out	of	the	heart.	It	only	comes	through	the	heart;	it	arises
out	of	being.	But	being	is	deeper	inside.	Heart	is	only	an	instrument,	a	medium,
a	vehicle.
So	 you	 need	 not	 be	 worried,	 as	 your	 question	 shows.	 "If	 it	 comes	 out	 of	 the
heart,	 does	 it	 drop	 away	when	 one	 reaches	 the	 being?"	The	 expression	 of	 joy
from	 the	 heart	 becomes	 fuller	 as	 one	 reaches	 the	 being,	 it	 does	 not	 drop.	 In
reaching	 the	 being,	 the	 passage	 of	 the	 heart	 becomes	 cleaner,	 wider,	 more
expressive.	You	need	not	be	afraid	that	you	will	have	to	drop	joy	also.
We	are	in	search	of	joy,	and	the	greatest	joy	is	when	you	have	reached	the	being.
Then	the	heart	will	be	expressing	it	at	the	maximum;	right	now	once	in	a	while	a
ray	of	joy	passes	the	heart.
"If	so,	how	come	You	are	radiating	so	much	with	joy?"	I	am	not	radiating	with
joy.	 Once	 you	 are	 centered	 in	 your	 being,	 you	 are	 joy,	 you	 are	 love,	 you	 are
blissfulness,	you	are	ecstasy.
These	are	no	longer	happening	to	you;	these	are	your	natural	qualities.
"Osho,	I	am	so	attached	to	joy	and	grace:	Do	I	even	need	to	drop	them?"	If	you
are	 attached,	 you	 will	 not	 get	 them	 in	 the	 first	 place;	 dropping	 is	 out	 of	 the
question.	You	have	 to	drop	attachment.	The	moment	you	drop	attachment,	you
will	have	joy	and	you	will	have	grace.
But	 such	 questions	 go	 on	 in	 everybody's	 mind.	 They	 are	 simple,	 but	 our
understanding	 is	not	deep	enough	 to	 see	 that	which	 is	very	clear.	 I	 am	 talking
against	 attachment;	 it	 is	 attachment	 that	 is	destroying	your	 capacity	 to	 express
joy	and	grace.	But	rather	than	dropping	attachment,	you	are	becoming	attached
to	joy	and	grace.
How	can	you	be	attached	to	something	that	you	don't	have?	You	don't	have	joy,
you	 don't	 have	 grace	 --	 just	 ideas,	 empty	 containers	with	 no	 content.	Because
once	you	know	joy,	you	know	there	is	no	need	to	be	attached;	it	is	impossible	to
be	 without	 joy.	 Once	 you	 know	 grace,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 attachment	 or
dropping	the	attachment;	grace	becomes	your	natural	expression	in	every	gesture
--	from	your	eyes,	from	your	face,	from	your	hands.	Whatever	you	do,	there	will
be	grace	and	there	will	be	joy.
Your	 attachment	 to	 joy	 and	 grace	 makes	 me	 wonder:	 perhaps	 you	 have	 seen
people	like	me	who	are	joyous...	even	if	I	 try	to	remember,	I	cannot	remember
what	misery	used	to	be.
The	very	language	is	almost	forgotten.	Seeing	joyous	people	you	want	to	imitate
them.	You	want	 to	grab	 joy	and	cling	 to	 it.	But	 remember,	all	great	values	are
killed	the	moment	you	cling	to	them.	And	no	great	value	can	be	imitated.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
236
Chapter	 23	 -	 Love...	 not	 a	 relationship	 but	 a	 state	 of	 being	You	 see	 beautiful
people,	joyous	people,	loving	people,	silent	and	serene	people,	and	a	greed	arises
in	you:	"These	are	the	qualities	I	must	have."	That	is	the	fear	that	has	come	into
your	question.	You	don't	have	them,	so	the	question	of	dropping	them	does	not
arise.	First	have	 them	and	 then	 try	 to	drop	 them!	Nobody	has	ever	 succeeded.
You	will	be	a	unique	person	if	you	find	enlightenment	and	can	drop	it.
A	French	couple,	an	Irish	couple,	and	a	Polish	couple	are	having	dinner	together.
The	Frenchman	says	to	his	wife,	"Pass	me	the	sugar,	Sugar."
Not	to	be	outdone,	the	Irishman	says,	"Could	you	pass	me	the	honey,	Honey?"
Most	impressed	by	these	clever	endearments,	the	Pole	leans	over	to	his	wife	and
says,
"Pass	me	the	pork,	Pig."
Avoid	 copying;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 do	 something	 stupid.	 But	 everybody	 is
imitating	everybody	else	in	the	world.
It	 is	 very	 strange	 to	 see	 why	 people	 imitate.	 Can't	 they	 find	 their	 own
individuality?	And	can't	they	enjoy	being	themselves?
Any	kind	of	stupid	fashion	and	people	will	imitate,	thinking	that	"perhaps	if	all
these	 intelligent	 people	 are	 doing	 it	 and	 I	 am	 not	 doing	 it,	 I	 will	 be	 thought
unintelligent."	But	imitation	is	unintelligent.
It	is	perfectly	good	to	be	in	search	of	your	being,	which	is	the	source	of	joy	and
bliss	and	truth	and	love	and	all	that	is	valuable	in	existence.	Of	course	it	needs
the	 heart	 for	 a	 few	 values	 to	 be	 expressed,	 and	 mind	 for	 other	 values	 to	 be
expressed.	 Your	 being	 is	 utterly	 intelligent,	 but	 intelligence	 can	 be	 expressed
only	 through	 the	mind.	And	 your	 being	 is	 immensely	 loving,	 but	 love	 can	 be
expressed	only	through	the	heart.
Right	 now	 you	 have	 forgotten	 about	 the	 being	 and	 you	 are	 only	 carrying
instruments	with	nothing	to	express.	It	is	just	like	carrying	a	guitar,	and	you	don't
know	why	you	are	carrying	this	thing	and	what	it	is	all	about.
An	 ancient	 story	 is...	 In	 India	 there	 are	 very	 refined	 instruments	 of	 music;
nowhere	else	in	the	world	has	such	refinement	happened.	Just	one	single	man	--
who	 lives	 in	 the	Himalayas	and	comes	once	 in	a	while	 to	 the	plains	 --	plays	a
special	veena	which	used	to	exist	in	the	past.
And	many	musicians	 used	 to	 play	 it,	 but	 now	only	 one	 person	 knows	 how	 to
play	it.	It	 is	called	rudra	veena.	Rudra	is	another	name	of	Shiva;	Shiva	used	to
play	it.	To	play	it	needs	such	a	long	discipline,	four	or	five	hours'	practice	every
day	for	years;	then	only	can	you	bring	those	subtle	notes	out	of	it.
The	 ancient	 story	 is	 that	 in	 one	 house	 there	was	 a	 strange	musical	 instrument
which	had	been	 there	 for	generations.	Nobody	knew	what	 to	do	with	 it,	 and	 it
was	a	nuisance.	It	had	to	be	cleaned,	dust	would	gather	on	it,	and	it	was	taking
up	 space	 in	 the	 room.	And	 sometimes	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	 a	 rat	would
jump	on	it	and	create	noise.
Finally	 they	decided,	 "It	 is	 useless	 for	us;	 it	 is	 better	 to	get	 rid	of	 it."	So	 they
went	out	and	threw	it	on	the	garbage	pile	by	the	side	of	the	road.
They	had	not	even	reached	back	home	and	they	heard	such	sweet	music...	they
had	 never	 even	 imagined.	 So	 they	 turned	 back	 --	 a	 beggar	 was	 playing	 the
instrument,	and	a	crowd	had	gathered.
The	 beggar	 knew,	 he	was	 a	musician,	 but	 a	musician	 of	 such	 old	 and	 ancient
instruments	 that	 even	 to	 find	 people	who	 could	 understand	 it	was	 difficult,	 so
there	was	no	possibility	for	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
237
Chapter	23	-	Love...	not	a	relationship	but	a	state	of	being	him	to	earn	anything.
He	 had	 become	 a	 beggar	 so	 that	 he	 could	 continue	 discovering	 old,	 ancient
instruments	 about	 which	 we	 have	 completely	 forgotten.	 And	 as	 he	 saw	 this
instrument	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 it,	 because	 he	 had	 been	 in	 search	 of	 this
instrument	for	years.
There	was	utter	silence	in	the	crowd	--	everybody	who	was	passing	on	the	road
stopped.
The	 people	 of	 the	 house	 came	 back,	 and	 when	 he	 stopped	 playing	 they	 said,
"That	instrument	belongs	to	us."
The	 beggar	 said,	 "Remember	 one	 thing:	 a	 musical	 instrument	 belongs	 to	 one
who	knows	how	to	play	it,	there	is	no	other	kind	of	ownership.	You	have	thrown
it	in	the	garbage.	You	have	insulted	an	immensely	valuable	thing.
"And	what	will	you	do	with	 it?	Again	 it	will	gather	dust	and	you	will	have	 to
clean	it.
Again	rats	will	make	noise	in	the	night	and	disturb	your	sleep.	This	instrument
can	be	played	only	if	one	knows	how	to	play	a	few	other	instruments.	They	are
the	 steps,	 and	 this	 is	 the	 end,	 and	 I	 have	 been	 searching	 for	 it.	 All	 other
instruments	I	have	found,	but	this,	the	final	instrument,	was	missing.	You	cannot
claim	ownership	of	it.
"If	you	can	play	 it	here,	before	 the	crowd,	 it	 is	yours.	Otherwise,	 it	belongs	 to
me."
Music	is	not	property;	it	is	art,	it	is	love.	It	is	devotion,	it	is	prayer.	You	cannot
possess	it.
The	same	is	my	feeling	about	your	being.
You	have	 it,	 but	 you	don't	 possess	 it	 because	you	don't	 know	how	 to	play	 the
instrument	of	your	being.	All	that	you	know	is	the	mind,	which	is	only	a	vehicle;
the	 heart,	 which	 is	 only	 a	 vehicle.	 But	 they	 are	 empty.	 Your	 thinking	 leads
nowhere.	Your	heart	remains	at	the	point	of	lust,	and	never	gets	to	know	love.
Search	for	your	being	and	everything	else	will	follow	it	on	its	own	accord.	You
don't	 have	 to	 drop	 anything	 --	 you	 cannot	 drop	 anything.	 They	 are	 your
innermost	 qualities;	 they	 will	 radiate	 on	 their	 own.	 Your	 heart	 will	 be	 full	 of
love;	your	mind	will	be	full	of	intelligence.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
238
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
24
All	our	doings	are	disturbances
24	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 FIND	THAT	THE	TRUE	MOMENTS	OF	 JOY	AND	PEACE	 IN	MY	LIFE
COME
WHEN	 I	 AM	 THE	WITNESS.	 WITNESSING	 SEEMS	 TO	 COME	 EASIER
WHEN	I	MAKE
SOME	 EFFORT	 FOR	 IT,	 SUCH	 AS	 NOW,	 IN	 VIPASSANA	GROUP.	 YOU
TALKED
RECENTLY	ABOUT	THE	FUTILITY	OF	WILL,	BUT	FOR	ME,	 IT	SEEMS
SOME
EFFORT	 OR	 WILL	 IS	 NEEDED	 FOR	 THE	 GROWTH	 OF	 AWARENESS.
WOULD	YOU
PLEASE	COMMENT?
Ramfakeer,	it	is	possible	to	create	a	certain	awareness	through	effort	and	through
will	but	it	will	not	be	the	true	awareness.
That	which	is	created	by	you	cannot	be	eternal.	That	which	is	forced	by	you,	will
immediately	 disappear	 the	moment	 you	 drop	 the	 effort.	 You	 forget...	 and	 you
cannot	will	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	Will	 needs	 tremendous	 energy;	 the	 effort
will	be	very	tiring.
And	after	the	awareness	that	is	created	by	will	disappears,	you	will	fall	deep	into
unawareness,	 deeper	 than	 you	were	 before.	Will	 is	 an	 instrument	 for	 creating
false	things.	You	can	create	an	ego	through	will	power	because	ego	is	false.	But
you	 cannot	 create	 your	 being,	 it	 is	 already	 there.	 And	 so	 is	 the	 case	 with
awareness:	 the	 authentic	 awareness	 is	 not	 created	 by	 you,	 it	 is	 discovered	 by
you.	 And	 the	 discovery	 needs	 no	 effort	 on	 your	 part	 because	 you	 are	 the
problem,	your	efforts	are	the	hindrances.
You	 have	 to	 be	 absent	 --	 with	 all	 your	will	 power,	 with	 all	 your	 efforts.	 You
simply	 have	 to	 give	 way,	 and	 then	 there	 will	 be	 a	 totally	 different	 quality	 of
awareness	--	spontaneous,	joyous,	relaxing,	rejuvenating,	and	you	can	never	be
tired	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 simply	 your	 nature.	 Even	 in	 your	 sleep	 it	 will	 remain	 there,
burning	like	a	small	candle	in	the	darkness	of	sleep.
That	which	is	created	by	will	cannot	be	of	the	beyond,	it	can	only	be	something
below	you.
It	 is	 your	 creation	 --	 it	 cannot	 be	 bigger	 than	 you.	 And	 that	 which	 you	 are
creating	has	a	cause:	your	will,	your	effort.	The	moment	the	cause	is	removed,
the	flame	of	awareness	will	be	gone.
Your	will	was	functioning	like	a	fuel.
I	will	not	support	 it.	It	 is	fake.	And	because	you	don't	know	the	authentic,	you
cannot	make	the	distinction.
Please	try	to	be	in	touch	with	the	spontaneous	--	even	a	moment's	glimpse	and
you	will	see:	the	difference	is	so	vast...	One	is	just	manufactured	by	you,	with	all
your	weaknesses,	with	all	your	frailties,	with	all	your	unconsciousness	--	and	the
other	comes	from	the	beyond.
The	other	is	divine,	and	only	the	divine	can	liberate	you.	Only	the	divine	can	be
your	eternal	peace,	silence,	blissfulness.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
239
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
You	are	 saying,	 "I	 find	 that	 the	 true	moments	 of	 joy..."	Have	you	 ever	 known
untrue	 moments	 of	 joy?	 Either	 joy	 is,	 or	 is	 not.	 Have	 you	 ever	 experienced
untrue	moments	of	joy?
What	do	you	mean	by	"true	moments	of	joy"?
Certainly,	you	are	comparing	with	your	moments	of	hypocrisy,	when	you	try	to
appear	 to	 be	 happy,	 joyful,	 and	 you	 know	 you	 are	 not;	 your	 smile	 is	 just	 an
exercise	of	the	lips.	The	heart	is	not	behind	it;	most	probably	it	is	just	a	way	to
hide	your	tears.	You	are	afraid	if	you	don't	start	laughing,	you	may	start	crying;	it
is	better	to	laugh	so	you	are	not	exposed	to	others.
People	try	in	every	way	to	hide	their	misery,	their	pain,	their	anguish.	Just	go	to	a
Lions	Club	or	a	Rotary	Club	and	see	people	--	everybody	seems	enlightened,	and
the	 same	 idiots,	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day	 in	 life,	 are	 behaving	 as
unconsciously	as	anybody	else.	But	they	are	simply	following	a	ritual.	You	are
supposed	to	smile,	you	are	supposed	to	look	happy.	Slowly,	slowly,	you	simply
become	a	supposition.
Mrs.	Reagan	boarded	a	train	in	Washington	late	one	night	and	was	escorted	to	an
upper	berth.	Nancy	climbed	up,	stretched	out	and	tried	to	sleep.	However,	a	man
in	 the	 lower	 berth	 was	 snoring	 intolerably.	 His	 loud	 snores	 became	 so
unbearable,	 the	 President's	 wife	 leaned	 over	 and	 jabbed	 the	 man	 with	 her
umbrella.
He	 awoke	 immediately,	 looked	 up	 at	 her	 and	 said.	 "It	won't	 do	 you	 no	 good,
lady,	I	had	a	good	look	at	you	when	you	got	on	the	train."	People	are	showing
one	thing,	thinking	something	else.	Now	when	he	was	looking	at	Nancy,	he	was
not	showing	what	was	going	on	in	his	mind.
We	have	become	so	pseudo,	and	 to	a	pseudo	personality,	nothing	of	value	can
ever	happen.
Ramfakeer,	I	would	like	you	to	remember	that	either	you	have	moments	of	joy
or	you	don't	have.	There	is	no	third	alternative	because	the	third	alternative	will
be	 simply	 fake,	 untrue,	 dishonest.	 And	 once	 you	 become	 accustomed	 to	 the
dishonest,	to	the	insincere	within	yourself,	then	your	darkness	will	start	getting
darker.	Rather	 than	moving	 towards	 light,	 you	will	 be	moving	 towards	 darker
spaces	of	your	being.
You	are	saying,	"I	find	that	the	true	moments	of	joy	and	peace	in	my	life	come
when	 I	 am	 the	witness."	 You	 have	 never	 experienced	 the	witness,	 because	 to
experience	 the	 witness	 is	 to	 go	 beyond	 peace,	 is	 to	 go	 beyond	 joy,	 is	 to	 go
beyond	everything	into	absolute	nothingness	and	silence.	There	is	no	experience.
Witnessing	 is	 not	 an	 experience.	Witnessing	 is	 going	 beyond	 all	 experiences.
Experiences	are	other	than	you;	witnessing	is	your	very	being.	Experiences	are
like	clouds	in	the	sky	--
sometimes	very	beautiful	--	white	clouds,	black	clouds	with	silver	lines	shining
through	 them,	 or	 rainbows	 passing	 through	 them,	 or	 at	 the	 time	 of	 sunrise	 or
sunset,	when	 the	whole	 sky	 becomes	 psychedelic...	But	 the	 clouds	 are	 not	 the
sky.
You	are	not	your	experiences.	Your	experiences	are	just	clouds	in	the	sky	of	your
being.
When	all	the	clouds	are	gone	and	the	empty	space	remains,	you	will	know	what
witnessing	means.
"Witnessing,"	according	to	you,	"seems	to	come	easier	when	I	make	some	effort
for	it,	such	as	now	in	Vipassana	group.	You	talked	recently	about	futility	of	will,
but	for	me,	it	seems	some	effort	or	will	is	needed	for	the	growth	of	awareness."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
240
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
In	a	way	you	are	right,	because	you	don't	know	the	real	awareness.	So	by	effort,
by	will,	you	force	yourself	into	some	kind	of	alertness.	This	alertness	is	almost
like	when	you	come	home	and	find	your	house	is	on	fire:	suddenly,	you	will	find
a	great	awareness	in	you	which	has	never	been	there.	But	it	is	because	the	house
is	on	fire;	the	shock	is	so	much	that	it	has	made	you	a	little	awake,	has	brought
you	out	of	your	sleep.	But	you	cannot	go	on	putting	houses	on	fire	just	to	be	a
little	awake.
And	this	kind	of	awareness	is	very	costly	and	very	dangerous	--	costly,	because
it	 can	deceive	you	and	you	can	 start	 feeling	 that	you	have	become	aware,	 and
dangerous	because	it	will	take	you	away	from	the	authentic	experience.
Try	 to	 relax;	 don't	 make	 any	 effort,	 because	 never	 in	 the	 history	 of	 man	 has
anybody	 become	 awakened	 through	 effort	 or	 will.	 Those	 who	 have	 become
aware	have	always	become	aware	when	they	had	dropped	all	their	efforts	and	all
their	will.	But	man's	blindness	knows	no	limits.
In	 the	 life	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 who	 can	 be	 said	 to	 be	 the	 most	 well-known
historical	 figure	 who	 reached	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 awareness...	 But	 his
followers	around	the	world	and	in	the	East	--	except	for	India,	the	whole	East	is
Buddhist;	it	is	the	third	greatest	religion	in	the	world
--	still	go	on	missing.	I	have	been	looking	into	hundreds	of	books	from	Korea,
from	China,	from	Japan,	from	Sri	Lanka,	from	Burma,	from	Tibet	--	but	I	have
not	found	a	single	mention	of	the	most	important	thing	that	happened	in	Gautam
Buddha's	life.
For	 six	 years,	 he	 made	 every	 effort.	 He	 brought	 his	 whole	 will	 power	 to
becoming	 aware,	 he	 left	 no	 stone	 unturned.	 Naturally,	 this	 intensity	 of	 work,
effort,	 this	 arduous	 journey,	made	him	so	 tired	and	so	 frustrated...	Finally,	one
fullmoon	 night	 sitting	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 small	 river,	 Niranjana	 in	 Bihar,	 he
decided,	"I	have	renounced	the	world,	I	have	renounced	my	kingdom.
Today	I	renounce	even	my	effort	and	my	will	--	even	the	desire	to	find	the	truth.
I	 am	 so	 tired,	 so	 utterly	 frustrated	 that	 this	 is	 my	 second	 renunciation."	 He
dropped	all	methods	that	he	had	been	trying	and	after	six	years,	for	the	first	time
he	relaxed	and	had	a	good	sleep,	without	a	dream.	Otherwise,	his	sleep	had	been
full	of	nightmares,	because	on	the	one	hand	he	had	renounced	everything	and	on
the	other	hand,	all	efforts	had	led	only	to	failure...	or	fake	experiences.
In	the	morning,	as	the	last	star	was	disappearing	in	the	sky,	he	opened	his	eyes
and	he	could	not	believe:	 this	is	 the	space	he	has	been	looking	for!	As	the	star
disappeared,	 his	 ego	 disappeared	 too.	 As	 the	 sky	 became	 utterly	 empty...	 the
stars	are	gone,	the	moon	is	gone	and	the	sun	has	not	come	yet	--	just	in	that	gap,
he	also	became	 just	 the	 same	 silence,	uncluttered	with	 anything.	And	 this	was
what	has	been	known	down	the	ages	as	his	enlightenment.
Buddhists	 around	 the	 world	 go	 on	 saying,	 go	 on	 writing	 that	 he	 found	 his
enlightenment	after	six	years	of	arduous	effort.	The	reality	 is	 just	 the	opposite.
He	found	enlightenment	after	he	renounced	all	his	efforts.
It	 is	 true	 that	 you	 cannot	 renounce	 if	 you	 have	 not	 made	 any	 effort.	 So,
Ramfakeer,	 you	 are	 in	 a	 good	 position:	 you	 are	 making	 effort	 and	 you	 are
making	use	of	 your	will	 power.	But	 remember,	 all	 these	will	 lead	you	 to	 fake
experiences.	And	when	 the	 time	 comes,	 don't	 be	 a	 coward:	 renounce	 all	 these
experiences	of	joy	and	peace	and	awareness,	because	they	are	produced	by	will
and	effort.	Then	is	the	real	miracle,	because	your	very	being	is	eternally	awake.
It	has	never	fallen	asleep,	but	you	have	lost	the	track	to	reach	to	it.
Only	in	relaxation	can	you	find	your	center	of	being.	If	you	go	on	making	effort
and	 running	 after	 some	 goal,	 to	 achieve	 awareness,	 you	 will	 go	 farther	 and
farther	away	from	your	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
241
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
reality.	Just	don't	do	anything.	At	least	for	a	few	moments	every	day,	simply	be.
The	heart	will	 be	beating,	 the	breathing	will	be	going	on	 --	you	are	not	doing
anything,	not	even	thinking.
And	in	these	moments,	the	whole	sky	opens	up.
It	is	one	of	the	greatest	wonders	that	what	we	are	seeking	and	searching	for	lives
together	 is	 just	 present,	 eternally	 present	within	 ourselves.	But	 because	 of	 our
efforts	and	because	of	our	mind	to	achieve,	we	go	on	missing	it.
Our	life	is	a	very	stupid	mess.	And	the	same	life	can	be	a	great	splendor,	but	we
won't	 allow	 it.	 We	 go	 on	 doing	 something	 or	 other,	 and	 all	 our	 doings	 are
disturbances.	 This	 is	 the	 greatest	 lesson	 in	 life	 to	 learn:	 that	 the	 ultimate
phenomenon	happens	only	when	we	are	not	doing	anything,	when	we	are	almost
absent,	when	we	are	just	an	open	door	and	the	sun	rays	come	dancing	in	and	the
fresh	breeze	passes	through	us.	Suddenly,	 the	whole	existence	starts	helping	us
to	be	our	true	self.
Witnessing	is	the	quality	of	our	true	self.	It	is	not	a	question	of	creating	it,	it	is	a
discovery.
I	have	heard...	God	is	making	all	the	creatures	of	the	earth	and	is	giving	out	sex
lives	to	each	animal.	First	he	turns	to	the	human.	"I	am	giving	you	ten	years	of	a
good	sex	life,"	says	God.
The	man's	face	falls.	"Is	that	all?"	he	asks.
"I	 only	 have	 so	 much	 to	 go	 around,	 fella,"	 says	 God.	 He	 then	 turns	 to	 the
monkey	and	says,
"I'm	giving	you	twenty	years	of	a	good	sex	life."
The	monkey	says,	"Oh,	I	don't	really	need	that	much.	Ten	years	would	be	more
than	enough	for	me."
The	man,	standing	nearby,	overhears	this	and	says	excitedly,	"I	will	take	it!	I	will
take	those	extra	ten	years."
"All	right,"	says	God.	"You	got	it."	He	then	turns	to	the	lion.	"I'm	going	to	give
you	twenty	years	of	good	sex	life."
The	 lion	 replies,	 "You	 know,	God,	 I	 really	 think	 I	would	 be	 happier	with	 just
ten."
The	man	starts	hopping	up	and	down.	"I	will	take	them!	I	will	take	the	other	ten
years!"
"You	can	have	them,"	says	God	to	the	man.
He	turns	to	the	donkey	and	says,	"Now,	I	am	going	to	give	you	twenty	years	of	a
good	sex	life.	Is	that	all	right	with	you?"
"To	tell	you	the	truth,"	says	the	donkey,	"I	would	also	be	satisfied	with	just	ten."
God	gives	the	man	the	other	ten	years	too.
This	 story	 explains	why	 a	man	 has	 ten	 years	 of	 a	 good	 sex	 life,	 ten	 years	 of
monkeying	around,	 ten	years	of	 lyin'	about	 it,	and	then	ten	years	of	making	an
ass	out	of	himself.
We	are	not	satisfied	with	anything,	and	we	go	on	asking	for	more,	and	we	go	on
making	our	life	more	of	a	confusion.
It	 is	 true	 in	every	dimension	of	 life	--	even	when	you	start	meditating,	you	are
the	same	man,	with	the	same	mind.	Your	whole	life	you	have	been	creating	false,
pseudo,	 dishonest,	 inauthentic	 experiences.	You	 know	 perfectly	well	 that	 they
are	not	true,	but	at	least	you	can	deceive	others.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
242
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
But	you	don't	know	a	simple	law:	if	you	can	deceive	many	people,	you	will	be
deceived	in	turn.	By	their	being	deceived,	you	will	start	thinking	there	must	be
something	in	it;	otherwise,	so	many	people	cannot	be	deceived.	Start	by	telling	a
lie	and	by	the	evening	--	when	your	wife	will	tell	it	to	you	--	it	will	have	gone
around	the	city.	You	know	perfectly	well:	you	started	it	in	the	morning.	But	if	the
whole	city	is	agog	about	it,	then	perhaps	there	is	something	in	it!
Such	 is	 the	madness	of	man	 that	he	can	believe	even	 in	his	own	 lies,	 and	can
believe	so	totally	that	you	cannot	suspect.
One	man	 played	 the	 role	 of	Abraham	Lincoln	 for	 one	 year	 continuously.	One
hundred	years	had	passed	 since	Abraham	Lincoln	was	assassinated,	 and	 in	his
honor	and	in	his	memory,	a	whole	year	was	devoted	to	celebrate	it.	A	drama	was
prepared	and	all	over	America,	a	great	search	was	made	to	find	a	man	who	could
play	the	part	of	Abraham	Lincoln.
Strangely	 enough,	 they	 managed	 to	 find	 a	 man	 who	 looked	 like	 Abraham
Lincoln	--	the	same	height,	the	same	weight.
They	 trained	 him...	 because	 Abraham	 Lincoln	 used	 to	 stutter	 a	 little,	 so	 they
trained	him	to	stutter.	One	of	Abraham	Lincoln's	legs	was	a	little	longer	than	the
other,	 so	 they	 put	 the	 poor	 fellow	 on	 a	 traction	machine	 and	 pulled	 one	 leg	 a
little	longer	so	he	started	walking	like	Abraham	Lincoln,	with	a	walking-stick	in
his	hand.
For	one	year,	morning,	afternoon,	evening,	three	times	a	day,	he	was	playing	the
role.	And	he	was	doing	it	so	perfectly	that	people	were	amazed:	it	seemed	as	if
Abraham	Lincoln	had	come	back.	One	year	is	a	long	time.	He	became	more	and
more	perfect,	and	when	the	year	ended,	he	was	awarded	a	first	prize.
He	came	home,	but	he	continued	to	stutter.	His	wife	said,	"Now,	there	is	no	need
to	stutter."
He	 said,	 "No	 need?	What	 do	 you	mean	 by	 no	 need?	Abraham	Lincoln	 has	 to
stutter."
The	wife	said,	"Whom	are	you	trying	to	befool?"
First,	they	thought	that	he	was	just	joking,	but	then	the	joke	went	on	so	long...	he
would	walk	like	Abraham	Lincoln,	he	will	talk	like	Abraham	Lincoln.	He	would
behave	as	if	he	were	the	president.	Finally,	they	thought,	"He	has	gone	crazy.	He
believes	it.	Three	hundred	sixty-five	days,	three	times	every	day,	going	through
the	same	role..."
At	that	very	time,	scientists	had	discovered	the	lie	detector	machine.	You	stand
on	the	machine	--	you	don't	know;	it	is	hidden	underneath	the	ground	--	and	they
ask	you	a	few	questions:	a	clock	is	hanging	in	front	of	you	on	the	wall	and	they
ask,	"What	time	is	it	on	the	clock?"	You	cannot	lie,	you	say,	"It	is	ten	o'clock"	or
"twelve	 o'clock."	And	 the	machine	 goes	 on	marking	whether	 you	 are	 right	 or
wrong.	They	go	on	asking	a	few	more	questions:	"How	many	people	are	here?"
Now,	 how	 can	 you	 lie?	 Four	 persons	 are	 there,	 so	 you	 say	 "four"	 and	 the
machine	makes	 the	 point	 again	 --	 "right."	 So	 four	 or	 five	 questions	 are	 asked
about	 which	 you	 cannot	 lie.	 And	 then	 they	 asked	 him,	 "Are	 you	 Abraham
Lincoln?"
And	he	was	tired.	His	family	was	after	him,	his	friends	were	after	him,	he	was
being	taken	to	this	psychologist	to	that	psychologist...
And	finally	he	had	decided	to	drop	this	idea,	to	just	accept	what	these	idiots	are
saying.
Although	he	IS	Abraham	Lincoln,	what	to	do?	If	nobody	is	ready	to	believe	it,
how	 long	 can	 he	 argue	 with	 these	 people?	 So	 when	 they	 asked,	 "Are	 you
Abraham	Lincoln?"	he	said,	"No."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
243
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
And	 the	 machine	 said,	 "He	 is	 lying!"	 Because	 deep	 in	 his	 heart,	 he	 knew
perfectly	well	--
and	the	machine	functions	according	to	the	heart.	When	you	lie,	your	heartbeat
loses	 its	symmetry.	When	you	say	something	true,	 the	heartbeat	goes	on	in	 the
same	rhythm,	but	when	you	lie,	just	a	little	jerk	--	and	the	machine	catches	that
jerk.
And	the	poor	man	was	saying,	"I	am	not	Abraham	Lincoln"	and	the	machine	is
saying	he	is!	When	the	result	came	out,	the	scientist	said,	"Now,	there	is	no	way.
Unless	he	gets	assassinated,	he	will	not	understand."
Don't	believe	in	this	joy	and	in	this	peace	that	you	are	feeling.	And	don't	 think
that	it	is	witnessing.	It	is	not.
I	 give	 you	 the	 criterion:	 in	 witnessing,	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 witness.	 That	 is	 a
simple	 criterion:	 as	 long	 as	 there	 is	 something	 to	 witness,	 witnessing	 has	 not
come	in.
When	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	witness	 and	 only	 a	 pure	 awareness	 remains,	 just	 the
mirror,	not	reflecting	anything,	you	have	found	yourself.	Of	course	this	finding
will	radiate	joy,	but	it	will	not	be	your	experience.	Others	will	experience	it;	to
you,	 it	will	be	 just	 like	breathing,	 just	natural.	You	will	be	 in	constant	ecstasy,
but	 others	 will	 feel	 it.	 You	 will	 radiate	 a	 new	 presence,	 a	 new	 charisma,	 but
others	will	feel	it.	To	you,	it	will	be	just	like	you	accept	your	body,	you	accept
your	eyes,	you	accept	your	hair,	you	accept	your	hands;	there	is	nothing	special
about	it.
The	 moment	 joy	 is	 no	 more	 anything	 special,	 the	 moment	 peace	 is	 no	 more
anything	 to	 brag	 about,	 the	moment	 ecstasy	 is	 just	 like	 breathing	 --	 you	 have
arrived	home.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
TODAY,	 I	 HAD	 A	 UNIQUE	 EXPERIENCE.	 AFTER	 SIESTA,	 I	 FELT
MYSELF	BEGIN
WAKING	UP.	I	OPENED	MY	EYES	AND	NEXT	TO	MY	HEAD	I	SAW	MY
HAND.	 I	 GOT	MY	WATCH	TO	 LOOK	AT	 THE	 TIME	BUT	 THE	WATCH
WAS	DARK:	THERE
WAS	 NO	 TIME.	 I	 TURNED	 THE	 WATCH	 TOWARDS	 THE	 WINDOW'S
LIGHT	BUT	--
DARKNESS	AGAIN.	I	STOOD	UP	AND	I	FELT	THE	FLOOR	UNDER	MY
FEET.	BUT
SUDDENLY	 I	 SAW	 MY	 HAND,	 UNMOVABLE,	 NEXT	 TO	 MY	 HEAD.	 I
GOT	SCARED.
BUT	 IMMEDIATELY	 A	 VOICE	 INSIDE	 TOLD	 ME,	 "YOU	 ARE
DREAMING,	WITH
OPEN	EYES!"	 I	RELAXED	AND	DECIDED	TO	CONTINUE	THE	GAME;
LOOKING	AT
MY	HAND,	 I	 COULD	 SEE	MY	WHOLE	BODY	MOVING.	AT	 THE	END,
MY	HAND
WAS	ALWAYS	AT	THE	SAME	POSITION.	THEN	I	DECIDED	TO	WAKE	UP
AND	 I	 MOVED	 MY	 HAND	 AND	 MY	 WHOLE	 BODY.	 I	 THINK	 I
EXPERIENCED	SOMETHING
OF	DEATH.	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?	IF	IT	HAPPENS	AGAIN,
CAN	YOU
SUGGEST	SOMETHING	FOR	ME	TO	DO?
Bodhi	Anand,	 it	was	nothing	but	a	nightmare	--	not	an	experience,	special	and
unique.
Neither	was	it	anything	to	do	with	death.	It	was	just	your	mind.
Everybody	 has	 experienced	 nightmares,	 dreams	 which	 are	 insane.	 But	 what
happens	more	often	is	that	you	don't	remember	them.	In	eight	hours	of	sleep,	you
dream	six	hours,	but	you	don't	remember	six	hours	of	dreaming.	You	remember
only	the	last	dream,	when	you	are	half	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
244
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
awake	and	half	asleep,	just	coming	out	of	sleep.	Your	memory	starts	functioning
and	you	catch	hold	of	the	last	dream	that	is	fleeting	by.
If	a	nightmare	happens	in	the	morning	hours,	then	there	is	a	possibility	that	you
may	remember	it.	If	it	happens	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	you	will	not	remember
it	 --	 unless	 it	 is	 really	 a	nightmare;	 something	 like	 the	 concentration	 camps	of
Adolf	Hitler,	or	the	gas	chambers	of	the	second	world	war.	If	it	is	too	dangerous,
then	it	can	wake	you	up	--	just	the	very	danger	of	it.	But	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
death.
It	 is	 just	 your	 mind	 which	 goes	 on	 collecting	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things,
unnecessarily.	 It	 is	 a	 junkyard.	 You	 have	 seen	 a	 film	 in	 which	 there	 are
dangerous	scenes,	you	have	read	a	novel	 in	which	there	are	murders	and	rapes
and	all	kinds	of	crimes.	You	have	been	reading	the	newspaper	every	day.	All	this
goes	on	collecting	inside	your	mind,	and	in	your	sleep	time,	the	mind	wants	to
unload	itself.	Your	dreams	are	nothing	but	an	unloading	of	the	mind.
If	you	don't	collect	unnecessary	junk,	you	won't	have	dreams.
I	have	not	dreamt	 for	years,	and	not	 to	dream	gives	a	different	quality	 to	your
sleep.	It	is	light	and	very	sweet,	almost	musical,	a	poetry	without	any	words,	a
meditation	of	immense	silence	and	serenity.
But	your	dreams	 say	much	about	you.	This	kind	of	dream	shows	 that	 you	 are
collecting	unnecessary	information,	and	all	that	gets	jumbled,	piled	up.	And	your
unconscious	 is	 not	 very	 reasonable,	 it	 knows	 nothing	 of	 reason,	 so	 everything
gets	mixed	up.	These	mixtures	create	nightmares.
It	 happened	 that	Charles	Darwin	 had	 become	very	 old	 and	 his	 friend	 thought,
"Perhaps	this	birthday	is	going	to	be	his	last;	we	will	not	be	able	to	celebrate	his
next	birthday."	He	was	feeling	weak	and	doctors	were	saying	that	he	could	not
last	long.	So	all	his	students	and	all	his	friends	gathered.	And	he	was	one	of	the
most	respected	men	of	his	times;	he	had	given	the	theory	of	evolution	which	had
helped	humanity	in	many	ways	to	grow.
Children	he	loved	very	much,	and	the	children	of	the	whole	neighborhood	were
thinking	what	 to	present	him	on	his	birthday.	Finally,	 they	decided	on	a	novel
idea...
Charles	Darwin's	whole	life	was	in	studying	animals,	insects,	birds,	and	he	had
gone	around	the	world	to	study	all	kinds	of	species	and	how	they	have	evolved
up	 to	 man.	 He	 wanted	 to	 know	 each	 step.	 So	 the	 small	 children	 of	 his
neighborhood,	 who	 were	 his	 friends,	 made	 a	 very	 beautiful	 present:	 they
collected	 as	many	 insects	 as	 they	 could	 find	 in	 his	 garden	 and	 they	 cut	 those
insects	--	some	insect's	head,	some	other	insect's	body,	some	other	insect's	legs,
some	other	insect's	other	parts	--	many	insects	they	cut	and	glued	them	into	one,
new	 insect.	They	did	a	 really	good	 job,	and	on	 the	birthday	when	all	his	great
scientist	friends	were	there,	they	also	came	with	their	present	and	they	said,	"We
would	like	to	know	to	what	species	this	insect	belongs."
Charles	Darwin	looked	at	it.	In	his	whole	life,	he	had	never	seen	such	a	thing.	He
remembered	that	he	had	seen	the	head...	he	had	seen	the	body...	but	not	with	this
head.	He	had	seen	the	legs,	but	not	with	this	body.
But	he	was	a	genius.	He	said	to	the	children,	"Yes,	I	know	this	insect.	Its	name	is
humbug."
Your	 mind	 creates	 many	 humbugs	 --	 a	 head	 from	 somewhere,	 a	 body	 from
somewhere,	 legs	 from	 somewhere	 else,	 a	 tail	 from	 somewhere	 else.	And	 then
you	have	a	ready-made	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
245
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
nightmare.	 This	 is	 not	what	 you	 are	 thinking	 --	 a	 "unique	 experience"	 --	 it	 is
simply	 a	 humbug	 experience.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	worried	 about	 such
experiences.	They	are	just	dreams,	soap	bubbles.
But	it	is	good	to	understand	one's	mind,	that	you	have	made	it	just	a	wastepaper
basket.
You	 go	 on	 throwing	 into	 it	 anything.	 You	 never	 think,	 "Is	 this	 novel	 worth
reading?	Is	this	film	worth	seeing?"
Whatever	 you	 see	 is	 going	 to	 be	 collected	 in	 your	memory.	You	 are	 not	 very
intelligent	about	what	kind	of	information	should	be	allowed	to	enter	into	your
mind.	That	 information	 is	going	 to	make	your	dreams;	 it	 can	even	affect	your
actions.
I	have	been	reading	data	that	in	California,	whenever	there	is	a	football	match	or
a	boxing	match,	 crime	 rates	 rise	up	 to	 fourteen	percent	higher,	 immediately.	 It
takes	seven	days	for	them	to	come	back	down	slowly	to	the	average.	And	what
kinds	of	crime	rates?	--	murders,	suicides,	rapes.	And	not	only	young	people	but
even	 children,	 seeing	 the	 boxing	 or	 seeing	 the	 football	 match,	 are	 getting	 a
certain	feedback	and	they	start	behaving	in	the	same	way.
And	in	fact	you	cannot	make	a	successful	film	without	murders,	without	racing
cars	at	 a	dangerous	 speed,	without	 suicides,	without	 rapes.	 If	you	make	a	 film
without	all	these	things,	nobody	is	going	to	see	it,	it	is	going	to	be	a	flop.	If	you
want	it	to	be	a	full-house	success,	then	make	it	as	criminal,	as	ugly	as	possible.
But	you	don't	know	that	you	are	feeding	all	that	to	the	people	who	are	seeing	it.
And	there	are	special	blue	films	for	rich	people	who	can	afford	a	theater	in	their
own	house	and	can	invite	their	friends	to	see	sex	orgies,	perverted	sexual	scenes,
pornography.	But	a	 simple	 thing	 is	not	understood:	 that	all	 this	 is	going	 inside
your	brain.	You	are	poisoning	yourself:	your	dreams	will	reflect	it,	your	actions
will	reflect	it.	Your	life	will	be	molded	by	what	you	collect	in	your	memory.
So	if	you	come	across	such	dreams,	it	is	an	indication	that	you	have	to	be	more
careful	 of	 what	 goes	 in	 your	mind,	 because	 it	 will	 come	 out	 in	 some	way	 or
other.	In	fact,	its	coming	out	through	dreams	is	the	most	harmless	way,	because	it
does	not	harm	anybody.	But	it	can	come	out	through	your	actions,	too.
Stopping	to	pay	a	call	on	some	of	his	suburban	flock,	the	priest	discovered	they
were	having	a	party	and	offered	to	come	back	at	a	more	convenient	time.
"Don't	 go,"	 implored	 the	 host,	 "we	 are	 playing	 a	 game	 you	 might	 like.	 We
blindfold	the	women	and	then	they	try	to	guess	the	identity	of	the	men	by	feeling
their	genitals."
"How	dare	you	suggest	such	a	thing	to	a	man	of	my	dignity	and	stature!"	roared
the	priest.
"You	might	as	well	play,"	said	the	host,	"your	name	has	been	guessed	three	times
already."
You	are	 living	in	a	society	which	is	one	thing	from	the	outside	and	just	 totally
different	 from	 inside.	This	 is	 not	 just	 a	 joke.	These	kinds	of	games	have	been
happening	down	the	ages,	but	they	were	happening	only	at	the	highest	level	of
society	--	 the	super-rich,	 the	kings,	 the	priests.	They	have	a	beautiful	facade	to
show	 to	 the	 world.	 They	 will	 teach	 morality	 and	 they	 will	 teach	 everything
against	obscenity,	pornography,	but	in	their	own	life,	hidden	behind	the	curtains,
totally	different	things	are	happening.
It	 is	 a	 very	 hypocritical	 world.	 In	 this	 world,	 to	 be	 interested	 in	 truth,	 to	 be
interested	in	the	search	of	your	own	being,	should	be	conceived	of	as	already	a
great	blessing.	A	Sufi	saying	is	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
246
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
that	before	you	choose	God,	God	chooses	you.	Before	you	begin	 to	search	 for
him,	he	has	already	started	searching	for	you;	you	are	always	number	two.
Even	in	this	country	which	is	poorest	of	the	poor,	there	are	ugly	films,	obscene
films,	pornographic	magazines	--	and	they	all	exist	because	all	 the	religions	go
on	insisting	on	repression.	So	everybody	goes	 to	 the	 temple,	 to	 the	mosque,	 to
the	church	to	pay	respect	to	God	--	but	in	his	heart,	in	his	mind,	there	is	all	kinds
of	crap.
If	he	is	a	little	intelligent,	he	should	not	enter	any	temple,	because	he	is	carrying
such	crap	inside	him	that	he	should	not	think	himself	worthy.	He	should	just	be
outside	the	temple.
The	country	may	be	poor;	people	cannot	afford	to	eat,	but	still	they	will	go	to	see
the	film.
Hungry	--	but	 they	cannot	miss	the	film	and	its	sexuality,	 its	sensuality.	And	if
you	 look	 into	 their	 dreams,	 you	will	 find	 all	 that	 they	 have	 repressed,	 all	 that
they	have	collected.
Ronald	Reagan	comes	to	God	and	says,	"Tell	me,	God,	how	many	years	before
my	people	will	be	happy?"
"Fifty	years,"	God	replies.
Reagan	weeps	and	leaves.
Thatcher	 comes	 to	 God	 and	 asks,	 "Tell	 me	 God,	 how	many	 years	 before	 my
people	are	happy?"
"A	hundred	years,"	replies	God.
Thatcher	weeps	and	leaves.
Rajiv	Gandhi	comes	to	God	and	says,	"Tell	me	God,	how	many	years	before	my
people	will	be	happy?"
God	weeps	and	leaves.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
247
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
25
The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
25	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	 IS	 A	 CONFUSION	 IN	ME	 THAT	 KEEPS	 COMING	 AGAIN	 AND
AGAIN.
THE	 MESSAGE	 I	 HAVE	 GOT	 FROM	 YOU	 MORE	 AND	 MORE	 IS	 TO
RELAX	WITH
MYSELF,	TO	WATCH	AND	WAIT,	BUT	I	ALSO	FEEL	THIS	URGENCY	TO
WAKE	UP
NOW;	AND	THEN	ANOTHER	PART	SCREAMS,	"BUT	HOW?"	WHAT	DO	I
NEED	TO
DO?	DO	 I	 NEED	 TO	 'PUSH'	MYSELF	 THROUGH	 THIS	WALL?	 COULD
YOU	MAKE
THIS	CLEAR	TO	ME?
Masti,	mind	is	confusion;	it	is	not	that	you	are	in	confusion.	And	there	is	no	way
for	 the	 mind	 to	 be	 not	 in	 confusion.	 Mind's	 whole	 structure	 is	 based	 on
confusion.
Mind	is	a	duality;	it	is	always	split.	There	is	no	single	point	on	which	the	mind
agrees	in	totality.	Half	of	the	mind	will	agree	and	half	of	the	mind	will	disagree,
and	whatever	you	choose,	you	are	choosing	only	the	half.	The	remaining	half	is
going	to	take	revenge.	The	unchosen	part,	the	left	over,	will	wait	for	its	chance	to
show	you	that	whatever	you	have	chosen	is	wrong.	But	it	does	not	matter	which
part	you	choose.	Choice	itself	is	wrong.
So	the	first	thing	to	be	understood	is	that	there	is	no	mind	which	has	ever	been
without	confusion.
One	very	learned	American	rabbi,	Joshua	Liebman,	has	written	a	book,	PEACE
OF
MIND.	 It	 is	one	of	 the	best-sellers:	Liebman	 is	a	good	writer,	 and	 the	book	 is
well	presented.
I	wrote	him	a	letter,	asking,	"Have	you	ever	considered	that	peace	of	mind	has
never	 existed?	 Peace	 of	 mind	 is	 intrinsically	 impossible.	 Peace	 happens	 only
when	mind	is	not.	It	is	not	peace	of	mind;	it	is	peace	beyond	mind."
It	 is	 almost	 like	 a	 lotus	 flower:	 it	 grows	 in	mud	 and	water;	 it	 is	 a	miracle	 of
nature	 that	 out	 of	 dirty	mud	 and	water	 it	 brings	 out	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful
flowers	 in	 existence.	 But	 mud	 and	 water	 are	 not	 the	 lotus	 flower.	 The	 lotus
flower	blossoms	only	when	the	lotus	plant	has	gone	beyond	the	mud,	beyond	the
water,	has	transcended	both	--	then	it	opens	up	to	the	sun,	to	the	sky,	and	releases
its	 fragrance	 to	 the	 wind.	 Although	 it	 comes	 from	 the	 mud,	 it	 is	 not	 mud
anymore.	It	is	transcendence.
The	same	is	true	about	peace.	Mind	is	muddy;	all	kinds	of	relevant	and	irrelevant
thoughts	are	jumbled	there.	It	is	a	crowd,	with	so	many	fragments	fighting	with
each	other	that	you	can	call	it	a	battleground.	Mind	cannot	be	at	peace.	But	you
can	 go	 beyond	 mind	 because	 you	 are	 not	 the	 mind.	 You	 can	 transcend	 and
become	a	lotus	flower.	And	then	there	is	peace,	there	is	beauty,	there	is	bliss,	and
all	that	you	have	always	dreamt	about	but	have	had	no	experience	of.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
248
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
I	will	read	your	question:	"There	is	a	confusion	in	me	that	keeps	coming	again
and	again."
Unless	you	resolve	it,	it	does	not	have	to	come,	it	is	always	there.	It	is	only	that
whenever	 you	 are	 unoccupied,	 it	 surfaces.	 It	 does	 not	 go	 and	 come,	 it	 is
embedded	in	your	mind.
"The	message	 I	 have	got	 from	You	more	 and	more	 is	 to	 relax	with	myself,	 to
watch	and	wait."	The	message	remains	the	same,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to
transcend	the	mind.	The	watcher	is	always	above	the	mind.	The	watcher	is	never
part	of	the	mind.
The	 mind	 is	 just	 like	 a	 TV	 screen	 on	 which	 thoughts,	 dreams,	 imaginations,
projections,	desires,	and	a	thousand	and	one	things	go	on	passing.	The	watcher	is
not	on	the	screen,	he	is	sitting	in	the	movie	hall.	But	the	problem	arises	when	the
watcher	becomes	identified	with	something	on	the	movie	screen.
You	must	have	seen	yourself	sometimes	crying,	sometimes	laughing,	sometimes
becoming	sad...	and	you	know	perfectly	well	that	there	is	nothing	on	the	screen.
It	 is	 empty,	 and	 all	 that	 you	 are	 seeing	 is	 only	 a	 projection,	 just	 a	 film	 being
projected	through	light.
I	have	heard	that	when	for	the	first	 time	the	silent	movies	came	into	existence,
the	first	show	happened	in	London,	and	a	man	watched	the	movie	in	the	matinee
showing.	Everybody	left,	but	he	remained.	The	manager	came	to	him	and	said,
"The	show	is	over."
He	said,	"I	want	to	see	the	second	show	also."	The	manager	said,	"What	is	the
point?	You	have	seen	it."
He	said,	"It	is	none	of	your	business.	This	is	the	money	for	the	ticket.	I	am	not
going	to	leave."
He	saw	the	second	show,	and	the	manager	was	thinking,	"What	happens	after	the
second	show?"	He	came	back	again;	the	crowd	had	gone,	but	the	man	was	still
there,	because	there	was	still	a	third	show.	The	manager	said,	"Do	you	want	to
see	the	third	show	also?"	He	said,
"Yes.	This	is	the	money."
The	manager	said,	"But	you	have	seen	it	twice!"	He	said,	"You	don't	understand
a	thing.
There	is	a	scene	in	which	a	beautiful	woman	is	undressing.	She	is	just	about	to
become	 nude	 and	 jump	 into	 a	 beautiful	 lake	 to	 swim.	At	 that	 very	moment	 a
train	passes	by,	and	that	train	becomes	a	curtain,	and	when	the	train	has	gone,	the
woman	is	already	in	the	water."
The	manager	said,	"But	I	still	don't	understand	the	point."
The	man	said,	"The	point	is,	the	train	is	going	to	be	late	sometime!"
Now	 the	 projected	 film	 has	 taken	 on	 a	 reality	 in	 his	 mind.	 He	 has	 become
identified;	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 film,	 he	 is	 part	 of	 it.	 He	 is	 not	waiting,	 he	 is	 not
watching;	he	is	participating.
It	 happened	 that	 one	 of	 India's	 very	 learned	men,	 Ishwar	Chandra	Vidyasagar
was	invited	to	inaugurate	a	drama.	He	inaugurated	the	drama,	and	of	course	he
was	sitting	in	front.
In	the	drama	there	is	a	character	--	a	very	cunning	man,	ugly	and	disgusting	--
who	 is	after	a	beautiful	woman,	harassing	her	 in	every	possible	way.	And	one
day	 he	 finds	 the	woman	 alone,	 passing	 on	 a	 path	 that	moves	 through	 a	 thick
forest.	He	takes	the	opportunity,	catches	hold	of	the	woman	--	he	wants	to	rape
her.	This	was	 too	much:	Vidyasagar	completely	forgot	 that	 it	was	a	drama.	He
jumped	 on	 the	 stage,	 took	 out	 one	 of	 his	 shoes,	 and	 started	 beating	 the	 poor
character,	the	actor!
But	 the	 actor	 proved	 to	 be	 far	wiser	 than	Vidyasagar.	He	 took	 the	 shoe	 in	 his
hands	 with	 great	 respect,	 touched	 the	 shoe	 to	 his	 head,	 and	 told	 Vidyasagar,
"This	is	my	greatest	prize.	I	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
249
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
have	been	winning	many	prizes	in	my	life,	but	this	is	my	greatest	prize.	I	could
have	never	believed	that	a	man	of	your	understanding	should	take	a	drama	as	if
it	were	real."
Vidyasagar	 woke	 up	 as	 if	 from	 a	 sleep.	 He	 said,	 "I	 am	 sorry,	 but	 I	 went	 on
becoming	 hotter	 and	 hotter,	 and	 when	 I	 saw	 that	 you	 were	 going	 to	 rape	 the
woman	I	could	not	resist	 the	 temptation	 to	prevent	you.	 It	was	my	moral	duty,
and	I	completely	forgot	that	this	is	not	a	real	rape,	it	is	just	acting."
I	have	seen	the	shoe.	In	the	family	of	that	actor,	they	are	keeping	it	in	a	beautiful
glass	box.
It	has	become	a	historical	 thing.	Now	it	must	be	 the	fourth	or	 fifth	generation,
but	they	say,
"This	 is	 our	 most	 prized	 treasure.	 One	 of	 our	 forefathers	 received	 this	 award
from	the	hands	of	Vidyasagar	himself."	And	certainly	 this	proves	 that	 the	man
was	 a	 perfect	 actor:	 he	 created	 the	 situation	 such	 that	 Vidyasagar	 became
identified	 and	 forgot	 it	was	 just	 a	 drama	 and	 he	was	 there	 to	watch	 it,	 not	 to
participate	in	it.
This	 is	happening	continuously	 in	your	mind.	The	whole	confusion	 is	 that	you
jump	into	the	drama	of	the	mind,	which	is	just	a	screen.
I	have	been	telling	you	again	and	again	just	to	watch.	Every	drama	has	its	end,
and	no	thought	in	the	mind	remains	for	long.	If	you	can	keep	alert	not	to	become
a	 victim	 of	 your	 thoughts,	 soon	 less	 and	 less	 thoughts	will	 be	moving	 on	 the
screen.	 And	 when	 the	 watching	 becomes	 perfect,	 the	 screen	 becomes	 empty.
When	you	are	ready	to	witness,	there	is	nothing	to	witness.
It	is	your	identification	with	thoughts	that	is	creating	the	confusion:	it	brings	you
down	into	the	mind;	otherwise	your	watcher	is	far	above	it.	And	to	get	centered
in	your	watching	is	the	only	way	for	peace.
There	is	no	such	thing	as	peace	of	mind.
There	is	only	one	peace,	and	that	is	when	there	is	no	mind.	When	there	is	only	a
watcher	and	nothing	to	watch,	suddenly	everything	becomes	calm	and	quiet.
Hence	I	repeat	again,	Masti:	relax,	watch,	and	wait	patiently.	But	you	are	saying,
"I	also	feel	 this	urgency	to	wake	up	now."	That's	what	I	mean	by	jumping	into
the	drama	and	becoming	a	participant.	The	watcher	 is	 always	 in	 the	now.	The
watcher	knows	no	other	tense
--	neither	past	nor	future,	but	only	the	present.
Only	this	moment	is	all	for	the	watcher.	It	is	the	imagination	that	needs	future,	it
is	memory	that	needs	past,	but	the	watcher	is	neither	imagination	nor	memory.	It
is	always	in	the	now.
And	your	urgency	is	simply	another	name	for	 impatience.	You	are	hiding	your
impatience	behind	a	beautiful	word,	urgency.	What	urgency	is	there?
You	cannot	force	things	to	happen	before	their	 time.	The	spring	will	come	and
the	 flowers	will	blossom,	but	you	cannot	 force	 the	spring.	The	 rain	will	come,
the	clouds	will	cover	the	sky,	the	whole	thirst	of	the	earth	will	be	gone	--	but	you
cannot	force	it,	you	have	to	be	patient.
And	this	is	the	beauty,	that	the	more	patient	you	are,	the	quicker	is	the	coming	of
the	spring.	If	you	can	be	absolutely	patient,	this	very	moment	spring	can	come.
Your	urgency	 is	 creating	a	 trouble	 for	you	because	 it	 is	making	you	more	and
more	confused,	more	and	more	restless,	in	a	hurry.	I	can	understand;	the	whole
Western	tradition	has	taught	you	only	one	thing,	and	that	is	speed.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
250
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
I	have	heard	about	a	pilot	who	was	a	lover	of	flying.	He	had	taken	his	girlfriend
for	 a	 flight,	 and	 he	 was	 going	 at	 full	 speed,	 maximum.	 The	 girl	 was	 a	 little
afraid.	Finally	she	asked,
"Where	are	we	going?"
The	 pilot	 said,	 "Don't	 ask	 unnecessary	 questions.	 The	 real	 question	 is,	we	 are
going	 at	 full	 speed.	Who	 cares	where	we	 are	 going?	The	 going	 in	 itself	 is	 so
good."
The	 speed	 has	 become	 such	 a	 problem	 because	 for	 centuries	 in	 the	West	 the
mind	has	been	conditioned	to	do	things	quickly:	"Don't	be	lazy,	be	efficient."	But
all	this	has	created	a	turmoil	in	the	mind.
Everybody	is	trying	to	become	rich	as	quickly	as	possible,	and	naturally	if	you
want	to	be	rich	quickly	you	have	to	find	some	immoral	means	--	maybe	heroin
money.	 All	 the	 Western	 religious	 leaders	 are	 against	 drugs,	 but	 they	 don't
understand	 that	 the	 idea	 of	 speed,	 that	 everybody	 has	 to	 be	 fast	 enough...	 and
millions	are	competing	for	the	same	place;	naturally	there	is	competition,	there	is
jealousy,	 there	is	violence.	It	does	not	matter,	means	don't	matter;	 the	end	is	 to
reach	quickly	--	either	to	a	powerful	position,	or	to	become	world	famous,	or	to
have	all	the	riches	possible.
But	 these	trees	don't	grow	impatiently.	They	move	with	a	grace,	with	patience,
with	trust.
There	is	no	hurry	anywhere	else	except	in	your	mind.	If	you	really	want	to	be	in
a	state	of	peace	and	 joy,	you	will	have	 to	unlearn	your	old	habit	 for	achieving
things	quickly,	fast.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	informed	that	in	Japan,	they	have	invented	a	train	that
moves	four	hundred	miles	per	hour.	Up	to	now	the	record	was	two	hundred	fifty
miles	per	hour;	they	have	broken	all	records.	And	because	the	train	moves	four
hundred	miles	per	hour	the	very	speed	of	the	train	creates	a	cushion	of	air,	and
raises	 the	 train	 above	 its	 rails	 one	 foot.	 It	 is	 no	 longer	 on	 the	 rails.	 It	 is	 very
comfortable	because	it	is	moving	in	the	air,	almost	like	an	airplane,	just	one	foot
above	the	earth.
And	 they	 forgot	 completely	 that	 Japan	 is	 such	 a	 small	 country.	 They	 have
recognized	 it	only	now,	and	for	years	 they	have	been	 inventing	 the	 train.	Now
they	have	recognized	--
where	are	we	going?	--	because	the	country	is	so	small	that	you	can	have	at	the
most	two	stations:	one	from	where	the	train	begins	and	the	other	where	it	stops.
So	 the	 train	 is	 now	 ready,	 but	 the	 land	 is	 not	 big	 enough	 to	 use	 it!	 But	 one
wonders...	 for	years	 they	have	been	working	and	 they	never	 thought	about	 the
fact	that	four	hundred	miles	in	Japan	is	absurd.
Japan	consists	of	two	small	islands.	Where	will	you	be	going	with	such	speed?
You	are	saying,	"And	then	another	part	screams,	 'but	how?'"	Urgency	naturally
creates	the	question:	"How?"	If	speed	is	needed,	then	the	technology	is	needed.
"How"	means	technology.
Meditation	 is	 not	 a	 by-product	 of	 any	 technology.	 It	 does	 not	 need	 any
technology.
It	does	not	need	any	"how."
It	simply	needs	now.
And	 in	 meditation	 you	 are	 not	 going	 anywhere.	 You	 are	 simply	 being	 here,
relaxed,	 utterly	 centered	 in	 yourself.	 Everything	 stops.	 For	 this,	 no	 "how"	 is
needed.
But	because	one	question	leads	to	another	question,	urgency	creates	the	question
"how,"
and	then	the	question	comes:	"What	do	I	need	to	do?	Do	I	need	to	push	myself
through	this	wall?"
There	is	no	wall!
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
251
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
These	are	our	unconscious	confusions.	Somehow	we	make	them	appear	rational.
One	drunkard	reached	his	home	one	night.	His	wife	was	tired	--	every	day	a	fight
in	 the	middle	of	 the	night,	 and	 the	whole	neighborhood	was	complaining.	The
man	was	 not	 going	 to	 change.	 So	 she	 had	 given	 him	 the	 keys,	 saying,	 "Don't
wake	me	up	and	don't	create	any	noise,	because	the	neighbors	are	getting	very
angry.	They	want	to	throw	us	out.	So	silently	open	the	door	and	go	to	your	bed."
He	came	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	absolutely	drunk.	His	hands	were	shaking,
so	he	was	holding	the	key,	but	to	put	the	key	in	the	lock	was	a	problem.	He	kept
missing	the	target.	He	said,	"This	is	strange.	This	has	never	happened;	certainly
there	must	be	an	earthquake,	the	whole	house	is	in	such	trembling	state."
Rather	 than	 looking	 at	 his	 own	 hands,	 rather	 than	 remembering	 his	 own
drunkenness,	 the	 whole	 earth	 is	 having	 a	 great	 earthquake	 and	 the	 house	 is
moving	--	that's	why	the	lock	is	moving.
A	 policeman	was	watching	 him	 from	 the	 street.	He	 laughed.	He	 came	 and	 he
said,	 "Can	 I	 help	you?"	The	man	 said,	 "It	would	be	great	 of	 you	 if	 you	 could
help	me.	 Just	 hold	 the	 house	 for	 a	moment	 so	 that	 I	 can	 put	 this	 key	 into	 the
lock."
The	policeman	 said,	 "It	 is	better	 that	you	give	me	 the	key	and	 I	will	open	 the
lock."	There	was	no	need	to	argue	with	him	that	 the	house	is	not	shaking,	 that
there	 is	 no	 earthquake	 happening,	 that	 it	 is	 simply	 that	 you	 are	 absolutely
unconscious.
The	 man	 entered	 the	 house	 very	 cautiously	 because	 the	 wife	 has	 said...	 And
whenever	a	drunkard	comes	close	 to	his	wife,	half	of	his	drunkenness	 is	gone.
The	wife	is	such	a	cure...
nothing	else	works,	but	the	closeness	of	the	wife	is	enough.
She	was	snoring	in	her	room.	He	remembered	what	she	had	said:	"Don't	create
any	noise."
So	silently	he	went	into	the	bathroom,	but	he	was	very	much	puzzled	because	his
whole	face	was	scratched.	There	was	blood	oozing	from	a	few	places.
Then	he	 remembered	 that	on	 the	way	home	he	had	been	 fighting	with	another
drunkard.	 So	 he	 tried	 to	 find	 some	 ointment	 to	 put	 on	 his	 face;	 otherwise	 the
wife	in	the	morning	will	create	trouble	for	him.	So	very	carefully	and	silently,	he
put	 the	 ointment	 on	 every	 scratch.	He	was	 very	 satisfied,	 and	went	 silently	 to
bed.
In	 the	 morning	 the	 wife	 screamed	 from	 the	 bathroom,	 "Who	 has	 spoiled	 my
mirror,	 and	 destroyed	my	 ointment	 too?	Who	 has	 painted	 the	mirror	with	 the
ointment?"
He	said,	"My	god..."	He	had	thought	he	was	putting	the	ointment	on	his	face,	but
he	was	putting	it	on	the	reflection	of	his	face;	he	was	putting	it	on	the	mirror.
The	unconscious	mind	goes	on	doing	things	and	creating	problems.	There	is	no
wall	at	all	that	you	have	to	push	through.	The	real	thing	is	that	you	want	to	push,
you	are	in	a	hurry.	And	because	you	want	to	push,	you	have	to	imagine	a	wall.	It
is	your	imagination.
Just	try	to	laugh	at	your	imagination,	at	your	hurry,	because	this	is	not	the	way
meditation	 happens.	 Laugh,	 relax,	 and	 just	 be	 in	 the	 moment	 --	 watching
whatever	 is	 going	 on,	 outside	 or	 inside,	 in	 the	world	 or	 in	 the	mind.	You	 are
neither	 the	 world	 nor	 the	 mind.	 You	 are	 behind	 all,	 just	 a	 pure	 watching
consciousness.
You	are	asking	me,	"Could	you	make	this	clear	to	me?"	There	is	nothing	to	be
made	clear.
Only	one	thing	is	harassing	you:	your	own	idea	of	achieving	things	as	quickly	as
possible.	But	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
252
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
meditation	is	not	to	be	achieved;	it	is	already	there.	It	has	only	to	be	discovered.
And	discovery	needs	only	one	thing:	a	silent	watcher	--	just	for	your	laughter,	so
that	you	can	relax.
Don't	 be	 serious;	 meditation	 is	 not	 a	 serious	 affair.	 Don't	 try	 to	 be	 a	 saint;
meditation	has	nothing	to	do	with	pious	egoism.	Meditation	is	as	simple	as	these
trees	growing,	these	birds	singing.
One	 night	 in	 Washington,	 when	 Nixon	 was	 president,	 there	 was	 a	 heavy
snowfall.	 When	 the	 president	 woke	 up	 in	 the	 morning,	 he	 looked	 out	 of	 the
window	and	saw	a	beautiful	blanket	of	snow	covering	the	White	House	lawn.	He
snapped	 out	 of	 his	 beautiful	 reverie	 when	 he	 noticed,	 written	 on	 the	 lawn	 in
yellow	snow,	"Dick	Nixon	is	an	asshole."
The	president	got	very	angry	and	summoned	the	FBI	and	CIA.	"I	want	that	urine
to	be	analyzed,"	he	ordered	them.	"And	I	want	to	find	out	who	the	culprit	is	right
now,	without	delay!	This	is	top	priority!"
Early	 in	 the	 afternoon	 a	 representative	 of	 the	 two	 agencies	 reported	 back	 to
Nixon.	He	said,	"We	have	tested	the	urine	and	we	know	whose	it	 is.	However,
there	is	some	good	news	and	some	bad	news;	which	would	you	like	first?"
"Oh	no,"	said	Nixon.	"Guess	you	had	better	give	me	the	good	news	first."
"Well,	sir,"	said	the	man.	"We	analyzed	the	urine,	and	it	is	Henry	Kissinger's."
"Oh	no,"	cried	Nixon,	and	then	suddenly	the	realization	hit	him.	"That's	the	good
news?
What	could	the	bad	news	possibly	be?"
The	man	answered	him,	"It	was	in	your	wife's	handwriting."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
PLEASE	 COULD	 YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 THE	 SUBTLE	 DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN
INSTINCT	AND	INTUITION?
Yogeshwar,	 your	 individuality	 can	 be	 divided	 --	 just	 for	 the	 purpose	 of
understanding	it;	otherwise	there	is	no	division.	It	is	one	single	unity,	whole:	the
head,	the	heart,	and	the	being.
Intellect	is	the	functioning	of	the	head,	instinct	is	the	functioning	of	your	body,
intuition	is	the	functioning	of	your	heart.	And	behind	these	three	is	your	being,
whose	only	quality	is	witnessing.
The	 head	 only	 thinks;	 hence	 it	 never	 comes	 to	 any	 conclusion.	 It	 is	 verbal,
linguistic,	 logical,	 but	 because	 it	 has	 no	 roots	 in	 reality,	 thousands	 of	 years	 of
philosophical	 thinking	 have	 not	 given	 us	 a	 single	 conclusion.	 Philosophy	 has
been	the	greatest	exercise	in	futility.
Intellect	is	very	clever	in	creating	questions	and	then	creating	answers,	and	then
out	of	those	answers,	more	questions	and	more	answers.	It	can	make	palaces	of
words,	systems	of	theories,	but	they	are	all	just	hot	air.
The	body	cannot	rely	on	your	intellect,	because	the	body	has	to	live.	That's	why
all	 essential	 functions	 of	 the	 body	 are	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 instinct	 --	 for	 example
breathing,	 heartbeat,	 digestion	 of	 your	 food,	 circulation	 of	 the	 blood	 --	 a
thousand	and	one	processes	 are	going	 inside	your	body	 in	which	you	have	no
part	 at	 all.	 And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 nature	 has	 given	 body	 its	 Osho	 -	 The	Hidden
Splendor
253
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
own	 wisdom.	 Otherwise,	 if	 your	 intellect	 were	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the	 body,	 life
would	have	been	impossible.	Because	sometimes	you	may	forget	to	breathe	--	at
least	in	the	night,	how	will	you	breathe	while	you	are	asleep?
You	are	already	so	confused	just	with	thoughts;	in	this	confusion,	who	will	take
care	about	the	blood	circulation	--	whether	right	amount	of	oxygen	is	reaching	to
your	cells	or	not?
Whether	the	food	that	you	are	eating	is	being	analyzed	into	its	basic	constituents,
and	 those	 basic	 constituents	 are	 sent	 where	 they	 are	 needed?	 Something	 is
needed	by	your	bones,	it	goes	to	the	bones;	something	is	needed	by	your	brain,	it
goes	 to	 the	 brain;	 something	 is	 needed	 by	 your	 skin,	 it	 goes	 to	 the	 skin.	And
continuously,	twenty-four	hours,	dead	cells	have	to	be	removed;	otherwise	they
will	block	the	passage	of	blood	circulation.
You	may	never	have	thought	about	it;	when	you	cut	your	hair,	why	don't	you	feel
pain?
Cut	your	fingers	and	you	will	feel	pain.	Hairs	are	also	part	of	your	body,	just	as
your	fingers,	but	why	don't	you	feel	any	pain	when	cutting	your	hair?	Hairs	are
the	dead	cells	of	the	body;	that's	why	you	don't	feel	hurt.	Nails	are	also	made	of
dead	cells	of	the	body;	that's	why	you	can	cut	them.	And	this	whole,	tremendous
amount	of	work	 is	 done	by	 instinct.	You	are	not	 needed.	You	 can	 remain	 in	 a
coma;	still	the	body	will	continue	to	work.
I	have	seen	one	woman	who	was	 in	a	coma	 for	nine	months.	The	doctors	had
said	that	she	would	never	revive,	and	even	if	she	did	revive,	she	would	not	be	a
human	being,	because	such	a	long	period	of	unconsciousness	destroys	the	very
delicate	 nervous	 system	 that	 makes	 you	 a	 human	 being,	 that	 gives	 you
intelligence.	 So	 she	would	 be	 just	 a	 vegetable.	 But	 her	 body	was	 functioning
perfectly	 well.	 Her	 intellect	 had	 disappeared,	 her	 consciousness	 had	 not	 been
there	for	nine	months,	but	her	body	was	perfectly	well;	there	was	no	disease	in
the	body.
Nature	has	left	all	essential	functions	of	your	body	to	instinct.	And	it	has	left	all
that	makes	your	life	meaningful	--	because	just	 to	exist,	 just	 to	survive,	has	no
meaning...	 to	 give	 meaning	 to	 your	 life,	 existence	 has	 given	 to	 your	 heart,
intuition.	Out	of	your	intuition	is	the	possibility	of	art,	of	aesthetics,	of	love,	of
friendship	--	all	kinds	of	creativity	is	intuitive.
But	 the	marketplace	 does	 not	 need	 your	 intuition.	 It	 does	 not	 deal	 in	 love,	 in
your	 sensibility;	 it	 deals	 with	 very	 solid	 and	 mundane	 things.	 For	 that,	 your
intellect,	 which	 is	 the	 most	 superficial	 part,	 functions.	 Intellect	 is	 for	 the
mundane	life	with	others	in	the	marketplace,	in	the	world,	to	make	you	capable
of	functioning.	It	is	mathematics,	it	is	geography,	it	is	history,	it	is	chemistry.	All
science	and	all	technology	is	created	by	your	intellect.
Your	logic,	your	geometry,	are	useful,	but	the	intellect	is	blind.	It	simply	goes	on
creating	things,	but	it	does	not	know	whether	they	are	being	used	for	destruction
or	for	creation.	The	nuclear	war	will	be	a	war	created	by	intellect.
Intellect	has	 its	use,	but	by	 some	misfortune	 it	has	become	 the	master	of	your
whole	being.
That	has	created	immense	troubles	in	the	world.
The	 master	 is	 hidden	 behind	 these	 three:	 the	 body,	 the	 mind,	 the	 heart.	 The
master	 is	hidden	behind	all	 these	 three	 --	 that	 is	your	being.	But	you	never	go
inwards;	 all	 your	 roads	 go	 outwards,	 all	 your	 senses	 go	 outwards.	 All	 your
achievements	are	there	in	the	world.
Only	very	 few	people	 in	 the	world	have	 traveled	 the	path	 towards	 their	being,
towards	their	very	center.	When	I	insist	that	you	should	be	only	a	watcher,	only	a
witness,	I	am	trying	to	bring	you	closer	to	your	own	being,	because	that	is	your
life	 source	 --	 and	 a	 life	 source	which	 is	 eternal	 and	 immortal.	Knowing	 it,	 all
fears	disappear,	because	even	death	disappears.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
254
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
Knowing	it,	you	know	the	very	heartbeat	of	existence.
Knowing	it,	you	have	known	all	that	is	worth	knowing,	and	you	have	achieved
all	that	is	worth	achieving.	It	opens	doors	to	all	the	mysteries	of	existence,	to	all
the	treasures	of	existence	which	belong	to	you.
Outside	you	are	simply	a	beggar.	Even	your	greatest	intellectuals	are	just	playing
with	words.
The	 father	 of	Western	 logic,	 Aristotle,	 has	 written	 in	 his	 books	 on	 logic	 that
women	have	one	tooth	less	than	men.	That	was	traditionally	thought	to	be	true
for	thousands	of	years	in	Greece,	because	a	woman	cannot	be	equal	in	any	way	-
-	how	can	she	have	the	same	number	of	 teeth	as	man?	And	Aristotle	--	who	is
the	 father	 of	 logic	 --	 had	 two	wives,	 not	 only	one.	He	 could	have	 simply	 told
Mrs.	Aristotle	Number	One	or	Number	Two,	"Open	your	mouth,	I	want	to	count
your	teeth."	But	philosophers	are	not	experimental.	He	has	written	that	women
have	one	tooth	less	than	men.	They	have	to	have	less	of	everything	than	men.
Intellect	is	useful	in	the	world,	and	all	your	educational	systems	are	techniques
to	 avoid	 the	 heart	 and	 take	 your	 energy	 directly	 to	 your	 head.	 The	 heart	 can
create	troubles	for	the	head.
The	 heart	 knows	 nothing	 of	 logic.	 The	 heart	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 center	 of
functioning,	and	that	is	intuition.	It	knows	love,	but	love	is	not	a	commodity	of
any	use	in	the	world.	It	knows	beauty,	but	what	are	you	going	to	do	with	beauty
in	the	marketplace?
The	people	of	the	heart	--	the	painters,	the	poets,	the	musicians,	the	dancers,	the
actors	--
are	 all	 irrational.	 They	 create	 great	 beauty,	 they	 are	 great	 lovers,	 but	 they	 are
absolutely	 unfit	 in	 a	 society	 which	 is	 arranged	 by	 the	 head.	 Your	 artists	 are
thought	by	your	society	to	be	almost	outcast,	a	little	bit	crazy,	an	insane	type	of
people.	Nobody	wants	their	children	to	become	musicians	or	painters	or	dancers.
They	all	want	them	to	be	doctors,	engineers,	scientists,	because	those	professions
pay.	Painting,	poetry,	dance,	are	dangerous,	risky:	you	may	end	up	just	a	beggar
on	the	street,	playing	on	your	flute.
The	heart	has	been	denied,	 and	by	 the	way,	 it	will	be	useful	 to	 remember:	 the
denial	 of	 the	 heart	 has	 been	 the	 denial	 of	 the	woman,	 and	 unless	 the	 heart	 is
accepted,	 the	 woman	 cannot	 be	 accepted.	 Unless	 the	 heart	 has	 the	 same
opportunity	to	grow	as	the	head,	the	woman	cannot	have	liberation.	The	woman
is	heart	and	the	man	is	head.	The	distinction	is	clear.
Instinct,	 nature	 has	 taken	 in	 its	 own	 hands,	 and	 whenever	 you	 interfere	 with
instinct	 you	 create	 perversions.	 All	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 doing	 that.	 For
example,	celibacy	is	interfering	with	the	body	and	its	instinct;	then	there	will	be
homosexuality,	lesbianism,	all	kinds	of	perversions.	But	every	religion	has	been
interfering	with	 the	 body	 --	 and	 the	 body	 is	 absolutely	 innocent;	 it	 has	 never
done	anything	wrong.
If	you	accept	the	body	in	its	absolute	naturalness,	it	will	help	you	tremendously.
It	 will	 help	 your	 heart,	 nourish	 your	 heart.	 It	 will	 help	 your	 intelligence	 to
become	sharper,	because	the	nourishment	for	the	intellect	comes	from	the	body.
Nourishment	to	the	heart	comes	from	the	body.	And	if	your	head,	your	heart	and
your	body	are	all	in	a	symphony,	then	to	find	your	being	is	the	easiest	thing	in
the	world.	But	because	they	are	in	conflict,	your	whole	life	goes	on	being	wasted
in	that	conflict,	conflict	between	instinct	and	intellect	and	intuition.
A	wise	man	is	one	who	creates	a	harmony	between	head,	heart,	and	body.	In	this
harmony	one	comes	to	the	revelation	of	the	source	of	one's	life,	the	very	center,
the	soul.	And	that	is	the	greatest	ecstasy	possible	--	not	only	to	human	beings	but
in	this	whole	universe,	nothing	more	is	possible.	It	is	already	too	much.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
255
Chapter	25	-	The	watcher	is	always	in	the	now
I	am	not	against	anything.	I	am	only	against	disharmony,	and	because	your	head
is	 creating	 the	most	 inharmonious	 situation,	 I	want	 your	 head	 to	 be	 put	 in	 its
right	place.	It	is	a	servant,	not	a	master.	As	a	servant	it	is	great,	very	helpful.
A	Dublin	milkman	has	just	finished	his	delivery,	so	he	parks	his	horse	and	cart
outside	the	pub	and	goes	in	for	a	drink.	Refreshed	after	an	hour,	he	comes	out	to
find	his	horse	painted	bright	green.	Very	angry,	he	strides	back	into	the	pub	and
demands,	"Which	of	you	just	painted	my	horse	green?"
A	seven	foot	Irish	giant	stood	up	and,	towering	over	him,	said,	"I	did.	Want	to	do
something	about	it?"
The	milkman	gave	a	sickly	grin	and	said,	"I	just	came	in	to	tell	you,	the	first	coat
is	dry!"
Intellect	is	helpful.	There	are	situations	where	you	will	be	in	need	of	intellect	--
but	only	as	a	servant,	not	as	a	master.
Two	psychiatrists	who	are	friends	happen	to	run	into	each	other	on	the	street	one
day.	One	of	them	says	to	the	other,	"You	are	fine,	how	am	I	doing?"
Intellect	can	be	helpful,	but	it	needs	consciousness	to	be	its	master;	otherwise	it
can	behave	in	a	very	stupid	way.	It	can	misunderstand	things,	it	can	misrepresent
things.	It	needs	a	master	to	guide	it,	to	give	it	a	sense	of	direction.	That	master	is
your	being.
Valerie,	a	twenty-three-year-old	typist,	walked	along	the	beach,	despondent.	She
was	flat-chested,	and	felt	totally	distraught	watching	the	other	big-bosomed	girls
on	the	beach	surrounded	by	eligible	men.	As	Valerie	strolled	on	the	sand	her	toe
kicked	a	small	bottle.	She	picked	it	up	and	removed	the	cork,	and	out	popped	a
genie.	"Who	are	you?"	asked	the	frightened	girl.
"I	am	a	genie,	and	because	you	were	kind	enough	to	give	me	my	freedom,	I	will
grant	you	any	wish	you	make."
"Oh,	that's	wonderful,"	declared	Valerie.	"I	would	like	the	two	biggest	boobs	in
the	world."
The	 genie	 snapped	 his	 fingers	 and	 there	 appeared	 Jimmy	 Carter	 and	 Ronald
Reagan.
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
256
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
26
Life's	aim	is	life	itself
25	March	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	AIM	OF	LIFE?
Anwar	Aman,	life	has	no	aim	other	than	itself,	because	life	is	another	name	for
God	himself.	Everything	else	in	the	world	can	have	an	aim,	can	be	a	means	to	an
end,	but	at	least	one	thing	you	have	to	leave	as	the	end	of	all	but	the	means	of
none.
You	can	call	it	existence.
You	can	call	it	God.
You	can	call	it	life.
These	are	different	names	of	a	single	reality.
God	is	the	name	given	to	life	by	the	theologians	and	it	has	a	danger	in	it	because
it	 can	 be	 refuted;	 it	 can	 be	 argued	 against.	 Almost	 half	 of	 the	 earth	 does	 not
believe	in	any	God.	Not	only	the	communists,	but	the	Buddhists,	the	Jainas	and
there	are	thousands	of	free	thinkers	who	are	atheists.	The	name	"God"	is	not	very
defensible	 because	 it	 is	 given	 by	man	 and	 there	 is	 no	 evidence,	 no	 proof,	 no
argument	for	it.	It	remains	more	or	less	an	empty	word.	It	means	whatever	you
want	it	to	mean.
"Existence"	 is	 better.	 All	 the	 great	 thinkers	 of	 this	 century	 are	 existentialists.
They	have	dropped	the	word	"God"	completely.	Existence	in	itself	is	enough	for
them.
But	 to	 me,	 just	 as	 "God"	 is	 one	 extreme,	 so	 is	 "existence"	 another	 extreme,
because	 in	 the	word	"existence"	 there	 is	no	 indication	 that	 it	may	be	alive	--	 it
may	 be	 dead.	 There	 is	 no	 indication	 that	 it	 is	 intelligent	 --	 there	 may	 be	 no
intelligence.	There	 is	 no	 indication	 that	 it	 is	 conscious	 --	 it	may	 not	 have	 any
consciousness.
Hence,	my	choice	is	"life".	Life	contains	everything	that	is	needed;	moreover,	it
needs	 no	 proof.	 You	 are	 life.	 You	 are	 the	 proof.	 You	 are	 the	 argument.	 You
cannot	deny	life;	hence	in	the	whole	history	of	man,	there	has	not	been	a	single
thinker	who	has	denied	life.
Millions	have	denied	God,	but	how	can	you	deny	life?	It	is	beating	in	your	heart,
it	is	in	your	breathing,	it	is	showing	in	your	eyes.	It	is	expressing	in	your	love.	It
is	 celebrating	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	ways	 --	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	 birds,	 in	 the
mountains,	in	the	rivers.
Life	is	the	aim	of	everything.	Hence,	life	cannot	have	an	aim	other	than	itself.	To
say	 it	 in	 other	 words:	 life's	 aim	 is	 intrinsic.	 It	 has	 it	 within	 itself	 to	 grow,	 to
expand,	to	celebrate,	to	dance,	to	love,	to	enjoy	--	these	are	all	aspects	of	life.
But	up	to	now,	no	religion	has	accepted	life	as	the	aim	of	all	our	efforts,	of	all
our	endeavors.	On	the	contrary,	religions	have	been	denying	life	and	supporting
a	hypothetical	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
257
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
God.	But	life	is	so	real	that	thousands	of	years	of	all	the	religions	have	not	been
able	even	to	make	a	dent	in	it,	although	they	have	all	been	anti-life.	Their	God
was	 not	 the	 innermost	 center	 of	 life,	 their	 God	 was	 to	 be	 found	 only	 in
renouncing	life.	It	has	been	a	very	great	calamity	humanity	has	passed	through:
the	very	idea	of	renouncing	life	means	respecting	death.
All	 your	 religions	 are	 worshipers	 of	 death.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 coincidence	 that	 you
worship	only	the	dead	saints.	When	they	are	alive,	you	crucify	them.	When	they
are	 alive,	you	 stone	 them	 to	death.	When	 they	are	 alive,	you	poison	 them	and
when	they	are	dead,	you	worship	them	--	a	sudden	change	happens.	Your	whole
attitude	changes.
Nobody	 has	 gone	 deep	 into	 the	 psychology	 of	 this	 change.	 It	 is	 worth
contemplating:	 Why	 are	 the	 dead	 saints	 worshiped	 and	 the	 living	 ones
condemned?	Because	the	dead	saints	fulfill	all	the	conditions	of	being	religious:
they	don't	 laugh,	 they	don't	enjoy,	 they	don't	 love,	 they	don't	dance,	 they	don't
have	any	kind	of	relationship	with	existence.	They	have	really	renounced	life	in
its	totality:	they	don't	breathe,	their	hearts	no	longer	beat.	Now	they	are	perfectly
religious!	They	cannot	commit	a	sin.	One	thing	is	certain	--	you	can	depend	on
them,	you	can	rely	on	them.
A	living	saint	is	not	so	reliable.	Tomorrow	he	may	change	his	mind.	Saints	have
become	sinners,	sinners	have	become	saints	--	so	until	they	are	dead,	nothing	can
be	said	about	them	with	absolute	certainty.	That	is	one	of	the	basic	reasons	that
in	your	temples,	in	your	churches,	in	your	mosques,	in	your	gurudwaras,	in	your
synagogues...	whom	are	you	worshipping?	And	you	don't	see	the	stupidity	of	it
all,	that	the	living	are	worshiping	the	dead.	The	present	is	worshiping	the	past.
Life	 is	 being	 forced	 to	worship	 death.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 these	 anti-life	 religions
that	 the	question	has	arisen	again	and	again	down	the	ages:	what	 is	 the	aim	of
life?
According	 to	 your	 religions,	 the	 aim	 of	 life	 is	 to	 renounce	 it,	 to	 destroy	 it,	 to
torture	yourself	in	the	name	of	some	mythological,	some	hypothetical	God.
Animals	don't	have	any	religion,	except	life;	trees	don't	have	any	religion	except
life;	 stars	don't	have	any	 religion	except	 life.	Except	man,	 the	whole	existence
trusts	only	in	life;	there	is	no	other	God	and	there	is	no	other	temple.	There	is	no
holy	scripture.
Life	is	all	in	all.
It	is	the	god	and	it	is	the	temple	and	it	is	the	holy	scripture	--	and	to	live	it	totally,
wholeheartedly,	is	the	only	religion.
I	 teach	you	 that	 there	 is	 no	 other	 aim	 than	 to	 live	with	 such	 totality	 that	 each
moment	 becomes	 a	 celebration.	 The	 very	 idea	 of	 "aim"	 brings	 future	 into	 the
mind,	because	any	aim,	any	end,	any	goal,	needs	future.	All	your	goals	deprive
you	of	your	present,	which	is	the	only	reality	you	have.	The	future	is	only	your
imagination,	 and	 the	 past	 is	 just	 footprints	 left	 in	 the	 sands	 of	 your	 memory.
Neither	is	the	past	real	anymore,	nor	is	the	future	real	yet.
This	moment	is	the	only	reality.
And	to	live	this	moment	without	any	inhibition,	without	any	repression,	without
any	greed	for	the	future,	without	any	fear	--	without	repeating	the	past	again	and
again,	but	being	absolutely	fresh	in	every	moment,	fresh	and	young,	unhampered
by	 memories,	 unhindered	 by	 imaginations	 --	 you	 have	 such	 purity,	 such
innocence,	that	only	this	innocence	I	call	godliness.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
258
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
To	me,	God	 is	 not	 someone	who	 created	 the	world.	God	 is	 someone	 that	 you
create	when	you	live	totally,	intensely	--	with	all	your	heart,	not	holding	anything
back.	When	your	 life	becomes	simply	a	moment-to-moment	 joy,	a	moment-to-
moment	dance,	when	your	life	is	nothing	but	a	festival	of	lights...	every	moment
is	so	precious	because	once	it	is	gone,	it	is	gone	forever.
Living	 for	 any	aim	simply	means	you	are	not	 living	 in	 the	present.	Living	 for
any	heaven	is	simply	greed.	And	you	are	missing	the	present,	you	are	sacrificing
the	real	that	is	in	your	hands,	at	the	feet	of	some	imaginary	heaven,	for	which	no
proof	exists	at	all.
Or	 being	 afraid	 of	 hell...	 There	 are	 thousands	 of	 monks	 --	 Christians,	 Hindu,
Buddhist,	 Jaina.	 They	 are	 all	 living	 out	 of	 fear	 and	 greed.	 It	 is	 strange	 that
nobody	sees	a	simple	fact	--
that	 they	 are	 living	 for	 greed	 to	 enter	 heaven	 and	 to	 enjoy	 the	 heavenly
pleasures,	and	they	are	living	out	of	fear	that	 they	should	not	commit	anything
wrong;	otherwise	they	will	have	to	suffer	hellfire	for	eternity.	And	these	monks,
to	whatever	religion	they	belong,	are	worshiped	by	you.
These	are	sick	people,	they	need	psychiatric	treatment.	They	are	so	full	of	greed
that	 this	 life	 is	 not	 enough	 for	 them,	 they	need	 some	heaven.	And	 they	 are	 so
much	afraid,	 so	much	 fear-oriented,	 that	out	of	 their	 fear	 they	have	created	all
kinds	of	hell.	Of	course,	heaven	is	for	those	who	will	follow	the	path	that	they
think	is	the	path	of	virtue.	And	hell	is	for	those	who	will	not	follow	the	path	of
virtue	according	to	them.
And	 just	 a	 little	 look	around,	 and	you	will	 be	very	much	 surprised:	 the	Hindu
gods	 are	 not	 celibate,	 and	 according	 to	 Jainism	 or	 Buddhism,	 or	 Catholic
theology,	 celibacy	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 all	 virtue.	 What	 about	 Hindu	 gods?
According	 to	 Jainism	and	Buddhism,	drinking	any	alcoholic	beverage	 is	 a	 sin,
but	 according	 to	Christians,	 even	 on	 their	 holy	 days	 they	 drink	 alcohol.	 Even
Jesus	was	drinking	alcohol.
Not	only	 that,	Christians	brag	 that	 Jesus	did	many	miracles.	One	of	 them	was
turning	water	into	wine.	Turning	water	into	wine	is	a	miracle	--	or,	is	it	a	crime?
According	to	Jainism	and	Buddhism,	Jesus	is	a	meat	eater,	a	drinker	of	wine;	he
is	not	following	the	path	of	virtue.
Even	Hindu	gods,	 according	 to	 Jainism	and	Buddhism,	 are	 living	 the	ordinary
life	 of	 a	 householder.	 They	 are	 not	 celibate	 and	 they	 have	 not	 renounced	 life;
they	cannot	be	accepted	as	holy.
Just	in	the	last	part	of	the	past	century,	Ramakrishna	was	worshiped	by	Hindus
almost	as	a	god,	but	being	a	Bengali,	his	food	consisted	mainly	of	rice	and	fish.
According	 to	 the	vegetarians,	 a	man	who	 is	 eating	 fish,	 destroying	 life	 for	 his
food,	is	not	even	human,	what	to	say	about	divine?
Looking	 from	 the	 other	 side,	 Christians	 cannot	 accept	 Gautam	 Buddha	 as	 a
religious	person	because	he	never	served	the	poor,	he	never	opened	institutions
for	the	orphans	like	Mother	Teresa	does.	He	never	opened	hospitals	for	the	sick.
He	was	not	concerned	at	all	with	human	misery,	poverty,	sickness,	disease.	He
was	not	in	the	service	of	God's	creation.	He	was	a	selfish	man,	just	meditating,
just	enjoying	his	own	being,	just	reaching	to	the	higher	peaks	of	consciousness.
But	his	ecstasy	is	selfish	--	it	is	not	in	the	service	of	those	who	are	suffering.
Mahavira	cannot	be	accepted	as	a	religious	man	according	to	Christianity	for	the
same	 reasons.	 These	 are	 all	 very	 selfish	 people.	 All	 meditators	 are	 selfish
because	 they	 are	 more	 concerned	 about	 their	 own	 growth	 than	 they	 are
concerned	about	the	blind	and	the	deaf	and	the	dumb.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
259
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
What	 is	 virtue?	 Who	 is	 going	 to	 decide?	 According	 to	 Mohammedanism,
animals	are	created	by	God	for	man	to	eat.	There	is	no	question	of	violence;	their
very	 purpose	 is	 to	 be	 nourishment	 for	 humanity	 --	 so	 says	 the	 holy	KORAN.
Now,	no	Eastern	religion	can	accept	Mohammedanism	as	a	religion.	Mohammed
married	nine	wives.	He	was	continuously	fighting.	His	whole	 life	was	a	 life	of
war,	 although	 the	word	 that	 he	 has	 for	 his	 religion	 is	 Islam	 and	 Islam	means
"peace".	But	a	strange	man	--	his	religion	is	peace	and	his	whole	life	is	nothing
but	violence.	Even	on	his	sword	it	was	written,	"Peace	is	my	religion."	He	could
not	find	any	other	place	to	write	it.
What	is	the	path	of	virtue?	No	religion	has	been	able	to	provide	it	--	not	even	the
criterion	by	which	it	can	be	judged.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	say	to	live	joyously,	contented,	fulfilled,	sharing	your
love,	your	 silence,	your	peace,	 letting	your	 life	become	such	a	beautiful	dance
that	not	only	you	 feel	blessed	but	you	can	bless	 the	whole	world	 --	 that	 is	 the
only	authentic	path.	Life	is	itself	the	criterion;	everything	else	is	non-essential.
And	each	individual	is	so	unique	that	you	cannot	make	a	superhighway	on	which
everybody	has	to	travel	to	find	the	aim	of	life.	On	the	contrary,	everybody	has	to
find	 his	 life	 without	 following	 the	 crowd,	 but	 following	 his	 own	 inner	 voice;
without	moving	in	a	mob,	but	following	a	small	footpath.	That	too	is	not	created
by	anybody	else.	You	create	it	as	you	walk.
The	world	of	 life	and	consciousness	is	almost	 like	the	sky	--	birds	fly	but	 they
don't	 leave	 any	 footprints.	 As	 you	 live	 deeply,	 sincerely,	 honestly,	 you	 don't
leave	any	footprints	and	nobody	has	to	follow	you.	Everybody	has	to	follow	his
own,	still,	small	voice.
My	 emphasis	 on	meditation	 is	 so	 that	 you	 can	 hear	 your	 still,	 small	 voice	 --
which	will	give	you	the	guidance,	the	sense	of	direction.	No	scripture	can	give	it
to	you.	No	 religion,	no	 religious	 founder	can	give	 it	 to	you	because	 they	have
been	giving	it	to	humanity	for	thousands	of	years	and	all	their	efforts	have	failed.
They	 have	 only	 created	 retarded	 people,	 unintelligent	 people,	 because	 they
insisted	 on	 believing.	 The	 moment	 you	 believe	 in	 someone,	 you	 lose
intelligence.	Belief	is	almost	like	poison	to	your	intelligence.
I	say	to	you	not	to	believe	in	anyone,	including	me.	You	have	to	find	your	own
insight,	and	then	follow	it.	Wherever	it	leads	is	the	right	path	for	you.	Whether
anybody	else	is	following	that	the	path	or	not	is	not	the	question.	Each	individual
is	unique	and	each	individual	life	has	a	beauty	in	its	uniqueness.
Anwar	 Aman,	 your	 question	 is	 very	 significant,	 perhaps	 the	 ancientmost
question.	Man	has	 asked	 it	 since	 the	very	beginning.	And	millions	of	 answers
have	 been	 provided	 but	 no	 answer	 has	 been	 successful.	 The	 question	 still
remains.	 The	 question	 is	 still	 relevant.	 That	 means...	 Mohammed,	 Moses,
Mahavira,	 Buddha,	 Krishna,	 Rama	 --	 what	 happened	 to	 their	 answers?	 Their
answers	have	not	satisfied	anyone.	The	question	bubbles	up	again	and	again,	and
it	will	continue	to	bubble	up	because	it	cannot	be	resolved	by	wrong	answers.
And	the	right	answers	they	could	not	give,	because	they	were	all	anti-life.	They
were	all	escapists;	they	were	afraid	to	live.
My	answer	is:	life's	aim	is	life	itself	--	more	life,	deeper	life,	higher	life,	but	life
always.
There	is	nothing	higher	than	life.
And	 a	 reverence	 for	 life	 is	 a	 necessary	 corollary.	 If	 life's	 aim	 is	 life,	 then
reverence	for	life	becomes	your	religion.	Then	respect	other	people's	life.	Don't
interfere	in	anybody's	life,	don't	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
260
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
try	 to	 force	somebody	 to	 follow	a	certain	path	 that	you	 think	 is	 right.	You	can
follow	it,	it	is	your	freedom,	but	never	impose	it	on	anybody	else.
The	 world	 does	 not	 need	 any	 organized	 religion.	 The	 world	 certainly	 needs
religious	 people	 --	 neither	 Hindus,	 nor	 Mohammedans,	 nor	 Christians	 --	 the
world	simply	needs	individuals	in	search	of	deeper	and	richer	life.	Not	God,	not
paradise,	not	heaven...	And	as	life	becomes	infinitely	deep,	it	is	the	paradise;	you
have	entered	the	kingdom	of	God.	And	the	doors	are	within	your	own	heart.
But	people	are	blind,	and	tradition	has	been	making	them	more	and	more	blind.
Tradition	 respects	 blind	 people,	 it	 respects	 people	who	 don't	 think,	 it	 respects
people	who	never	doubt.
It	 respects	 people	 who	 are	 not	 skeptical.	 It	 wants	 people	 to	 be	 just	 obedient
machines.	 Perhaps	 machines	 are,	 according	 to	 the	 traditional	 mind,	 the	 most
religious	people	in	the	world	because	they	never	disobey.
As	 far	 as	 my	 insight	 is	 concerned,	 a	 man	 who	 is	 not	 rebellious	 cannot	 be
religious	--
rebellious	 against	 the	 past,	 rebellious	 against	 organized	 religions,	 rebellious
against	all	those	people	who	want	to	dominate	you.	And	they	have	found	subtle
ways	to	dominate	you:	"Our	religion	is	the	most	ancient!"	So	what?	That	means
your	religion	is	the	most	rotten!	But	they	are	trying	to	make	it	"most	ancient"	so
that	you	feel	an	awe;	if	for	ten	thousand	years	nobody	has	disobeyed,	there	must
be	some	truth	in	it.
Every	 religion	 uses	 the	 argument	 that	 it	 is	 very	 old,	 very	 ancient.	 Religions
which	are	not	very	old	naturally	have	to	try	the	opposite	argument;	for	example
Sikhism,	which	 is	 only	 five	 hundred	 years	 old,	 or	Mohammedanism,	which	 is
only	fourteen	hundred	years	old.	Their	argument	is,	that	older	religions	are	older
versions	of	God's	message	to	man:	"We	are	bringing	the	latest	message	of	God	to
man."
Hazrat	Mohammed	has	said	that	"There	have	been	other	messengers	before,	but
after	 me	 there	 will	 be	 no	 other	 messenger,	 because	 I	 have	 brought	 the	 final
version	of	the	message."
Hence	he	could	say,	"There	 is	only	one	God	and	one	holy	book,	 the	KORAN,
and	one	holy	messenger,	Mohammed.	After	me,	anybody	who	claims	that	he	has
a	direct	communication	with	God	is	committing	the	greatest	sin	possible."
It	 happened	 in	 Baghdad	 once...	 a	 man	 was	 brought	 to	 the	 Caliph's	 court	 in
Baghdad.	The	Caliph	is	the	chief	representative	of	the	messenger	of	God,	Hazrat
Mohammed.	 Omar	 was	 at	 that	 time	 the	 Caliph	 in	 Baghdad	 and	 the	man	 was
brought	because	he	was	declaring	 that	 he	had	brought	 an	 even	 fresher	version
than	Mohammed.
The	Caliph	said,	"This	is	unforgivable,	but	you	look	so	simple	and	so	innocent:	I
will	give	you	seven	days	time	to	think	it	over,	and	simultaneously,	you	will	be
punished	as	much	as	possible	so	 that	you	come	back	to	your	senses.	And	after
seven	days,	 I	will	 come	 to	 the	prison	myself	 to	ask	you	what	you	 think	now."
After	seven	days,	he	went	there.	The	man	was	naked,	bound	to	a	pillar,	and	he
had	been	beaten	continually	for	seven	days.	He	had	not	been	allowed	to	sleep,
had	not	been	given	anything	to	eat.	They	had	tortured	him	as	much	as	possible.
When	Caliph	Omar	asked	him,	"What	do	you	think	now?"	he	said,	"What	do	I
think?	When	 I	was	 sent	 by	God,	 he	warned	me:	 'Listen,	my	messengers	 have
always	been	tortured.	'He	was	right.
Your	torture	has	proved	that	I	am	the	messenger.	Now	there	is	no	need	of	Hazrat
Mohammed;	I	have	brought	the	latest	message	from	God."
And	at	that	very	moment,	from	another	pillar,	another	naked	man	who	had	been
caught	one	month	before,	because	he	had	been	declaring	himself,	"I	am	God"	--
for	one	month	he	had	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
261
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
been	tortured	--	he	shouted	from	the	other	pillar,	"Don't	believe	this	cheat!	After
Mohammed,	 I	 have	 not	 sent	 any	 messenger	 to	 the	 world.	 This	 man	 is	 a
deceiver."
You	will	 think	these	people	are	mad	but	 the	same	kind	of	people	have	become
the	 founders	 of	 your	 religions.	 Perhaps	 these	 people	 were	 not	 very	 articulate,
were	 not	 very	 intelligent;	 otherwise	 they	 might	 have	 created	 a	 new	 religion.
Mahavira,	the	twenty-fourth	teerthankara	of	the	Jainas,	declares	that	he	is	the	last
teerthankara;	now	there	will	be	no	other	teerthankara...
I	used	 to	go	 to	Wardha	while	 traveling	around	 India.	 In	Wardha,	 there	used	 to
live	a	man,	Swami	Shakti	Bakta.	He	was	a	 learned	man;	he	was	a	 Jaina,	very
scholarly.	And	just	joking	with	him,	I	told	him,	"You	are	so	learned	that	you	can
easily	 declare	 yourself	 the	 twenty-fifth	 teerthankara	 of	 the	 Jainas."	 He	 said,
"That	 idea	 has	 come	many	 times	 to	my	mind	 too,	 but	 Jainas	 are	 not	 going	 to
accept	it."
I	said,	"They	never	accepted	Mahavira	easily.	There	were	eight	other	contenders,
and	it	was	a	long,	drawn	out	fight,	in	which	Mahavira	succeeded	in	convincing
people	 that	he	was	 the	 twenty-fourth,	 the	other	were	fake.	So	 it	all	depends;	 if
you	have	the	ability,	you	may	convince	them."
He	said,	"I	have	 the	ability."	 I	said,	"Then	 this	 is	a	good	chance!"	He	declared
himself	the	twenty-fifth	teerthankara,	and	the	Jainas	expelled	him.	Now	he	was
very	angry	with	me,	saying	 that	"You	destroyed	my	reputation!"	 I	 said,	"I	was
giving	 you	 the	 greatest	 respect	 possible,	making	 you	 the	 twenty-fifth."	 I	 said,
"You	should	have	thought	about	it,	whether	you	have	guts	enough.	They	are	not
going	to	accept	you	so	easily,	against	the	statement	of	Mahavira,	that	'After	me
there	is	going	to	be	no	teerthankara;	my	message	is	complete,	entirely	complete.
Nothing	can	be	added,	nothing	can	be	edited	out;	there	is	no	need	for	the	twenty-
fifth.'	 It	was	 on	 your	 intelligence,	 arguments,	 scholarship	 that	 the	whole	 thing
depended.	I	am	not	to	be	blamed.
"Just	look	at	it	this	way:	if	Jainas	came	to	me	and	said,	'You	are	our	twenty-fifth
teerthankara,'	I	am	not	going	to	accept,	because	who	wants	to	be	twenty-fifth	in	a
line?	I	am	the	first,	otherwise	forget	all	about	it!	You	were	stupid	to	accept	the
idea	 of	 being	 twenty-fifth,	 standing	 in	 a	 queue,	 the	 twenty-fifth.	 The	moment
you	 accepted	 it,	 that	 very	 moment	 I	 understood	 that	 now	 you	 would	 be	 in
trouble.	You	cannot	blame	me.
"And	you	had	told	me	that	this	idea	had	occured	to	you	yourself,	many	times.	It
was	just	that	you	had	not	the	courage	to	say	it,	and	because	I	supported	it,	you
thought	at	least	there	is	one	person...	I	said,	"I	am	still	ready	to	support	you,	but
you	will	have	to	fight	for	it."
He	 said,	 "But	 how	 can	 I	 fight?	They	 have	 expelled	me."	 I	 said,	 "That	 is	 your
business;	you	tried	and	you	failed."
All	these	religions	have	been	doing	the	same:	they	closed	the	doors	out	of	fear,
because	somebody	may	come	afterwards	and	may	change	the	structure	of	their
religion,	 of	 their	 disciplines.	 And	 certainly	 it	 needs	 constant	 change,	 because
times	 go	 on	 changing.	 If	 Mahavira	 comes	 today,	 he	 himself	 will	 find	 that
everything	has	changed.	It	was	one	thing	to	walk	barefooted	on	mud	paths	--	it	is
another	 thing	 to	walk	 barefooted	 in	 the	 hot	 summer	 days	 in	 India	 on	 coal	 tar
roads.
Jaina	monks	and	nuns	all	have	their	feet	burned.	And	what	are	they	doing?	They
put	towels	around	their	feet.	Now	I	said,	"This	is	stupid,	because	that	is	a	kind	of
primitive	shoe.
Why	can't	you	purchase	a	shoe	made	of	synthetic	leather,	in	which	no	violence	is
involved?
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
262
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Or	a	rubber	shoe	in	which	no	violence	is	involved,	or	a	cloth	shoe.	That's	what
you	are	trying	to	do,	and	it	looks	so	awkward	--	towels	around	the	feet,	and	then
binding	them	with	ropes.
You	look	simply	stupid."	But	the	trouble	is,	Mahavira	will	not	allow	any	change
to	happen	after	him.
Life	 is	not	 a	 static	phenomenon.	 It	 is	 a	 flux,	 a	 riverlike	 flux;	 it	needs	constant
change.	 It	 needs	 moment-to-moment	 awareness;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 left
behind.
Not	 to	 be	 left	 behind	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 steps	 for	 the	 growth	 of
intelligence.	 The	 whole	 world	 is	 almost	 retarded,	 and	 the	 people	 who	 are
responsible	for	your	retardedness	are	the	people	you	worship.	They	have	stopped
thousands	 of	 years	 before	 and	 you	 are	 still	 following	 them.	 Meanwhile,
everything	has	changed.
Coming	home	 early	 from	work	one	 afternoon,	 a	man	 found	his	wife	 naked	 in
bed,	breathing	heavily	and	quite	visibly	distressed.	"Honey,	what	is	the	matter?"
he	 asks.	 "I...	 I...	 I	 don't	 know,"	 she	 cried,	 "I	 think	maybe	 I	 am	having	 a	 heart
attack."	The	husband	freaked,	and	rushed	downstairs	to	call	the	doctor.	He	was
in	 the	 middle	 of	 dialing	 the	 number	 when	 his	 young	 daughter	 rushed	 in	 and
screamed,	"Daddy,	Daddy,	there	is	a	naked	man	in	the	closet!"
The	distraught	 husband	 threw	down	 the	 phone,	 rushed	up	 the	 stairs	 again	 and
opened	the	closet	door,	only	to	find	his	best	friend	inside.
"For	Christ's	sake,	Ed,"	 the	man	shouted,	"my	wife	is	 in	the	bedroom	having	a
heart	attack,	and	you	have	got	to	sneak	around	naked,	scaring	the	kids!"
Only	retarded	people	are	left	in	the	world.
At	 the	 beginning	 of	 World	 War	 II,	 a	 Nazi	 officer	 is	 forced	 to	 share	 a
compartment	on	a	crowded	train	with	a	Jew	and	his	family.	After	ignoring	them
for	 a	while	 he	 says	 contemptuously,	 "You	 Jews	 are	 supposed	 to	 be	 so	 clever:
where	does	this	so-called	intelligence	come	from?"
"It	is	from	our	diet,"	says	the	Jew,	"we	eat	a	lot	of	raw	fish	heads."	Upon	which
he	 opens	 his	 basket	 and	 saying,	 "Lunchtime!"	 and	 proceeds	 to	 hand	 out	 fish
heads	to	his	wife	and	children.	The	Nazi,	getting	excited	says,	"Wait	a	minute,	I
want	some!"
"Okay,"	says	the	Jew,	"I	will	sell	you	six	for	twenty-five	dollars."
The	 Nazi	 accepts	 and	 begins	 to	 chew.	 He	 almost	 throws	 up,	 but	 the	 children
shout	encouragement,	"Suck	out	the	brains,	suck	out	the	brains!"	The	Nazi	is	on
his	 fourth	 head	 when	 he	 says	 to	 the	 Jew,	 "Is	 not	 twenty-five	 dollars	 a	 lot	 of
money	for	six	fish	heads,	that	are	usually	thrown	out	as	garbage?"
"See?"	says	the	Jew,	"It	is	working	already!"
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	INTELLIGENCE?	IS	IT	A	STATE	FAR	BEYOND	THE	MIND	AND
ITS
LIMITS?	A	KIND	OF	AWARENESS	OF	WHAT	THE	MIND	 IS,	WITHOUT
BELONGING
TO	IT?	IS	MEDITATION	CONNECTED	WITH	INTELLIGENCE?	AND	IS
INTELLIGENCE	 A	 POTENTIAL	 THAT	 WE	 ALL	 HAVE,	 AND	 THAT
SIMPLY	NEEDS
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
263
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
TO	BE	AWAKENED?	CAN	WE	RAISE	OUR	CONSCIOUSNESS	WITH
INTELLIGENCE?
Benoit,	 the	 question	 you	 have	 asked	 is	 of	 great	 significance:	 "What	 is
intelligence?	Is	it	a	state	far	beyond	the	mind	and	its	limits?"	Yes.	Intelligence	is
not	of	 the	mind;	 intelligence	 is	one	of	 the	qualities	of	your	being.	But	mind	 is
being	used	as	a	vehicle	for	it;	hence	the	confusion.	People	think	intelligence	is	of
the	mind	--	it	comes	through	the	mind.	Mind	is	the	instrument	for	its	expression.
Mind	itself	is	only	a	bio-computer.	It	has	a	memory	system	just	as	any	computer
has:	you	feed	the	memory	system	and	the	mind	keeps	the	memory.	But	memory
is	not	intelligence.
Intelligence	 is	 the	 clear	 insight	 into	 things	 about	 which	 you	 don't	 have	 any
information.
Memory	can	function	only	about	those	things	which	are	known	to	you	--	but	life
consists	 of	 the	 known,	 of	 the	 unknown,	 and	 of	 the	 unknowable.	As	 far	 as	 the
known	is	concerned,	memory	is	enough.
That's	what	all	your	universities	and	all	your	educational	systems	are	doing:	they
are	simply	feeding	your	memory	with	more	and	more	information,	and	whatever
is	 known	 to	 your	memory	 system,	 you	will	 answer	 immediately.	 That	 answer
does	not	prove	that	you	are	intelligent.
Intelligence	is	known	only	when	you	encounter	the	unknown,	about	which	you
don't	have	any	memory,	any	knowledge,	any	information	beforehand.	When	you
encounter	 the	 unknown,	 that	 is	 the	 point	 which	 is	 decisive.	 How	 do	 you
respond?	You	can	respond	intelligently	or	you	can	respond	stupidly.
For	 example,	 Germany	 is	 one	 of	 the	 countries	 where	 the	 population	 is
decreasing.	 And	 the	 government	 is	 worried,	 because	 for	 every	 three	 thousand
people	who	leave	or	die,	thirty	thousand	people	are	coming	from	other	countries
as	immigrants	into	Germany.	The	government	is	afraid	that	just	within	a	decade
Germany	will	not	be	the	land	of	the	Germans.
Their	population	is	decreasing	and	immigrants	are	entering	into	the	country.
And	here	 in	 India	 in	1947,	when	 India	became	 independent,	 the	population	of
the	 country	was	 four	 hundred	million	 --	 now	 the	 population	 of	 the	 country	 is
nine	hundred	million	--	five	hundred	million	people	is	the	increase.	Even	in	1947
the	country	was	poor,	and	Britain	was	in	a	hurry	to	give	freedom	to	this	country
because	soon	Britain	would	be	blamed	for	the	poverty.
The	 prime	minister	 of	 England,	Atlee,	 had	 sent	Mountbatten	 to	 India	with	 an
urgent	message:
"Whatever	happens,	before	1948	--	the	deadline	is	1948	--	you	have	to	give	India
freedom.
Because	we	can	see	what	is	going	to	happen,	and	the	whole	blame	will	be	on	our
heads	--	so	be	quick!"
And	 Mountbatten	 did	 really	 a	 quick	 job.	 Even	 before	 1948	 he	 gave	 India
freedom	 --	 in	 1947,	 one	 year	 earlier.	 Atlee	was	 very	 happy.	 And	 none	 of	 the
Indian	leaders	even	thought	about	what	was	the	hurry.	In	1942	Britain	was	not
ready	 to	 give	 freedom	 to	 India;	 when	 India	 was	 ready	 to	 fight	 for	 freedom,
Britain	was	 not	willing	Britain	 crushed	 India's	 revolution	 in	 1942	within	 nine
days.	And	not	a	single	Indian	leader,	including	Mahatma	Gandhi	and	Jawaharlal
Nehru,	could	see	the	point	why	Britain	suddenly	became	so	much	interested	to
give	them	freedom.	There	was	no	revolution;	after	1942	Indian	leaders	had	lost
hope,	 because	 their	 revolution	 had	 been	 crushed	 in	 nine	 days.	 This	 was	 the
smallest	revolution	in	the	whole	history	of	mankind!	And	then	suddenly	out	of
the	blue,	Britain	itself	decides...	If	they	had	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
264
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
been	 intelligent,	 they	could	have	seen	 that	 there	was	something	unknown:	you
are	not	asking	for	freedom	and	they	are	ready	to	give	it	to	you;	what	new	factors
have	come	into	existence?
But	 nobody	 bothered	 about	 it.	 They	 were	 simply	 happy	 because	 they	 were
getting	 old	 and	 if	 freedom	 did	 not	 come	 soon,	 then	 it	 would	 not	 be	 in	 their
lifetimes;	perhaps	in	the	footnotes	of	history	their	names	would	remain,	but	they
would	not	be	great	leaders	of	the	country.
They	 were	 so	 happy,	 like	 children,	 that	 freedom	 had	 come.	 But	 they	 never
thought	about	it:	has	any	empire,	any	imperialist	country,	ever,	on	its	own	been
in	 such	 a	 hurry	 to	 give	 freedom	 to	 the	 slaves,	 when	 the	 slaves	 are	 perfectly
happy	and	no	revolution	is	happening?
And	there	was	no	possibility	of	any	revolution	for	at	least	another	twenty	years.
The	 situation	 was	 clear,	 but	 it	 needed	 intelligence.	 There	 was	 no	 question	 of
memory,	 because	 the	 situation	was	 new.	 India	 had	 grown	 to	 the	 point	 of	 four
hundred	million	 people,	 and	 Britain	 could	 see	 by	 the	 rate	 of	 growth	 that	 this
country	is	going	to	die	from	hunger	and	starvation,	and	they	did	not	want	to	be
responsible	for	it.
I	 started	 saying	 in	 1950	 that	 India	 needs	 birth	 control,	 and	 I	was	 condemned:
"You	are	talking	against	religion.	God	sends	the	children	--	how	can	we	prevent
them?"
I	argued	with	them:	"When	you	fall	sick,	God	sends	the	sickness	--	why	do	you
call	the	doctor?	If	God	wants	you	to	be	well,	he	will	send	the	medicine	too."
They	 argued	 with	 me.	 The	 shankaracharya	 of	 Puri	 himself	 argued	 with	 me:
"Birth	control	methods	are	artificial."
I	asked	him,	"What	do	you	mean	by	artificial?"	He	said,	"They	are	not	created
by	God."
I	said,	"Do	you	think	railway	trains	are	created	by	God,	airplanes	are	created	by
God?	The	medicines	you	are	using	are	all	artificial."
And	he	was	wearing	heavy	glasses	on	his	nose.	I	said,	"What	about	this	--	have
you	come	from	God's	house?	Have	you	brought	 these	glasses	with	your	birth?
God	has	 given	you	 eyes	 and	you	 should	 remain	with	 your	 eyes	 --	what	 is	 the
need	of	having	these	heavy	glasses?
These	are	artificial.	Everything	else	artificial	 is	okay,	but	birth	control	methods
cannot	be	used	because	they	are	artificial."
He	became	so	angry	with	me	that	he	refused	to	speak	from	the	same	stage,	in	a
meeting,	saying	"I	cannot	speak	with	this	man	on	the	same	stage.	Either	he	will
speak	or	I	will	speak."
And	I	was	 telling	 them	that	soon	 they	would	be	 in	 trouble,	but	even	 today	 the
government	 is	 afraid,	 the	 religious	 leaders	 are	 afraid.	 It	 goes	 against	 their
memory	 system;	 otherwise,	 a	 small	 intelligence	 would	 be	 enough	 to	 show
them...
Scientists	 are	 predicting	 that	 by	 the	 end	 of	 this	 century,	 India	 will	 have	 one
billion	people
--	that	is	one	thousand	million	people,	and	that	is	the	lowest	estimate.	The	more
progressive	and	more	intelligent	people	have	estimated	that	India	will	have	one
billion	and	eight	hundred	million	people	by	 the	end	of	 this	century,	almost	 the
double	population	of	today.
Fifty	percent	of	India	is	going	to	die	by	the	end	of	this	century,	and	when	one	in
two	 persons,	 is	 going	 to	 die,	 what	 do	 you	 think	 about	 those	who	will	 be	 left
living	amongst	corpses?	Their	situation	will	be	worse	than	being	dead.	The	dead
will	at	least	be	at	rest.
But	to	talk	about	birth	control	or	the	birth	control	pill	goes	against	the	memory,
against	 the	system,	against	 the	mind	that	has	been	told	something	for	centuries
but	is	not	aware	that	a	totally	new	situation	has	arisen.	India	has	never	been	the
most	populated	country	--	it	was	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
265
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
China.	By	the	end	of	this	century	India	will	have	gone	ahead	of	China.	China	is
behaving	more	intelligently.
But	the	real	intelligent	people	you	will	find	in	Germany,	in	Switzerland,	where
population	 is	 decreasing.	 Increasing	 the	 population	 is	 increasing	 death.	 The
situation	is	new;	it	needs	new	methods	to	face	it.
Intelligence	means	 the	 capability	 to	 respond	 to	 new	 situations.	 It	 comes	 from
your	being	--
mind	 is	 only	 a	 vehicle	 --	 a	 kind	 of	 awareness	 of	 what	 the	 mind	 is,	 without
belonging	to	it.
You	are	only	intellectually	 thinking	about	 it.	But	whatever	you	are	saying,	 if	 it
becomes	your	experience,	it	will	transform	your	whole	life.
Intelligence	 is	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 witness;	 it	 watches	 the	 mind	 and	 it	 gives
direction	 to	 the	mind.	 Right	 now,	whatever	 you	 have	 in	 your	mind	 has	 come
from	the	outside.	Intelligence	comes	from	your	inside.	That	used	to	be	the	basic
meaning	of	the	word	education	--	it	means
"to	 draw	 out."	 But	 what	 is	 being	 done	 in	 the	 name	 of	 education	 is	 just	 the
opposite	--	it	is	"to	stuff	in,"	to	stuff	in	all	kinds	of	nonsense.	Nowhere	are	efforts
being	made	that	your	intelligence	be	drawn	out.	You	have	it	already,	it	just	needs
a	passage,	a	way.
Meditation	 creates	 that	 passage,	 that	way.	 It	makes	 your	 being	 the	master	 and
your	mind	just	a	servant.
Memory	 is	 from	the	outside,	 intelligence	 is	 from	your	 innermost	sources,	your
very	life,	responding	to	situations.
"Is	meditation	connected	with	intelligence?"
Meditation	 is	 connected	 with	 your	 being,	 and	 your	 being	 has	 many	 aspects:
intelligence,	blissfulness,	grace,	gratitude,	prayer,	 love,	compassion...	 infinite	is
the	treasure	of	your	being.
Intelligence	is	only	one	of	the	parts.
"And	 is	 intelligence	 a	 potential	 that	we	 all	 have,	 and	 that	 simply	 needs	 to	 be
awakened?
Can	we	raise	our	consciousness	with	intelligence?"
Everybody	is	born	with	the	same	potential.	Differences	exist	because	we	are	not
using	our	potential	to	the	same	extent.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	even	a	man	like	Albert	Einstein,	whom	you
can	 call	 an	 example	 of	 genius,	 uses	 only	 fifteen	 percent	 of	 his	 potential.	 The
people	 whom	 you	 think	 of	 as	 very	 talented	 use	 only	 ten	 percent	 of	 their
potential.	And	the	ordinary	masses,	the	millions	of	people,	use	between	five	and
seven	percent.
The	world	would	be	a	totally	different	place	if	everybody	was	using	a	hundred
percent	of	their	potential,	in	different	directions,	in	different	dimensions.
Meditation	can	only	make	you	aware	of	your	potential,	can	make	the	passage	in
which	your	potential	can	grow	and	can	find	its	expression.	And	nobody	is	devoid
or	 unequal	 as	 far	 as	 intelligence	 is	 concerned.	 The	 inequality	 appears	 only
because	of	our	use:	somebody	uses	it,	somebody	does	not	use	it.
An	 American,	 a	 very	 devout	 Catholic,	 had	 tried	 for	 years	 to	 get	 a	 private
audience	with	the	pope.	When	his	request	was	finally	granted,	he	flew	to	Rome,
and	within	the	hour	was	kneeling	before	His	Holiness.	Kissing	the	ring	after	the
pope	had	blessed	him,	the	man	said,
"Your	 Holiness,	 I	 want	 you	 to	 know	 this	 has	 been	 the	 most	 inspirational
experience	of	my	life.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
266
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
I	 am	deeply	 grateful.	 I	would	 like	 to	 share	my	 favorite	 story	with	 you:	There
were	these	two	Polacks..."
"Excuse	me,	my	son,"	the	pope	interrupted,	a	little	offended,	"are	you	aware	that
I	am	Polish?"
"Ah	yes,	Your	Holiness,	but	don't	worry.	I	will	tell	it	very,	very	slowly."
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
267
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
27
Harmony	is	your	reality
26	March	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
LAST	NIGHT	WHILST	LYING	 IN	BED	AND	ALLOWING	MY	MIND	TO
WANDER
DOWN	CREATIVE	 CORRIDORS,	 I	 EXPERIENCED	WHAT	 I	 CAN	ONLY
DESCRIBE
AS	A	MENTAL	SOMERSAULT,	AND	I	LOOKED,	FOR	THE	FIRST	TIME,
INSIDE.	I	WILL	NOT	ATTEMPT	TO	DESCRIBE	HOW	IT	FELT,	BUT	I	CAN
SAY	IT	WAS	MORE
ECSTATIC	THAN	ANYTHING	I	COULD	IMAGINE.	I	FELT	DOORS	THAT
WERE
STUCK	TIGHT,	DISSOLVE,	AND	IN	MY	TREMBLING	AND	ASTONISHED
INNOCENCE	 I	 WAS	 AWARE	 OF	 YOUR	 COMPASSIONATE	 PRESENCE
CUSHIONING
ME.	 OH	 MY	 PRECIOUS	 AND	 BELOVED	 MASTER,	 WHAT	 WAS	 THIS
TREASURE	 I	DISCOVERED?	 IS	THIS	WHAT	YOU	CALL	MEDITATION,
AND	WILL	IT	BE	EASY	TO
FIND	AGAIN?
Parambodhi,	 it	 has	 been	 a	 beautiful	 first	 glimpse	 of	 meditation.	 But	 the	 first
glimpse	 should	 not	 be	 desired;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 destroy	 it.	 Just	 as	 it	 has
happened	on	its	own	--	you	were	not	attempting	to	achieve	it	--	allow	it	to	come
and	go;	don't	be	greedy.	That	is	one	of	the	great	obstacles	on	the	path	of	those
who	are	 in	search	of	 themselves.	A	glimpse	happens,	 it	 is	ecstatic,	and	 the	old
mind	 immediately	 grabs	 it	 and	 starts	 thinking	 in	 its	 old	 pattern:	 how	 to	 get	 it
again.
Mind	is	not	going	to	get	any	experience	of	meditation.	And	the	more	greedy	the
mind	becomes,	 the	 less	 is	 the	possibility	of	 that	 relaxed	 state	when	meditation
blossoms.	So	one	most	important	thing	to	be	remembered	is:	forget	all	about	it.
It	has	come	on	its	own,	it	will	come	on	its	own.	It	cannot	be	made	a	goal.	Our
mind	turns	everything	into	a	goal;	its	whole	training	is	for	achieving:	if	you	have
achieved	this	much,	you	should	achieve	it	again	and	you	should	achieve	more.
But	 the	very	desire	of	achieving	 is	a	disturbance,	 is	a	 tension,	 is	an	anxiety.	 It
happens	to	almost	everybody	when	for	the	first	 time	the	sky	opens	inside.	You
were	 not	 asking	 for	 it;	 you	were	 doing	 something	 else.	But	 you	were	 relaxed,
calm,	 and	 quiet.	You	were	 ready,	 but	 you	were	 not	 demanding	 anything	 from
existence.
Existence	never	yields	to	any	of	our	demands.	It	is	the	demanding	mind	that	has
been	creating	all	our	misery.
Once	 you	 have	 tasted	 something	 that	 you	 have	 never	 tasted	 before,	 it	 seems
absolutely	natural	to	ask	for	it	again	and	again.	But	you	have	to	understand	that
meditation	is	something	not	of	your	doing.	It	is	not	your	act.	It	is	something	that
happens	to	you	in	a	certain	space.
That	space	is	not	of	desire,	not	of	demand,	but	of	absolute	relaxation	and	trust	in
nature.	 If	 it	 has	 given	 you	 one	 glimpse,	 it	 will	 give	 you	many	 glimpses	 of	 a
deeper	nature,	of	a	higher	Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
268
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
quality.	Right	now	you	may	not	be	able	even	 to	 imagine	 them,	because	unless
you	experience	something,	you	cannot	imagine	it,	you	cannot	dream	about	it.
This	 is	 the	 very	 beginning	 of	 the	 journey	 on	 the	 path,	 but	 a	 very	 beautiful
opening.	If	you	don't	come	in	the	way,	many	more	experiences	will	follow.
So	the	only	thing	to	avoid	is	yourself	coming	in	the	way.	Remember	always	that
it	is	a	happening,	so	when	you	are	not	anxious	to	get	it,	only	then	it	is	possible.
Your	anxiety,	your	 tension,	your	greed,	make	your	mind	very	confused	and	do
not	allow	the	relaxed	space	where	flowers	of	meditation	blossom.
You	 are	 saying,	 "Last	 night	 whilst	 laying	 in	 bed	 and	 allowing	 my	 mind	 to
wander	 down	 creative	 corridors,	 I	 experienced	 what	 I	 can	 only	 describe	 as	 a
mental	 somersault.	 And	 I	 looked	 for	 the	 first	 time	 inside."	 It	 all	 happened
naturally.	It	was	not	preplanned.	You	were	not	looking	for	it.
"I	will	not	attempt	 to	describe	how	I	felt."	Even	 if	you	do	attempt,	you	cannot
describe	it.
The	experience	of	your	inner	being,	howsoever	small,	is	basically	indescribable.
There	 are	 no	words,	 no	 concepts	 into	which	 you	 can	 put	 it	 rationally.	 It	 is	 an
experience	where	language	has	never	entered,	where	mind	has	never	entered.	It
is	not	a	mental	experience;	otherwise	there	would	be	no	difficulty	to	describe	it.
Anything	 that	 can	 be	 described	 is	 of	 the	 mind,	 and	 anything	 that	 cannot	 be
described	is	of	real	authentic	value;	it	is	spiritual.
"I	will	not	attempt	to	describe	how	I	felt,	but	I	can	say	it	was	more	ecstatic	than
anything	that	I	could	imagine.	I	felt	doors	that	were	stuck	tight,	dissolve,	and	in
my	 trembling	 and	 astonished	 innocence..."	 Remember	 these	 words.	 It	 was
happening	in	your	"trembling	and	astonished	innocence."
"I	was	aware	of	Your	compassionate	presence	cushioning	me.	Oh	my	precious
and	beloved	master,	what	was	this	treasure	I	discovered?"
You	 are	 again	 asking	 for	 a	 description,	 for	 an	 explanation.	 And	 you	 know
perfectly	well	 that	even	in	ordinary	life	there	are	many	things	which	cannot	be
described,	but	only	experienced.
You	taste	something	--	is	there	any	way	to	describe	it?	Is	there	any	way	to	give
an	explanation	about	it?	And	it	is	an	ordinary	thing.	You	have	tasted	something,
you	 have	 smelled	 a	 fragrance,	 you	 have	 heard	music...	 You	 experienced	 it;	 it
thrilled	you.	You	can	say	what	happened	to	you,	but	you	cannot	say	what	it	was
exactly.	 You	 know	 perfectly	 well	 what	 it	 is,	 but	 there	 exists	 no	 language.
Language	is	created	by	people	for	mundane	affairs.
For	the	sacred	there	is	only	silence.
A	man	came	to	a	Zen	master,	Rinzai.	He	was	sitting	on	the	beach.	The	man	said,
"I	have	been	looking	for	you,	and	for	many	days	I	have	been	thinking	to	come	to
you.	I	want	to	know	the	essential,	the	very	essence,	of	all	your	religious	teaching
--	in	short,	because	I	am	not	a	man	of	philosophical	bent.	What	is	it	that	you	are
teaching?"
Rinzai	looked	at	him	and	remained	silent.	A	moment	passed.	The	man	felt	a	little
strange.
He	said,	"Have	you	heard	me	or	not?"
Rinzai	said,	"I	have	heard	you,	but	have	you	heard	me	or	not?"
The	man	said,	"My	god,	you	have	not	said	a	single	word."
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
269
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Rinzai	 said,	 "I	 was	 sitting	 silent.	 That	 is	 the	 essential	 part	 of	 my	 teaching.	 I
thought	that	rather	than	talking	about	it,	it	would	be	better	to	show	it	to	you.	In
words,	 things	 get	 distorted;	 in	words,	 you	 start	 interpreting	 according	 to	 your
own	prejudices."
The	man	said,	"It	is	beyond	me.	Please	give	some	words	that	I	can	remember."
Rinzai	 said,	 "If	 you	 insist	 I	 will	 commit	 the	 crime	 of	 forcing	 something	 into
words	which	is	not	ready,	which	is	absolutely	unwilling	to	be	put	into	words."
He	wrote	with	his	finger	in	the	sand	where	he	was	sitting:	meditation.
The	man	said,	"I	have	come	from	very	far	away	and	you	are	making	me	more
puzzled.
First	you	remained	silent;	now	you	simply	write	'meditation.'	That	does	not	make
any	sense	to	me.	What	is	meditation?"
Rinzai	 said,	 "What	 is	 meditation...	 what	 is	 a	 roseflower?	 A	 roseflower	 is	 a
roseflower.	You	can	see	it	dancing	in	the	wind	and	in	the	rain	and	in	the	sun.	You
can	 enjoy	 its	 dance,	 you	 can	 enjoy	 its	 fragrance,	 its	 beauty,	 but	 what	 is	 a
roseflower?	Don't	ask	such	stupid	questions."
He	 said,	 "But	 I	 have	 come	 from	 so	 far,	 with	 great	 expectations...	 just	 a	 little
more,	so	that	I	can	understand	what	meditation	is."
So	Rinzai	wrote	with	capital	letters:	MEDITATION.
The	man	said,	"Does	it	make	any	difference	whether	you	write	in	small	letters	or
you	write	in	capital	letters?"
Rinzai	said,	"You	are	only	concerned	with	your	difficulty.	You	are	not	concerned
with	 my	 difficulty.	 Even	 writing	 it	 as	 meditation,	 I	 am	 committing	 a	 crime
against	meditation	itself,	because	it	is	an	experience,	not	an	explanation.
"It	 is	 the	 flower	 of	 silence.	 It	 cannot	 be	 contained	 in	 words.	 Even	 the	 word
meditation	 is	 just	 utilitarian.	 People	 ask	 and	 feel	 annoyed	 if	 they	 are	 not
answered,	so	we	answer,	but	all	our	answers	are	wrong.
"The	moment	we	transform	the	experience	into	an	explanation,	something	goes
wrong.	It	is	a	wordless	state	of	being.	If	you	really	want	to	know	it,	you	sit	with
me;	you	be	with	me	for	a	few	days.	Perhaps	my	silence	may	affect	you,	because
it	is	contagious."
Don't	 ask	 what	 treasure	 you	 have	 discovered.	 You	 have	 discovered	 only	 the
door;	 you	have	not	 even	 entered	 into	 the	 temple	 yet.	But	 you	 are	 on	 the	 right
path	and	you	are	going	in	the	right	direction.
If	 you	 don't	 allow	 greed,	 if	 you	 don't	 start	 expecting	 it	 to	 happen	 every	 day,
according	to	your	desires,	you	will	discover	the	treasure	too.	It	is	inside	you.
"Is	this	what	You	call	meditation?"
Just	the	beginning...	Meditation	is	when	mind	is	no	more	at	all.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind.	Your	mind	has	not	dissolved;	it	was	watching,
standing	by	 the	corner.	And	it	 is	your	mind	which	 is	enquiring	about	what	has
happened.	It	is	not	the	business	of	the	mind.
Mind	is	meant	for	outward	things,	for	objective	reality.	In	science	it	is	perfectly
in	its	right	place,	but	in	religion,	in	your	interiority,	in	your	subjectivity	it	has	no
place	at	all.
"And	will	it	be	easy	to	find	it	again?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
270
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
It	all	depends	on	you.	If	you	don't	try	to	find	it	again,	it	will	be	very	easy.	If	you
try	to	find	it	again,	you	will	make	it	more	and	more	difficult.	The	more	you	try,
the	less	is	the	possibility.
The	American	idea	of	"try	and	try	and	try	again"	will	not	help.	It	is	good	for	the
outside	world;	for	the	inside	world,	don't	try.	Just	wait,	and	wait	with	patience.	If
it	happens,	feel	grateful.	If	it	does	not	happen,	don't	feel	sad.
I	have	heard	about	 a	Sufi	mystic,	Bayazid,	who	used	 to	 say	after	 each	prayer,
raising	his	hands	towards	the	sky,	"Father,	you	are	so	generous.	You	take	my	are
of	me	so	carefully,	as	if	I	am	the	only	one	to	be	taken	care	of."	His	disciples	were
very	tired	of	listening	to	it	every	day,	morning,	evening...
Once	it	happened	that	for	three	days...	Bayazid	obviously	was	a	rebel;	no	mystic
can	be	otherwise.	I	have	not	heard	that	a	mystic	can	be	orthodox,	traditional.	A
mystic	is	naturally	rebellious.	His	religion	is	rebellion,	rebellion	against	all	kinds
of	 lies	 that	 tradition	goes	on	giving	from	one	generation	 to	another	generation.
And	Bayazid	had	annoyed	 the	orthodox,	 the	so-called	 religious,	 the	priests,	all
the	vested	interests	who	want	man	to	remain	enslaved	to	the	past.	For	three	days
they	had	been	passing	through	villages	where	no	food	was	given	to	them,	doors
were	closed	in	their	faces,	even	water	was	not	given	and	it	was	a	desert,	with	no
shelter.
They	were	sleeping	cold	nights	on	the	sand.
And	still	after	every	prayer	he	was	saying,	"How	can	you	manage?	You	have	to
look	after	such	a	vast	universe,	but	you	take	so	much	care.	I	cannot	ever	return
it;	I	don't	have	anything	to	give	to	you."
The	disciples	finally	freaked	out!	They	said,	"It	 is	enough.	Before	 it	was	okay,
but	for	 three	days	no	food,	no	water...	we	are	dying!	Cold	nights	 in	 the	desert,
hot	days	in	the	desert,	and	you	are	still	telling	God,	"You	are	taking	care	of	us"?
Bayazid	said,	"He	knows	what	is	needed	and	when	it	is	needed.	These	three	days
of	 hunger	 and	 thirst	 and	 the	 cold	 nights	 and	 the	 hot	 days	 must	 have	 been
absolutely	necessary	for	us.	He	always	takes	care."
Such	a	trust	in	existence	will	bring,	whenever	you	are	ready,	whatever	you	need.
So	be	grateful	 if	 it	 happens	 and	be	grateful	 if	 it	 does	 not	 happen.	That	 is	 real
gratefulness.
But	don't	start	asking,	"Will	it	be	easy	to	find	it	again?"	Have	you	found	it	in	the
first	place,	or	has	 it	 found	you?	You	have	not	 found	it,	so	how	can	you	find	 it
again?
It	 has	 found	 you.	 And	 it	 will	 find	 you	 again	 and	 again,	 but	 don't	 lose	 your
innocence	 in	 expectations,	 in	 desires.	 That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 very	 stupid	 things
religious	people	go	on	doing.
Two	polacks	rent	a	rowboat	and	go	fishing	in	a	lake.	They	are	catching	fish	after
fish,	and	have	almost	two	dozen	by	the	end	of	the	afternoon.
One	man	 says	 to	 the	 other,	 "Why	don't	we	 come	back	 to	 the	 very	 same	place
tomorrow?"
"Good	idea,"	his	friend	answers.
So	 the	 first	man	 takes	 a	 piece	 of	 chalk,	 and	draws	 an	X	on	 the	 bottom	of	 the
boat.	 "Don't	 be	 stupid!"	 the	 friend	 says.	 "How	do	you	know	 that	we'll	 get	 the
same	boat	tomorrow?"
Just	remain	available	and	grateful	--	waiting	with	a	 throbbing	heart,	not	with	a
desiring	mind;	waiting	with	an	open	heart,	not	with	a	closed	mind,	with	the	idea
that	"It	has	to	happen.
Why	is	it	not	happening?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
271
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
If	you	can	remember	this	simple	thing,	it	will	happen	more	often,	it	will	happen
more	deeply,	it	will	happen	in	new	forms,	in	new	riches,	in	new	colors,	with	new
significance,	with	deeper	meanings,	with	higher	flights.
But	it	will	always	happen.
It	will	not	be	your	doing.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	 MORNING	 BEFORE	 DISCOURSE	 STARTED,	 SITTING	 ON	 THE
MARBLE,	I	FELT	AS	IF	WE	WERE	ONE	MOUTH	SINGING,	ONE	HEART
BEATING,	ONE
BREATH	BREATHING.	I	FELT	SO	MUCH	LOVE	IN	MY	BEING,	AS	IF	WE
WERE	ALL
ONE	BEING.	I	FEEL	LIKE	GIVING	A	LOT;	I	FEEL	AS	IF	I	AM	TAKING	SO
MUCH
FROM	 EVERYWHERE,	 AND	MY	 BEING	WANTS	 TO	 BE	 USEFUL	 FOR
DEVELOPING
ETERNAL	 LOVE.	 I	 HAVE	 THE	 FEELING	 WE	 ARE	 HOLDING	 EACH
OTHER'S	HANDS
AND	 STARTING	 TO	 FLOWER	ALL	 TOGETHER	 IN	 THE	 SPRING.	 AM	 I
JUST	A	DREAMER,	BELOVED	OSHO?
Amrito,	Friedrich	Nietzsche	in	one	of	his	statements	says,	"The	greatest	calamity
will	fall	on	humanity	the	day	all	the	dreamers	disappear."	The	whole	evolution	of
man	is	because	man	has	dreamt	about	it.	What	was	a	dream	yesterday,	today	is	a
reality,	and	what	is	a	dream	today	can	become	a	reality	tomorrow.
All	 the	 poets	 are	 dreamers,	 all	 the	musicians	 are	 dreamers,	 all	 the	mystics	 are
dreamers.	In	fact,	creativity	is	a	by-product	of	dreaming.
But	these	dreams	are	not	the	dreams	that	Sigmund	Freud	analyzes.	So	you	have
to	make	a	distinction	between	the	dream	of	a	poet,	the	dream	of	a	sculptor,	the
dream	of	an	architect,	 the	dream	of	a	mystic,	 the	dream	of	a	dancer	 --	and	 the
dreams	of	a	sick	mind.
It	 is	 very	 unfortunate	 that	 Sigmund	 Freud	 never	 bothered	 about	 the	 great
dreamers	 who	 are	 the	 foundation	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 human	 evolution.	 He	 came
across	 only	 the	 psychologically	 sick	 people,	 and	 because	 his	 whole	 life's
experience	was	to	analyze	the	dreams	of	psychopaths,	the	very	word	"dreaming"
became	 condemned.	 The	 madman	 dreams,	 but	 his	 dream	 is	 going	 to	 be
destructive	of	himself.	The	creative	man	also	dreams,	but	his	dream	is	going	to
enrich	the	world.
I	am	reminded	of	Michelangelo.	He	was	passing	 through	 the	market	where	all
kinds	of	marble	was	available,	and	he	saw	a	beautiful	rock,	so	he	enquired	about
it.
The	owner	said,	"If	you	want	that	rock	you	can	take	it	for	free	because	it	has	just
been	 lying	 around	 taking	 up	 space.	 And	 for	 twelve	 years,	 nobody	 has	 even
enquired	about	it;	I	also	don't	see	that	there	is	any	potential	in	that	rock."
Michelangelo	took	the	rock,	worked	on	it	for	almost	the	whole	year,	and	made
perhaps	 the	most	beautiful	 statue	 that	has	ever	existed.	 Just	a	 few	years	ago,	a
madman	destroyed	it.	It	was	in	the	Vatican;	it	was	a	statue	of	Jesus	Christ	after
he	was	taken	down	from	the	cross,	and	is	lying	dead	in	his	mother	Mary's	lap.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
272
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
I	have	seen	only	the	photographs	of	it,	but	it	 is	so	alive,	as	if	Jesus	is	going	to
wake	up	any	moment.	And	he	has	used	the	marble	with	such	artfulness	that	you
can	feel	both	things	--	the	strength	of	Jesus	and	the	fragileness.	And	the	tears	are
in	the	eyes	of	Jesus'	mother,	Mary.
A	madman,	just	few	years	ago,	hammered	the	rock	that	Michelangelo	had	made,
and	when	 he	was	 asked	why	 he	 had	 done	 it	 he	 said,	 "I	 also	want	 to	 become
famous.	Michelangelo	had	to	work	one	year;	then	he	became	famous.	I	had	only
to	work	 for	 five	minutes,	 and	 I	destroyed	 the	whole	 statue.	And	my	name	has
gone	around	the	world	as	a	headline	on	all	the	papers."
Both	men	worked	on	 the	 same	marble	 rock.	One	was	a	creator,	 another	was	a
madman.
After	 one	 year,	 when	 Michelangelo	 had	 finished	 the	 work,	 he	 asked	 the
shopkeeper	to	come	to	his	home,	because	he	wanted	to	show	him	something.
He	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	He	said,	"From	where	did	you	get	this	beautiful
marble?"
And	 Michelangelo	 said,	 "Don't	 you	 recognize?	 It	 is	 the	 same	 ugly	 rock	 that
waited	 in	 front	 of	 your	 shop	 for	 twelve	years."	And	 I	 remember	 this	 incident,
because	the	shopkeeper	asked,
"How	did	you	manage	 to	 think	 that	 that	ugly	 rock	could	be	 turned	 into	such	a
beautiful	statue?"
Michelangelo	said,	"I	did	not	think	about	it.	I	have	been	dreaming	of	making	this
statue,	and	when	I	was	passing	by	the	rock	I	suddenly	saw	Jesus,	calling	me,	I
am	encaged	in	the	rock.	Free	me;	help	me	to	get	out	of	this	rock.'	I	saw	exactly
the	same	statue	in	the	rock.	So	I	have	only	done	a	small	job:	I	have	removed	the
unnecessary	parts	of	the	rock,	and	Jesus	and	Mary	are	free	from	their	bondage."
It	would	have	been	a	great	contribution	if	a	man	of	the	same	caliber	as	Sigmund
Freud,	instead	of	analyzing	the	sick	people	and	their	dreams	had	worked	on	the
dreams	of	psychologically	healthy,	and	not	only	healthy,	but	creative	people.	The
analysis	 of	 their	 dreams	 will	 not	 show	 that	 all	 dreams	 are	 repressions.	 The
analysis	of	their	dreams	will	show	that	there	are	dreams	which	are	born	out	of	a
more	creative	consciousness	than	ordinary	people	have.
So	don't	 be	worried	 about	 being	 a	dreamer.	All	 the	people	who	have	gathered
around	me	are	dreamers.	They	are	dreaming	of	a	higher	state	of	consciousness,
they	 are	 dreaming	 of	 a	 possibility	 to	 find	 the	 eternal	 source	 of	 life.	 They	 are
dreaming	of	God.	And	their	dreams	are	not	sick,	their	dreams	are	authentically
healthy.	 The	whole	 evolution	 of	man	 and	 his	 consciousness	 depends	 on	 these
dreamers.
Amrito,	you	are	saying,	"This	morning	before	discourse,	sitting	on	the	marble,	I
felt	as	if	we	were	one	mouth	singing,	one	heart	beating,	one	breath	breathing.	I
felt	so	much	love	in	my	being,	as	if	we	were	all	one	being.
"I	feel	like	giving	a	lot,	I	feel	as	if	I	am	taking	so	much	from	everywhere,	and
my	being	wants	 to	be	useful	for	developing	eternal	 love.	I	have	the	feeling	we
are	holding	each	other's	hands	and	starting	to	flower	all	together	in	the	spring."
It	is	not	a	dream.	It	is	a	dream	that	is	becoming	real,	a	dream	that	is	transforming
itself	into	reality.
And	it	is	not	only	you.	Many	people	have	written	to	me;	in	different	ways	they
have	felt	it,	and	what	they	have	felt	is	not	their	projection.	It	is	our	reality,	it	is
our	discovery.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
273
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
The	whole	existence	is	one	organic	unity.	You	are	not	only	holding	hands	with
each	 other,	 you	 are	 holding	 hands	 with	 the	 trees.	 You	 are	 not	 only	 breathing
together,	the	whole	universe	is	breathing	together.
The	 universe	 is	 in	 a	 deep	 harmony.	 Only	 man	 has	 forgotten	 the	 language	 of
harmony,	 and	 our	 work	 here	 is	 to	 remind	 you.	We	 are	 not	 creating	 harmony;
harmony	is	your	reality.	It	is	just	that	you	have	forgotten	about	it.	Perhaps	it	is	so
obvious	that	one	tends	to	forget	about	it.
Perhaps	you	are	born	in	it;	how	can	you	think	about	it?
An	ancient	parable	 is	 that	a	 fish	who	was	of	a	philosophical	bent	of	mind	was
asking	other	fish,	"I	have	heard	so	much	about	the	ocean;	where	is	it?"	And	she
is	in	the	ocean!	But	she	was	born	in	the	ocean,	she	has	lived	in	the	ocean;	there
has	never	been	any	separation.	She	has	not	seen	ocean	as	a	separate	object	from
herself.	An	old	fish	caught	hold	of	the	young	philosopher	and	told	her,	"This	is
the	ocean	we	are	in."
But	the	young	philosopher	said,	"You	must	be	kidding.	This	is	water	and	you	are
calling	it	the	ocean.	I	will	have	to	enquire	more	of	wiser	people	around."
A	fish	comes	to	know	about	the	ocean	only	when	it	is	caught	by	a	fisherman	and
drawn	 out	 of	 the	 ocean,	 thrown	 into	 the	 sand.	 Then,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 she
understands	 that	 she	 has	 always	 lived	 in	 the	 ocean,	 that	 ocean	 is	 her	 life	 and
without	it	she	cannot	survive.
But	 with	 man	 there	 is	 a	 difficulty.	 You	 cannot	 be	 taken	 out	 of	 existence.
Existence	 is	 infinite,	 there	 are	 no	 shores	 where	 you	 can	 stand	 aloof	 and	 see
existence.	Wherever	you	are,	you	will	be	part	of	existence.
We	are	all	breathing	together.	We	are	part	of	one	orchestra.	To	understand	it	is	a
great	 experience	 --	 don't	 call	 it	 dreaming,	 because	 dreaming	 has	 got	 a	 very
wrong	connotation	because	of	Sigmund	Freud.	Otherwise	 it	 is	one	of	 the	most
beautiful	words,	very	poetic.
You	are	experiencing	a	reality,	because	all	the	people	who	are	here,	are	here	for
the	same	purpose:	just	to	be	silent,	just	to	be	joyful,	just	to	be.	In	their	silence,
they	will	feel	they	are	joined	with	others.
When	you	are	 thinking,	you	are	separate	 from	others	because	you	are	 thinking
some	thoughts	and	the	other	person	is	thinking	different	thoughts.	But	if	you	are
both	silent,	then	all	the	walls	between	you	disappear.
Two	silences	cannot	remain	two.	They	become	one.
All	great	values	of	 life	 --	 love,	 silence,	blissfulness,	ecstasy,	godliness	 --	make
you	aware	of	an	immense	oneness.	There	is	nobody	else	other	than	you;	we	are
all	 different	 expressions	 of	 one	 reality,	 different	 songs	 of	 one	 singer,	 different
dances	of	one	dancer,	different	paintings
--	but	the	painter	is	one.
But	this	has	to	be	reminded	to	you,	Amrito,	again:	don't	call	it	a	dream,	because
in	calling	it	a	dream	you	are	not	understanding	that	it	is	a	reality.	And	reality	is
far	more	 beautiful	 than	 any	 dream	 can	 be.	 Reality	 is	more	 psychedelic,	more
colorful,	 more	 joyful,	 more	 dancing	 than	 you	 can	 ever	 imagine.	 But	 we	 are
living	so	unconsciously...
Our	first	unconsciousness	is	that	we	think	that	we	are	separate.	But	I	emphasize
that	no	man	is	an	island,	we	are	all	part	of	a	vast	continent.	There	is	variety,	but
that	does	not	make	us	separate.	Variety	makes	 life	 richer	 --	part	of	us	 is	 in	 the
Himalayas,	a	part	of	us	is	in	the	stars,	a	part	of	us	is	in	the	roses.	A	part	of	us	is
in	 the	 bird	 on	 the	 wing,	 a	 part	 of	 us	 is	 in	 the	 green	 of	 Osho	 -	 The	 Hidden
Splendor
274
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
the	trees.	We	are	spread	all	over.	To	experience	it	as	reality	will	transform	your
whole	approach	towards	life,	will	transform	your	every	act,	will	transform	your
very	being.
You	will	become	full	of	love;	you	will	become	full	of	reverence	for	life.	You	will
become	for	the	first	time,	according	to	me,	truly	religious	--	not	a	Christian,	not	a
Hindu,	not	a	Mohammedan,	but	truly,	purely	religious.
The	 word	 religion	 is	 beautiful.	 It	 comes	 from	 a	 root	 which	 means	 bringing
together	those	who	have	fallen	apart	in	their	ignorance;	bringing	them	together,
waking	them	up	so	that	they	can	see	they	are	not	separate.
Then	you	cannot	hurt	even	a	tree.	Then	your	compassion	and	your	love	will	be
just	 spontaneous	 --	 not	 cultivated,	 not	 something	 of	 a	 discipline.	 If	 love	 is	 a
discipline,	 it	 is	 false.	 If	 nonviolence	 is	 cultivated,	 it	 is	 false.	 If	 compassion	 is
nurtured,	 it	 is	false.	But	 if	 they	come	spontaneously	without	any	effort	of	your
own,	then	they	have	a	reality	so	deep,	so	exquisite...
In	the	name	of	religion,	so	much	crime	has	been	done	in	the	past.	More	people
have	been	killed	by	 religious	people	 than	by	 anybody	 else.	Certainly	 all	 these
religions	have	been	fake,	pseudo.
The	authentic	religion	has	to	be	born.
Once	H.G.	Wells	was	asked,	when	he	had	published	his	history	of	the	world	--	a
tremendous	work	--	"What	do	you	think	about	civilization?"
And	 H.G.	Wells	 said,	 "It	 is	 a	 good	 idea,	 but	 somebody	 should	 do	 something
about	it	to	bring	it	into	existence."
Up	to	now	we	have	not	been	civilized,	not	cultured,	not	religious.	In	the	name	of
civilization,	in	the	name	of	culture,	in	the	name	of	religion	we	have	been	doing
all	kinds	of	barbarous	acts	--	primitive,	subhuman,	animalistic.	And	sometimes
we	have	passed	 even	beyond	 the	 animals:	 no	 animals	 eats	 its	 own	 species,	 no
animal	is	a	cannibal,	except	man.
And	you	will	be	thinking	that	only	in	Africa	a	few	people	eat	human	flesh.	It	is
not	so	simple	to	throw	the	responsibility	on	small	tribes	in	Africa.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 in	 Palestine,	 people	 asked	 the	 government	 --	 because	 so
many	people	are	dying	from	hunger	and	starvation	--	"Can	we	eat	human	flesh?
Of	course,	of	dead	people
--	 those	who	have	died	of	 starvation	at	 least	 can	help	others	 to	 survive	a	 little
longer.	And	the	government	of	Palestine	has	accepted	the	idea	that	it	is	better	to
eat	human	flesh	than	to	die.
The	population	is	growing	so	fast	in	the	world	that	it	is	not	just	a	guess	that	by
the	end	of	this	century,	millions	of	people	will	be	eating	human	flesh.	No	animal
goes	 that	 low.	He	will	 die	 hungry,	 but	 he	will	 not	 eat	 any	 animal	 of	 his	 own
species.
Man	has	fallen	far	away	from	reality.	He	has	to	be	awakened	to	the	truth	that	we
are	all	one.	And	it	is	not	a	hypothesis;	it	is	the	experience	of	all	the	meditators,
without	exception,	down	the	ages,	that	the	whole	existence	is	one	organic	unity.
So	don't	mistake	a	beautiful	experience	as	a	dream.	To	call	it	a	dream	cancels	its
reality.
Dreams	have	to	be	made	real,	not	reality	changed	into	dreams.
An	old	man	of	eighty-two	went	to	a	sperm	bank	to	make	a	deposit.
"Are	 you	 sure,"	 asked	 the	woman	 at	 the	 reception	 desk,	 "that	 you	want	 to	 do
this?"
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
275
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
"Yes,"	answered	the	old	man,	"I	feel	it	is	my	duty	to	give	something	of	myself	to
the	world."
The	woman	handed	him	a	jar,	and	directed	him	to	a	room	down	the	hall.	When
thirty	minutes	 had	 passed	 and	 he	 did	 not	 return,	 the	 girl	 began	 to	worry.	 She
feared	he	might	have	had	a	heart	attack	or	a	stroke.
At	 that	moment	 the	old	man	came	out	of	 the	 room	and	approached	 the	young
woman.
"Listen,"	he	said,	"I	tried	it	with	one	hand,	then	I	tried	it	with	two	hands,	then	I
got	 it	up	and	beat	 it	on	 the	sink.	Then	I	ran	warm	water	on	 it,	 then	cold	water
over	it...
"And	still	I	can't	get	the	lid	off	the	jar."
Don't	guess!
Okay,	Vimal?
Yes,	Osho.
Osho	-	The	Hidden	Splendor
276
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	8	-	The	taste	of	your	being
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	10	-	Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	11	-	A	noah's	ark	of	consciousness
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	12	-	Life	itself	is	a	miracle
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	13	-	Truth	is	not	divisible
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	15	-	This	is	the	last	dance
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	16	-	Love	is	always	an	emperor
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	18	-	Inside	you	god	is	hidden
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	19	-	At	the	maximum	you	disappear
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	20	-	Your	longing	is	the	seed
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	22	-	What	more	do	you	want?
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	24	-	All	our	doings	are	disturbances
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	26	-	Life's	aim	is	life	itself
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
Chapter	27	-	Harmony	is	your	reality
