

THE VITAL BALANCE
Acharya Rajneesh
Compilation by:
Dolly Diddee (Poona)
Edited by:
Swami Yoga Chinmaya (Bombay)
and
Swami Krishna Christ (Mr. Walter Pfuetze)
New York (U.S.A.)
Publisher:
Ishwarlal N . Shah,
Secretary, Jeevan Jagruti Kendra,
(LIFE AWAKENING CENTRE)
31, Israil Mohalla,
Bhagwan Bhuvan,
Masjid Bunder Road,
B O M B A Y - 9 .
●
53, Empire Building,
146, Dr. D. N. Road,
B O M B A Y - 1.
Copyright
JEEVAN JAGRUTI KENDRA - BOMBAY.
First Edition:
March 1971
Price Rs. 1.50
Sh. 5
Cents. 50
Francs. 2
Printed by:
Jayesh Sangani,
Empire Printery,
189, L. J. Road,
Bombay-16. DD.
THE VITAL BALANCE
[An interview with Acharya Rajneesh by
Dr. Jean Georges Henrotte, Paris (France)
and Ma Yoga Maitri (Mme. Yuki Fujita)
Tokyo, (Japan). ]
on 6-1-1971, Bombay (India).
THE VITAL BALANCE
Dr. Henrotte:
There is a problem with people like me, in our
civilization and especially in our profession. We make
too much use of our intelligence, so much so, that we
tend to view life through the intellect only, thus negating
all other means of doing so. This tends to make life
boring and dull and robs it of its lustre.
Acharya Rajneesh:
No one can use his intellect too much. It is such a
great force, with so much potentiality that you cannot use
it too much. Not only too much, we never even use it
totally - never. Ordinarily, we do not use more than 10 to
15% of the total potentiality. Another thing, when you do
intellectual work, it does not necessarily mean you are
using your intelligence. Intellectual work too, is
mechanical. It does not require any intelligence at all!
Once you get the know-how, no intelligence is required
at all. Then the mind works just like a computer.
The real problem is, not the use of too much of
intelligence, but the non-use of emotion. Emotion is
completely discarded in our civilization and the balance
is lost. Our whole civilization is anti-emotional. So a
lopsided personality develops. If emotion is also used
then there is no imbalance. An emotion-intellect balance
must be maintained in the proper ratio; otherwise, the
whole personality gets diseased. It is just like using your
one leg only. You may keep on using it but you reach
nowhere. You will simply tire yourself. The other leg
must be used. Emotion and intellect are two legs - they
are like two wings. When we use only one wing, the only
outcome will be frustration and then the Bliss that comes
by using both the wings, simultaneously, in balance and
in harmony is never attained.
So do not fear to use intellect. Only when
intelligence is used, then you touch the depths. You are
stimulated in your potentiality. Intellectual work is
merely superficial. No depth is touched, nothing is
challenged. That gives rise to boredom. That creates
lustreless work - work without enjoyment. Enjoyment
always comes - when your individuality is challenged
and you have to prove yourself or when you have to
respond to a challenge, intelligence or emotion when
challenged create their own bliss.
A person becomes schizophrenic if only one part of
his personality is working and the other is dead. Then
even the part that is working will not be really working
well due to overwork. It cannot work because personality
is a totality, it is not divided - it has no division at all.
Actually the whole personality is a flowing energy. When
energy is used logically, it becomes intelligence and
when used, not logically but emotionally, it becomes the
heart. These are not two separate things but the same
energy is challenged through different channels.
When there is no heart but only intellect, then you
can never relax. For relaxation means the same energy
working in a different channel. Relaxation is never no-
work. It is work in another dimension, so that the dimen-
sion which is already overtaxed relaxes. So a person, who
follows an intellectual pursuit continuously, never
relaxes. He has not diverted his energy to other
dimensions, thus causing the mind to go on working
unnecessarily in one direction only. This creates
boredom. The thoughts just come and go and energy is
diffused, wasted. You cannot enjoy it. On the contrary,
you will be disappointed and disgusted with this
unnecessary burden. However, the mind or the intellect is
not at fault, because an alternate dimension has not been
provided. The energy is veritably ruined, and it keeps
circling round and round, as no other door is open to it.
Energy can never be stagnant. Energy means - that which
is not stagnant - that which is always flowing. So
relaxation does not mean energy-stagnant or energy-
asleep. Relaxation scientifically means energy in another
channel, another dimension, in another room.
Even if the room is different but not the very
opposite, the mind will not relax. You work on a
scientific problem, and then you can relax by reading a
novel. The work is different. As to deal with a scientific
problem is to be active - a very masculine trait - to read a
novel is to be passive - an absolutely feminine trait. The
work is different, and although the mind is used, all the
same you will be at ease, as another and opposite pole of
the mind is used. You are not solving anything, you are
not active. You are just a receptor - receiving something.
The dimension is the same, only emotion - the opposite
polarity is brought into use. Similarly when we love, the
intellect does not come into play at all. Rather, quite the
opposite; the irrational part of your personality comes
into action.
Intelligence must be balanced by love. But ordinarily
this balance is not found anywhere. If someone is loving
and he is not intelligent this too becomes a case of
boredom. Even love becomes a tension if it is a twenty-
four hour business. It will create its own boredom. Once
the challenge is lost, the enjoyment too will be lost. The
`play' will be lost and it will become - just work. The
same happens with the intellectual. These two parts, two
polarities of the human individuality must be in balance.
Only then the integrated and individuated being is born.
Otherwise, it is the same disease; whether from the part
of emotion, or from the part of the intellect.
The East became warped with the heart. Now the
West has tried the other polarity. Both have achieved
disastrous results. There is rebellion in the West's new
generation against intellect, against reason. The whole
mind of the new generation is leaning towards the
irrational. Nature takes its own revenge - always. Nature
is very revengeful. It never pardons, it never forgets. If
some part of it remains suppressed or unfulfilled, it will
have its revenge. So the irrational in the West is taking its
revenge. In the East, the rational has got the appeal, the
scientific has got the appeal and communism has got the
appeal. Religion has lost - it no longer appeals to the
East, as reason has been all along suppressed.
So to me, neither a human being nor a human culture
can be healthy without an inner balance between the
rational and the irrational. I do not take these two as two
different parts; I take them as the two poles existing in
the same energy. All energy exists between two opposite
poles. Otherwise, it can never exist. Energy requires an
inner tension to create itself - to be. It could be the
negative and the positive, as in electricity. It could be one
pole and another, as in magnetism. It could be the male
and the female, as in biology. Energy cannot exist in one
pole. The other - the opposite is needed to challenge, to
stimulate, to create the necessary tension. But in the
human society, the other is always suppressed - either the
intellect or the emotion. Therefore, the total culture has
not come into existence yet. There has only been
civilization either of the intellect or of the emotion.
Culture as such is yet unborn. Culture means the
polarities functioning simultaneously.
So always balance one by the other. The more the
other is put to use, the more the one for which it proves
to be a relaxation brightens, is illumined. So the mind
must be capable of changing poles, just as easily as
waking and sleeping. One must be able to close one
dimension and open another. When this happens, life is
no longer dull. It becomes bliss. Unfortunately we
become addicted to one polarity. Why this addiction to
one?
We become addicted to one, because the one which
is in use, and for which we are trained, is easier to do.
You can do it without any conscious effort.
Consciousness is not required. When you change the
pole, when you change the total perspective, you become
an amateur. Then you are not an expert in this realm. You
are not trained in it. So, you try to escape from it. Then in
the realm in which you are proficient you tend to overdo.
This over-doing is the problem. One must not be an
expert all the twenty-four hours! One must also do
something in which one is `no-one'. One must also do
something about which one knows nothing. One must be
a child, sometimes playing, immature, unknowing and
ignorant; and that will be a help to the expert part of the
mind.
So every genius has the child in him. No genius can
exist without the child in him. And the child is the source
of all his energy. He can, in moments, be a novice. He
can, in moments, be totally ignorant. He can touch realms
of which he knows nothing. A mathematician turning to
poetry is never the loser. He comes back to his
mathematics with a purer mind, with new experiences
unknown to the mathematical realms.
All that has been invented and discovered has never
been done by the professional. It is always the outsider,
because he comes with the mind of a child. Only a child
is inventive - never an old man, for he is an expert! But
he cannot invent. He will go on repeating the same thing
- doing it, and over-doing it. He will make it more perfect
but never new. So a professional cannot contribute
anything new to knowledge. He knows too much. He
cannot touch anything which is new. So persons who
know, who are professionals, are always orthodox. They
are never revolutionaries. They cannot be. Their very
being is heavy. They cannot see the new. They are
always oblivious of the new.
So whenever it happens that a scientist turns to
poetry; or a poet turns to mathematics, or a businessman
turns to painting; or a painter comes to be a sannyasin,
then something new is born. And to give birth to
something new is blissful. Otherwise, your every work
will be dull and boring.
Man cannot work like a machine. He cannot just go
on producing the same things mechanically, repeating the
same routine endlessly. If he goes on doing this, he will
be completely dead, long before he dies. He will only
know that he has been alive when death comes. In a
mechanical routine, there is every danger of the human
machines being replaced by `machine-humans'. These
human machines can be replaced because whatsoever
they can do, can be more efficiently done by a
mechanical device. One can never be at ease if one has
just turned into a mechanical device.
Society does not need individuality, it needs
efficiency. So the more a person becomes a person, the
less useful he becomes to the society - and more
dangerous. So the whole pattern of our civilization, and
in fact of all civilizations that have existed in this world,
is to turn the human being into an automaton. Then he is
obedient, efficient, and, not dangerous! Otherwise, a
mind which is inventive, inquiring, searching for the
new, seeking the new and always trying to give birth to
something unknown is bound to create disturbances. The
establishments cannot be at ease with him. So they begin
to kill individuality as soon as a child is born. Before he
is seven they kill his individuality completely. If by
change they are not successful in doing this, then only a
person becomes his own individual self. But this is rare.
Every type of social institution is a means to kill the
individual and convert him into a machine. All our
universities are factories to kill the spontaneous - to kill
the spark, to kill the spirit and change man into a
machine. Then the society feels at ease with him. He can
be relied upon. He knows what he can do, what he will
do. He can be predicted. Man becomes predictable as
soon as he be-comes a machine. We can predict a
husband, a wife, a doctor, a lawyer, a scientist. We know
who they are and how they will react. We can be at ease
with them.
But with a person who is living, spontaneous, it is
impossible to be at ease. Because we do not know what
he will do! He is unpredictable; and unpredictability is
always a source of insecurity. A wife will not be at ease
with a husband who is unpredictable. The moment he is
unpredictable, he is unmanageable. He cannot be
managed, he cannot be manipulated. No one is at ease
with an unpredictable person. Not even a father with an
unpredictable son. And only the unpredictable can feel
happiness - can feel life, no one else. Life itself is
unpredictable, unmanageable. Life as such is from
moment to moment - towards the unknown. It is an
opening into the unknown - nothing more, nothing else.
So if you are open, just like life itself, then you
necessarily live in all your dimensions - the physical, the
intellectual, the emotional and the spiritual. Then you
live totally. Then there is no bifurcation, no division.
Your energy flows as if from one room to the other, and
then to another. There is no barrier to your energy. It is
not pulled from anywhere. It is a flowing river. You have
just to switch on to any realm. You are always fresh and
relaxed. And, whenever you return to your particular
field of work, you approach it with newness, a freshness
that comes only from relaxing in the opposite fields.
So the problem as I see it is not excessive intellectual
work, but too little or no work in the other dimensions -
specifically the emotional. Reason is balanced by
emotion. If you can do an exercise in logic but cannot
weep, then you are bound to be in trouble. If you can
only argue and not laugh, you are inviting trouble. But
whenever a person appears, whose life is like a flowing
river, it is difficult to understand him, because he cannot
be categorized.
There is a Zen story. A famous monk died, he was a
great teacher. He was well known, however, because of
his chief disciple. Thousands of people came to pay
homage to this monk. To their amazement, they found
the chief disciple weeping. They were at a loss to
understand him. An unattached person should not weep,
especially he, who had always said that the spirit never
dies! One comes and asks, “Why do you weep?”The
monk replied, "I cannot live with the `Why' always.
There are moments when there is no `why'. I am weeping
and that is all." They still insisted, "You always say that
the soul is immortal. Then why do you weep?" He
replied, "I still maintain that the soul is immortal. But
that does not check me from weeping"! This sounds
illogical - 'the soul is immortal so one must not weep'.
But the monk says, "The soul itself is weeping and I
cannot do anything about it. I have never done anything
myself. Whatsoever comes to me, I am with it. Tears are
coming and I am one with them." This attitude cannot be
categorized.
We can understand someone weeping if he believes
the soul to be mortal. If one believes the soul to be
immortal and does not weep, that too is understandable.
It is alright. The soul is immortal, for whom to weep? No
one has died; but this man says that the soul is immortal
and yet he weeps. There is no `why'. The tears just flow.
They ask, "Then do you weep for the body?" The Monk
says, "Yes, it must be for the body that I weep. The body
too was beautiful and it will never be seen again. I weep
for the body." "But you are a spiritualist," they say. And
so the arguments go on. They accuse him of confusing
them. "I myself am confused - Life is such. The soul is
important but so also are the tears! Such is Life - so
contradictory! It exists in contradictions. I myself am
confused. But I am at ease with my confusions. I am at
ease with my contradictions. So I am not tense. See my
tears! See me weeping, I am at ease; I am relaxed. I am
blissful."
The other part must not be denied. The more you use
reasons, the more you must use the irrational to balance
it. The moment it is balanced, you become weightless.
You feel free. The weight of one is set off by the weight
of the other. The balance is achieved. You are free.
Otherwise you will feel the burden, the weight, more till
a moment comes when there is only burden and you are
no more! You will feel only the burden; that is the only
reality you will be conscious of. This burden will be so
much with you always that you cannot conceive, what it
is to be without it.
No one is without burden. But burden can be
balanced by another burden - from the opposite pole.
When the two burdens are balanced, there is no burden.
Thus a mind which has no burden is not a mind without
burden. Rather, it is a mind with balanced burdens. So I
am in favour of reason and `no-reason' at the same time
and I advise a perpetual balance between the two. As
soon as the burden is felt, you should know that the
balance is lost. You must set about to restore it, by
adding the necessary weight, wherever it is required. If
the intellect is heavy, do something irrational - meditate.
Meditation is not reason. It is irrational. So when
someone asks me to explain meditation, I am at a loss!
Simply because you cannot understand meditation. You
can do it and know it. It is not at all concerned with logic,
reason, arguments and understanding.
There are people who have been studying meditation
all their lives, and still not understood it. They cannot.
Krishnamurti talks about understanding it and makes
understanding equivalent to meditation, as if meditation
is something to be understood! Rather, understanding
must be balanced by meditation. It is the opposite pole.
So, once you try not to understand meditation you can do
it. If one goes on trying to understand meditation, there is
less possibility of practising it. And because
understanding is intellectual, there are people who say
they understand Krishnamurti perfectly. Intellectually we
understand him. And even though he says intellectual
understanding will not do, he still equates understanding
with meditation. If intellectual understanding will not do,
then I say a non-intellectual JUMP will do. There is no
understanding which is not intellectual. Whenever you go
into meditation, it is less like understanding and more
like feeling. It is felt. It is never understood.
Philosophy and science are intellectual processes.
Religion and art are non-intellectual processes.
Philosophy must be balanced by religion and science
must be balanced by art. Otherwise, a topsy-turvy,
lopsided world is created in which everyone is diseased. I
have not come across a single individual who is at ease.
Something or the other is always disturbing him. It does
not matter what! All that matters is that he is disturbed.
Everyone is disturbed. Then there must be something in
our very conception of a human being which has gone
wrong. In the very structure of our society something has
gone wrong. Therefore, persons who are diseased in the
mind are only symptomatic.
There is a very surprising fact. In the 30's, all the
mental patients who visited the psychoanalysts were
basically disturbed by violence. Then came the Second
World War. The same thing happened in the early 19th
century and this was followed by the First World War. So
as I see it, the mental patients are the forerunners of us
all. They herald that which is to come. In a way they are
more sensitive. They perceive things beforehand.
The same happens with the artist. Everything that is
to happen first happens in poetry, painting, music, etc. If
we look deep in the art of Picasso we will find the
indication of a diseased civilization. In his painting
`Guernica', or for that matter in any of his other works, he
never portrays a human figure as it is. He never paints all
his parts together, nor in the right context. The head will
be in one place and the neck somewhere else. The eyes
are under the head. Such is his painting - schizophrenic,
schizoid! He is an extra sensitive person who sees the
shape of things to come, the plight of the human being in
time to come.
A society basically philosophic only, will be lacking
in religion. A society basically scientific only, will be
lacking in aesthetic art. Art will become ugly. Thus the
whole Western art has become ugly. Rather, the
grotesque and the absurd has become the criterion.
Ugliness is appreciated as greatness in art. The uglier a
painting, the more distorted, the better it is appreciated.
There should be no harmony, no rhythm, no music -
everything should be deranged and decayed like the
present human mind.
These are indications and symptoms. They are
symbolic expressions. The other part of the human mind
is taking revenge. It is demanding attention. When a
society becomes less and less religious, religion takes its
revenge. It will become ugly, ritualistic. Priesthood will
come up, religion will go down. The Church will come
up. The Church is religion turned ugly. The priest is the
revenge of the prophet. The prophet has no place, so the
priest comes in. He fills the vacuum.
We have not yet even conceived a total culture, a
total personality, a total mind. The totality is the sum
total of both the opposite polarities. Therefore, a totally
consistent personality is an imperfect and partial
personality, and is in a way on the path to madness. This
is dangerous. The part that has been denied expression,
denied attention, because of a consistent mind, will take
its revenge. The irrational will become aggressive. It will
come with a revengeful force and shatter all reason.
You must not only understand, but also feel this.
This is not difficult to understand intellectually. The
problem comes only with the question of feeling. You
must also feel it. This can only be possible when you do
something irrational. Just jump and dance for an hour and
see how relaxed and refreshed you feel - and how bright!
The mind gets purified because the irrational is satisfied.
Now reason can work freely without any enemy behind.
There is now a freedom in its working. Thus give an
opportunity to both sides of the mind to express freely.
Always balance the two. Live in these two
complementary compartments. They are not
contradictory. They look so, because we have been living
only in one and become fixed in it.
When you dream, you do not feel the contradiction,
the inconsistency of the dream. You see a friend
approaching. Suddenly he turns into something else. But
you take this as a fact in the dream. You feel no
inconsistency, no contradiction. You do not ask how man
can change into an animal. This is because a dream has
no logic. Dream has still to know its Aristotle. In a dream
you cannot say that, if A is A, then he cannot be B. If A
is A, he cannot be `not-A'. In a dream, A can be `not-A'
and `not-A' can be A. No logic is taken into account, nor
is any contradiction imposed. So there are realms totally
lacking in logic. All the same they are part of you.
Rather, you are part of them, for they are greater.
If this balance is achieved between the rational and
the irrational, boredom vanishes. There is moment to
moment bliss. Then every moment comes with bliss of its
own. Otherwise, life becomes a burden. But life is not
responsible for this. We alone are responsible, for the
choice lies with us.
Dr. Henrotte:
If one tries to balance oneself, he will not fit into a
category. Then he will be rejected by society. He will
become redundant.
Acharya Rajneesh:
It is better to be rejected by society than to be
rejected by life!
Ma Yoga Maitri:
How should I plan to proceed in this method of
yours when I go back to Japan?
Acharya Rajneesh:
Do not plan anything. Just go on digging. Things
will take their own course. Planning always presupposes
frustration. When you plan you create seeds of
frustration. Do not plan. Just go on digging. Let it come.
It is always beautiful when it comes by itself. It is always
fulfilling, never frustrating, because there has been no
expectation! Where there is no expectation, you are never
disappointed. The less you are disheartened the more you
can do. The more you are disheartened, the less you do!
So I say again: "Do not plan." Just go on. Let it come
by itself. Let it come. It WILL come. When we plan, we
hinder the way of its coming. Because of our plans, the
plans we have made, life cannot work. Our plans come in
the way. I have made my life without plan and I have
never been frustrated. There is no question of frustration.
So, I am always successful! I cannot be a failure as there
is no plan against which I calculate.
No failure is a failure, no success is a success, only
our conceptions and pre-determined plans make them so.
If you fail in your plan you feel disappointed; the ego is
hurt. If you succeed, the ego is strengthened and it will
plan more, ceaselessly, causing perpetual strain and
burden on the mind. The ego is always in fear of life. In
life we never know what is going to happen, so we make
plans for our security. Life disturbs them, as we are not
whole and sole. We are only a negligibly small part of
the infinite existence,
Ma Yoga Maitri:
The plan I was following in Japan, seems to be
identical with yours.
Acharya Rajneesh:
Yes, it will be so. The moment you start planning,
you begin to compare and contrast. Doubts and fears will
catch hold of you. "Will I succeed? Is it possible? What
will happen? What will people say?" The moment you
plan, the seeds of frustration take root. Now anxiety
follows. We normally plan to be free from anxiety but the
plan itself is an anxiety! We become anxious! The
anxiety comes because of planning.
So do not plan. Just go on. You do not plan your
breathing! You just go on breathing. So let it come
easily. And all that comes easily becomes Divine. And all
that comes with effort cannot be divine. The divine
comes effortlessly. It is in fact coming all the time. So let
it come. Just let go of yourself and see; things will begin
to move. You will find yourself in the midst of
movement, but there will be no anxiety. Then there will
not be any trouble created for the mind. If something
happens, it is alright. If nothing happens, then too it is
alright. Everything is alright with this type of a mind.
Only then you can do something for meditation,
otherwise not. Because meditation is not a business, it
should not be made a business. Then you will not be
helpful to others towards meditation; much less to
yourself. Rather, you will be suicidal to your own
meditation, as it will be a burden to you.
Ma Yoga Maitri:
So I should not plan!
Acharya Rajneesh:
But if you plan for not to plan, then again the same
thing will happen. Do not plan - just go on. If meditation
has come to you, if something has flowered in you, the
perfume will spread. It will work in its own way.
Something has happened to you. You are calm and at
ease. Tranquility is achieved. It WILL work. You will
not have to work. It will gather people there. They will
come by themselves. They will ask. Let them plan. You
just go and meditate. Things will begin to happen. They
must happen. Only then they have a beauty of their own -
a beatitude, otherwise not.
Business is always tiring. It has no beauty, no joy.
Meditation is not a business. Yet it has been converted
into a business in India - a flourishing business. There are
shops and there are factories. Do not take meditation in
this way. You have experienced meditation. You have
come to a door. You have seen something. You have felt
something. Let it go on. Let God work.
Go completely without planning. Do not think about
it at all. You just be there. Your very presence will begin
to work. Only then it will be my work. If you plan, then it
will not be my work at all. That way, you will be merely
distracting yourself and others. You will not be a help to
others in meditation if you yourself are tense. You cannot
help. You will be helpful only if you go without
planning. Just go. Sit there. Meditate and see what
happens. Things are bound to take their own course.
