
Osho
The	Goose	is	Out
Responses	to	Disciples	Questions
Talks	given	from	01/03/81	am	to	10/03/81	am
English	Discourse	series
10	Chapters
Year	published:	1982
1
The	goose	is	out!
2
2
Just	see	it
16
3
No	peaks,	no	valleys
32
4
Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
45
5
Perfectly	imperfect
59
6
I	exalt	the	ordinary
73
7
Only	one	time:	now
87
8
The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
102
9
Rejoice	to	abandon!
118
10	Dissolve	in	my	people
131
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
1
The	goose	is	out!
1	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	IS	THE	GOOSE	REALLY	OUT?
Anand	Bhavo,	the	goose	has	never	been	in,	the	goose	has	always	been	out.	It	is	a
Zen	koan.	First	you	have	to	understand	the	meaning	of	Zen	and	the	meaning	of	a
koan.
Zen	 is	 not	 a	 religion,	 not	 a	 dogma,	 not	 a	 creed,	 Zen	 is	 not	 even	 a	 quest,	 an
inquiry;	it	is	non-philosophical.	The	fundamental	of	the	Zen	approach	is	that	all
is	 as	 it	 should	be,	nothing	 is	missing.	This	very	moment	everything	 is	perfect.
The	goal	is	not	somewhere	else,	it	is	here,	it	is	now.	Tomorrows	don't	exist.	This
very	moment	 is	 the	 only	 reality.	Hence	 in	Zen	 there	 is	 no	distinction	between
methods	and	goals,	means	and	goals.
All	the	philosophies	of	the	world	and	all	the	religions	of	the	world	create	duality;
howsoever	 they	 may	 go	 on	 talking	 about	 non-duality,	 they	 create	 a	 split
personality	in	man.
That	 has	 been	 the	 greatest	 calamity	 that	 has	 befallen	 humanity:	 all	 the	 do-
gooders	have	created	a	schizophrenic	man.	When	you	divide	reality	into	means
and	goals	you	divide	man	himself,	because	for	man,	man	is	the	closest	reality	to
man.	His	consciousness	becomes	split.	He	lives	here	but	not	really;	he	is	always
there,	 somewhere	else.	He	 is	 always	 searching,	 always	 inquiring;	never	 living,
never	 being,	 always	 doing;	 getting	 richer,	 getting	 powerful,	 getting	 spiritual,
getting	holier,	saintly	--	always	more	and	more.	And	this	constant	hankering	for
more	creates	his	tense,	anguished	state,	and	meanwhile	he	is	missing	all	 that	is
made	available	by	existence.	He	is	interested	in	the	far	away	and	God	is	close	by.
His	 eyes	 are	 focused	 on	 the	 stars	 and	 God	 is	 within	 him.	 Hence	 the	 most
fundamental	 thing	to	understand	about	Zen	is:	The	goose	has	NEVER	been	in.
Let	me	 tell	you	 the	 story	how	 this	koan	started:	A	great	philosophical	official,
Riko,	once	asked	the	strange	Zen	Master,	Nansen,	to	explain	to	him	the	old	koan
of	the	goose	in	the	bottle.
"If	a	man	puts	a	gosling	into	a	bottle,"	said	Riko,	"and	feeds	him	until	he	is	full-
grown,	 how	 can	 the	man	 get	 the	 goose	 out	 without	 killing	 it	 or	 breaking	 the
bottle?"
Nansen	gave	a	great	clap	with	his	hands	and	shouted,	"Riko!"
"Yes,	Master,"	said	the	official	with	a	start.
"See,"	said	Nansen,	"the	goose	is	out!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
2
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
It	is	only	a	question	of	seeing,	it	is	only	a	question	of	becoming	alert,	awake,	it	is
only	a	question	of	waking	up.	The	goose	is	in	the	bottle	if	you	are	in	a	dream;
the	goose	has	never	been	in	the	bottle	if	you	are	awake.	And	in	the	dream	there
is	 no	way	 to	 take	 the	 goose	 out	 of	 the	 bottle.	Either	 the	 goose	will	 die	 or	 the
bottle	will	have	to	be	broken,	and	both	alternatives	are	not	allowed:	neither	has
the	bottle	to	be	broken	nor	has	the	goose	to	be	killed.	Now,	a	fully-grown	goose
in	a	small	bottle...	how	can	you	take	it	out?	This	is	called	a	koan.
A	koan	is	not	an	ordinary	puzzle;	it	is	not	a	puzzle	because	it	cannot	be	solved.	A
puzzle	is	that	which	has	a	possibility	of	being	solved;	you	just	have	to	look	for
the	right	answer.	You	will	find	it	--	it	only	needs	intelligence	to	find	the	answer
to	the	puzzle;	but	a	puzzle	is	not	really	insoluble.
A	koan	 is	 insoluble;	you	cannot	 solve	 it,	you	can	only	DISSOLVE	 it.	And	 the
way	 to	dissolve	 it	 is	 to	change	 the	very	plane	of	your	being	 from	dreaming	 to
wakefulness.	In	the	dream	the	goose	is	in	the	bottle	and	there	is	no	way	to	bring
it	 out	 of	 the	 bottle	 without	 breaking	 the	 bottle	 or	 killing	 the	 goose	 --	 in	 the
dream.	Hence,	as	far	as	the	dream	is	concerned,	the	puzzle	is	impossible;	nothing
can	be	done	about	it.
But	there	is	a	way	out	--	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	puzzle,	remember.	You
have	to	wake	up.	That	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	bottle	and	nothing	to	do	with
the	goose	either.	You	have	to	wake	up.	It	has	something	to	do	with	YOU.	That's
why	Nansen	did	not	answer	the	question.
Riko	asked,	"If	a	man	puts	a	gosling	into	a	bottle	and	feeds	him	until	he	is	full-
grown,	 how	 can	 the	man	 get	 the	 goose	 out	 without	 killing	 it	 or	 breaking	 the
bottle?"
Nansen	didn't	answer.	On	the	other	hand,	he	gave	a	great	clap	with	his	hands	and
shouted,
"Riko!"
Now,	 this	 is	 not	 an	 answer	 to	 the	 question	 --	 this	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the
question	at	all
--	it	is	irrelevant,	inconsistent.	But	it	solves	it;	in	fact,	it	dissolves	it.	The	moment
he	shouted,
"Riko!"	the	official	with	a	start	said,	"Yes,	Master"	The	whole	plane	of	his	being
is	transformed	by	a	simple	strategy.
A	Master	is	not	a	teacher;	he	does	not	teach	you,	he	simply	devises	methods	to
wake	 you	 up.	 That	 clap	 is	 a	 method,	 that	 clap	 simply	 brought	 Riko	 into	 the
present.	And	it	was	so	unexpected...	When	you	are	asking	such	a	spiritual	koan
you	 don't	 expect	 the	Master	 to	 answer	 you	 with	 a	 loud	 clap	 and	 then	 shout,
"Riko!"
Suddenly	he	is	brought	from	the	past,	from	the	future.	Suddenly	for	a	moment	he
forgets	the	whole	problem.	Where	is	the	bottle	and	where	is	the	goose?	There	is
only	the	Master,	in	a	strange	posture,	clapping	and	shouting	for	Riko.	Suddenly
the	whole	problem	is	dropped.	He	has	slipped	out	of	the	problem	without	even
knowing	that	he	slipped	out	of	it.	He	has	slipped	out	of	the	problem	as	a	snake
slips	out	of	its	old	skin.	For	a	moment	time	has	stopped.	For	a	moment	the	clock
has	stopped.	For	a	moment	the	mind	has	stopped.	For	a	moment	there	is	nothing.
The	Master,	the	sound	of	the	clap,	and	a	sudden	awakening.	In	that	very	moment
the	Master	says,	"See!	See,	the	goose	is	out!"	It	is	dissolved.
A	koan	can	only	be	dissolved	but	 can	never	be	 solved.	A	puzzle	can	never	be
dissolved	but	can	be	solved.	So	remember,	a	koan	is	not	a	puzzle.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
3
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
But	when	people	who	are	accustomed	to	continuous	thinking,	logical	reasoning,
start	studying	Zen,	they	take	a	false	step	from	the	very	beginning.	Zen	cannot	be
studied;	it	has	to	be	lived,	it	has	to	be	imbibed	--	imbibed	from	a	living	Master.	It
is	 a	 transmission	 beyond	 words,	 a	 transmission	 of	 the	 lamp.	 The	 lamp	 is
invisible.
Now,	 anybody	 watching	 this	 whole	 situation	 --	 Riko	 asking	 a	 question,	 the
Master	clapping	and	shouting	--	would	not	have	found	anything	very	spiritual	in
it,	 would	 not	 have	 found	 any	 great	 philosophy,	 may	 have	 come	 back	 very
frustrated.	But	something	transpired	--
something	which	is	not	visible	and	can	never	be	visible.
It	 happens	 only	 when	 the	 silence	 of	 the	 Master	 penetrates	 the	 silence	 of	 the
disciple,	when	 two	silences	meet	and	merge;	 then	 immediately	 there	 is	 seeing.
The	Master	has	eyes,	the	disciple	has	eyes,	but	the	disciple's	eyes	are	closed.	A
device	 is	needed,	 some	method,	 so	 that	 the	disciple	can	open	his	eyes	without
any	effort	of	his	own.	If	he	makes	an	effort	he	will	miss	the	point,	because	who
will	make	the	effort?
Christmas	Humphreys,	one	of	the	great	lovers	of	Zen	in	the	West,	the	founder	of
the	Buddhist	 Society	 of	 England	 and	 the	man	who	made	 Zen	Buddhism	 very
famous	 in	 the	 Western	 world,	 writes	 about	 this	 koan,	 and	 you	 will	 see	 the
difference.	He	says:
"There	is	a	method	of	taking	the	problem	in	flank,	as	it	were.	It	will	be	nonsense
to	 the	 rational-minded,	 but	 such	will	 read	 no	 further.	 Those	who	 read	 on	will
expect	 increasing	 nonsense,	 for	 sense,	 the	 suburban	 villas	 of	 rational	 thought,
will	soon	be	left	behind,	and	the	mind	will	be	free	on	the	illimitable	hills	of	its
own	inherent	joy.	Here,	then,	is	the	real	solution	to	the	problem	of	the	opposites.
"Shall	I	tell	it	you?	Consider	a	live	goose	in	a	bottle.	How	to	get	it	out	without
hurting	 the	 goose	 or	 breaking	 the	 bottle?	 The	 answer	 is	 simple	 --	 'There,	 it's
out!"'
Now,	 the	 whole	 point	 is	 lost:	 it	 becomes	 philosophical.	 First,	 Christmas
Humphreys	thinks	Zen	is	part	of	Buddhism;	that	is	to	begin	with	a	wrong	door,
with	 a	 wrong	 step.	 Zen	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Buddhism.	 It	 certainly	 has
something	to	do	with	the	Buddha,	but	nothing	to	do	with	Buddhism	as	such,	just
as	 Sufism	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Islam,	 Hassidism	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
Judaism,	 Tantra	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Hinduism.	 Yes,	 Tantra	 certainly	 has
something	 to	do	with	Shiva	and	Sufism	has	 something	 to	do	with	Mohammed
and	Hassidism	has	something	to	do	with	Moses,	but	not	with	the	traditions,	not
with	the	conventions,	not	with	the	theologies.
A	Moses	 alive,	 a	Mohammed	 alive,	 can	 transmit	 something	 which	 cannot	 be
said,	can	show	something	which	cannot	be	said,	can	create	a	certain	vibe	around
him	 which	 can	 trigger	 enlightenment	 in	 many	 people,	 but	 without	 any
explanation,	without	any	logical	proof.
Enlightenment	is	almost	like	a	love	affair.	Just	as	you	fall	in	love	--	you	cannot
rationalize	it;	it	is	below	reason	--	in	the	same	way	you	fall	into	enlightenment.	It
is	above	reason:	you	fall	above	words.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	of	a	Master	who	was	staying	at	a	disciple's	house.	The
disciple	was	 a	 little	worried	 about	 the	Master	 because	 his	ways	were	 strange,
unexpected.	He	could	do	anything!	He	was	almost	thought	to	be	mad.	So	not	to
create	any	trouble	for	the	neighborhood	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
4
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
--	because	in	the	night	he	might	start	dancing,	singing,	shouting,	sermonizing	to
nobody	 and	 create	 a	 disturbance	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 --	 they	 put	 him	 in	 the
basement	 and	 locked	him	up	 in	 the	basement,	 so	 that	 even	 if	he	went	 and	did
something	nobody	would	hear	him.	They	closed	all	the	windows,	all	the	doors,
and	locked	them.
In	the	middle	of	the	night	they	were	suddenly	awakened.	Somebody	was	rolling
about	on	the	roof	with	such	a	loud	laughter	that	a	great	crowd	had	gathered	all
around	and	they	were	asking,	"What	is	the	matter?"
They	rushed	up,	they	found	the	Master	rolling	on	the	roof.	They	asked,	"What	is
the	matter?	How	did	you	manage?	We	locked	you	in	the	basement	just	to	avoid
such	a	scene!"
The	Master	said,	"That's	why	I	am	laughing.	Suddenly	I	started	falling	upwards.
I	cannot	believe	it	myself!	It	has	never	happened	before,	falling	upwards!"
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story.	 Enlightenment	 is	 falling	 upwards	 just	 as	 love	 is	 falling
downwards.
But	 something	 is	 similar	 in	 both;	 the	 falling	 --	 unreasonable,	 unexplainable,
inexpressible.
Only	those	to	whom	it	has	happened	know,	and	even	when	it	has	happened	you
cannot	explain	it	to	anybody	to	whom	it	has	not	happened	yet.
Christmas	Humphreys	calls	Zen	"Zen	Buddhism"	That	 is	starting	 in	 the	wrong
direction	from	the	very	beginning.	Zen	is	not	Buddhism	--	the	essential	core	of
the	 heart	 of	 Buddha,	 certainly,	 but	 it	 is	 the	 essential	 core	 of	 Moses	 too,	 the
essential	core	of	Zarathustra	too,	Lao	Tzu	too.	It	is	the	essential	core	of	all	those
who	 have	 become	 enlightened,	 of	 all	 those	 who	 have	 awakened	 from	 their
dream,	of	all	those	who	have	seen	that	the	goose	is	out,	that	the	goose	has	never
been	 in,	 that	 the	problem	was	not	 a	problem	at	 all	 in	 the	 first	 place,	hence	no
solution	is	needed.
Christmas	Humphreys	says:	"There	is	a	method	of	taking	the	problem	in	flank,
as	it	were.
It	will	be	nonsense	to	the	rational-minded..."
He	 himself	 is	 rational-minded;	 otherwise,	 it	 is	 not	 nonsense.	 Nonsense	 is
something	below	sense.	Zen	is	supra-sense,	not	nonsense;	it	is	above	sense.	It	is
something	 far	 beyond	 the	 reaches	 of	 reason.	 Logic	 is	 a	 very	 ordinary	 game;
anybody	who	has	 a	 little	 intelligence	 can	 play	 the	 game.	The	moment	 you	 go
beyond	logic	then	you	enter	into	the	world	of	Zen.	It	is	not	nonsense,	it	is	supra-
sense.	His	 very	 use	 of	 the	word	 "nonsense"	 shows	 a	 deep-down	 bias	 towards
rationality.
He	 says:	 "...	 but	 such	 will	 read	 no	 further.	 Those	 who	 read	 on	 will	 expect
increasing	nonsense,	for	sense,	the	suburban	villas	of	rational	thought,	will	soon
be	left	behind...	"
They	are	not	left	behind,	because	if	you	leave	something	behind	you	are	on	the
same	track.
You	 have	 left	 a	 milestone	 behind,	 but	 the	 road	 is	 the	 same,	 the	 path	 is	 not
different.	 Maybe	 you	 have	 gone	 a	 mile	 ahead,	 but	 your	 dimension	 has	 not
changed.	The	difference	is	only	of	quantity,	not	of	quality.
Reason	 is	 not	 only	 left	 behind,	 reason	 is	 transcended,	 surpassed.	 There	 is	 a
difference,	a	great	difference,	a	difference	that	makes	the	difference.
I	have	heard	a	story	--	it	happened	in	the	Second	World	War:	Osho	-	The	Goose
is	Out
5
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
In	a	thick	part	of	the	Burmese	jungle,	a	small	plane	was	left	by	the	army.	They
were	in	a	hurry,	they	were	retreating,	and	for	some	mechanical	reason	they	could
not	manage	to	take	it	with	them.	The	primitives	found	the	plane;	they	could	not
understand	what	 it	was.	They	figured	out	 that	 it	must	be	some	kind	of	bullock
cart	--	that	was	the	only	possible	thing	for	them	to	think;	the	bullock	cart	was	the
ultimate	vehicle	in	their	vision.	So	they	started	using	the	plane	as	a	bullock	cart,
and	they	enjoyed	it.	It	was	the	best	bullock	cart	they	had	ever	found!
Then	 somebody	 passed	 by	 --	 a	 man	 who	 lived	 a	 little	 further	 away	 from	 the
primitive	 tribe	 but	was	 part	 of	 the	 tribe.	He	knew,	 he	 had	 come	 to	 experience
cars,	trucks,	buses.	He	said,
"This	is	not	a	bullock	cart,	this	is	a	car,	and	I	know	something	about	cars"	So	he
fixed	it,	and	they	were	immensely	amazed	that	without	horses,	without	bulls,	the
machine	was	working.	 It	was	 such	 a	 toy!	Every	morning,	 every	 evening,	 they
enjoyed	just	looking	at	it	again	and	again	from	all	sides,	entering	it,	sitting	in	it;
and	 because	 there	 were	 not	 many	 roads,	 even	 to	 go	 a	 few	 feet	 was	 a	 great
excitement.
Then	one	day	a	pilot	passed	by	the	primitive	forest	and	he	said,	"What	are	you
doing?	This	is	an	airplane,	it	can	fly!"
He	took	two	primitives	with	him,	and	when	they	left	the	ground	they	could	not
believe	it.
This	 was	 absolutely	 beyond	 their	 imagination,	 beyond	 all	 their	 dreams.	 They
used	to	think	that	only	Gods	could	fly;	they	had	heard	stories	about	Gods	flying
in	the	sky.	Yes,	they	had	seen	airplanes	in	the	sky,	but	they	had	always	believed
they	belonged	to	the	Gods.
Now,	the	same	mechanism	can	be	used	as	a	bullock	cart	or	as	a	car,	but	between
the	bullock	cart	and	the	car	the	distinction	is	only	of	quantity,	not	of	quality.	The
moment	the	airplane	takes	off	from	the	ground	it	changes	its	plane:	it	surpasses
the	bullock	cart,	the	car.	It	moves	in	a	totally	new	dimension.
So	 reason	 is	 not	 left	 behind,	 reason	 is	 simply	 transcended.	 Hence,	 Christmas
Humphreys	calling	 it	nonsense,	 irrational,	or	 thinking	 that	 reason	has	been	 left
behind	is	still	thinking	in	terms	of	rationality.
He	says:	"...	and	the	mind	will	be	free..."
Now,	that	is	absolutely	stupid;	the	mind	will	not	be	free.	When	you	enter	into	the
world	of	Zen	there	is	no-mind.	Zen	is	equivalent	to	no-mind.	It	is	not	freedom	of
the	 mind,	 it	 is	 freedom	 from	 the	 mind,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 lot	 of	 difference,	 an
unbridgeable	 difference.	 The	mind	 is	 not	 free,	 you	 are	 free	 of	 the	 mind.	 The
mind	 is	no	 longer	 there,	 free	or	unfree,	 the	mind	has	simply	ceased.	You	have
gone	through	a	new	door	which	was	always	available	to	you	but	you	had	never
knocked	on	it	--	the	door	of	being,	the	door	of	eternity.
Zen,	the	very	word	"Zen"	comes	from	the	Sanskrit	word	DHYANA.	DHYANA
means	meditation,	but	the	word	"meditation"	does	not	carry	its	total	significance.
"Meditation"	 again	 gives	 you	 the	 feeling	 that	mind	 is	 doing	 something:	mind
meditating,	 concentrating,	 contemplating,	 but	mind	 is	 there.	DHYANA	 simply
means	a	state	of	no-mind,	no	concentration,	no	contemplation,	no	meditation,	in
fact	 --	 but	 just	 a	 silence,	 a	 deep,	 profound	 silence	 where	 all	 thoughts	 have
disappeared;	 where	 there	 is	 no	 ripple	 in	 the	 lake	 of	 consciousness;	 when	 the
consciousness	is	functioning	just	like	a	mirror	reflecting	all	that	is	--
the	stars,	the	trees,	the	birds,	the	people,	all	that	is	--	simply	reflecting	it	without
any	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
6
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
distortion,	without	any	interpretation,	without	bringing	in	your	prejudices.	That's
what	your	mind	is:	your	prejudices,	your	ideologies,	your	dogmas,	your	habits.
Christmas	Humphreys	says:	"...	and	the	mind	will	be	free	on	the	illimitable	hills
of	its	own	inherent	joy."
This	 is	 real	 nonsense!	 First,	 "mind	 will	 be	 free".	 Mind	 can	 never	 be	 free.
Freedom	and	mind	never	meet.	Mind	means	bondage,	mind	 is	a	prison.	 In	 the
mind	you	live	an	encapsulated	life,	surrounded	by	all	kinds	of	thoughts,	theories,
systems,	 philosophies,	 surrounded	 by	 the	whole	 past	 of	 humanity,	 all	 kinds	 of
superstitions	 --	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,	 Christian,	 Buddhist,	 Jaina;	 political,
social,	 economic,	 religious.	 Either	 your	mind	 is	made	 up	 of	 the	 bricks	 of	 the
Bible,	 the	 Koran,	 the	 Gita,	 or	 maybe	 DAS	 KAPITAL,	 or	 the	 Communist
Manifesto.	You	may	 have	made	 your	 prison	 differently	 from	 others,	 you	may
have	chosen	a	different	architect,	but	the	prison	is	the	same.	The	architect	can	be
Sigmund	Freud,	Karl	Marx,	Albert	Einstein	--	you	can	choose,	prisons	come	in
all	shapes	and	all	sizes	--	and	then	the	interior	decoration	is	up	to	you.	You	can
put	 beautiful	 paintings	 inside,	 you	 can	 carpet	 it	wall	 to	wall,	 you	 can	 paint	 it
according	to	your	likes	and	dislikes,	you	can	make	a	few	changes	here	and	there,
a	window	on	the	left	or	on	the	right,	a	curtain	of	this	material	or	that,	but	a	prison
is	a	prison.
Mind	as	such	is	a	prison,	and	everybody	is	living	in	the	prison.	Unless	you	get
out	of	the	prison	you	will	never	know	what	freedom	is.	Your	prison	can	be	very
cozy,	 comfortable,	 convenient,	 it	 can	 be	 very	 well	 decorated,	 golden,	 studded
with	 diamonds...	 It	will	 be	 difficult	 to	 leave	 it	 --	 you	 have	worked	 so	 hard	 to
create	 it	 --	 it	 is	not	going	to	be	easy.	But	a	prison	is	a	prison;	made	of	gold	or
made	 of	 mud,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference.	 You	 will	 never	 know	 the	 infinity	 of
freedom,	 you	 will	 never	 know	 the	 beauty	 and	 the	 splendor	 of	 freedom;	 your
splendor	will	is.	You	will	never	know	that	the	goose	is	always	out.	You	will	live
in	 all	 kinds	 of	 dreams.	Howsoever	 beautiful	 they	 are,	 dreams	 are	 dreams,	 and
sooner	or	later	all	dreams	are	shattered.
But	 mind	 is	 self-perpetuating.	 If	 one	 dream	 shatters	 it	 immediately	 creates
another	dream
--	in	fact,	 it	always	keeps	one	ready.	Before	the	old	one	is	shattered	it	supplies
you	with	 a	new	one	 --	 a	better	dream,	more	 refined,	more	 sophisticated,	more
scientific,	more	technological	--
and	 again	 you	 are	 infatuated,	 again	 the	 desire	 arises:	 "Why	 not	 try	 it?	Maybe
other	dreams	have	failed,	but	that	does	not	necessarily	mean	that	all	dreams	will
fail.	One	may	succeed."
That	 hope	 goes	 on	 lingering;	 that	 hope	 keeps	 you	 running	 after	 dreams.	 And
when	death	comes,	one	finds	that	one's	whole	life	has	been	nothing	but	the	same
stuff	 as	 dreams	 are	 made	 of:	 "...	 A	 tale/Told	 by	 an	 idiot/Full	 of	 sound	 and
fury/Signifying	nothing."	But	this	is	how	millions	of	people	are	living.
Christmas	Humphreys	says:	"...	and	the	mind	will	be	free	on	the	illimitable	hills
of	its	own	inherent	joy."
This	 shows	 that	 he	 never	 understood	 even	 a	 single	 dewdrop	 of	 the	 Zen
experience.	He	became	 the	propagator	 of	Zen	philosophy	 in	 the	West,	 but	 not
knowing	what	he	was	doing,	not	experiencing	anything	of	what	he	was	talking
about.
The	mind	cannot	 reach	"the	 illimitable	hills	of	 its	own	inherent	 joy";	 the	mind
has	no	 inherent	capacity	for	 joy.	The	mind	is	 the	cause	of	all	misery;	 it	knows
nothing	of	joy.	It	only	thinks	about	joy,	and	its	thinking	about	joy	is	also	nothing
but	an	imagination	against	the	suffering	in	which	it	lives.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
7
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
If	you	ask	the	mind	to	define	 joy,	 its	definition	will	be	negative;	 it	will	simply
say.	"There	will	be	no	suffering,	 there	will	be	no	pain,	 there	will	be	no	death."
But	 this	 is	 all	 negative	definition;	 it	 says	nothing	about	bliss,	 it	 simply	 speaks
about	painlessness.	But	the	goal	of	painlessness	is	not	of	any	worth.	Even	if	you
are	without	 pain	will	 you	 find	 it	worth	 living	 and	 for	 how	 long?	Even	 if	 you
don't	have	any	illness	that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	the	well-being	of	health;
that	 is	 a	 totally	different	 quality.	A	person	may	be	medically	 fit,	 there	may	be
nothing	 wrong	 as	 far	 as	 the	 diagnosis	 of	 the	 physician	 goes,	 but	 if	 he	 is	 not
feeling	an	overflowing	joy	it	is	not	health	--	an	absence	of	disease	perhaps,	but
not	 the	 presence	 of	 health.	 The	 absence	 of	 disease	 is	 not	 equivalent	 to	 the
presence	of	health;	that's	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
You	may	not	be	miserable;	that	does	not	mean	that	you	are	blissful.	You	may	be
simply	in	a	limbo,	neither	blissful	nor	miserable,	which	is	a	far	worse	situation
than	being	miserable,	because	the	miserable	person	at	least	tries	to	get	out	of	it.
The	person	who	lives	in	a	limbo,	just	on	the	boundary	line,	neither	miserable	nor
blissful,	cannot	get	out	of	misery	because	he	 is	not	 in	misery.	He	cannot	enter
into	 bliss	 because	 there	 is	 no	 push	 from	behind;	 the	misery	 is	 not	 hitting	 him
hard	enough	so	that	he	can	take	a	jump.	He	will	remain	stuck,	stagnant.
Misery	 is	 a	 negative	 state,	 bliss	 is	 a	 positive	 state,	 but	 the	 mind	 knows	 only
misery.	 The	 mind	 cannot	 know	 "the	 illimitable	 hills	 of	 its	 own	 inherent	 joy"
because	there	is	nothing	in	it.
The	mind	is	only	a	creation	of	the	society	to	help	you	perform	your	social	duties
efficiently.
The	mind	is	a	strategy	of	the	establishment	to	manipulate	you,	to	enslave	you,	to
keep	 you	 as	 unintelligent	 as	 possible,	 because	 the	 intelligent	 person	 is
dangerous.
In	the	whole	of	the	Bible	there	is	not	a	single	statement	praising	intelligence.	It	is
full	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	 rubbish,	 but	 there	 is	 not	 a	 single	 statement	 in	 praise	 of
intelligence.	Superstition	 is	praised,	belief	 is	praised,	all	kinds	of	 stupid	 things
are	praised.
All	 the	religions,	organized	religions,	have	been	 trying	 to	make	man	a	robot,	a
machine,	and	they	have	almost	succeeded.	That's	why	there	are	so	few	Buddhas,
so	 few	Jesuses.	The	 reason	 is	 simple:	 societies,	 factories,	 the	state,	 the	church,
the	nation	--	they	are	in	a	deep	conspiracy	to	destroy	the	small	child,	who	is	very
vulnerable,	delicate	and	helpless.
You	can	destroy	him.	And	the	basic	strategy	for	destruction	is	to	create	a	mind,
impose	 a	 mind	 on	 him,	 so	 that	 he	 forgets	 his	 innermost	 qualities	 of	 joy,	 he
forgets	 the	 innocence	 that	he	brought	 from	the	sources	of	existence,	 so	 that	he
forgets	all	 that	is	beautiful	and	becomes	only	a	cog	in	the	wheel	of	society.	He
has	 to	 be	 a	 good	 servant,	 he	 has	 to	 be	 a	 good	mechanic,	 he	 has	 to	 be	 a	 good
station-master,	 a	 good	 professor,	 this	 and	 that,	 but	 he	 has	 not	 to	 be	 a	 divine
being,	he	has	not	to	function	blissfully.
The	 society	 is	 very	 afraid	of	blissful	 people	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 bliss	 is
such	 a	 tremendous	 experience	 that	 one	 can	 sacrifice	 one's	 life	 for	 it	 but	 one
cannot	 sacrifice	 one's	 bliss	 for	 anything	 else.	One	 lives	 for	 bliss,	 one	 dies	 for
bliss,	once	one	has	known	what	bliss	is.	Hence	the	blissful	person	is	absolutely
beyond	 the	 imprisoning	 forces	 of	 the	 society.	 The	 society	 can	 only	 rule	 the
miserable,	the	church	can	only	exploit	the	miserable.
And	Christmas	Humphreys	says:	"Here,	then,	is	the	real	solution	to	the	problem
of	the	opposites."
There	 is	 no	 "problem	 of	 the	 opposites."	Opposites	 are	 not	 opposites,	 they	 are
complementaries,	hence	there	is	no	problem	as	such.	Darkness	and	light	are	one
phenomenon,	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	Life	and	death	are	inseparable,	you
cannot	separate	them	--	how	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
8
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
can	you	make	them	opposites?	They	are	complementaries,	they	help	each	other.
Hence	there	is	no	problem	and	there	is	no	need	for	any	solution.
And	Zen	is	not	a	solution	to	opposites,	it	is	a	transcendence,	it	is	a	higher	vision
--	a	bird's-eye	view	from	where	all	dualities	look	stupid.
The	 most	 important	 thing	 that	 happened	 to	 the	 first	 man	 who	 walked	 on	 the
moon	was	that	he	suddenly	forgot	that	he	was	an	American.	Suddenly	the	whole
earth	was	one,	there	were	no	boundaries,	because	there	is	no	map	on	the	earth.
The	American	continent,	the	African	continent,	the	Asian	continent,	this	country
and	 that	 country	 all	 disappeared.	 Not	 that	 he	 made	 any	 effort	 to	 put	 all	 the
opposing	camps	together;	there	was	not	even	a	Soviet	Russia	or	an	America,	the
whole	earth	was	just	simply	one.
And	the	first	words	that	were	uttered	by	the	American	were	"My	beloved	earth!"
This	 is	 transcendence.	 For	 a	moment	 he	 had	 forgotten	 all	 conditionings:	 "My
beloved	earth!"	Now	the	whole	earth	belonged	to	him.
This	is	what	actually	happens	in	a	state	of	silence:	the	whole	existence	is	yours
and	all	opposites	disappear	into	each	other,	supporting,	dancing	with	each	other.
It	becomes	an	orchestra.
Christmas	Humphreys	says,	"Shall	I	tell	it	you?	Consider..."
Now,	 look	how	just	 small	changes	make	great	differences:	"Shall	 I	 tell	 it	you?
Consider..."
This	is	the	way	philosophy	moves,	not	Zen:	"Consider..."	It	is	not	a	question	of
consideration;	either	you	know	or	you	don't	know.
The	 Master	 Nansen	 did	 not	 say,	 "Consider,	 now	 I	 will	 give	 a	 great	 clap.
Consider,	now	I	will	shout,	'Riko!'	and	you	have	to	say,	'Yes,	Master!'	Then	I	will
say,	'See,	the	goose	is	out!"'
Then	the	whole	point	would	have	been	lost.
Just	a	few	days	ago	in	a	darshan	meeting	in	the	evening	I	called	Nirupa.	She	had
broken	 one	 of	 her	 hands.	 She	 is	 one	 of	 my	 mediums,	 but	 now	 she	 cannot
participate	in	the	dancing.
She	was	just	sitting	in	the	front	line	and	I	called	her.	For	a	moment	she	hesitated
and	everybody	laughed,	because	what	was	she	going	to	do	with	one	hand?	But
Zen	 is	 done	with	 one	 hand	 --	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand	 clapping!	 --	 and	 she	 did
well.	 Of	 course,	 only	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 sound,	 but	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand
clapping...	 Even	 when	 you	 are	 making	 a	 sound	 with	 two	 hands	 clapping	 the
energy	is	one.	Your	left	hand	and	your	right	hand	are	not	two,	they	are	joined	in
you.	They	are	not	opposites,	they	are	complementary,	they	belong	to	one	being.
All	opposites	belong	 to	one	being,	 and	 it	 is	not	 a	question	of	 consideration.	 If
you	consider,	you	take	all	the	juice	out	of	the	beautiful	koan.
"Consider,'	he	says,	"a	live	goose	in	a	bottle.	How	to	get	it	out	without	hurting
the	goose	or	breaking	the	bottle?"
He	cannot	even	say	"without	killing	the	goose."	A	proper	Englishman!	"Without
hurting	 the	 goose	 or	 breaking	 the	 bottle."	 In	 fact,	 even	 to	 say	 "breaking	 the
bottle"	his	heart	must	be	breaking!	"The	answer	is	simple..."
It	is	not	simple.	In	the	first	place	it	is	not	an	answer	either.	"There,	it	is	out!"	He
has	destroyed	the	whole	beauty	of	 the	koan.	But	habits	die	very	hard.	It	 is	 just
the	way	of	thinking,	the	way	of	the	mind.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
9
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
The	Pope	was	given	a	pair	of	red	silk	slippers	with	the	initials	T.I.F	inscribed	on
them.
When	His	Holiness	asked	what	the	letters	stood	for,	he	was	told,	"Toes	In	First:'
Anand	Bhavo,	you	ask	me:
OSHO,	IS	THE	GOOSE	REALLY	OUT?
It	has	always	been	out,	it	has	never	been	in.	It	is	only	a	question	of	dreaming.
Wake	up!
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 IN	 THE	WEST	 I	 AM	 A	 STUDENT	 OF	 PHILOSOPHY.	 IS	 THERE
ANY	LOVE
OR	WISDOM	IN	PHILOSOPHY?	I	HAVE	NOT	FOUND	THEM	YET.
Anand	Wolfgang,	it	is	good	that	you	have	not	found	it	yet.	I	hope	that	you	will
never	find	it,	ever,	because	Germans	tend	to	find	it!
It	is	said	philosophy	is	like	a	blind	man	searching	on	a	dark	night	in	a	dark	room
for	 a	 black	 cat	which	 is	 not	 there.	 But	Germans	 find	 it!	 They	 have	 given	 the
greatest	 philosophers	 to	 the	world:	 Immanuel	Kant	 and	Hegel	 and	 Fichte	 and
Marx	and	Feuerbach	and	so	on	and	so	forth.
It	is	good,	Wolfgang,	that	you	say:
IN	THE	WEST	I	AM	A	STUDENT	OF	PHILOSOPHY.	IS	THERE	ANY	LOVE
OR
WISDOM	IN	PHILOSOPHY?
Love	is	not	possible	at	all,	because	philosophy	means	logic	and	logic	cannot	be
loving.
Logic	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 science	 but	 not	 the	 foundation	 of	 life.	 Logic	 is
applicable	 to	 dead	 things,	 to	 objects,	 because	 the	 basic	 method	 of	 logic	 is
dissection.	The	moment	you	dissect	something	you	kill	it,	so	if	you	want	to	find
life	through	logic	you	will	never	find	it;	the	very	method	prohibits	it.
You	 can	 cut	 a	 rose	 flower,	 you	 can	 dissect	 it,	 you	 can	 put	 all	 the	 ingredients
separately	 into	 different	 bottles	 methodically	 labelled,	 but	 one	 thing	 will	 be
missing:	there	will	be	no	beauty	to	be	found	and	no	life	to	be	found,	no	joy	to	be
found,	no	dance	of	the	rose	flower	in	the	wind,	in	the	rain,	in	the	sun;	they	will
all	be	gone.	There	will	be	a	few	chemicals,	but	those	chemicals	are	not	the	rose
flower,	 those	 chemicals	 were	 simply	 the	 situation	 in	 which	 the	 rose	 has
appeared.	They	don't	constitute	 the	rose,	 they	only	constituted	 the	situation	for
the	appearance	of	 the	 rose.	 If	you	 take	 them	away,	 the	 rose	disappears	 into	 its
invisible	world.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
10
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
It	is	like	dissecting	a	dancer	--	do	you	think	you	will	find	something	like	dance
inside?
You	will	find	bones,	you	will	find	all	kinds	of	nasty	things,	but	you	will	not	find
a	dance.	You	can	cut	the	throat	of	a	singer,	but	you	will	not	find	the	song	--	and
you	had	always	believed	that	the	song	came	from	the	throat.	The	throat	is	only	a
vehicle;	the	song	comes	from	the	beyond.	The	throat	can	be	a	good	vehicle	or	a
bad	vehicle,	that	is	a	different	matter,	but	it	is	only	a	vehicle.	By	dissecting	the
vehicle	you	cannot	find	that	which	was	descending	on	it	from	the	world	of	the
beyond.
Love	and	logic	never	meet,	cannot	meet.	Logic	means	the	outward	journey,	love
means	 the	 inward	 journey.	 Logic	 means	 dissection,	 love	 means	 finding	 the
organic	unity.	Logic	thinks	in	terms	of	the	many,	the	multiple.
In	fact,	scientists	should	stop	calling	the	universe	"universe,"	they	should	call	it
"multiverse."	"Universe"	is	a	poetic	name	given	by	lovers;	universe	means	one,
"uni."
According	 to	 science	 it	 is	 not	 a	 universe,	 it	 is	 many,	 it	 is	 a	 multiverse.	 Only
lovers	know	the	unity,	thinkers	cannot	know	unity.
And	in	the	unity	of	the	whole	one	finds	love	and	one	finds	wisdom.	Wisdom	is
the	shadow	of	love;	wherever	there	is	love	there	is	wisdom.	When	love	is	alive
there	 is	 dance,	 there	 is	 song,	 there	 is	 beauty;	 those	 are	 all	 the	 qualities	 of
wisdom.	 If	you	 think	 logic	can	give	you	wisdom	then	you	will	have	 to	decide
one	 thing	 very	 clearly,	 and	 that	 is	 that	 knowledge	 has	 to	 be	 taken	 as	wisdom.
Then	 logic	 can	 give	 you	wisdom,	 but	 then	 knowledge	 becomes	 equivalent	 to,
synonymous	with,	wisdom	--	and	knowledge	is	not	synonymous	with	wisdom.
Knowledge	is	all	borrowed,	rubbish;	you	have	gathered	it	from	others.
Wisdom	is	the	explosion	of	your	own	consciousness.	Wisdom	is	intrinsic;	it	does
not	come	from	the	outside,	it	explodes	within	you	and	spreads	towards	the	outer
world.	It	is	like	light	radiating:	you	share	it,	you	don't	accumulate	it.	Knowledge
has	 to	 be	 begged	 for,	 wisdom	 has	 to	 be	 shared.	 They	 are	 totally	 different
dimensions.
Philosophy,	Wolfgang,	cannot	give	you	love	or	wisdom,	but	it	can	go	on	giving
you	hope.
And	if	philosophy	is	the	answer,	it	must	have	been	a	silly	question.
Remember	it,	if	you	can	find	any	answer	through	philosophy,	that	simply	proves
one	 thing:	 that	 your	 question	 was	 silly.	 If	 the	 question	 is	 really	 significant,
philosophy	has	no	answer.	You	will	 have	 to	 look	 in	 a	different	direction.	That
direction	 I	 call	 Zen,	 that	 direction	 I	 call	 awakening	 --	 not	 theorizing,
philosophizing,	 but	 becoming	 silent;	 not	 becoming	 more	 knowledgeable	 but
dropping	all	knowledge,	discarding	it,	so	that	you	can	be	empty,	utterly	empty.	In
emptiness	there	is	clarity,	there	is	cleanliness,	there	is	purity,	there	is	innocence,
a	 childlike	wonder	 and	 awe.	And	 those	 are	 the	moments	 of	 love	 and	wisdom
growing	 in	 you;	 they	 grow	 together.	 Knowledge	 and	 logic	 grow	 together.
Wisdom	and	love	grow	together.
A	famous	zoology	professor	at	the	Sorbonne	had	the	habit	of	giving	his	students
an	oral	exam	at	 the	end	of	his	course,	and	he	always	asked	 the	same	question:
"Tell	me	all	you	know	about	worms."
Of	course	his	students	would	goof	around	all	semester	and	then	just	before	the
exam	study	assiduously	all	about	worms.	And	they	all	got	very	high	marks.
Finally	the	professor	became	concerned	that	all	his	students	were	doing	so	well.
The	time	came	to	give	the	exam	and	meanwhile	all	 the	students	were	studying
all	about	worms.	When	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
11
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
the	first	student	came	for	the	exam,	the	professor	asked,	"Tell	me	all	you	know
about	elephants:'
The	 student	 was	 profoundly	 flustered	 for	 a	 moment,	 then	 he	 answered,
"Elephants	have	worm-like	tails.	Worms	are	classified...	"	And	then	he	started.
Knowledge	is	always	unintelligent.	If	a	question	is	asked	for	which	you	have	a
ready-made	answer	it	is	good,	if	a	question	is	asked	for	which	you	don't	have	a
ready-made	 answer	 you	 are	 in	 trouble.	 You	 are	 just	 behaving	 mechanically.
Knowledge	 is	 mechanical,	 and	 how	 can	 anything	 mechanical	 help	 you	 to	 be
wise?	Knowledge	is	nothing	but	categorization.
Once	 upon	 a	 time	 there	was	 a	 handsome	 young	 lion.	He	was	 captured	 in	 the
African	 jungle	and	brought	 to	America,	where	he	was	put	on	display	 in	a	zoo.
This	made	the	lion	very	unhappy	because	he	preferred	the	freedom	of	his	wild
native	 land	 and	 the	 companionship	 of	 other	 jungle	 beasts.	But	 after	 a	 time	 he
became	resigned	to	his	fate	and	made	up	his	mind	that	if	he	had	to	live	behind
bars	he	would	be	the	best	zoo	lion	around.
In	an	adjoining	cage	there	was	another	lion,	an	old	and	lazy	one	with	a	negative
responsibility	and	no	signs	of	ambition	or	capability	of	any	kind.	He	lay	all	day
in	 the	 sun,	 aroused	 no	 interest	 from	visitors.	 In	 sharp	 contrast,	 the	 young	 lion
paced	 for	 hours	 back	 and	 forth	 in	 his	 cage.	He	 acted	 the	 true	King	 of	Beasts,
rolling	his	maned	head,	 snarling,	 and	baring	his	 teeth.	The	 crowds	 loved	him;
they	paid	no	attention	to	the	indolent	old	lion	asleep	in	the	next	cage.
The	young	lion	appreciated	the	attention	he	was	getting,	but	he	was	annoyed	by
his	failure	to	win	adequate	reward.	Each	afternoon	the	zoo	keeper	came	through
the	cages	to	feed	the	animals.	The	lazy	old	lion	who	made	no	effort	to	please	the
spectators	 was	 given	 a	 big	 bowl	 of	 horsemeat.	 The	 young	 lion,	 now	 a	 star
attraction,	 was	 given	 a	 bowl	 of	 chopped-up	 oranges,	 bananas	 and	 nuts.	 This
made	him	very	unhappy.
"Perhaps,"	he	mused,	"I	am	not	trying	hard	enough.	I	will	improve	the	act."	So
he	strutted	longer	and	more	spectacularly.	To	the	snarls	and	gnashing	of	teeth	he
added	 frequent	 roars	 that	 shook	 the	 bars	 of	 his	 cage.	 The	 crowds	 got	 bigger.
Thousands	of	citizens	came	to	see	his	performance,	and	he	was	pictured	on	page
one	in	the	local	newspaper.
But	 the	diet	did	not	change.	Still	 the	 lazy	 lion	got	 the	 red	meat	and	 the	young
lion	stayed	on	a	vegetarian	diet.	Finally	he	could	endure	it	no	longer.	He	stopped
the	keeper	with	a	challenge.	"I	am	getting	sick	and	tired	of	this,"	he	complained.
"Each	day	you	give	that	no-good	lazy	type	next	door	a	big	bowl	of	red	meat	and
you	feed	me	oranges,	bananas	and	nuts.	It	is	grossly	unfair.	Why	do	you	think	all
these	people	come	to	the	zoo?	They	come	to	see	me!	I	am	the	star	attraction,	the
lion	 that	 is	doing	all	 the	work	and	 the	one	 that	gets	 the	 results.	Why	am	I	not
entitled	to	meat	for	dinner?"
The	keeper	replied,	"Young	man,	you	don't	know	how	lucky	you	are.	The	Table
of	 Organization	 in	 this	 zoo	 calls	 for	 one	 lion.	 You	 are	 being	 carried	 as	 a
monkey!"
The	 philosophers	 are	 good	 at	 categorizing	 things,	 the	 scientists	 are	 good	 at
categorizing	 things.	 Their	 whole	 effort	 is	 how	 to	 categorize,	 how	 to	 put
everything	in	a	particular	category
--	this	is	this,	that	is	that	--	and	they	go	on	and	on.	They	are	not	in	search	of	the
organic	unity	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
12
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
of	life,	they	are	not	in	search	of	the	ultimate	principle	of	life	that	runs	in	the	trees
and	 the	 mountains	 and	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 animals	 and	 the	 birds	 and	 men	 and
women.	They	 are	 not	 in	 search	 of	 that	 unifying	 factor.	That	 unifying	 factor	 is
what	 religions	have	called	 the	 truth,	what	Buddha	has	 called	NIRVANA,	what
Jesus	has	called	the	kingdom	of	God.
You	will	not	find,	Wolfgang,	any	wisdom,	any	love	in	philosophy.	Yes,	you	will
find	 all	 kinds	 of	 beautiful	 answers,	 you	 will	 find	 all	 kinds	 of	 parrot-like
information,	facts,	you	will	become	very	efficient	in	repeating	them,	in	quoting
them,	but	you	will	only	be	becoming	a	computer.	That	can	be	done	better	by	a
computer	than	by	you.
Find	out	something	within	you	which	a	computer	cannot	do	and	you	will	have
found	the	right	direction	for	your	innermost	being,	for	your	freedom.	That	is	the
whole	effort	of	Zen,	that's	what	we	are	trying	to	do	here.	The	computer	cannot
love;	it	can	say	"I	love	you,"	but	you	know	that	it	is	a	computer.	It	can	make	all
the	gestures	of	love,	but	if	suddenly	the	electricity	goes...	"Grrr,	grrr,	grrr,"	or	if
the	battery	runs	out,	first	you	have	to	replace	the	battery,	then	it	will	say	"I	love
you."
But	 people	 are	 foolish	 and	 people	 are	 trying	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 to	make	man
more	like	a	robot.
Just	 the	other	day	 I	was	 reading	 this	 item	 in	a	newspaper:	"Mundane	Mating,"
Toronto,	25
February:
Men	and	women	in	future	will	have	robot	sexual	partners,	and	erotic	technology
will	 offer	 them	 their	 hearts'	 desires:	 stimulants,	 aphrodisiacs,	 and	 chemical
orgasms.
Sexologists	 concluded	 during	 a	 seminar	 here	 that	 men	 and	 women	 will	 still
mate,	 but	 during	 well-defined	 periods.	 Some	 said	 that	 women	 will	 want	 the
"profound	and	basic	experience"	of	pregnancy	without	giving	birth.
One	sexologist	said	that	sexual	relations	with	robots	will	help	to	"supplement	or
enrich	fantasy	life	and	contribute	to	the	establishment	of	a	milieu	which	fosters
rather	than	arrests	sexual	growth	and	development."
It	is	going	to	happen!	In	a	way	it	has	already	happened.	For	thousands	of	years
man	 has	 been	 making	 love	 mechanically,	 and	 the	 so-called	 mahatmas	 --
Mahatma	Gandhi	and	the	Polack	Pope	and	Mother	Teresa	--	they	all	say	that	if
you	make	love	only	for	one	reason,	that	is	reproduction,	then	it	is	not	sin.	If	you
make	love	just	for	the	sheer	joy	of	it,	for	the	sheer	fun	of	it,	it	is	sin.
Now,	 reproduction	 is	 chemical,	 biological;	 fun	 is	 a	 higher	 value.	 No	 animal
knows	anything	about	fun.	Have	you	seen	animals	making	love?	Do	you	see	any
fun?	They	don't	even	say,	"Hello!"	to	each	other,	and	when	they	are	finished	they
don't	even	say,	"Thank	you,	see	you	soon!"	They	don't	even	look	at	each	other;
they	seem	to	be	utterly	bored.	Look	at	animals	making	love	--	they	seem	to	be
utterly	bored,	 as	 if	 some	biological	 force	 is	 forcing	 them	 to	do	 something	and
they	have	to	do	it.	Once	they	are	finished	they	go	on	their	ways;	they	will	never
recognize	each	other	again,	they	will	not	write	love	letters.
Fun	is	not	animal,	fun	is	human.	And	all	these	mahatmas	go	on	condemning	man
for	 everything	 animal	 except	 reproduction	 --	 and	 reproduction	 is	 absolutely
animal!	All	animals	reproduce;	there	is	nothing	special	in	it.	The	only	thing	is	--
they	don't	enjoy	it,	they	don't	have	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
13
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
any	fun	in	it,	they	don't	have	any	loving	relationship	growing	out	of	it,	they	don't
transform	the	sexual	energy.	But	reproduction	is	thought	to	be	a	virtue	and	fun	is
thought	 to	 be	 something	 absolutely	 condemnable.	 These	 people	 have	 always
changed	human	joy	into	a	robot-like	phenomenon.
People	 have	 been	 making	 love	 to	 each	 other	 in	 the	 darkness,	 under	 blanket
covers.	If	a	Martian	comes	to	the	earth,	particularly	to	India,	he	will	not	see	any
sign	 of	 anybody	 making	 love.	 He	 will	 be	 very	 puzzled	 how	 these	 people
reproduce.	His	basic	inquiry	here	will	be	to	find	out	how	you	reproduce,	because
he	 will	 not	 see	 anybody	 making	 love.	 Love	 is	 far	 away,	 he	 will	 not	 see	 any
people	holding	hands.
I	have	heard:
Once	 a	 couple	 reached	Mars,	 and	 of	 course	 their	 basic	 inquiry	was...	 because
they	could	not	find	out	how	people	made	love	there.	They	tried	hard,	they	did	all
kinds	of	 things	 that	 they	had	done	on	Earth	 to	know	about	other	people's	 love
affairs	--	they	became	peeping	toms	--
but	they	could	not	find	out	anything.
Finally	they	asked	a	Martian	couple,	very	politely,	"We	have	come	from	Earth,
we	are	on	a	research	tour.	We	want	to	know	how	you	make	love."
They	said,	 "It	 is	very	 simple!"	They	opened	 their	 fridge,	brought	out	 two	 jars,
started	mixing	 the	chemicals	contained	 in	 the	 jars	 into	a	 third	small	 jar,	mixed
them	well	and	put	the	jar	back	into	the	fridge.
The	 couple	 inquiring	 about	 love-making	 could	 not	 see	 any	 love-making	 in	 it.
They	said,
"What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	preparing	coffee	or	something?"	They	said,	"No,
because	in	nine	months	this	new	jar	will	have	a	child	in	it.	We	have	mixed	all	the
ingredients	needed.
This	is	how	we	reproduce."
The	couple	from	Earth	started	laughing.	They	said,	"Then	tell	us	one	thing	more
--	how	do	you	prepare	coffee?"
Then	they	both	undressed	and	started	making	love!	And	the	couple	from	Earth
went	into	hysterical	laughter;	they	could	not	believe	what	was	happening.	They
were	making	coffee!
The	Martians	asked,	"What	are	you	laughing	at?	Why	are	you	laughing?"
They	said,	"Because	this	is	the	way	we	reproduce	--	and	you	are	making	coffee!
So	this	is	the	coffee	which	you	served	us	this	morning!"
Man	has	been	trying	to	find	some	scientific	way	to	reproduce	so	that	everything
can	become	mechanical.	Then	even	love	will	no	longer	be	private.	Wisdom	has
already	been	taken	over	by	the	churches,	the	universities;	love	is	still	a	little	bit
private.	Of	 course,	 the	 society	 has	 dominated	 almost	 ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 it
through	marriage,	through	all	kinds	of	laws,	through	all	kinds	of	legal	bindings,
but	 still	 one-percent	 remains	 private.	 That	 too	 the	 society	 is	 not	 very	 happy
about;	that	has	also	to	be	encroached	upon	--	your	love	has	also	to	be	taken	away
from	you.	Wisdom	was	 taken	 away	 long	 ago,	 now	 love	has	 to	be	 taken	 away.
Then	 you	 are	 reduced	 to	 a	machine,	 a	 servile	machine,	 a	 slave;	 then	 you	will
only	repeat	clichés.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
14
Chapter	1	-	The	goose	is	out!
A	man	 rings	at	 the	chaplain's	door.	When	 the	housekeeper	opens	 the	door,	 the
man	says,	"I	am	bringing	you	the	twenty-four	thousand	liters	of	oil	you	ordered"
The	housekeeper	is	very	surprised	and	asks	the	chaplain	if	he	ordered	all	 those
liters	of	oil.
The	chaplain	is	even	more	surprised,	but	suddenly	he	remembers	his	parrot.	So
he	storms	into	the	room	and	shouts,	"Did	you	order	twenty-four	thousand	liters
of	oil?"
"No,"	says	the	parrot.
"Are	you	sure?	Quite	sure?"	asks	the	chaplain.
"Yes!"	shrills	the	parrot.
"Well,	just	wait!"	replies	the	chaplain.	"If	I	find	out	that	you	have	been	lying,	I'll
nail	you	by	your	two	wings	to	the	wall!"
Sure	enough,	he	soon	discovers	that	 it	 is	 the	parrot	that	placed	the	order,	so	he
nails	it	to	the	wall.
After	 the	 parrot	 has	 been	 hanging	 there	 for	 a	while,	 he	 sadly	 looks	 out	 of	 the
window	and	sees	the	crucifix	in	front	of	the	church.	He	lifts	his	head	and	says,
"Well,	Jesus,	did	you	order	twenty-four	thousand	liters	of	oil	too?"
Man	has	been	reduced	to	a	parrot.	My	sannyasins	have	to	come	out	of	all	these
cages	--	the	cages	that	philosophy,	theology,	science	and	all	other	kinds	of	things
have	created	around	you.
You	have	to	come	out	of	it	all,	IN	toto	--	not	partially,	not	gradually,	not	slowly,
not	tomorrow	but	now,	at	this	very	moment.
"Riko!"
"Yes,	Master,"	said	the	official	with	a	start.
"See,"	said	Nansen,	"the	goose	is	out!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
15
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
2
Just	see	it
2	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	I	FEEL	THAT	WE	NEED	TO	HURRY,	THAT	THERE	IS	NOT	MUCH
TIME
LEFT.	 THE	 COCOON	 OF	 SLUMBER	 I	 AM	 EXISTING	 IN	 SEEMS	 TO
SUFFOCATE	ME,	AND	I	AM	AFRAID	I	WILL	NEVER	MAKE	IT.	YOU	SAY
THE	GOOSE	IS	OUT
ALREADY.	WHY	DOES	IT	FEEL	SO	IMPOSSIBLE	TO	GRASP?
Anand	Bhagawati,	 it	 is	difficult	 to	grasp	because	 the	goose	 is	out;	 if	 it	was	 in
there	would	have	been	no	difficulty	in	grasping	it.	The	bottle	is	dead	--	you	can
grasp	it.	The	bottle	 is	 like	philosophy,	 theology,	dogma,	creed,	cult,	doctrine	--
just	 a	 corpse.	The	 goose	 is	 alive,	 it	 is	 life	 itself;	 you	 cannot	 grasp	 it.	 It	 is	 not
conceptual,	it	is	existential.	Who	is	going	to	grasp	whom?
You	are	the	goose!	The	mind	is	your	bottle,	and	the	mind	is	not	something	that
can	be	broken.	 It	 is	not	material;	 it	 is	 just	a	 thought,	an	 imagination,	 the	same
stuff	 as	 dreams	 are	 made	 of.	 You	 cannot	 destroy	 a	 dream,	 you	 cannot	 kill	 a
dream,	you	cannot	cut	a	dream	with	a	sword,	you	cannot	burn	it	with	fire.	You
just	have	 to	be	awake	and	 the	dream	disappears.	 In	 fact,	 to	 say	 that	 the	dream
disappears	is	not	right,	but	it	was	not	there	in	the	first	place;	it	only	appeared	to
be	there.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	Eastern	word	MAYA,	"illusion":	a	mirage;	it	appears
but	 it	 exists	 not.	You	 can	 see	 the	horizon	 far	 away	 --	 it	APPEARS,	 it	 appears
real.	It	seems	that	the	earth	is	meeting	the	sky	there;	just	a	little	effort	and	you
will	reach	it.	It	seems	within	your	capacity	to	reach	it,	but	you	can	never	reach	it
for	the	simple	reason	that	 it	 is	only	an	appearance,	 it	 is	not	a	reality.	The	earth
and	the	sky	never	meet,	there	is	no	meeting	place.	So	the	closer	you	come	to	the
so-called	horizon,	 the	more	 the	horizon	goes	on	 and	on	disappearing	 ahead	of
you.	The	distance	between	you	and	the	horizon	always	remains	constant.
Albert	 Einstein	 says	 that	 the	 only	 thing	 constant	 in	 existence	 is	 the	 speed	 of
light.	I	am	not	a	physicist,	I	don't	know	whether	he	is	right	or	wrong,	but	I	know
one	thing	which	is	absolutely	constant	and	that	is	the	distance	between	you	and
the	horizon.	That	 is	 absolutely	 constant;	 not	 a	 single	 inch	 less	 can	 it	 be,	 not	 a
single	inch	more	can	it	be.	The	difference,	the	distance	between	the	real	and	the
unreal	cannot	be	reduced.
The	mind	is	unreal,	hence	it	is	not	really	a	question	of	coming	out	of	it,	it	is	only
a	question	of	SEEING.
Hence	the	crazy	Master	Nansen	said,	"See,	the	goose	is	out!"	He	was	not	making
a	logical	statement	--	he	was	not	saying,	"See,	THEREFORE	the	goose	is	out"
He	was	not	even	saying	what	Christmas	Humphreys	makes	him	appear	 to	say.
Christmas	Humphreys	says,	"There,	the	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
16
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
goose	is	out!"	It	cannot	be	said	by	Nansen.	Nansen	is	not	referring	to	there	and
here,	 he	 is	 not	 even	 referring	 to	 then	 and	 now,	 he	 is	 simply	 saying,	 "See,	 the
goose	is	out!	It	has	never	been	in,	it	cannot	be	in."
Your	 consciousness	 is	 always	 free,	 it	 is	 freedom	 itself.	 But	 the	 problem	 is
arising,	Bhagawati,	because	you	want	to	grasp	it.	This	is	MIND	trying	to	grasp
something	which	is	beyond	its	capacities.	The	illusory	cannot	grasp	the	real	and
the	real	cannot	grasp	the	illusory,	remember.	The	illusory	cannot	grasp	because	it
is	not;	the	real	cannot	grasp	the	illusory	because	how	can	you	grasp	the	illusory?
It	is	not	there	at	all.
Hence	Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 says,	 "The	moment	 you	 are	 absolutely	 empty	 and
aware,	all	is	found."	It	is	only	a	question	of	shaking	you	up.	It	is	a	nightmare	--
the	goose	is	in	the	bottle	is	a	nightmare	--	and	sometimes	it	can	happen	in	a	very
strange	situation.	It	happened	in	many	strange	situations	in	the	past.
In	 Joseph	 Grimaldi's	 memoirs,	 as	 edited	 by	 Charles	 Dickens,	 there	 is	 the
following	story:
"In	 the	July	of	 this	year	a	very	extraordinary	circumstance	occurred	at	Sadler's
Wells,	which	was	the	great	topic	of	conversation	in	the	neighborhood	for	some
time	afterwards.	It	happened	thus:
"Captain	George	Harris,	 of	 the	Royal	Navy,	 had	 recently	 returned	 to	 England
after	 a	 long	 voyage.	 The	 crew	 being	 paid	 off,	 many	 of	 them	 followed	 their
commander	to	London	and	proceeded	to	enjoy	themselves	after	the	usual	fashion
of	 sailors.	 Sadler's	 Wells	 was	 at	 that	 time	 a	 famous	 place	 of	 resort	 with	 the
bluejackets,	the	gallery	being	sometimes	almost	solely	occupied	by	seamen	and
their	 female	companions.	A	 large	body	of	Captain	Harris's	men	resorted	hither
one	night,	and	amongst	 them	a	man	who	was	deaf	and	dumb,	and	had	been	so
for	many	years.
"This	man	was	placed	by	his	shipmates	in	the	front	row	of	the	gallery.	Grimaldi
was	 in	 great	 force	 that	 night,	 and	 although	 the	 audience	 were	 in	 one	 roar	 of
laughter,	 nobody	 appeared	 to	 enjoy	 his	 fun	 and	 humor	 more	 than	 this	 poor
fellow.	His	 companions	good-naturedly	 took	a	great	deal	of	notice	of	him	and
one	of	 them,	who	 talked	very	well	with	his	 fingers,	 inquired	how	he	 liked	 the
entertainments;	 to	 which	 the	 deaf	 and	 dumb	 man	 replied	 through	 the	 same
medium,	 and	 with	 various	 gestures	 of	 great	 delight,	 that	 he	 had	 never	 seen
anything	half	so	comical	before.
"As	 the	 scene	 progressed,	 Grimaldi's	 tricks	 and	 jokes	 became	 still	 more
irresistible;	 and	 at	 length,	 after	 a	 violent	 peal	 of	 laughter	 and	 applause	which
quite	 shook	 the	 theater	 and	 in	 which	 the	 dumb	 man	 joined	 most	 heartily,	 he
suddenly	turned	to	his	mate,	who	sat	next	to	him,	and	cried	out	with	much	glee,
"What	a	damned	funny	fellow!"
"Why,	 Jack	 shouted	 the	other	man,	 starting	back	with	great	 surprise,	 "can	you
speak?"
"Speak!"	replied	the	other,	"Ay,	that	I	can,	and	hear,	too"
"Upon	 this	 the	whole	party,	 of	 course,	 gave	 three	vehement	 cheers,	 and	 at	 the
conclusion	of	the	piece	adjourned	in	a	great	procession	with	the	recovered	man,
elevated	 on	 the	 shoulders	 of	 a	 half-dozen	 friends,	 in	 the	 center.	 A	 crowd	 of
people	 quickly	 assembled	 round	 the	 door,	 and	 great	 excitement	 and	 curiosity
were	 occasioned	 as	 the	 intelligence	 ran	 from	mouth	 to	mouth	 that	 a	 deaf	 and
dumb	 man	 had	 come	 to	 speak	 and	 hear,	 all	 owing	 to	 the	 cleverness	 of	 Joey
Grimaldi.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
17
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
"The	landlady	of	the	tavern,	thinking	Grimaldi	would	like	to	see	his	patient,	told
the	man	that	if	he	would	call	next	morning	he	should	see	the	actor	who	had	made
him	laugh	so	much.
Grimaldi,	 being	 apprised	 of	 the	 circumstances,	 repaired	 to	 the	 house	 at	 the
appointed	time,	and	saw	him,	accompanied	by	several	of	his	companions,	all	of
whom	still	continued	to	manifest	the	liveliest	interest	in	the	sudden	change	that
had	 happened	 to	 their	 friend,	 and	 kept	 on	 cheering,	 and	 drinking	 and	 treating
everybody	in	the	house,	in	proof	of	their	gratification.
"The	man,	who	appeared	an	intelligent	well-behaved	fellow,	said	that	in	the	early
part	of	his	life	he	could	both	speak	and	hear	very	well;	and	that	he	had	attributed
his	deprivation	of	the	two	senses	to	the	intense	heat	of	the	sun	in	the	quarter	of
the	world	to	which	he	had	been	and	from	which	he	had	very	recently	returned.
He	 added	 that	 on	 the	 previous	 evening	he	 had	 for	 a	 long	 time	 felt	 a	 powerful
anxiety	 to	 express	 his	 delight	 at	what	was	passing	on	 the	 stage;	 and	 that	 after
some	feat	of	Grimaldi's	which	struck	him	as	being	particularly	amusing	he	had
made	a	strong	effort	 to	deliver	his	thoughts,	 in	which	to	his	own	astonishment,
no	less	than	that	of	his	companions,	he	succeeded.
"Mr.	 Charles	Dibdin,	 who	was	 present,	 put	 several	 questions	 to	 the	man;	 and
from	his	answers	it	appeared	to	everyone	present	that	he	was	speaking	the	truth.
Indeed,	his	story	was	in	some	measure	confirmed	by	Captain	Harris	himself;	for
one	 evening,	 about	 six	 months	 afterwards,	 as	 Grimaldi	 was	 narrating	 the
circumstances	 in	 the	 green-room	 at	 Covent	 Garden,	 that	 gentleman,	 who
chanced	 to	 be	 present,	 immediately	 remarked	 that	 he	 had	 no	 reason	 from	 the
man's	behavior	while	with	him	to	suppose	him	an	imposter,	and	that	he	had	seen
him	on	that	day	in	full	possession	of	his	senses."
What	happened	actually?	Just	a	 laughter	which	shook	him	from	his	very	roots.
For	a	moment	he	forgot	that	he	was	in	the	bottle;	for	a	moment	he	was	outside
the	 bottle;	 for	 a	 moment	 those	 forty	 years	 of	 deafness	 and	 dumbness
disappeared.	It	is	a	simple	forgetfulness.
That's	 what	 happens	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 Master.	 Sometimes	 it	 can	 happen
without	a	Master	--	Grimaldi	was	not	Nansen.	Grimaldi	himself	was	surprised;
he	could	not	believe	his	eyes	--	he	was	not	trying	to	wake	the	man	up.
It	has	happened	in	 the	past	 in	many	strange	situations,	unexpectedly.	 In	fact,	 it
has	 happened	more	unexpectedly	 than	 it	 has	 ever	 happened	with	 expectations,
because	 expectations	 belong	 to	 the	 mind	 and	 when	 you	 are	 not	 expecting
anything	you	are	more	relaxed,	you	are	more	calm,	at	ease.	The	goose	can	slip
out	 of	 the	 non-existential	 bottle	more	 easily	 if	 it	 is	 relaxed.	 If	 it	 is	 tense	 and
trying	to	get	out	of	it,	that	very	tension	will	keep	it	in.
That's	what	is	happening	to	you,	Bhagawati.	You	say:
WHY	DOES	IT	FEEL	SO	IMPOSSIBLE	TO	GRASP?
It	is	impossible	to	grasp!	If	you	are	trying	to	grasp	it,	it	is	impossible;	if	you	drop
grasping	 it,	 it	 is	 immediately	 possible,	 instantly	 possible	 --	 not	 even	 a	 single
moment	is	lost.
The	 story	 is	 told	 that	 sometime	 in	 the	 last	 century	 a	 prominent	 European
physician	was	 examining	 an	 elderly	man.	After	 checking	him	over	 thoroughly
and	 listening	 to	 his	many	 vague	 complaints,	 the	 physician	 could	 find	 nothing
physically	wrong	which	would	account	for	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
18
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
this	patient's	symptoms.	We	might	imagine	that	it	occurred	to	the	doctor,	just	as
it	might	to	one	of	his	latter-day	colleagues,	that	his	patient's	physical	complaints
were	 in	 all	 probability	 serving	 as	 a	mask	 for	 deep-seated	 emotional	 stress	 and
depression.
Suddenly,	 an	 inspired	 idea	 came	 to	 him.	 He	 said	 to	 the	 old	 man	 that	 Joseph
Grimaldi,	perhaps	the	greatest	clown	of	all	times,	was	in	town	for	a	performance
that	very	evening,	and	he	 told	 the	whole	story	which	I	have	 just	 told	you.	The
physician	shrugged	his	shoulders	about	his	inability	to	arrive	at	a	diagnosis	and
suggested	to	the	patient,	"Why	don't	you	go	to	see	Grimaldi	tonight?"
A	distressed	and	disappointed	expression	suddenly	played	across	 the	old	man's
face,	and	he	exclaimed,	"Oh,	but	you	don't	understand.	I	AM	Grimaldi!"
It	has	happened	that	in	the	company	of	a	pseudo	Master	somebody	has	become
enlightened;	in	a	situation	where	no	Master	was	present,	just	a	natural	accident,
and	somebody	has	become	enlightened.
Lao	Tzu	became	enlightened	through	seeing	a	dead	leaf	falling	from	a	tree.	He
was	sitting	under	a	tree	meditating	for	years,	and	nothing	was	happening	--	and
he	had	been	to	great	Masters.	Something	was	missing.	He	was	trying	too	hard	to
grasp	 the	 truth;	 that	very	effort	was	 the	barrier.	That	early	spring	morning,	 the
birds	singing,	the	trees	swaying,	the	sun	shining,	the	fragrance	of	the	flowers...
he	forgot	all	about	enlightenment.
Once	in	a	while	it	is	very	good	to	forget	all	about	enlightenment,	otherwise	it	can
drive	you	nuts	 --	more	 than	anything	else!	Money	will	not	drive	you	so	crazy,
nor	will	politics,	because	 they	are	all	graspable.	 If	you	 try	hard	you	can	get	as
much	 money	 as	 you	 want;	 just	 a	 little	 effort,	 a	 little	 cunningness,	 a	 little
calculativeness	--	something	Jewish	in	your	blood	--
and	 you	 can	manage.	 Something	 of	 the	 insane	 in	 you	 and	 you	 can	 become	 a
politician.
When	Adolf	Hitler	 started,	nobody	ever	 thought	 that	he	would	become	one	of
the	greatest	historical	 figures	of	 this	century.	Two	friends,	a	great	psychologist
and	a	great	 theologian,	heard	him	speak	for	 the	first	 time	and	both	agreed	 that
this	insane	man	would	never	be	able	to	make	his	name	in	any	possible	way.	Both
agreed	on	it;	one	was	an	expert	in	psychological	matters,	the	other	was	an	expert
in	 theological	matters.	 It	was	 a	 great	 agreement	 between	 a	 psychologist	 and	 a
spiritualist.
The	man	who	was	 a	 theologian	 finally	 became	 the	 Pope.	 By	 that	 time	Adolf
Hitler	 had	 become	 the	 most	 powerful	 man	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 Pope's	 old
psychologist	 friend	 came	 to	 see	 him	 and	 he	 reminded	 him,	 "What	 do	 you	 say
about	it	now?	We	both	agreed	that	this	man	would	never	make	his	name	in	the
world	of	politics;	he	was	simply	insane.	Who	was	going	to	be	impressed	by	him
in	 a	 country	 like	 Germany	 which	 can	 brag	 about	 its	 intelligence	 and	 brag
sincerely,	truthfully?	It	is	one	of	the	most	intelligent	countries	in	the	world.	Who
was	going	to	be	befooled	by	this	maniac?	We	agreed,	but	what	do	you	say	now?
He	has	made	his	mark;	his	name	is	going	to	remain	part	of	history	forever"
The	Pope	looked	at	the	psychologist	and	said,	"Yes,	I	made	that	comment,	but	at
that	time	I	was	not	infallible!"
Neurotics,	 nuts,	 cuckoos,	 they	 can	 make	 their	 name,	 they	 can	 be	 great
politicians,	they	can	be	the	wealthiest	people	in	the	world,	they	can	become	very
famous.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	crazy	urge	to	be	on	top	--	it	is	graspable.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
19
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Enlightenment	 is	 ungraspable,	 so	 the	more	 you	 try	 to	 grasp	 it,	Bhagawati,	 the
less	 it	 is	possible.	You	cannot	hold	enlightenment	 in	your	fist	 --	 the	 tighter	 the
fist,	 the	 less	 is	 the	 possibility.	 But	 you	 can	 hold	 enlightenment	 in	 your	 open
hands;	that	is	the	only	way	to	hold	it.
In	 your	 open	 hands	 you	 can	 hold	 the	 whole	 sky,	 all	 the	 stars,	 the	 whole
existence,	but	in	your	closed	fist	there	is	nothing.	The	more	closed	it	is,	the	more
tight	it	is,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	anything	being	there.	Enlightenment	has	to
be	achieved	with	open	hands,	by	relaxed,	calm,	quiet	resting	in	your	being.
It	happened	to	Lao	Tzu	that	way.	For	years	he	was	trying	to	grasp	and	grasp,	and
nothing	was	 happening.	 That	morning	 he	 simply	 forgot	 all	 about	 it.	 It	was	 so
beautiful,	 so	 sunny,	 there	 was	 so	 much	 delight	 all	 around,	 who	 cared	 about
enlightenment?	 For	 a	 moment	 that	 ambition	 was	 put	 aside.	 And	 just	 by
coincidence	 a	 dead	 leaf,	 which	 must	 have	 been	 hanging	 off	 the	 tree,	 started
falling.
Lao	Tzu	saw	it	falling	from	above,	slowly	slowly.	He	watched	it,	he	became	just
a	watcher;	 there	was	nothing	 to	 do.	He	observed	 it;	 he	 remained	 aware	of	 the
swaying,	and	the	leaf	falling	in	the	subtle	breeze	of	the	morning.	As	it	settled	on
the	ground	something	settled	in	Lao	Tzu	too.	Suddenly	the	feeling	of	"Eureka!"
Suddenly	a	great	outburst	of	joy:	"Aha!"	He	danced...	the	goose	was	out!
When	the	goose	is	out,	what	else	can	you	do	except	dance,	sing,	laugh	--	laugh	at
the	whole	absurdity	of	it	all,	that	you	were	never	in,	that	you	believed	that	you
were	in?	Your	belief	was	the	only	imprisonment.
You	say:
I	FEEL	THAT	WE	NEED	TO	HURRY...
What	is	the	hurry?	The	whole	of	eternity	is	yours!	You	have	always	been	here,
you	ARE
here,	 you	will	ALWAYS	be	 here.	Nothing	 is	 ever	 lost.	Now	 it	 is	 a	 confirmed
scientific	 truth	 that	 nothing	 is	 ever	 destroyed.	 If	matter	 is	 not	 destroyed,	 why
should	 consciousness	 be	 destroyed?	 Matter	 belongs	 to	 a	 very	 gross	 plane	 of
existence.	 If	 the	 gross	 is	 so	 valued	 by	 existence,	 do	 you	 think	 the	 higher
manifestation	 is	not	valued	by	existence?	The	higher	 is	more	valued!	 If	matter
persists	and	is	impossible	to	destroy,	consciousness	cannot	be	destroyed	either.	It
is	 the	 highest	 expression	 of	 life;	 there	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than	 it.	 It	 is	 the	 very
Everest	of	life,	the	peak	beyond	which	there	is	nothing.	The	whole	of	existence
is	moving	towards	that	peak.	There	is	no	hurry.
The	whole	 idea	 of	 hurry	 is	 a	 creation	 of	 the	mind.	Let	me	 say	 it	 in	 this	way:
mind	and	 time	are	synonymous;	 the	moment	your	mind	stops,	 time	also	stops.
The	more	you	are	in	your	mind	the	more	you	are	in	time;	the	less	you	are	in	your
mind	the	more	you	are	out	of	time.
There	is	a	famous	statement	of	Jesus	Christ	--	of	course,	not	related	in	the	Bible.
The	Bible	has	missed	many	beautiful	statements	of	Jesus,	but	truth	has	its	own
way	of	persisting.	It	has	been	carried	by	the	Sufi	mystics	down	the	ages.
The	 statement	 is...	 Somebody	 asks	 Jesus,	 "You	 talk	 again	 and	 again	 about	 the
Kingdom	 of	 God.	What	 will	 be	 the	most	 special	 thing	 about	 the	 kingdom	 of
God?	What	will	be	the	most	unique	phenomenon	in	the	kingdom	of	God	that	you
talk	about?"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
20
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Jesus	said	--	a	very	simple	statement	but	very	pregnant	--	he	said,	"There	shall	be
time	no	longer."	Strange,	unexpected.	One	should	have	expected	something	else
from	Jesus:	God	 the	Father	will	be	 there,	 the	Holy	Ghost	will	be	 there,	all	 the
saints	will	be	 there,	 and	 the	angels	will	be	playing	on	 their	harps	"Alleluia"	 --
something	like	that.	And	what	he	says	is	totally	different.	He	says,	"There	shall
be	time	no	longer,"	and	he	is	right.
Eternity	means	timelessness,	but	the	Judaic	tradition	out	of	which	three	religions
were	 born	 --	 the	 Jewish	 religion,	 the	Christian	 religion	 and	 the	Mohammedan
religion	 --	 they	 all	 live	with	 the	 idea	 of	 one	 life.	That	 idea	 of	 one	 life	 creates
hurry,	worry,	a	constant	 rush	 to	 reach,	not	knowing	exactly	where	you	want	 to
reach	or	for	what	or	what	you	will	do	even	if	you	do	reach.	A	craziness	has	been
created	because	time	is	short	and	it	is	slipping	out	of	your	hands	and	soon	death
will	 knock	 on	 the	 doors	 and	 you	 are	 still	 unfulfilled	 --	 nothing	 special	 has
happened	yet.
Hence	 as	 days	 pass	 your	 anguish	 becomes	more	 and	more	 deep,	 your	 anxiety
becomes	 bigger	 and	 bigger,	 your	 life	 becomes	 a	 burden,	 you	 start	 dragging
yourself.	You	are	constantly	trembling	and	afraid	that	you	are	not	going	to	make
it.
That's	what	Bhagawati	says.	She	says:
THE	COCOON	OF	SLUMBER	I	AM	EXISTING	IN	SEEMS	TO	SUFFOCATE
ME,	AND	I	AM	AFRAID	I	WILL	NEVER	MAKE	IT.
There	is	nothing	to	make!	All	 that	 is	needed	has	happened;	it	 is	 there	from	the
very	beginning.	You	have	to	enjoy	it,	not	make	it.	You	have	to	rejoice	in	it,	not
make	 it.	 But	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 small	 span	 of	 life,	 just	 seventy	 years,	 and	 a	 great
trembling	is	bound	to	arise,	because	one-third	of	it	will	be	lost	in	sleep,	another
third	will	 be	 lost	 in	 education,	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
nonsense.	 The	 remaining	 third	 will	 be	 wasted	 in	 earning	 bread	 and	 butter,
quarreling	 with	 the	 wife,	 taking	 care	 of	 the	 children,	 nagging	 the	 husband,
fighting	with	the	neighbors,	competing	for	this	and	that.
In	fact,	if	you	sit	down	quietly	one	day	and	write	down	how	your	life	has	been
spent	up	to	now,	you	will	be	shocked!	What	have	you	been	doing?	Even	small
things	take	much	of	your	time	--	shaving	your	beard	and	moustache	every	day...
Look	at	women	standing	before	the	mirror	for	hours	--	even	the	mirrors	get	tired!
How	much	time	are	you	wasting	reading	the	same	stupid	newspapers	every	day?
It	is	the	same	story;	nothing	new	ever	happens.	There	is	no	news;	it	is	all	old	--
the	same	rape	that	has	been	happening	for	thousands	of	years...
Just	the	other	day	Sheela	brought	a	cutting	from	an	English	newspaper.	A	bishop
--	who	else?	--	had	been	sentenced	to	twelve	years'	jail	for	raping	many	women.
That	 was	 his	 only	 work	 --	 he	 was	 doing	 it	 religiously.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 an
exception;	the	bishop's	only	fault	was	that	he	was	caught,	otherwise	all	bishops
are	bound	to	do	it.	They	are	ordained	to	do	it,	disciplined	to	do	it!	Their	whole
structure	of	life	is	such	that	it	has	to	be	phony,	pseudo,	double.	He	was	living	a
double	 life,	 and	 all	 the	 rapes	 that	 he	 committed	 were	 committed	 after	 his
beautiful,	spiritual	sermons.	First	he	would	sermonize	about	the	great	things	of
life	--	and	celibacy	must	have	been	one	of	those	great	things	of	life	--	and	then,
because	 of	 his	 beautiful	 sermons,	 his	 learned	 scholarship	 and	 his	 mask	 of	 a
religious	 holy	man,	 he	was	 able	 to	 get	 hold	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	women.	And	 they
were	innocent	girls	--	fourteen,	sixteen,	eighteen	years	old.
He	had	been	doing	it	for	years,	but	when	you	do	it	behind	a	religious	screen	it	is
easier.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
21
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
A	long	report,	a	full-page	story...	I	told	Sheela,	"You	keep	it,	because	this	is	an
old	thing,	it	has	always	been	happening.	This	is	what	the	RISHIS,	the	MUNIS,
the	bishops,	the	saints	have	always	been	doing.	This	man	is	unfortunate."
One	 of	 my	 teachers,	 a	 very	 beautiful	 old	 man,	 used	 to	 say	 before	 every
examination	 in	 the	 school...	 He	 used	 to	 be	 the	 superintendent	 of	 the
examinations.	I	loved	that	old	man,	his	honesty,	his	truthfulness.	He	would	come
and	tell	all	the	students,	"I	am	not	against	it	if	you	are	copying	from	others	or	if
you	have	brought	books	with	you	or	you	have	brought	notes	with	you	--	that	has
nothing	 to	do	with	me.	My	whole	concern	 is	 that	you	should	not	be	caught.	 If
you	are	caught	 then	you	will	be	 in	difficulty,	so	make	sure...	 If	you	are	certain
you	will	not	be	caught	there	will	be	no	problem	with	me,	but	if	you	are	caught
then	I	cannot	save	you."
So	he	would	say,	"I	will	give	you	five	minutes.	Close	your	eyes	and	ponder	the
situation,	and	those	who	have	brought	books,	notes,	etcetera,	 to	cheat	with	can
give	 them	to	me	--	no	notice	will	be	 taken	of	 it.	But	once	you	decide	 to	cheat
then	don't	 be	 caught,	 then	be	 clever	 enough,	 then	be	 intelligent	 enough...	And
remember	one	thing:	that	if	you	are	intelligent	enough	you	need	not	have	those
notes!	 So	 let	me	warn	 you	 that	 having	 those	 notes	 simply	 proves	 you	 are	 not
intelligent	enough,	and	you	will	be	caught!"
And	 immediately	people	would	 start	 bringing	 their	 copies	 and	notes	 --	 and	he
would	empty	almost	everybody!
But	I	loved	that	old	man;	he	was	sincere.	He	was	saying	that	the	question	is	not
that	you	are	cheating,	the	question	is	that	you	should	not	be	caught.
What	 you	 read	 in	 the	 newspapers	 is	 that	 some	 people	 have	 been	 caught.
Everybody	 is	 doing	 the	 same	 --	 yes,	with	 little	 differences	 but	 not	many.	 The
quantity	may	be	different	but	 the	quality	 is	 the	same.	Murders	are	being	done,
rapes	are	being	done,	wars	continue,	all	kinds	of	stupid	things	go	on	and	on	for
centuries,	and	you	are	reading	all	these	things	and	wasting	your	time	--	seeing	a
movie,	seeing	a	TV	show	or	listening	to	the	same	old	scriptures.	You	have	heard
them	thousands	of	times,	you	know	the	whole	story,	but	still	you	go	on	keeping
yourself	occupied.
If	in	a	seventy-year	life	you	can	find	even	seven	minutes	which	were	just	yours
unoccupied,	 undistracted,	 relaxed,	 resting	 in	 your	 own	 being,	 that	 will	 be
enough.	But	even	those	seven	minutes	are	missing,	hence	the	hurry:	life	is	short
and	it	 is	running	by	--	and	there	is	no	other	life.	Death	will	come	and	you	will
die	 utterly	 empty,	 unfulfilled.	 And	 this	 hurry	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help,	 this	 hurry
simply	makes	things	more	difficult.	It	keeps	you	running,	certainly,	it	keeps	you
chasing	shadows,	but	while	you	are	chasing	shadows	you	are	again	wasting	your
time.
Bhagawati,	you	say:
I	FEEL	THAT	WE	NEED	TO	HURRY...
If	 you	 are	 here	with	me	 forget	 all	 about	 hurrying,	 forget	 all	 about	 time.	 Jesus
says:	There	shall	be	time	no	longer	in	my	kingdom	of	Cod.	I	say	to	you:	Drop
time,	and	this	very	moment,	here	and	now,	you	are	in	the	kingdom	of	God.	Why
wait	for	the	kingdom	of	God?	I	would	like	to	reverse	the	statement	of	Jesus.	He
says:	Enter	the	kingdom	of	God,	because	there	shall	be	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
22
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
time	no	longer.	This	is	not	right;	it	is	putting	the	horse	behind	the	cart.	How	will
you	enter	the	kingdom	of	God?	From	where	will	you	enter	the	kingdom	of	God?
In	fact,	with	the	very	idea	that	there	will	no	longer	be	any	time	in	the	kingdom	of
God,	you	will	be	in	a	deep	hurry:
"How	to	reach	quickly?	How	to	enter	the	kingdom	of	God	so	that	there	will	be
no	time,	no	problem,	no	anxiety,	and	one	will	live	in	the	eternal	now?"	But	that
"now"	becomes	a	"then":	now	becomes	a	goal.
If	you	see	the	point,	I	will	say	drop	time,	and	in	that	very	dropping	the	goose	is
out	--
because	time	is	mind.	Drop	time	and	you	ARE	in	the	kingdom	of	God.	Not	only
are	 you	 in	 the	 kingdom	of	Cod	 but	 you	 have	 always	 been	 in	 it,	 but	 time	was
creating	 a	 nightmare	 around	 you,	 a	 mind	 was	 there	 fabricating	 all	 kinds	 of
dreams.	You	were	surrounded	by	a	mist	of	your	own	creation.
You	say:
THE	COCOON	OF	SLUMBER	I	AM	EXISTING	IN	SEEMS	TO	SUFFOCATE
ME,	AND	I	AM	AFRAID	I	WILL	NEVER	MAKE	IT.
I	am	also	afraid!	If	you	try	to	make	it,	Bhagawati,	you	will	never	make	it.	Drop
the	whole	idea	of	making	it,	forget	all	about	it.	Rejoice	in	the	moment!	Can't	you
listen	 to	 the	distant	 call	of	 the	 cuckoo,	 can't	 you	 listen	 to	 the	crows,	 can't	 you
listen	 to	 the	 birds?	 They	 are	 now	 and	 here.	 No	 hurry.	 No	 yesterdays,	 no
tomorrows.
Jesus	says	to	his	disciples,	"Look	at	the	beautiful	lilies	in	the	field.	They	are	far
more	 beautiful,	 they	 have	 far	 more	 grandeur	 than	 even	 King	 Solomon	 had,
attired	in	all	his	glory."
What	is	the	secret	of	those	poor	lily	flowers?	The	secret,	Jesus	says,	is	that	they
think	not	of	the	morrow,	they	live	now.	Life	is	now,	so	there	is	no	need	to	make
it.	It	is	already	there!	You	are	in	it!
Kabir	says:	you	are	like	a	fish	which	is	thirsty	in	the	ocean.	You	are	born	in	it,
you	 are	 part	 of	 it,	 you	 live	 in	 it,	 you	 are	 a	 manifestation	 of	 it	 and	 you	 will
disappear	into	it.	You	are	just	like	a	wave	in	the	ocean.	But	the	fish	is	thirsty	in
the	ocean	because	she	is	contemplating	some	other	ocean,	some	other	life,	some
other	time,	some	other	space,	some	kingdom	of	God.
Drop	all	that	rubbish!	There	is	no	other	kingdom	of	God	than	this	moment.	And
the	trees	are	already	in	it,	the	mountains	are	already	in	it,	the	stars	are	already	in
it	 --	only	man	has	 fallen	apart,	only	man	has	gone	astray.	And	 the	 reason	why
man	 has	 gone	 astray	 is:	 his	 effort	 to	 grasp	 it,	 to	 understand	 it,	 to	 make	 a
conceptual	 system	 in	 which	 he	 can	 put	 everything	 logically.	 Existence	 is
paradoxical;	if	you	try	to	make	it	logical	you	are	never	going	to	make	it,	you	are
never	going	to	grasp	it.
Bhagawati,	you	say:
OSHO,	YOU	SAY	THE	GOOSE	 IS	OUT	ALREADY.	WHY	DOES	 IT	FEEL
SO
IMPOSSIBLE	TO	GRASP?
Because	 it	 is	 already	 out!	 Just	 see	 the	 point,	 don't	 think	 about	 it.	A	moment's
thought,	and	you	have	gone	far	away.	Don't	brood	about	it,	just	see	it.	It	is	not	a
question	of	thinking	about	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
23
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
and	 about,	 going	 in	 circles,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 great	 intellectuality,	 of
philosophical	acumen,	of	logical	efficiency.	It	is	not	a	question	of	a	trained	mind;
it	is	a	question	of	an	innocent	heart.
Just	see	it!	Wipe	your	eyes	of	all	the	tears,	wipe	your	eyes	of	all	the	dust	that	has
accumulated	on	them,	and	just	look	at	existence.	A	leaf	falling	from	the	tree	may
become	your	enlightenment.
Buddha	became	enlightened	seeing	the	last	star	in	the	morning	disappearing.	As
the	star	disappeared,	Buddha	became	enlightened.
Enlightenment	 is	not	something	 that	has	 to	be	achieved,	 it	 is	 something	 that	 is
your	very	nature.	So	don't	try	to	chase	your	own	tail.	You	must	have	seen	dogs
doing	it...	Dogs	are	very	philosophical,	Aristotelian;	they	suffer	from	Aristotle-it
is!	You	 can	 see	 them	 in	 the	winter	morning	 enjoying	 the	 sun,	 but	 they	 cannot
enjoy	because	of	the	tail.	The	tail	is	always	there;	they	would	like	to	catch	hold
of	it.	They	jump,	the	tail	jumps	away,	they	jump	harder	--	a	logical	conclusion:
you	have	not	jumped	hard	enough,	you	have	to	make	a	greater	effort.	The	greater
the	effort	they	make,	the	faster	the	tail	jumps	--	and	they	start	going	crazy.	It	is
the	dog's	own	tail;	there	is	no	need	to	chase	it.
Existence,	 enlightenment,	 truth	 --	 they	 all	 belong	 to	 you;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
grasp,	to	achieve	in	the	first	place.	And	then	it	is	achieved,	and	then	it	is	grasped.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	I	AM	A	RADICAL	REVOLUTIONARY	POLITICIAN.	HAVE	YOU
SOMETHING	TO	SAY	TO	ME?
Werner,	 you	 have	 already	 gone	 too	 far	 --	 you	 will	 not	 listen.	 Just	 to	 be	 a
politician	 is	 enough,	 but	 you	 are	 a	 revolutionary	 radical	 politician	 --	 cancer
doubled,	trebled!	Is	not	politics	enough?	Have	you	to	be	radical,	revolutionary?
But	we	always	find	beautiful	words	to	hide	ugly	realities.
No	politician	can	be	 revolutionary,	because	 the	only	 revolution	 is	 spiritual.	No
politician	 can	 be	 radical	 either;	 the	 very	word	 "radical"	means	 concerning	 the
roots.	The	politician	only	prunes	the	leaves,	he	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	roots.
Only	enlightenment	takes	you	to	the	roots,	only	meditation	takes	you	to	the	roots
of	the	problems.
Politics	 has	 existed	 always,	 politicians	 have	 existed	 always,	 but	 what	 has
happened?	The	world	remains	the	same	sorry-go-round!	In	fact,	misery	goes	on
becoming	multiplied	every	day.	All	these	revolutionaries	and	radical	politicians
have	only	proved	to	be	mischievous	--
with	good	intentions,	of	course;	but	intentions	don't	count	at	all	--	what	counts	is
consciousness.
The	politician	has	no	consciousness;	in	fact,	he	is	trying	to	avoid	his	own	inner
problems,	he	is	trying	to	escape	from	his	own	problems.	And	the	easiest	way	to
escape	from	oneself	is	to	become	concerned	about	world	problems,	economics,
politics,	 history,	 service	 to	 the	 poor,	 transformation	 of	 the	 conditions	 of	 the
society,	reformation.	All	these	are	strategies	for	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
24
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
escaping	 from	one's	own	problems	--	 subtle	strategies,	dangerous,	because	one
feels	that	one	is	doing	something	great,	while	one	is	simply	being	a	coward.
Werner,	 first	 face	 your	 own	 problems,	 encounter	 them.	 First	 try	 to	 transform
YOUR	being.
Only	a	transformed	person	can	trigger	processes	of	transformation	in	others.
You	ask	me:
OSHO,	HAVE	YOU	SOMETHING	TO	SAY	TO	ME?
Remember	two	things.	First,	the	three	rules	of	ruination.	There	are	three	ways	to
be	ruined	in	this	world:	first	is	by	sex,	second	is	by	gambling,	and	the	third	is	by
politics.	Sex	 is	 the	most	 fun,	gambling	 is	 the	most	exciting,	and	politics	 is	 the
surest.
Second,	 also	 remember	 the	 fundamental	 law	 of	 all	 revolutions:	 when	 the
revolution	comes,	things	will	be	different	--	not	better,	just	different.
Politicians	have	been	driving	the	whole	world	for	centuries	--	to	where,	to	what
end?	Is	it	not	time	enough	that	we	should	see	the	whole	stupidity	of	the	game?
At	least	we	are	aware,	fully	aware,	of	five	thousand	years	of	politics;	before	that
the	 case	 must	 have	 been	 the	 same,	 but	 after	 five	 thousand	 years	 of	 political
games	 what	 has	 happened?	 Man	 remains	 in	 the	 same	 darkness,	 in	 the	 same
misery,	 in	 the	same	hell.	Yes,	politics	goes	on	giving	him	hope	--	a	hope	for	a
better	tomorrow,	which	never	comes.	Tomorrows	never	come.
It	is	the	opium	of	the	people.	Karl	Marx	says	religion	is	the	opium	of	the	people.
It	is	true,	ninety-nine	point	nine	percent	it	is	true;	just	point	one	percent	it	is	not
true.	A	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Zarathustra,	just	these	few	people	can	be
counted	in	that	point	one	percent,	otherwise	Karl	Marx	is	ninety-nine	point	nine
percent	right,	that	religion	has	proved	the	opium	of	the	people.	It	has	kept	people
in	 a	 drugged	 state,	 almost	 in	 such	 a	 sleep	 that	 they	 can	 tolerate	 an	 intolerable
existence,	that	they	can	tolerate	all	kinds	of	slavery,	starvation,	in	the	hope	of	a
better	tomorrow.	Religions	used	to	give	this	better	tomorrow	in	the	other	world,
after	death.
People	 come	 to	 me	 and	 ask,	 "What	 will	 happen	 after	 death?"	 I	 don't	 answer
them,	 I	 ask	 them	 another	 question	 instead.	 I	 ask	 them,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 after
death,	 let	 me	 ask	 you	 one	 thing:	 what	 is	 happening	 before	 death?"	 Because
whatsoever	is	happening	before	death	will	continue	to	happen	after	death.	It	is	a
continuum:	your	consciousness	will	be	the	same	--
before	or	after	will	not	make	any	difference.	The	body	may	not	be	the	same,	the
container	 may	 change,	 but	 the	 content	 will	 remain	 the	 same.	 Whatsoever
happens	is	happening	to	the	content,	not	to	the	container.
Think	 about	 the	 goose,	 don't	 be	 bothered	 about	 the	 bottle.	 You	 may	 have	 a
different	bottle,	better-produced,	of	better	material,	more	sophisticated,	a	crystal
bottle,	a	diamond	bottle,	but	that	does	not	make	any	difference.	What	makes	the
difference	is	your	consciousness	--	the	goose.
First,	 religion	 was	 giving	 opium	 to	 the	 people	 "tomorrow,"	 "after	 death."
Millions	of	people	remained	in	that	state	of	druggedness,	under	that	chloroform	-
-	religious	chloroform.
Now	politics	is	doing	the	same.	Even	communism	has	proved	nothing	but	a	new
opium	for	the	masses	--	communism	is	a	new	kind	of	religion.	The	strategy	is	the
same:	"Tomorrow	will	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
25
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
come	the	revolution,	and	everything	will	be	all	right."	You	have	to	sacrifice	your
today	for	tomorrow,	and	the	tomorrow	never	comes.
Sixty	years	have	passed	since	the	Russian	Revolution,	and	the	tomorrow	is	still
as	far	away	as	before.	Thirty	years	have	passed	since	the	Indian	Revolution,	the
Gandhian	 Revolution,	 and	 the	 tomorrow	 remains	 as	 far	 away,	 in	 fact,	 farther
away	than	before.	The	people	who	sacrificed,	sacrificed	 in	vain;	 it	would	have
been	better	if	they	had	lived.	The	people	who	were	killed	were	really	committing
suicide,	hoping	that	they	were	doing	great	service	to	humanity.
Don't	create	more	madness	in	the	world,	Werner,	it	is	already	full	of	madness.
A	colleague	of	mine	once	worked	in	a	mental	hospital.	While	making	the	rounds
he	would	test	the	patient	by	asking,	"Why	are	you	here?"	The	response	usually
revealed	the	patient's	degree	of	reality	orientation.
One	morning	the	psychologist	received	a	response	that	rocked	him.	"I	am	here,"
replied	the	patient,	"for	the	same	reason	you	are,	doc.	I	couldn't	make	a	go	of	it
in	the	outside	world."
The	patients	and	 the	doctors,	 the	people	and	 the	politicians	are	all	 in	 the	same
boat.	They	are	all	Ayatollah	Khomaniacs!	All	kinds	of	maniacs	are	loose	in	the
world.	Werner,	if	you	drop	out	of	your	radical	revolutionary	politics	there	will	be
at	least	one	Khomaniac	less	and	that	will	be	a	great	blessing.
Question	3
OSHO,	 I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 KNOWLEDGE	 IS	 USELESS.
THEN
WHAT	IS	NEEDED	TO	GUIDE	US	TO	THE	ULTIMATE	GOAL?
Geetam,	there	is	one	good	thing	about	your	question	that	I	appreciate:	you	say	"I
have	heard	you	say."	All	the	Buddhist	scriptures	begin	in	that	way;	that	is	a	very
sincere	thing.	The	Christian,	the	Judaic,	the	Hindu,	the	Mohammedan	scriptures
don't	begin	that	way,	but	all	Buddhist	scriptures	begin	"I	have	heard	the	Master
say"	because	 it	 is	not	a	question	whether	 the	Master	has	said	 it	or	not,	"I	have
heard	 it";	 these	 are	 two	different	 things.	The	Master	may	have	 said	one	 thing,
you	may	have	heard	 something	 totally	different,	 because	between	you	 and	 the
Master	 there	 is	 a	 great	 barrier	 --	 the	 barrier	 of	 the	mind,	 prejudices,	 concepts,
preconceived	ideas.	So	what	YOU	hear	is	not	necessarily	the	thing	that	is	said.
Geetam,	this	is	good	that	you	say	"I	have	heard	you	say."	You	are	not	saying	that
"YOU
have	said	it,"	you	are	saying	"I	have	heard...	It	may	be	right,	it	may	not	be	right;
you	may	have	said	it,	you	may	not	have	said	it."
This	has	to	be	remembered	by	all	of	my	sannyasins:	whenever	you	are	quoting
me,	remember,	it	is	what	you	have	heard.	There	is	a	possibility	it	may	have	been
said,	there	is	a	possibility	it	may	not	have	been	said	at	all;	something	else	may
have	been	said.
And	that's	actually	what	has	happened.
You	say:
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
26
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	KNOWLEDGE	IS	USELESS.
No,	 I	 have	 not	 said	 that.	 Knowledge	 is	 very	 useful	 --	 wisdom	 is	 useless!
Knowledge	 is	 needed	 in	 the	marketplace,	 in	 business,	 in	 politics.	 Everywhere
knowledge	 is	 needed	 --	 in	 technology,	 in	 science	 --	 everywhere	 knowledge	 is
needed.	Knowledge	is	very	useful,	utilitarian;	wisdom	is	absolutely	useless,	but
that's	its	beauty.	It	is	not	a	commodity,	you	cannot	use	it	in	any	way;	you	cannot
sell	it,	you	cannot	purchase	it.	It	does	not	belong	to	the	utilitarian	world;	it	is	a
flowering.
What	use	is	a	rose	flower?	What	use	is	the	song	of	a	bird?	What	use	is	it?	If	you
look	around	in	existence	--	the	stars,	the	clouds,	the	mountains,	the	rivers	--	what
is	the	use	of	it	all?	It	is	all	useless.	Why	are	butterflies	so	beautiful?	Why	does
God	take	so	much	care	in	painting	their	wings?	What	is	the	point	of	it	all?
Remember,	the	outside	world	is	the	world	of	utility;	the	inside	world	is	the	world
of	significance,	not	of	utility.	The	outside	world	has	a	totally	different	dimension
--	 there	 it	 is	 needed.	You	need	 bread,	 you	 need	 butter,	 you	 need	 a	 house,	 you
need	medicine,	you	need	clothes,	shelter;	you	need	thousands	of	things.	But	the
inner	world	is	simply	of	luxury;	it	is	not	a	need,	it	is	a	joy.	It	is	a	sheer	rejoicing.
If	somebody	asks	you,	"What	is	the	use	of	love?"	the	question	is	unanswerable,
by	the	very	fact	of	its	use	of	the	word	"use."	Love	is	not	a	commodity;	the	world
can	go	on	without	love	--
it	is	already	going	on	without	it.	Everything	is	going	perfectly	well;	in	fact,	it	is
only	when	love	happens	that	some	disturbance	happens.	Hence	all	the	societies
are	against	love.
The	 world	 is	 going	 perfectly	 well	 without	 musicians.	 Who	 needs	 musicians?
They	will	not	be	able	to	drive	a	train,	to	pilot	an	airplane;	they	are	not	reliable
people.
I	used	to	travel	in	India.	One	of	my	friends	who	died	just	a	few	months	ago	was
a	lover	of	travelling.	I	used	to	go	on	the	fastest	trains	possible,	because	I	had	to
cover	 the	 whole	 country,	 and	 he	 loved	 to	 travel	 by	 passenger	 trains	 which
stopped	at	every	station,	every	small	station.
The	 journey	 that	 could	have	been	completed	within	 ten	hours	would	 take	 four
days,	five	days,	sometimes	seven	days.	And	whenever	he	was	with	me	he	would
insist...
One	time	I	agreed	and	really	it	was	a	joy,	because	he	knew	every	place	where	the
tea	was	 the	 best,	where	 the	milk	was	 the	 purest,	where	 you	 could	 get	 a	 good
sweet,	 where	 you	 could	 get	 good	 apples,	 mangoes.	 In	 those	 five	 days	 of
travelling	with	him	I	forgot	all	about	where	we	were	going	--	there	was	no	need
to	go	anywhere!	And	everybody	knew	him	--	the	porters,	the	station-masters,	the
drivers	 --	 because	he	was	 always	 travelling	on	 these	 small	 trains.	And	at	 each
station	the	train	would	stop	for	one	hour,	half	an	hour,	two	hours.
One	small	station	was	really	a	beautiful	place.	The	whole	station	was	surrounded
by	a	big	mango	grove,	hundreds	of	mango	trees.	He	took	me	out	of	the	station
and	 he	 started	 climbing	 a	 tree.	 I	 said,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?"	 He	 said,	 "The
mangoes	are	ripe!"	And	I	said,	"If	the	train	leaves	we	will	be	in	difficulty!"	He
said,	"Don't	be	worried.	Come	along	with	me."	So	I	went	along	with	him.	I	was
constantly	telling	him,	"It	is	time	now,	the	train	will	leave."	And	he	said,	"Don't
be	worried.	Do	you	see	the	man	above	us?"	One	man	was	there.	He	said,	"He	is
the	driver.	Unless	he	gets	down,	the	train	cannot	move!"
I	enjoyed	that	moment!
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
27
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Life	 can	 be	 lived	 either	with	 utility	 as	 your	 very	 style	 or	 it	 can	 be	 lived	 as	 a
playfulness.
Music,	 love,	 flowers,	 stars,	 poetry,	 painting,	 dancing,	 all	 belong	 to	 the	 inner
world.	I	am	not	against	knowledge;	when	you	are	doing	something	in	the	world
use	your	knowledge.	There,	to	use	wisdom	is	foolish;	there,	sitting	in	a	car	and
meditating	 is	 dangerous.	 There,	 you	 should	 use	 all	 your	 efficiency,	 all	 your
knowledge,	all	your	know-how;	but	you	should	not	be	confined	to	it.	You	should
not	become	obsessed	with	it,	you	should	be	able	to	go	inside.	When	the	work	is
over	you	should	be	able	to	close	the	doors	to	the	outside	world	and	return	to	the
inner.	Then	dance,	sing,	meditate,	love,	live.	One	should	be	flexible,	liquid.
This	 misunderstanding,	 Geetam,	 is	 possible	 with	 me,	 but	 you	 can	 see	 my
approach	if	you	don't	bring	your	own	mind	in.	I	am	not	telling	you	to	renounce
the	world	for	the	simple	reason	that	you	can	always	use	your	knowledge.	Sitting
in	a	cave	in	the	Himalayas	you	will	not	be	able	to	use	your	knowledge.	And	the
outside	world	 is	 as	 beautiful	 as	 the	 inside	world	 --	 if	we	 can	 have	 both,	why
choose	one?
My	whole	message	is	 that	you	can	eat	 the	cake	and	have	it	 too,	so	why	go	for
half?
Knowledge	is	useful	in	the	outside	world,	 in	the	inside	world	it	 is	a	hindrance.
And	 the	 same	 is	 true	about	 the	 inner	wisdom:	 it	 is	of	 immense	 joy	 inside,	but
don't	try	to	use	it	outside.
Both	things	have	been	done.	The	West	has	lived	through	knowledge	only,	hence
it	has	lost	the	inner	dimension,	it	has	lost	the	inner	flowering,	it	has	lost	contact
with	 its	own	being.	The	East	has	done	 the	 reverse:	 thinking	 that	knowledge	 is
useless	 it	 has	 become	 non-scientific,	 non-utilitarian,	 so	 its	 outside	 world	 has
become	shrunken.	It	is	poor,	ugly,	unscientific.
The	West	has	lost	contact	with	its	own	soul	and	the	East	has	lost	contact	with	its
own	 body.	 And	man	 is	 a	 dance	 of	 these	 two	 complementaries;	 these	 two	 are
partners	in	the	dance.
These	two	are	like	two	wings:	you	cannot	fly	into	the	sky	with	one	wing	alone,
with	one	wing	you	will	fall.	The	West	has	fallen,	the	East	has	fallen;	both	have
proved	to	be	utter	failures.
We	 need	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 human	 being	 who	 has	 both	 wings:	 the	 wings	 of
knowledge,	 science,	 technology,	 and	 the	 wings	 of	 meditation,	 enlightenment,
love,	 freedom.	When	 both	wings	 are	 functioning	 in	 a	 deep	 synchronicity,	 in	 a
deep	togetherness,	in	accord	and	harmony,	then	only	man	is	complete,	total.
Knowledge	 is	not	needed	for	 the	 inner	world.	About	 the	 inner	world,	you	ask:
THEN	WHAT	IS	NEEDED	TO	GUIDE	US	TO	THE	ULTIMATE	GOAL?
There	is	no	ultimate	goal	--	let	it	be	clear	from	the	very	beginning.	There	is	no
goal	as	such,	hence	there	is	no	question	of	there	being	an	ultimate	goal.	All	that
is,	 is	 immediate	 --	 let	 me	 repeat,	 IMMEDIATE.	 There	 is	 nothing	 ultimate
anywhere;	 the	 immediacy	 itself	 is	 the	 ultimate.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 goal;	 the
pilgrimage	itself	is	the	goal.	Each	step	is	the	goal,	each	moment	is	the	goal.
For	 that,	 knowledge	 is	not	needed	because	knowledge	 is	 a	guidance	 for	goals,
for	achievements.	For	that,	that	goal-less	immediate	life,	innocence	is	needed	not
knowledge.
Innocence,	like	a	child,	what	Dionysius	calls	a	"luminous	ignorance"	--	exactly
that	is	needed;	a	luminous	ignorance,	an	enlightened	state	of	not-knowing.
You	always	think	in	terms	of	enlightenment	as	if	it	were	the	ultimate	in	knowing
--	 you	 are	 wrong.	 Enlightenment	 is	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 not-knowing;	 it	 is
luminous	ignorance,	it	is	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
28
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
childlike.	The	 sage	 again	becomes	 a	 child.	He	 starts	 collecting	 colored	 stones,
pebbles,	 seashells	 on	 the	 sea	 beach.	 He	 starts	 collecting	 wildflowers,	 for	 no
reason	at	all,	just	for	the	sheer	joy	of	it.
The	Sunday-schoolteacher	asked	her	class	of	youngsters	if	they	could	name	any
of	 the	 Ten	 Commandments,	 and	 the	 kindergarten-aged	 boy	 stood	 up	 and
announced	proudly,	"Thou	shalt	not	omit	adultery!"
This	is	luminous	ignorance,	so	innocent:	"Thou	shalt	not	omit	adultery!"
The	pretty	young	schoolteacher	was	concerned	about	one	of	her	eleven-year-old
students.
Taking	 him	 aside	 after	 class	 one	 day,	 she	 asked,	 "Victor,	 why	 has	 your
schoolwork	been	so	poor	lately?"
"I	can't	concentrate."	replied	the	lad.	"I'm	afraid	I	have	fallen	in	love."
"Is	that	so?"	said	the	teacher,	holding	back	an	urge	to	smile.	"And	with	whom?"
"With	you,"	he	answered.
"But,	 Victor,"	 exclaimed	 the	 secretly	 pleased	 young	 lady,	 "don't	 you	 see	 how
silly	that	is?
It's	 true	 that	 I	 would	 like	 a	 husband	 of	my	 own	 someday,	 but	 I	 don't	 want	 a
child"
"Oh,	don't	worry,"	said	Victor	reassuringly,	"I'll	be	careful!"
A	 stern	 father	 was	 taking	 his	 little	 son	 Johnny	 for	 a	 walk	 in	 the	 park	 when
suddenly	a	honeybee	settled	on	a	 rock	 in	 front	of	 them.	 Just	 for	 spite,	 the	boy
smashed	it	with	a	rock,	whereupon	his	father	said,	"That	was	cruel,	and	for	being
cruel	you'll	get	no	honey	for	a	whole	year"
Later	Johnny	deliberately	stepped	on	a	butterfly.	"And	for	that,	young	man,"	said
the	 father,	 "you	 will	 get	 no	 butter	 for	 a	 year."	 When	 they	 returned	 home,
Johnny's	mother	was	 busy	 fixing	 dinner.	 Just	 as	 they	 entered	 the	 kitchen,	 she
spied	a	cockroach	and	immediately	crushed	it.	The	little	boy	looked	at	his	father
impishly	and	said,	"Shall	I	tell	her,	dad,	or	will	you?"
The	grade-school	principal	dropped	 into	 the	new	 third-grade	 teacher's	 room	 to
see	how	she	was	adjusting	to	her	first	day	of	school.	"There	IS	one	problem,"	she
said.	"That	little	boy	in	the	first	row	belongs	in	the	second	grade	but	insists	on
remaining	here,	and	he	is	so	smart	I	hate	to	send	him	back."
"He	can't	be	that	smart,"	said	the	principal.	"Ask	him	something."
The	teacher	called	the	boy	forward	and	inquired,	"What	does	a	dog	do	on	three
legs	that	a	man	does	on	two	legs	that	I	do	sitting	down?"
"Shake	hands,"	said	the	boy.
"What	has	a	cow	got	four	of	that	I	have	only	two	of?"	she	went	on.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
29
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
"Legs,"	the	boy	replied.
"What	is	a	four-letter	word	meaning	intercourse?"	she	continued.
"Talk,"	he	answered.
The	teacher	turned	to	the	principal.	"Well,	what	should	I	do?"
He	 drew	 her	 aside	 and	whispered,	 "Better	 promote	 him	 to	 the	 fourth	 grade.	 I
missed	all	three	questions!"
The	last	question
Question	4
OSHO,	WILL	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	SERIOUS	SO	THAT	I	CAN	ALSO
UNDERSTAND?
Prem	Brita,	this	is	really	a	difficult	question!	I	don't	know	what	seriousness	is.	I
can	 try,	but	 I	don't	 think	 I	will	 succeed.	 I	have	never	been	serious	 --	 the	more
serious	 I	 look,	 the	 less	 I	 am!	But	 let	 us	 try	 a	 few	 things	 for	Prem	Brita.	Who
knows?	She	may	get	something	serious	out	of	it.	People	get	all	kinds	of	things
which	I	have	not	said,	which	I	have	not	meant,	which	I	have	not	even	dreamt	of.
And	she	may	even	understand	something!
In	the	old	days	it	was	the	custom	in	the	old	Jewish	villages	that	 the	night	after
someone	got	married	the	rabbi	would	come	and	inspect	the	bedsheets	to	see	that
the	bride	had	still	been	a	virgin.
The	young	bride	knew	this	and	also	knew	she	would	not	pass	the	test.	So	she	got
up	in	the	middle	of	the	night	and	put	some	spots	of	ink	on	the	bedsheet,	but	as	it
was	dark	she	grabbed	the	wrong	bottle	and	got	green	ink.
The	next	morning,	the	rabbi	came	as	expected	and	did	his	inspection.	Suddenly
he	shouted,	"What	a	monster!	He	poked	her	through	the	gallbladder!"
No,	it	was	not	serious!	Let	us	try	again.
An	old	gentleman	and	an	old	lady	have	a	conversation.	They	talk	about	the	good
old	times	and	he	asks	her,	"Excuse	me,	did	you	ever	blush?"
"Oh	yes,	she	says,	"and	that	four	times.	The	first	time	when	I	undressed	in	front
of	my	 husband.	 The	 second	 time	when	 I	 undressed	 in	 front	 of	my	 lover.	 The
third	time	when	I	took	money	for	it.	And	the	fourth	time	when	I	paid	someone
for	it.	And	you?"
The	man	is	silent	for	a	moment	and	then	says,	"I	blushed	twice.	The	first	 time
when	I	couldn't	do	it	the	second	time.	And	the	second	time	when	I	couldn't	do	it
the	first	time."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
30
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
I	missed	 again!	 I	 am	 not	 a	 good	 archer	 because	 I	 don't	 believe	 in	 targets	 and
goals,	so	my	arrows	go	everywhere	except	the	target.
The	last	attempt:
It	 is	 the	 annual	hunting	 season	 in	heaven.	Only	 the	Holy	Ghost	 is	 reluctant	 to
participate	--
every	year	up	to	now	he	has	ended	up	with	a	shot	in	his	bum.
God	the	Father	finally	convinces	him	to	participate	and	promises	to	watch	over
him	carefully.	But	just	towards	the	end	it	happens	again:	there	is	a	shot	and	the
Holy	Ghost	jumps	around	in	agony,	hands	on	his	lower	back.
In	rage,	God	the	Father	runs	into	the	bushes	and	pulls	Joseph	out.	"Joseph!"	he
screams,
"Will	you	never	be	able	to	forgive	what	he	did	with	Mary?"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
31
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
3
No	peaks,	no	valleys
3	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 YOU	 ARE	 CALLING	 FROM	 THE	 PEAK.	 I	 AM	 LOST	 IN	 THE
ECHOING
VALLEYS.	HOW	MAY	I	COME	TO	YOU?
Swami	 Deva	 Rahaman,	 there	 are	 no	 peaks,	 no	 valleys;	 the	 whole	 idea	 is	 a
fabrication.
There	 is	no	higher,	no	 lower;	 there	 is	no	hierarchy	 in	existence	at	all.	 It	 is	 just
one	cosmic	whole,	it	is	an	organic	unity.
But	the	egoist	has	always	been	trying	to	divide	people	into	different	categories:
the	ignorant,	the	enlightened;	the	sinners,	the	saints;	the	criminals,	the	virtuous;
the	notorious,	the	famous;	the	moral,	the	immoral.	The	game	is	the	same:	divide
people	 and	 then	 try	 to	belong	 to	 the	higher	 category	 so	you	can	pretend	 to	be
"holier	than	thou."
Hence	I	want	it	 to	be	continuously	remembered	by	you	that	there	are	no	peaks
and	there	are	no	valleys;	we	all	belong	to	one	oceanic	whole.	The	smallest	blade
of	 grass	 is	 as	 significant	 as	 the	 greatest	 star.	 They	 all	 participate	 in	 the	 same
cosmic	 play,	 they	 all	 contribute	 to	 its	 beauty,	 to	 its	 joy,	 to	 its	 song,	 to	 its
celebration.	The	existence	will	be	less	even	if	a	small	blade	of	grass	is	missing;
there	will	be	something	lacking,	there	will	be	an	emptiness.
My	approach	 to	 life	 is	non-divisive.	My	sannyasins	are	not	my	followers;	 they
are	not	to	imitate	me,	they	are	not	to	become	me.
Hence,	Deva	Rahaman,	don't	use	such	language,	don't	use	such	concepts.
Don't	say:
OSHO,	 YOU	 ARE	 CALLING	 FROM	 THE	 PEAK.	 I	 AM	 LOST	 IN	 THE
ECHOING
VALLEYS.
The	peaks	and	the	valleys	are	part	of	one	whole:	the	peaks	cannot	exist	without
the	 valleys,	 the	 valleys	 cannot	 exist	 without	 the	 peaks.	 So	 who	 is	 important?
Both	 are	 interdependent.	 Life	 is	 neither	 dependent	 nor	 independent,	 life	 is	 a
continuum	of	interdependence.	It	is	beautiful	wherever	you	are,	it	is	lovely	to	be
whatsoever	you	are.
The	desire	to	be	on	the	peaks	is	a	wrong	desire	--	all	desires	as	such	are	wrong,
and	 religious	desires	 are	 far	more	wrong	 than	any	other	desires	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	other	desires	can	be	fulfilled.	Of	course,	by	their	fulfillment	you	will
not	 go	 beyond	 frustration;	 fulfilled	 or	 not	 fulfilled,	 frustration	 is	 inevitable.	 If
your	desire	is	fulfilled	you	will	be	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
32
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
frustrated	 --	 in	 fact,	 more	 so,	 because	 now	 you	 will	 see	 you	 were	 chasing	 a
shadow;	you	have	got	it	and	there	is	nothing	in	it.	If	your	desire	is	not	fulfilled
you	will	be	frustrated,	because	your	whole	life	is	wasted	and	you	have	not	been
able	to	fulfill	a	single	desire.	All	your	hopes	are	shattered.
Hopes	are	bound	to	be	shattered.	To	hope	is	to	hanker	for	hopelessness,	to	desire
is	to	breed	frustration.	But	in	the	worldly	things	at	least	there	is	a	possibility	of
succeeding,	 failing,	 attaining,	not	 attaining.	But	 in	 spiritual	matters	 there	 is	no
question	of	attainment	at	all	because	the	goose	is	out!	Nothing	can	be	done	about
it,	 it	 is	already	out.	The	moment	you	start	enjoying	your	valley	you	are	on	 the
peak	--	there	is	no	other	peak!
One	day	I	suddenly	decided	enough	is	enough.	I	dropped	the	idea	of	the	peaks
and	started	enjoying	the	valley,	and	a	miracle	I	saw:	 the	valley	disappeared.	In
fact,	from	the	very	beginning	there	had	been	no	valley,	I	was	always	on	the	peak,
but	because	I	was	searching	for	a	peak	I	could	not	see	where	I	was.
Your	eyes	are	focused	far	away,	hence	you	miss	the	obvious.	It	is	here,	and	your
mind	 is	 there,	 arrowed	 into	 the	 blue	 sky.	 And	 the	 reality	 surrounds	 you:	 it	 is
closer	than	your	very	heartbeat,	it	is	closer	than	your	breathing,	it	is	closer	than
the	circulation	of	your	blood,	it	is	closer	than	your	very	marrow,	it	is	closer	than
your	very	consciousness.	It	is	your	very	core,	your	very	being!
Rahaman,	don't	ask	for	 the	peak,	otherwise	you	will	go	on	missing	 it.	And	the
more	you	miss	 the	more	you	will	be	 in	a	vicious	circle,	because	 the	more	you
miss	the	more	you	try	to	reach,	the	more	you	miss	the	greater	the	endeavor,	the
more	you	miss	the	more	you	become	an	American:	"Try	it	again	and	again,	try
hard."	A	simple	conclusion:	if	you	are	missing	that	shows	you	are	not	trying	hard
enough,	so	put	your	total	energy	into	it.	And	you	will	still	be	missing;	there	is	no
way	 to	make	 it.	You	are	 trying	 for	 the	 impossible	and	 the	 impossible	does	not
happen;	 it	 cannot	 happen,	 it	 has	 never	 happened	 --	 it	 is	 not	 in	 the	 nature	 of
things.
Buddha	 says	 again	 and	 again:	 AIS	 DHAMMO	 SANANTANO	 --	 this	 IS	 the
nature	of	things.	Listen	to	the	nature	of	things	and	you	will	never	be	in	misery;
try	 to	 improve	 upon	 it	 and	 you	will	 live	 in	 hell.	 Hell	 is	 our	 creation,	 and	we
create	 hell	 by	 trying	 to	 do	 the	 impossible.	 Heaven	 is	 our	 nature,	 it	 is	 our
spontaneity,	it	is	where	we	always	are.
You	 have	 heard	 the	 biblical	 story	 that	 God	 threw	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 out	 of	 his
kingdom,	the	Garden	of	Eden.	It	is	basically	wrong;	for	two	reasons	it	is	wrong.
First:	the	reason	why	he	threw	them	out	is	very	despotic	--	they	had	not	obeyed
him.	 He	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 very	 ordinary	 daddy,	 too	 ordinary,	 fanatic!	 A	 small,
childish	 rebellion,	 which	 is	 part	 of	 nature,	 part	 of	 growth...	 We	 should	 be
immensely	 grateful	 to	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 because	 they	 disobeyed.	 That	 is	 the
beginning	of	humanity,	that	is	the	beginning	of	revolution,	that	is	the	beginning
of	growth,	of	maturity,	of	freedom,	of	a	sense	of	dignity.	They	revolted	against
being	animals.	All	other	animals	were	very	good	Catholics,	all	going	to	Church
every	Sunday,	reading	the	Bible,	following	the	commandments,	following	every
order	without	ever	questioning	it.	They	are	still	doing	the	same,	hence	dogs	have
remained	dogs,	eagles	have	remained	eagles,	buffaloes	have	remained	buffaloes,
donkeys,	 howsoever	 saintly	 and	holy	 they	 look,	 have	 remained	donkeys.	Only
man	has	grown;	his	growth	started	with	the	rebellion.
The	rebellion	was	simple	--	every	child	has	to	go	through	it.	A	moment	comes
when	the	child	has	 to	say	no,	he	has	 to	 insist	on	 the	no.	 In	fact,	unless	a	child
learns	to	say	no	he	will	never	be	able	to	say	yes;	his	yes	will	be	impotent	without
a	background	of	no.	A	fundamental	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
33
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
no	is	needed	as	a	blackboard;	only	on	that	fundamental	blackboard	of	no	can	he
write	a	beautiful	yes.
God	 denied	 man	 his	 fundamental	 right	 to	 say	 no,	 and	 in	 that	 very	 denial	 he
denied	man's	ultimate	growth	to	say	yes.	The	whole	story	is	fanatical,	ugly.
Secondly:	where	can	you	drive	man	out	to?	This	whole	existence	is	the	Garden
of	Eden!
There	is	no	other	place,	there	is	no	other	space,	there	is	no	other	time.	The	whole
universe	is	divine,	so	wherever	you	are	you	are	in	the	Garden	of	Eden.	The	only
thing	that	CAN	be	is:	the	idea	has	been	implanted	in	man	that	you	have	to	reach
the	Garden	 of	 Eden.	You	 are	 in	 the	Garden,	 and	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 have	 been
thrown	out	of	the	Garden	and	you	have	to	get	back	to	the	Garden	is	creating	your
trouble,	your	whole	misery,	your	whole	anguish.	Not	recognizing	where	you	are,
you	are	hankering	for	something	which	is	not	possible,	because	this	is	the	place.
THIS	VERY	BODY	THE	BUDDHA.
AND	THIS	VERY	PLACE	THE	LOTUS	PARADISE.
There	 is	no	other	Buddhahood	and	 there	 is	no	other	Lotus	Paradise.	The	word
"paradise"
comes	from	the	Persian	FIRDAUS;	FIRDAUS	means	a	garden	--	the	same	story,
the	 Garden	 of	 Eden.	 Everybody	 is	 searching	 for	 a	 paradise.	 You	 can	 give	 it
different	 names	 --	 NIRVANA,	 enlightenment,	 SAMADHI,	 kingdom	 of	 God,
ultimate	 truth	 --	 you	 can	go	on	giving	 it	 different	 names,	 but	 you	will	 still	 be
missing	 --	missing	 not	 because	 you	 have	 been	 thrown	 out	 of	 the	Garden,	 but
missing	because	you	are	in	the	Garden	and	you	have	fallen	in	a	deep	dreamlike
state.	The	dream	consists	of	your	desires	to	reach	somewhere	else,	to	the	peaks.
My	insistence	is	that	you	are	already	there.	Just	sit	silently	and	look	around,	sit
silently	and	 look	within.	You	have	never	been	anywhere	else!	AIS	DHAMMO
SANANTANO	--	this	IS
the	nature	of	things	--	you	cannot	be	anywhere	else.
A	rose	is	a	rose	is	a	rose	--	there	is	no	other	possibility	--	but	you	can	drive	a	rose
crazy.
You	can	put	the	idea	into	the	mind	of	the	rose	that	"You	have	to	be	a	rose.	What
are	you	doing	here?	Wasting	 time,	wasting	a	great	opportunity.	God	has	given
you	an	opportunity	to	be	a	rose.	What	are	you	doing	here?	Swaying	in	the	wind,
dancing	in	the	sun,	taking	life	as	fun?	Be	serious,	be	somber,	become	holy!	Read
the	Koran,	the	Gita,	the	Bible,"	and	you	will	have	driven	the	rose	crazy.
It	 is	good	 that	 roses	don't	 understand	your	 language.	 It	 is	good	 that	 they	don't
care	a	bit	about	what	you	are	saying.	It	is	good	that	they	go	on	doing	their	thing
without	 bothering	 at	 all	 about	 your	 politicians,	 your	 priests,	 your	 professors.
That's	why	they	are	so	beautiful,	so	innocent.	Your	priests	cannot	be	so	beautiful,
they	cannot	be	so	innocent;	they	are	bound	to	be	cunning.
After	checking	into	the	large	motel	complex,	the	evangelist	read	in	his	room	for
several	hours,	then	sauntered	over	to	the	bar	where	he	struck	up	a	conversation
with	the	pretty	hat	check	girl.	After	she	had	finished	working	they	shared	a	few
drinks	and	then	retired	to	his	room.	But	when	the	evangelist	began	removing	her
blouse	she	seemed	to	have	second	thoughts.	"Are	you	sure	this	is	all	right?"	she
asked.	"I	mean,	you	are	a	holy	man."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
34
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
"My	dear,	he	replied,	"it	is	written	in	the	Bible."
She	took	him	at	his	word,	and	the	two	spent	a	very	pleasant	night	together.	The
next	morning,	however,	as	the	girl	was	preparing	to	leave,	she	said,	"You	know,	I
don't	remember	the	part	of	the	Bible	you	mentioned	last	night.	Could	you	show
it	to	me?"
In	 response,	 the	 evangelist	 took	 the	Gideon	Bible	 from	 the	nightstand,	opened
the	cover	and	pointed	to	 the	flyleaf	on	which	someone	had	inscribed,	"The	hat
check	girl	screws."
These	 are	your	priests,	 your	 evangelists,	 your	great	 spiritual	 leaders!	They	 are
neurotic	and	they	are	driving	the	whole	of	humanity	neurotic.	Avoid	all	spiritual
nonsense	--	and	spiritual	nonsense	is	REAL	nonsense;	all	other	nonsense	is	very
ordinary,	 very	 mundane.	 In	 fact,	 with	 mundane	 matters	 you	 cannot	 be	 too
nonsensical	--	reality	will	prevent	you	--	but	with	religious	nonsense	there	are	no
checks.	There	is	no	reality,	no	criterion,	you	cannot	judge,	so	you	can	fly	off	into
all	kinds	of	esoteric	bullshit.
And	 your	 priests	 are	 such	 bullshitters,	 and	 for	 centuries	 they	 have	 been
bullshitting	on	you!
You	are	crawling	in	holy	cowdung!	It	is	time	to	get	out	of	it.
Deva	Rahaman,	 the	way	you	 are	 is	 the	only	way	you	 can	be.	Accept	 it	 --	 not
only	accept	it	but	rejoice	in	it,	love	it,	and	the	peak	will	start	opening	up	within
your	 very	 heart,	 and	 suddenly	 you	 will	 find	 you	 are	 awake	 in	 the	 Garden	 of
Eden,	immediately.	It	is	not	a	question	of	going	anywhere,	just	of	being	here.
You	ask	me:
HOW	MAY	I	COME	TO	YOU?
There	is	no	need.	You	have	to	come	to	YOU,	not	to	me.	I	am	not	here	to	create	a
new	 kind	 of	 neurosis.	 There	 are	 enough	 alternatives	 available!	 Christianity,
Hinduism,	 Mohammedanism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism...	 three	 hundred	 religions	 in
the	world.	You	can	choose	your	own	kind	of	neurosis;	they	come	in	all	shapes,	in
all	sizes.	You	can	easily	pick	any	kind	of	fanaticism,	neurosis,	and	that	will	keep
you	engaged	your	whole	life	--	but	simply	engaged.
It	will	not	give	you	time	or	space	to	dance,	to	sing,	to	celebrate.
All	kinds	of	goals	basically	create	deep	down	in	you	a	split,	a	hypocrisy.	You	are
that	 which	 you	 are	 and	 you	 start	 trying	 to	 be	 that	 which	 you	 are	 not.	 In	 the
beginning	 it	 is	 only	 an	 effort	 to	be	 that	which	you	are	not;	 slowly	 slowly	you
start	 pretending	 too	 that	 you	 are	 becoming	 that	which	you	 are	 not,	 because	 to
encounter	 failure	continuously	 is	very	humiliating.	At	 least	you	can	pretend	 to
others,	 you	 can	wear	masks,	 you	 can	 create	 a	 certain	 persona,	 a	 personality,	 a
garb,	a	facade,	and	you	can	start	living	behind	that	facade.	And	people	will	look
only	at	your	mask	and	they	will	believe	it,	and	once	they	start	believing	it	--
you	will	start	believing	it	--	because	they	are	believing	that	you	are	holy,	that	you
are	saintly,	that	you	are	this	and	you	are	that.
It	is	a	very	strange	game:	you	start	it,	and	soon	you	will	be	caught	in	it	yourself	-
-	in	your	own	lie!	And	once	you	are	caught	in	your	own	lie	you	will	try	to	hide
the	truth,	to	evade	the	truth,	to	repress	the	truth;	you	will	begin	investing	more
and	more	in	your	lie.	You	may	be	a	marigold	and	you	may	invest	your	whole	life
in	being	a	rose.	You	may	be	a	rose	and	you	may	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
35
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
invest	your	whole	 life	 in	being	a	diamond	 --	which	you	cannot	be.	This	 is	 the
sheer	stupidity	of	the	experience	humanity	has	been	living	with	for	centuries.
Hence	what	I	say	hurts.	It	is	not	a	question	of	small	dimensions,	it	is	a	question
of	immense	dimensions.	For	thousands	of	years	man	has	lived	a	hypocritical	life,
utterly	 false,	 pseudo,	 and	 now	 to	 shatter	 his	 whole	 investment,	 to	 shatter	 his
whole	mind,	certainly	hurts.
Hence	 everybody	 is	 going	 to	 be	 against	me	 except	 just	 a	 few	 people	who	 are
intelligent	enough	to	wake	up.
"My	so-called	liberal	mother	is	really	such	a	prude,"	the	high-school	cheerleader
sadly	told	her	locker	partner.	"She	said	that	I	could	only	pet	with	my	dates	if	they
didn't	touch	me	below	the	waist."
"Oh,	 that's	 too	bad,"	her	schoolmate	commiserated.	"What	do	you	intend	to	do
about	it?"
"Well,"	the	cheerleader	giggled,	"the	first	thing	I'm	going	to	do	is	learn	to	stand
on	my	head."
That's	what	your	religious	people	have	been	doing:	SIRSHASANA	--	the	art,	the
yoga	of	standing	on	your	head.	It	certainly	fulfills	something:	the	ego.	Whenever
you	can	do	something	unnatural	or	at	least	pretend	that	you	are	doing	it,	it	fulfills
the	ego.	Nature	cannot	fulfill	the	ego.	If	you	eat	and	enjoy	eating,	what	is	there
to	brag	about?	If	you	make	love	and	you	enjoy	it,	what	is	 there	to	brag	about?
But	 if	you	become	a	celibate	 then	there	 is	something	to	brag	about,	 if	you	fast
then	 you	 have	 something	which	 nobody	 else	 has.	 Then	 you	 can	 feel	 superior,
higher,	 greater,	 bigger,	 chosen.	 The	 unnatural	 has	 an	 attraction,	 although	 it
destroys	your	whole	life,	but	the	attraction	is	in	the	ego.	And	unless	we	drop	this
whole	game	of	the	ego,	hypocrisy	cannot	disappear	from	the	world.
Rabbi	Goldstein	had	 just	moved	 into	his	 apartment	 and	decided	he	 should	get
acquainted	with	his	across-the-hall	neighbor.	When	the	door	was	opened,	he	was
pleasantly	surprised	to	be	confronted	by	a	young	damsel	considerably	more	than
passing	fair	and	considerably	less	than	fully	clad.
Though	 justifiably	 flustered	 by	 this	 smiling	 apparition,	 the	 rabbi	 nevertheless
managed	 a	 remark	 singularly	 appropriate	 to	 the	 occasion:	 "Hi,	 I'm	 your	 new
sugar	across	the	hall	--	can	I	borrow	a	cup	of	neighbor?"
You	can	try	to	be	unnatural,	but	your	nature	will	assert	itself	in	a	thousand	and
one	ways;	 it	will	 come	up	again	and	again.	You	will	have	 to	hush	 it,	you	will
have	to	repress	it.
It	was	eight	a.m.	at	a	Las	Vegas	gambling	palace	and	two	lone	bettors	were	still
standing	 by	 a	 dice	 table	 awaiting	 further	 competition,	 when	 a	 lusciously
endowed	brunette	attired	in	a	suit	happened	by.
"Although	it's	quite	early	in	the	day,"	she	announced,	"I	feel	lucky	this	morning.
I'd	like	to	roll	the	dice	once	for	twenty	thousand	dollars.	Would	the	two	of	you
care	to	take	me	up	on	the	wager?"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
36
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
"Sure,	lady,"	answered	one	of	the	men,	"we'll	take	your	action."
"I	hope	you	gentlemen	won't	mind,"	she	then	said,	"but	the	only	way	I	can	get
lucky	is	to	roll	the	dice	without	my	panties	on."
So	saying,	the	lissome	lovely	proceeded	to	remove	her	slacks	and	panties.	With	a
shout	of
"Mamma	needs	a	new	pair	of	pants!"	she	rolled	the	dice,	gave	a	squeal	of	delight
and	yelled,
"I	win!"	She	then	picked	up	her	money,	her	slacks	and	her	underwear	and	made
a	hasty	exit	from	the	room.
The	two	men	exchanged	double	takes,	and	one	of	them	blurted	out,	"Hey,	what
did	she	roll	anyway?"
"How	 the	 hell	 should	 I	 know?"	 snapped	 the	 other,	 "I	 thought	 YOU	 were
watching	the	dice!"
We	have	created	such	a	strange	humanity,	and	the	whole	rationale	of	this	whole
mad	earth,	this	mad	humanity,	is	religious,	spiritual.	Search	for	the	truth,	search
for	God,	search	for	the	peaks,	and	you	have	lost	yourself	in	the	search.
There	 is	 only	 one	 search	 --	 to	 find	 yourself	 --	 and	 for	 that	 you	 need	 not	 go
anywhere	else.
For	that	you	have	to	withdraw	from	all	your	desires,	ambitions,	goals.	You	have
to	come	back	home.
Rahaman,	you	are	not	to	become	me.	I	am	not	your	enemy	--	I	cannot	tell	you	to
become	me.	If	you	try	to	become	me	you	will	only	be	a	carbon	copy,	a	hypocrite,
you	will	only	be	an	imitation.
Those	who	have	gathered	around	me	are	not	my	followers,	not	my	imitators	--
just	fellow	companions,	fellow	celebrants,	dance	partners!	Existence	to	me	is	a
carnival,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 festival.	 It	 is	 for	 those	who	 know	how	 to	 dance.	And	 the
dance	need	not	wait	for	tomorrow	--
tomorrow	never	comes	--	the	dance	has	to	be	now,	here,	this	very	moment.	This
very	silence	has	to	become	the	dance!
So	 don't	 hanker	 for	 any	 peaks,	 just	 be	 where	 you	 are	 totally,	 utterly,	 and	 the
goose	is	out!
Hanker	for	the	peaks,	and	the	goose	is	in	the	bottle.	Those	peaks	are	the	bottle,
those	 goals	 are	 the	 bottle.	 They	 keep	 you	 encapsulated,	 they	 keep	 you
imprisoned.	The	future	is	your	bondage	and	the	present	is	your	freedom.
Here	 I	 differ	 totally	 from	 Jesus,	 from	Buddha,	 from	Krishna,	 from	Mahavira,
from	everybody	 else.	Knowingly,	 unknowingly,	 they	 have	 created	 a	 pattern	 of
imitation	 for	 humanity.	 I	want	 to	 destroy	 this	whole	 pattern,	 this	whole	 status
quo.	I	want	you	to	be	just	yourself.	Whatsoever	you	are,	you	are	beautiful	as	you
are;	you	need	not	be	somebody	else	to	be	beautiful.
That's	the	only	way	to	enjoy,	but	it	is	up	to	you.	If	you	want	to	suffer...	and	there
are	people	who	love	suffering,	they	cannot	live	without	suffering;	their	only	joy
is	in	suffering	and	more	suffering.	The	more	they	suffer	the	more	they	feel	that
they	are	doing	something	great.
Then	it	is	up	to	you;	then	don't	make	any	fuss	about	it,	then	go	to	the	peaks.	But
the	peaks	won't	satisfy	you	because	from	those	peaks	you	will	again	be	looking
far	ahead	for	further	peaks.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
37
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
The	headmistress	of	a	girls'	boarding	school	was	abruptly	awakened	one	night	by
one	of	her	students,	a	rather	mature-looking	sixteen-year-old.	"Miss	Forbes,"	she
cried,	"I've	just	been	raped!"
"Now,	be	calm,	Melissa,"	the	headmistress	told	her	firmly.	"The	first	thing	you
must	do	is	to	go	to	the	refrigerator	and	eat	half	a	lemon."
"Half	 a	 lemon?"	 asked	 the	 surprised	 student.	 "Will	 that	 keep	me	 from	 getting
pregnant?"
"No,"	admitted	the	headmistress,	"but	it	WILL	get	rid	of	that	silly	grin."
That's	what	religious	people	have	been	doing:	removing	all	your	smiles,	making
you	look	as	sad	as	possible,	as	long-faced	as	possible.
Christians	say	Jesus	never	 laughed.	 If	 it	 is	 true,	 then	whatsoever	he	has	said	 is
wrong.	 If	what	 he	 has	 said	 is	 right	 then	 this	 cannot	 be	 true,	 because	 the	man
continuously	says,
"Rejoice!	 I	 say	 to	 you	 again	 and	 again	 rejoice!"	And	Christians	 say	 he	 never
laughed!
Laughter	seems	to	be	mundane	for	them,	laughter	seems	to	be	worldly;	it	is	not
good	for	holy	people.	Holy	people	have	to	be	continuously	sad,	hence	they	have
created	a	long	tradition	of	sad,	ill,	sick,	pathological	people	whom	they	worship.
The	more	pathological	you	look	the	more	you	will	be	worshipped.	The	more	you
are	a	sadist	and	a	masochist	the	more	you	will	be	worshipped.	Torture	yourself
and	 teach	 others	 to	 torture	 themselves	 --	 they	 call	 it	 asceticism	 --	 become	 a
monk,	renounce	the	world...
The	word	"monk"	means	one	who	lives	alone,	escapes	from	people.	And	in	fact
it	is	relationship	that	is	the	opportunity	to	grow,	it	is	love	that	is	a	challenge	to
growth,	 it	 is	 friendship	 that	 brings	 you	 to	 your	 real	 flavor.	 It	 is	 life	 in	 all	 its
adventures,	challenges,	that	helps	you	to	become	mature,	integrated.
Monks	remain	retarded,	they	remain	stupid.	They	are	bound	to	remain	stupid	--
they	 have	 been	 taken	 out	 of	 the	 soil	 of	 life.	At	 the	most	 they	 are	 greenhouse
plants:	bring	them	into	the	world	and	they	will	immediately	shrink	and	die.	They
are	 very	 afraid	 people,	 continuously	 trembling,	 afraid	 of	 hell,	 which	 does	 not
exist,	greedy	 for	heaven,	which	does	not	exist	 --	 and	between	hell	 and	heaven
missing	everything	that	does	exist.
The	inexperienced	young	man	had	heard	that	a	good	way	to	arouse	sexual	desire
in	 a	 girl	 who	 proved	 impervious	 to	 the	 more	 usual	 forms	 of	 wooing	 was	 to
forthrightly	 place	 her	 hand	 on	 his	 organ.	Having	 parked	with	 a	 date	 for	more
than	an	hour	in	the	local	lovers'	lane	with	nothing	to	show	for	it	but	some	sisterly
kisses,	he	decided	to	try	this	new	technique.	The	response	was	instantaneous:	the
girl	 berated	 him	 with	 the	 longest	 stream	 of	 invectives	 he	 had	 ever	 heard.
Stunned,	he	tried	to	reply,	but	she	refused	to	listen,	insisting	instead	that	he	take
her	home	at	once.
As	he	pulled	up	 in	front	of	her	house,	she	again	started	shouting	 imprecations.
Finally	 out	 of	 breath,	 she	 demanded,	 "Well,	 do	 you	 have	 anything	 to	 say	 for
yourself?"
"Yes,	I	have,"	was	his	pained	reply.	"Please	let	go."
The	second	question
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
38
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
Question	2
OSHO,	I	AM	A	HOMOSEXUAL	CATHOLIC	AND	BADLY	SUFFER	FROM
STUTTERING.	CAN	YOU	HELP	ME	OUT	OF	MY	MESS?
Gyaneshwar,	the	first	thing	you	should	get	out	of	is	your	Catholicism;	that	is	the
real	mess.
Homosexuality	is	not	such	a	big	problem,	it	is	not	a	problem	at	all,	in	fact.	It	is
part	of	human	freedom.	There	is	nothing	wrong	if	two	persons	choose	a	certain
style	of	sexual	relationship;	 it	should	be	nobody's	business.	But	 the	priests	and
the	politicians	are	poking	their	noses	into	everything!	They	create	guilt	in	you	--
absolutely	unnecessary.
If	 two	 men	 are	 in	 love,	 what	 is	 wrong	 in	 it?	 What	 harm	 are	 they	 doing	 to
anybody?	In	fact,	 they	look	happier	 than	the	heterosexuals;	 that's	why	they	are
called	"gay."	This	is	strange:	I	never	see	lesbians	looking	gay	--	 they	look	sad,
they	 look	 very	 serious	 --	 but	 homosexuals	 always	 look	 very	 gay,	 very	 sweet,
really	honey.
I	have	been	wondering	what	is	the	matter,	why	are	lesbians	not	so	happy?	Maybe
they	cannot	enjoy	nagging,	which	has	been	an	eternal	joy	for	the	woman.	In	fact,
without	their	nagging	I	don't	think	anybody	would	ever	have	become	religious.
All	 your	 saints	 are	 the	 by-product	 of	 nagging.	 All	 your	 saints	 should	 be
immensely	grateful	 to	women:	 they	have	driven	 them	to	be	spiritual!	They	did
not	 leave	 any	 possibility	 for	 them	 IN	 the	 world;	 they	 had	 to	 escape	 to	 the
monasteries.	They	say	they	are	going	in	search	of	God;	in	fact,	they	are	simply
going	away	from	the	wife.	They	were	cowards.
Lesbians	don't	look	very	happy.	Something	is	missing,	and	that	something	seems
to	be	they	cannot	torture	each	other.	They	understand	each	other	perfectly	well,
and	because	they	understand	each	other	very	well	there	is	no	mystery	left.
Man	lives	in	the	head,	the	woman	lives	in	the	heart.	The	heart	can	rejoice	only
when	 there	 is	 something	very	mysterious,	 something	 like	a	koan:	 the	goose	 in
the	bottle.	Neither	the	bottle	has	to	be	broken	nor	the	goose	has	to	be	killed,	and
it	 has	 to	 be	 taken	 out	 too.	 The	 heart	 enjoys	 the	 mysterious;	 the	 head	 is	 not
interested	in	the	mysterious,	it	is	interested	in	the	puzzling,	in	the	riddling.	Any
riddle,	 any	 puzzle,	 and	 the	 head	 is	 interested.	 The	 approach	 of	 the	 head	 is
logical.
To	a	man	the	woman	is	mysterious;	to	connect	with	the	woman	he	has	to	come
to	 his	 heart,	 and	 he	 lives	 in	 the	 head.	 Hence	 the	 woman	 always	 remains	 a
trouble.	 He	 cannot	 understand	 her,	 he	 cannot	 explain	 what	 is	 happening,	 he
cannot	 explain	 it	 away	 either.	 He	 has	 to	 live	 with	 a	 mystery,	 and	 that	 is	 a
constant	pain	in	his	neck;	it	is	beyond	his	grasp.
But	 with	 a	 man	 things	 are	 simple:	 both	 are	 logical.	 They	 understand	 the
language,	 they	 understand	 logic,	 they	 understand	mathematics,	 calculation.	At
the	most	the	man	is	just	a	new	question	to	be	solved	--	not	a	mystery	to	be	lived
but	 a	 question	 to	 be	 solved;	 a	 problem	 which	 can	 be	 solved,	 which	 is	 not
impossible	 to	 solve.	 That	 keeps	 them	 interested,	 that	 keeps	 them	 intrigued.
Hence	I	see	homosexuals	looking	gay.	Lesbians	look	very	sad.
And	one	more	thing	happens:	homosexuals	become	more	feminine	and	they	start
having	a	certain	beauty,	a	certain	"niceness"	about	them,	a	certain	roundness,	a
grace.	 The	 lesbian	 becomes	 manly,	 she	 starts	 losing	 her	 feminine	 grace;	 she
becomes	masculine,	aggressive,	hard.	Hence,	Gyaneshwar,	if	you	were	a	woman
it	would	have	been	a	problem	and	I	would	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
39
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
have	helped	you	to	come	out	of	it.	But	you	are	a	man.	Why	bother?	Why	make
much	out	of	a	simple	thing?	If	you	are	enjoying	a	relationship	with	a	man,	enjoy
it!
The	Christian	God	himself	seems	to	be	homosexual	--	the	whole	trinity	consists
of	three	men.	How	they	are	managing	it	nobody	knows	--	not	a	single	woman!
Only	 the	Holy	Ghost	 is	 a	 little	 suspect	 --	maybe	 the	Holy	Ghost	 is	 bisexual?
Ghosts	can	do	any	kind	of	thing!
Otherwise	the	Father	and	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Ghost	--	what	kind	of	trinity	is
this?	It	is	very	homosexual!	They	have	not	allowed	a	single	woman	to	be	in	it,
just	to	keep	out	of	trouble.
One	woman	would	 have	 destroyed	 the	whole	 trinity;	 it	would	 have	 become	 a
real	triangle!
So	homosexuality	is	not	a	problem.	We	should	start	looking	at	real	problems	and
should	not	be	concerned	about	unreal	problems.	There	are	 real	problems	 to	be
solved.	And	this	is	a	trick	of	the	human	mind:	to	create	unreal	problems	so	that
you	become	occupied	with	them	while	real	problems	go	on	growing.	And	this	is
an	old	strategy:	politicians,	priests,	so-called	religious	leaders	go	on	giving	you
pseudo	problems	to	solve	so	that	you	become	occupied	with	the	pseudo.
The	 problem	 in	 itself	 is	meaningless,	 the	 problem	 is	 not	 a	 problem	 at	 all,	 but
how	 much	 fuss	 has	 gone	 on	 down	 the	 ages	 about	 homosexuality!	 There	 are
countries	where	people	are	still	killed	for	homosexual	acts,	murdered,	sentenced
to	 jail	 for	 their	whole	 lives.	Strange	world!	This	 is	 a	 twentieth-century	world?
Homosexuality	is	not	a	problem	at	all;	there	are	thousands	of	real	problems	to	be
solved.	But	man	has	to	be	kept	engaged	with	toys.
My	effort	is	to	withdraw	all	your	attention	from	toys	so	that	you	can	focus	on	the
real	problems	of	 life;	and	if	you	focus	on	the	real	problems	of	 life	 they	can	be
solved.	Now,	 I	 don't	 see	how	homosexuality	becomes	 a	problem.	How	does	 it
become	a	problem?	Why	 should	 it	 be	of	 concern	 to	 anybody?	A	 love	 affair	 is
two	individuals'	private	concern;	it	is	THEIR
intimacy,	it	is	not	a	social	phenomenon.
And,	in	fact,	it	will	help	the	world	population	if	more	people	turned	homosexual.
It	will	be	good,	very	good	for	the	world:	less	people	will	be	born,	the	earth	will
be	 less	 burdened,	 there	will	 be	 less	 poverty.	 Of	 course,	 less	 orphans	 and	 less
Mother	 Teresas!	 There	 will	 be	 less	 need	 for	 contraceptives,	 birth	 control
methods,	sterilization,	and	of	course	the	whole	business	of	the	Polack	Pope	will
go	out	of	his	hands.	That	is	his	whole	business!	For	one	year	continuously	he	has
been	talking	against	contraceptives,	against	birth	control,	sterilization,	abortion.
Homosexuality	can	solve	all	these	problems	simply!
So	 I	 don't	 see	 there	 is	 much	 of	 a	 problem	 in	 it.	 The	 only	 problem	 is	 your
Catholicism.
Rodney,	the	eldest	son	of	a	respectable	Boston	family,	announced	to	his	shocked
father	that	he	intended	to	live	with	his	swishy	boyfriend	on	Beacon	Hill.
"Damn	 it,	 Rodney,"	 the	 parent	 responded,	 "our	 family	 came	 over	 with	 John
Winthrop,	and	we've	never	had	a	scandal	such	as	this."
"I	can't	help	it,	father,	I	love	him."
"But	for	God's	sake,	son,	he's	Catholic!"
That	is	the	true	problem!	Come	out	of	your	Catholicism.	And	when	I	say	come
out	of	your	Catholicism,	I	mean	come	out	of	all	kinds	of	stupid	ideologies	and
start	living	life	as	if	you	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
40
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
are	Adam	and	Eve	 --	 the	 first	man	on	 the	 earth,	 the	 first	woman	on	 the	 earth.
Start	afresh,	from	scratch.
And	as	 far	as	your	stuttering	 is	concerned,	what	 is	wrong	 in	 it?	 It	may	 just	be
because	 you	 have	 made	 such	 a	 problem	 out	 of	 homosexuality	 that	 you	 are
stuttering.	Stuttering	--	I	have	watched	it	in	many	people	--	comes	in	a	state	of
stress,	tension.
When	 I	was	a	 student	 in	 the	university,	my	neighbor...	 a	young	man,	beautiful
man,	healthy,	in	every	way	intelligent,	and	I	had	never	seen	him	stuttering.	Once
his	father	visited	him	and	he	immediately	started	stuttering	--	before	the	father.	I
could	 not	 believe	 what	 was	 happening.	 The	 moment	 the	 father	 left	 he	 was
perfectly	okay.	I	asked	him.
He	 said,	 "This	 is	 a	 problem.	When	 I	 go	 back	 home,	 I	 cannot	 avoid	 stuttering
before	my	father	and	mother.	It	happens...	the	more	I	try	to	avoid	it	the	more	it
happens.	Even	when	my	 father's	 letter	comes	and	 I	 start	 reading	 it,	 I	 suddenly
feel	a	trembling.	I	cannot	read	my	father's	letter	without	stuttering.	Otherwise	I
am	perfectly	okay."
So	I	said	to	him,	"So	it	is	not	a	question	of	stuttering;	there	is	some	stress,	some
tension.
The	father	is	heavy	on	you	and	he	regresses	you	back	towards	your	childhood,
back	to	your	old	fears,	and	those	fears	start	overcoming	your	intelligence."
I	 said	 to	 him,	 "Do	 one	 thing:	 next	 time	 your	 father	 comes,	 try	 to	 stutter	with
every	word!"
He	said,	"How	is	that	going	to	help?"
I	said,	"You	try.	Don't	try	not	to	stutter,	on	the	contrary	try	to	stutter.	Make	every
effort	that	not	a	single	word	should	come	out	without	stuttering!"
He	said,	"What	are	you	suggesting?	I	have	been	doing	just	the	opposite	and	have
failed	utterly,	and	your	method	seems	to	be	such	that	it	is	bound	to	create	more
troubles	for	me!"
I	said,	"Give	it	a	try."
And	the	father	came,	and	I	was	there,	and	he	tried	it	--	and	he	could	not	stutter!
There	 are	 a	 few	 things	 which	 happen	 only	 if	 you	 try;	 there	 are	 a	 few	 things
which	happen	only	if	you	DON'T	try,	because	the	very	effort	comes	out	of	fear
and	if	fear	is	the	cause	then	the	effort	cannot	help.
Hypnotherapists	call	it	"the	law	of	the	reverse	effect."
If	 you	 are	 learning	 to	 ride	 a	 bicycle	 you	 may	 be	 on	 a	 sixty-foot-wide	 road,
absolutely	empty,	nobody	on	the	road,	and	then	you	see	a	milestone	by	the	side
of	the	road,	and	suddenly	your	cycle	starts	moving	towards	that	milestone	for	no
reason	at	all.	You	start	feeling	afraid,	you	try	to	avoid	the	milestone.	Now,	on	a
sixty-foot-wide	 road	 even	 a	 blind	 man	 has	 only	 a	 rare	 chance	 of	 hitting	 the
milestone,	but	you	will	try	hard,	and	the	more	you	try	the	more	you	will	become
focused.	 Now	 the	 whole	 road	 disappears,	 there	 is	 only	 that	 milestone	 just
standing	there	like	Hanumanji,	the	monkey	god,	giggling	at	you,	making	faces	at
you,	attracting	you	like	a	magnetic	force.	And	you	are	doing	every	act	that	you
can	 do	 to	 avoid	 it,	 but	 you	 are	 going...	 you	 know	 you	 are	 going.	 It	 is
unavoidable!	The	more	unavoidable	you	feel	it	is,	the	more	energy	you	put	into
it.	You	 become	 tense.	 The	whole	world	 has	 shrunken	 to	Hanumanji...	 and	 the
crash!
This	is	one	of	the	fundamental	laws	of	life.	Homosexuality	may	be	the	cause,	but
it	is	not	homosexuality	really	but	your	attitude	to	it,	your	approach	to	it.	You	are
making	a	problem	out	of	it;	then	there	will	be	trouble.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
41
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
My	suggestion,	Gyaneshwar,	is:	stutter	beautifully	--	make	stuttering	songs!	You
will	enjoy,	others	will	enjoy,	and	that's	what	we	are	here	for.
"Have	 faith	 and	 ye	 shall	 be	 healed!"	 intoned	 the	 evangelist	 at	 the	 revival
meeting.	A	woman	on	crutches	and	a	man	came	forward.	The	evangelist	asked,
"What	is	your	name,	my	good	woman?"
"I'm	 Mrs.	 Smith,"	 she	 answered,	 "and	 I	 haven't	 been	 able	 to	 walk	 without
crutches	for	twenty	years."
"Well,	Mrs.	Smith,"	he	said,	"go	behind	that	screen	and	pray."
Turning	to	the	man,	he	asked,	"What	is	your	name?"
"My	 name	 ith	 Thamuelth,"	 he	 answered,	 "and	 I	 have	 alwayth	 thpoken	with	 a
lithp."
"All	 right,	Mr.	Samuels,"	 the	evangelist	 said,	"go	behind	 that	 screen	with	Mrs.
Smith	and	pray."
After	several	minutes	had	passed,	the	revivalist	announced,	"I	think	the	time	has
come.
Witness	these	miracles.	Mrs.	Smith,	throw	your	left	crutch	over	the	screen."	The
audience	gasped	as	it	sailed	over.	"Mrs.	Smith,	throw	your	right	crutch	over	the
screen."	The	crowd	cheered	as	the	second	crutch	appeared.
Encouraged,	the	evangelist	commanded,	"Mr.	Samuels,	say	something	in	a	loud,
clear	voice,	so	we	can	all	hear	you."
Samuels	answered,	"Mithuth	Sthmith	jutht	fell	on	her	ath!"
So	what	 is	wrong	 in	 it?	 It	 is	 a	 far	 greater	miracle!	 So	 don't	 be	worried	 about
unnecessary	things.	Stutter	joyously,	enjoy	it,	and	there	is	a	possibility	that	you
may	stop	stuttering	--
beware	of	it!	If	you	don't	want	to	stop	it	then	don't	listen	to	me,	you	just	go	on
trying	not	to	stutter.
My	 suggestion	 is	 stutter,	 and	 don't	 be	 a	 miser.	 Fill	 the	 whole	 place	 with
stuttering!
Whomsoever	you	meet,	stutter	--	don't	miss	an	opportunity.	Even	the	words	that
you	can	speak	well	don't	speak	well,	stutter!	And	you	may	be	surprised	that	once
you	relax,	once	you	start	enjoying,	once	 the	 tension	 is	dropped,	stuttering	may
disappear.	If	it	disappears,	good;	if	it	does	not	disappear	there	is	no	harm	in	it.	It
is	innocent!
Take	 life	 as	easily	as	possible.	But	people	don't	understand	me.	 I	 say	 to	 them,
"Life	 is	 a	mystery.	 It	 is	 not	 to	 be	 solved	 but	 to	 be	 lived."	And	 somebody	 has
asked	me,	 "Osho,	 when	 you	 said	 that,	 I	 heard,	 "Life	 is	 a	MISERY,	 not	 to	 be
solved	but	to	be	lived."	That	is	up	to	you.	To	me	it	is	a	mystery,	not	to	be	solved
but	to	be	lived,	but	you	can	hear	it	as	"misery."
Don't	make	unnecessary	problems	 for	 yourself,	 so	 that	 your	whole	 energy	 can
become	focused	on	the	essential	problem.	And	the	essential	problem	is	only	one:
Know	thyself.
The	last	question
Question	3
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
42
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
OSHO,	I	AM	IMMENSELY	INTERESTED	IN	GOING	TO	THE	MOON.	THIS
LONGING	 HAS	 ALWAYS	 HAUNTED	 ME	 AS	 LONG	 AS	 I	 CAN
REMEMBER.	CAN
YOU	TELL	ME	ONE	OR	TWO	JOKES	ABOUT	THE	MOON?
Gandharva,	 perhaps	 that's	 why	 you	 have	 come	 to	 me	 --	 my	 name	means	 the
moon.	 You	 are	 moonstruck;	 that	 means	 you	 are	 a	 lunatic!	 "Lunatic"	 simply
means	 struck	 by	 the	moon...	 and	 this	 is	 a	 gathering	 of	mad	 people.	You	 have
come	to	the	moon!	Your	long-cherished	desire	is	fulfilled...	the	goose	is	out!
But	I	have	two	jokes	for	you:
Shortly	 after	 his	 spaceship	 landed	 on	 the	 moon,	 the	 astronaut	 debarked	 and
began	exploring	the	strange	new	terrain.	He	had	walked	for	only	fifteen	minutes
when	he	came	upon	a	lovely	young	moon	girl	who	was	busily	stirring	an	empty
pot	with	a	stick.
"Hi,"	 he	 said,	 introducing	 himself,	 "I'm	 an	 astronaut	 here	 to	 discover	 things
about	the	moon."
The	moon	girl	stopped	stirring	long	enough	to	throw	him	quite	a	pleasant	smile.
"How	 nice	 it	 is	 that	 you	 are	 formed	 just	 like	 our	 moon	 men,"	 she	 observed.
Throwing	off	her	clothes,	she	asked,	"And	am	I	structured	as	are	Earth	women?"
"Yes,	you	are,"	answered	 the	now	excited	astronaut.	 "But	 tell	me,	why	do	you
stir	that	pot?"
"I'm	making	 a	 baby,"	 she	 said.	And,	 sure	 enough,	 a	 few	minutes	 later	 a	 baby
appeared	in	the	pot.
"Now	would	you	like	to	see	how	we	make	babies	on	Earth?"	asked	the	astronaut.
The	girl	agreed,	and	the	astronaut	proceeded	with	his	passionate	demonstration.
"That	was	enjoyable,"	she	said	afterward,	"but	where	is	the	baby?"
"Oh,	that	takes	nine	months,"	explained	the	astronaut.
"Nine	months?"	she	asked.	"Then	why	did	you	stop	stirring?"
A	 small	 group	 of	 scientists	 had	 spent	 an	 enlightening	 week	 on	 the	 moon
comparing	life	there	with	our	own.
"Tell	me,"	 one	 Earth	 scientist	 asked	 his	moon	 counter-part,	 "just	 how	 do	 you
reproduce	the	species	here	on	this	planet?"
"I	shall	be	pleased	to	demonstrate,"	replied	the	leader	of	the	moon	group,	and	he
called	forth	a	voluptuous	moon	beauty	with	three	heads.	They	then	engaged	their
tentacles	for	a	few	moments,	and	almost	at	once	a	small	pouch	began	to	form	on
the	female's	back;	it	grew,	and	within	little	more	than	a	minute	it	opened	up	very
much	 like	 a	 blooming	 flower,	 and	 a	 small	 moon	 child	 dropped	 out,	 as	 fully
developed	as	the	adults	but	much	smaller,	and	began	scampering	about	the	room.
Once	 the	 Earth	 scientists	 had	 recovered	 from	 this	 unexpected	 experience	 they
attempted	 to	 explain	 how	 procreation	 differs	 in	 our	 world.	 The	 Moonians
insisted	upon	being	shown,	and	after	unsuccessful	attempts	to	dissuade	them,	the
chief	scientist	of	the	expedition	finally	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
43
Chapter	3	-	No	peaks,	no	valleys
agreed.	Choosing	a	comely	scientific	aide	from	the	group,	he	took	her	to	a	cot	in
the	corner	of	the	room	and	there	proceeded	to	make	love	to	her	in	a	manner	to
which	we	here	on	Earth	are	more	accustomed.
The	 Moonians	 examined	 the	 couple	 from	 every	 angle,	 and	 when	 they	 were
finished,	 their	 leader	 said,	 "That	 was	 certainly	 unusual	 and,	 I	 must	 say,
interesting,	but	where	is	the	baby	--
or	was	the	demonstration	a	failure?"
"It	is	difficult	to	say,"	replied	the	Earth	scientist.	"We	cannot	tell	at	once.	But	if
the	 contact	 was	 successful,	 then	 the	 baby	 will	 arrive	 in	 approximately	 nine
months."
"Nine	months!"	exclaimed	 the	Moonian.	"Amazing!	But	 tell	us	 then,	doctor,	 if
the	Earth	child	will	not	be	born	for	nine	months,	why	were	you	in	such	a	hurry
there	at	the	end?"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
44
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
4
Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
4	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
WHY	DO	 INDIANS	THINK	OF	 SEX	 IN	TERMS	OF	NEED	 INSTEAD	OF
FUN?	THEY
ALSO	THINK	AT	THE	SAME	TIME	THAT	THEY	HAVE	TRANSCENDED
SEX,	BUT	IN
REALITY	 IT	 HAS	 ONLY	 BEEN	 SUPPRESSED.	 OSHO,	 IS	 THERE	 ANY
SIMILARITY
BETWEEN	 SUPPRESSION	 AND	 TRANSCENDENCE	 WHICH	 CAN
MISLEAD	PEOPLE,	AS	YOU	SOMETIMES	 SAY	THAT	THERE	 IS	 SOME
SIMILARITY	BETWEEN	A	BUDDHA	AND	A	MADMAN?
Mukesh	Bharti,	Indian	culture	is	the	most	rotten	culture	that	has	evolved	in	the
world,	the	rottenest	--	rotten	to	the	very	core.	It	is	so	rotten	that	it	has	forgotten
how	to	die.	To	die	one	needs	to	be	a	little	bit	alive,	and	unless	you	know	how	to
die,	you	simply	vegetate,	you	stagnate.
Death	is	a	process	of	revival.	Just	as	each	individual	has	to	die	to	be	born	again,
each	culture	has	 to	die	 to	be	born	again.	Each	 society,	 each	civilization	has	 to
pass	through	life	to	death,	from	death	to	life	again.
Indian	 culture	 is	 the	 only	 culture	 which	 has	 not	 died	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.
There	have	been	many	cultures	in	the	world:	 the	Assyrian,	 the	Babylonian,	 the
Greek,	the	Roman,	the	Egyptian.	They	all	flowered,	blossomed:	they	contributed
to	the	world	their	beauty,	 their	sculpture,	 their	music,	 their	poetry,	 their	drama,
and	then	they	disappeared	without	leaving	a	trace	behind.	This	is	how	it	should
be.
If	 all	 the	old	people	 in	your	 family	were	 alive	 --	 your	 father	 and	your	 father's
father	 and	 his	 father's	 father	 to	 the	 very	 end,	 to	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 and	 God	 the
Father	--	 then	one	thing	is	certain:	you	would	have	been	crushed.	So	many	old
people,	all	corpses,	are	enough	to	crush	a	small	child	who	is	delicate	like	a	rose.
One	of	 the	greatest	 things	 that	Friedrich	Nietzsche	did	was	 to	declare	 "God	 is
dead	and	man	is	free."
God	as	Father	has	to	be	dead,	otherwise	his	weight	will	be	too	much,	it	will	be
too	 mountainous.	 It	 won't	 allow	 the	 freshness	 of	 humanity,	 it	 won't	 allow
exploration,	 it	 won't	 allow	 adventure.	 The	 old	 man	 will	 be	 too	 cautious,	 too
cunning,	too	calculating,	too	Jewish.
His	whole	experience	of	the	past	will	be	enough	to	destroy	the	child.	The	child
needs	exploration;	and,	of	course,	when	you	explore	you	commit	many	mistakes
--	that	is	part	of	growth.	One	should	be	allowed	to	commit	mistakes.	One	should
certainly	be	intelligent	enough	not	to	commit	the	same	mistakes	again	and	again;
one	should	be	creative	enough	to	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
45
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
invent	 new	 mistakes.	 That's	 the	 way	 one	 expands,	 grows;	 that's	 the	 way
consciousness	becomes	integrated.
Life	 is	 a	 trial-and-error	 process.	 The	 old	 man	 drops	 all	 mistakes,	 errors.	 He
becomes	 so	 accustomed	 to	 doing	 the	 right	 thing	 that	 exploration,	 adventure,
disappears	from	his	 life.	And	because	of	his	own	fears	he	won't	allow	the	new
generations	 to	 go	 in	 new	directions,	 into	 new	dimensions.	He	will	make	 them
afraid,	 he	 will	 paralyze	 them,	 he	 will	 cripple	 them.	 That's	 what	 has	 been
happening	in	India.
India	 is	 a	 strange	 case.	 It	 is	 extraordinary	 in	 a	 way:	 this	 has	 never	 happened
anywhere	else.
All	 the	 countries,	 all	 the	 cultures,	 civilizations,	 have	 lived,	 died	 and	 were
resurrected	again;	India	has	remained	the	same.	It	 is	more	like	a	plastic	flower
than	 a	 real	 rose.	 It	 is	more	 concerned	with	 stability	 than	 aliveness.	 It's	whole
concern	is	how	to	go	on	and	on	forever.
But	 that	 is	 not	 the	 real	 thing.	 How	 to	 live	 each	 moment	 totally...	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	duration,	the	question	is	of	depth.	Only	those	who	live	in	depth	know
what	life	is	all	about.
Those	who	live	in	duration	live	horizontally,	superficially.	Their	life	is	a	mask;
there	is	no	authenticity	in	it.	Hence,	I	say	Indian	culture	is	neither	alive	nor	dead
but	living	in	a	kind	of	suspension,	in	a	kind	of	limbo.	It	is	a	ghost	culture:	all	that
is	significant,	all	that	makes	life	a	joy,	has	been	dropped	because	it	is	dangerous,
and	all	that	is	stable,	permanent,	plastic,	has	been	gathered	because	it	is	safer.
Remember,	this	is	the	way	of	an	old	man.	The	old	man	always	thinks	of	safety,
security,	 a	 bank	 balance;	 he	 always	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of	 fear,	 because	 death	 is
always	standing	in	front	of	him.
The	child	never	bothers	about	death,	his	concern	is	life.	He	is	interested	in	going
to	the	uncharted,	to	the	unknown;	he	is	ready	to	risk.	And	those	who	are	ready	to
risk,	only	they	are	truly	alive.	They	may	not	live	long,	but	that	is	not	the	point	at
all.	Just	to	live	for	a	single	moment	with	authenticity,	totality,	integrity	is	more
than	enough.	A	single	moment	of	total	experience	is	far	bigger	than	the	whole	of
eternity.	It	contains	the	whole	of	eternity;	 it	contains	timelessness.	But	one	can
go	 on	 vegetating	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 like	 a	 cabbage,	 a	 cauliflower	 --	 very
holy-looking,	very	saintly.
Cabbages	 are	 not	 sinners,	 and	 cauliflowers	 are	 great	 scholars.	 A	 cabbage
becomes	 a	 cauliflower	 through	 college	 education.	 Cauliflowers	 are	 pundits,
theologians,	religious	people.
This	country	is	full	of	these	people,	and	the	burden	of	them	is	great.	Somebody
needs	to	help	this	country	to	die	so	that	it	can	live	again.	Crucifixion	is	a	basic
condition	for	resurrection.
The	art	of	living	is	preceded	by	the	art	of	dying.
This	 country	 is	 stinking,	 but	 this	 country	 has	 nothing	 else	 to	 brag	 about,	 so	 it
brags	about	 the	past.	 It	brags	about	 its	phoniness,	 it	brags	about	 its	holiness,	 it
brags	about	its	spirituality	--
which	 is	 all	 nonsense	 because	 the	 basic	 foundation	 is	 missing	 and	 you	 are
talking	 about	 the	 temple.	The	 temple	 is	 possible,	 but	 first	 you	have	 to	 put	 the
basic	foundation	together.
Life	is	a	hierarchy	of	needs.	First	the	physical	need	has	to	be	taken	care	of,	the
material	existence	has	 to	be	 taken	care	of.	Science	 fulfills	a	basic	need.	 If	you
miss	science	you	will	miss	religion.	Between	science	and	religion	is	the	world	of
art.	These	are	the	three	basic	dimensions	of	life.	Science	has	to	take	care	of	the
material,	the	physiological,	the	biological	--
the	 extrovert	 needs	 of	man.	 Religion	 has	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the	 innermost	 --	 the
interiority,	the	subjectivity.	And	between	the	two	is	the	world	of	aesthetics:	art,
poetry,	music,	dance,	drama,	literature.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
46
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
A	 man	 who	 is	 hungry	 cannot	 think	 of	 poetry.	 A	 man	 who	 is	 hungry	 cannot
conceive	of	meditation.	It	is	impossible!	But	a	long,	long	traditional	ego	tries	to
hide	its	poverty.	The	so-called	Indian	spiritualism,	the	so-called	desire	of	Indian
culture	 to	 guide	 the	whole	world	 towards	 spirituality	 is	 just	 stupid.	 It	 is	 sheer
nonsense,	it	is	rubbish.	But	that	is	their	only	face-saving	device	--	they	can	save
face	only	behind	that	screen.	They	know	their	bodies	are	hungry,	they	know	that
things	 which	 are	 absolutely	 necessary	 to	 them	 are	 not	 available.	 They	 are
starving,	 they	are	 ill,	 sick	 in	every	way.	Ninety-eight	percent	of	 the	country	 is
living	 in	 the	 state	of	 a	beggar.	Nobody	 is	well	nourished:	 almost	 everybody	 is
undernourished.	And	when	a	person	 is	undernourished,	 it	 is	not	only	 the	body
that	 suffers,	 remember;	 undernourishment	 in	 a	 very	 subtle	 way	 destroys	 the
capacity	of	your	mind.
Mind	needs	 its	own	nourishment,	 and	unless	 the	body	 is	 adequately	nourished
the	mind	cannot	be	nourished.	But	first	the	body	has	to	be	fulfilled.	When	there
is	something	more	than	the	body's	fulfillment,	then	it	goes	to	the	brain	cells.	The
mind	is	a	luxury	--	it	does	not	exist	in	animals,	it	is	a	human	prerogative.	It	came
into	existence	only	because	man	could	manage	his	bodily	needs	so	 totally	 that
there	 was	 energy	 left	 over,	 and	 that	 overflowing	 energy	 became	 his	 brain,
became	his	mind,	became	his	psychology.
When	 the	psychological	needs	 are	 fulfilled,	 totally	 fulfilled,	 and	again	 there	 is
more	 energy	 available,	 that	 energy	 is	 transformed	 into	 spirituality,	 into
meditation,	into	Buddhahood.
But	 India	 is	 in	 a	 sad	 state,	 and	 the	 saddest	 thing	 is	 that	 Indians	 try	 to	 hide	 it
rather	than	expose	it.	They	are	angry	at	me	because	I	am	exposing	the	truth	as	it
is.	They	are	angry	at	me	because	I	am	not	trying	to	cover	it	up.	They	would	like
me,	they	would	respect	me,	they	would	call	me	a	great	mahatma,	an	incarnation
of	God	and	all	kinds	of	rubbish,	but	on	one	condition:	that	I	go	on	covering	their
wounds.
I	cannot	cover	anybody's	wounds.	I	can	heal	them,	but	the	healing	process	is	a
totally	different	process.	First	you	have	to	expose	your	wounds	to	the	sun,	to	the
wind.	You	 have	 to	 expose	 them.	 It	 hurts!	And	wounds	which	 have	 been	 kept
secret	 for	 thousands	 of	 years,	 suddenly	 exposed...	 You	 cannot	 believe	 it.	 You
have	 always	 believed	 that	 you	 are	 great	 spiritualists,	 and	 I	 see	 the	 whole
phoniness	 of	 it,	 I	 see	 the	 hypocrisy	 of	 it.	 And	 the	 greatest	 hypocrisy	 that
happens,	happens	through	two	denials:	food	and	sex.	These	are	the	basic	needs,
and	they	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	They	are	not	very	different.
Food	 is	 needed	 for	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 individual.	 An	 individual	 can	 exist
without	sex.	It	will	not	be	much	of	a	joy,	but	he	can	survive.	But	without	food
the	individual	cannot	exist;	he	will	shrink	and	die.	At	the	most,	if	he	is	perfectly
healthy,	he	can	exist	without	food	for	three	months	--	ninety	days	--	but	that	too
only	if	he	is	perfectly	healthy	and	if	he	has	too	much	extra	food	accumulated	in
his	 body	 in	 the	 form	 of	 fat	 and	 other	 things.	 Then	 he	 can	 survive	 for	 three
months.
That	 survival,	 remember,	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 religion;	 that	 is	 sheer
cannibalism:	one	is	eating	oneself.	When	you	fast	you	are	eating	your	own	meat,
hence	 I	 am	against	 fasting;	 that	 is	 the	worst	kind	of	meat-eating.	You	can	 fast
and	every	day	--	you	will	 lose	one	kilo.	Where	 is	 that	weight	disappearing	 to?
You	are	digesting	it.	Within	three	months	you	will	die.
The	individual	can	exist	for	a	little	while	without	food,	he	can	exist	without	sex	-
-	 he	 can	 survive	 --	 but	 the	 human	 race,	 the	 species,	 cannot	 exist	without	 sex.
That	is	food	for	the	species.	Sex	is	food	for	the	species.	Without	sex	humankind
will	disappear.	And	the	people	who	have	been	teaching	celibacy	are	murderous.
The	people	who	have	been	teaching	celibacy	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
47
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
to	humanity	are	basically	cutting	the	very	roots	of	humanity.	If	they	were	to	be
followed	literally	there	would	be	no	humanity	left.
There	would	have	been	no	Mahavira,	no	Buddha,	no	Krishna,	there	would	have
been	no	Mohammed,	no	Kabir,	no	Nanak,	if	their	parents	had	followed	the	idea
of	 celibacy.	 It	 is	 good,	 it	 is	 fortunate	 that	 Buddha's	 father	 did	 not	 follow	 the
stupid	 idea	 of	 celibacy,	 otherwise	 the	 world	 would	 have	 missed	 one	 of	 the
greatest	flowerings.
If	celibacy	is	perpetuated,	then	humanity	will	disappear.	It	is	a	very	egoistic	idea,
egoistic	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 you	 only	 care	 about	 yourself.	 Indians	 go	 on	 talking
about	spirituality,	selflessness,	and	at	the	same	time,	with	the	same	face,	they	go
on	talking	about	celibacy.
Celibacy	is	selfishness,	absolute	selfishness.	Your	parents	and	their	parents	and
their	 parents	 have	 all	 joined	 together	 to	 give	 birth	 to	 you.	 Now,	 trying	 to	 be
celibate,	 forcing	 celibacy,	 simply	 means	 you	 are	 closing	 the	 doors	 to	 future
humanity.	And	you	call	it	selflessness?	You	call	it	spirituality?
This	is	pure	egoism	--	as	if	you	were	the	center	of	the	whole	existence,	as	if	the
whole	 existence	 existed	 only	 for	 you:	 because	 you	 have	 been	 produced,	 now
there	is	no	need	for	anything;	the	whole	can	disappear.
But	 although	 the	 teaching	 continues,	 nobody	 follows	 it.	 Unnatural	 teachings
cannot	 be	 followed.	 That	 is	 one	 good	 thing	 about	 them.	 Only	 a	 few	 fools,
maniacs,	obsessed	people,	may	try	to	follow	them,	but	any	man	of	 intelligence
will	not	follow	such	ideas.
Such	 ideas	 create	 two	 kinds	 of	 difficulties.	One:	 those	who	 are	 cunning,	 they
become	hypocrites.	And	those	who	are	innocent,	they	become	guilty.	That's	what
has	happened	in	India,	and	the	same	has	happened	on	a	wider	scale	all	over	the
world.	The	disease	is	contagious.	It	must	have	started	in	India;	its	origin	seems
to	be	Indian.	That	is	the	only	contribution	that	India	has	made	to	the	world	--	a
contagious	 disease	 which	 creates	 hypocrites	 and	 guilty	 people.	 Both	 are	 ugly
specimens.	The	world	needs	neither	the	hypocrites	nor	the	guilty.
But	 the	 hypocrites	 become	 priests,	 monks,	 mahatmas,	 sages,	 saints,	 and	 the
guilty	become	the	followers.	This	is	the	game	that	is	going	on.
You	ask	me,	Mukesh	Bharti:
WHY	DO	INDIANS	THINK	OF	SEX	IN	TERMS	OF	NEED...?
Because	their	needs	are	not	fulfilled.	They	are	in	all	kinds	of	need	--	to	them	sex
is	also	a	need.	A	needy	person	has	an	eye	which	projects	his	needs	everywhere.
You	see	only	that	which	you	can	see,	you	hear	only	that	which	you	can	hear:	you
are	 continuously	 choosing	 according	 to	 your	 needs.	 To	 a	 hungry	 person	 a
beautiful	woman	simply	looks	like	a	delicious	dish.	The	very	idea	shows	where
the	man	stands.
There	 are	 expressions	 in	 all	 the	 languages	 of	 the	world	 for	 love.	 People	 have
started	using	words	like	"eating."	--	"I	would	like	to	eat	you,"	the	lover	says	to
the	woman.	What	kind	of	love	is	this?	Lovers	bite	each	other,	lovers	chew	each
other	--	as	if	they	are	chewing	gum.
Lovers	 leave	 tooth	 marks	 on	 each	 other.	 What	 kind	 of	 poetry	 is	 this?	 They
scratch	 each	 other	 with	 their	 nails...	 Is	 this	 love	 or	 is	 something	 else
masquerading	behind	it?
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
48
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
Love	should	be	deep	caring.	One	should	not	 think	 in	 terms	of	 food,	 things,	of
eating,	biting
--	these	are	ugly	expressions.
But	India	lives	in	all	kinds	of	needs.	Hence,	sex	also	becomes	only	a	need,	at	the
most,	a	release,	a	tranquilizer	--	the	same	kind	of	release	that	you	feel	when	you
have	 a	 good	 sneeze:	 some	 burden,	 some	 tension	 is	 gone.	 But	 there	 is	 no
fulfillment	in	it,	there	is	no	rejoicing	in	it.
Indians	make	love	as	if	they	are	thieves,	as	if	they	are	doing	something	wrong.
They	make	love	as	if	they	are	going	against	God,	as	if	they	are	committing	some
sin.
Of	course	they	have	to	make	love	because	that	 is	a	need.	And	it	can	only	be	a
need	unless	their	other	needs	are	fulfilled.	When	all	the	needs	are	fulfilled,	love
starts	 having	 a	 totally	 different	 dimension	 to	 it	 --	 the	 dimension	 of	 fun,	 the
dimension	of	dance	and	music.	Then	you	are	not	using	 it	 as	 a	 relaxation,	 as	 a
tranquilizer,	as	a	sneeze;	you	start	sharing.	Love	becomes	more	prominent,	sex
becomes	secondary.	When	it	is	a	need,	love	is	just	a	word,	sex	is	the	only	thing,
the	reproductive	activity	is	the	only	thing.
And	you	know	 it	 --	 it	 is	 a	well-known	 fact	 scientifically	observed	all	over	 the
world	 --	 that	 poor	 people	 produce	more	 children.	Why?	 They	 don't	 have	 any
other	possibilities	of	entertaining	themselves.	They	don't	have	the	idiot	box,	the
TV	--	they	cannot	sit	glued	in	their	chair	for	six	hours.	They	don't	have	a	chair,
in	 fact!	 They	 don't	 have	 the	 money	 to	 go	 to	 a	 hotel	 to	 participate	 in	 some
celebration,	 to	 go	 to	 a	 movie,	 to	 drink	 alcohol,	 to	 dance,	 sing...	 All	 the
possibilities	 are	 closed.	 The	whole	 tiredness	 of	 the	 day,	 the	 routine	work,	 the
continuity	of	the	same	rut...	The	only	possibility,	a	free	amusement	available	to
them,	 is	 sex.	That	 becomes	 their	 last	 act	 in	 the	 day.	So	before	 going	 to	 sleep,
they	religiously	devote,	one,	two	minutes	to	it,	and	then	they	fall	asleep	like	logs.
The	 newly-married	 couple	 were	 entertaining	 a	 bachelor	 in	 the	 den	 of	 their
suburban	home,	when	the	conversation	turned	to	sexual	morality.
"Since	you	claim	to	be	so	liberal,"	the	Indian	bachelor	challenged	the	husband,
"would	you	let	me	kiss	your	wife's	breasts	for	a	thousand	rupees?"
Not	wishing	 to	seem	prudish,	and	needing	 the	extra	money,	 the	couple	agreed,
and	 the	wife	 removed	her	blouse	 and	bra.	Then	pressing	his	 face	between	her
breasts	 the	 chap	 nestled	 there	 for	 several	 minutes,	 until	 the	 husband	 grew
impatient	to	complete	the	deal.	"Go	ahead	and	kiss	them,"	he	urged	the	bachelor.
"I	would	love	to,"	the	fellow	sighed,	"but	I	really	can't	afford	it."
The	 question	 is	 whether	 you	 can	 afford	 anything	 else...	 Hence,	 to	 the	 Indian
mind,	sex	remains	an	animal	act.	It	never	rises	to	the	realms	of	poetic	beauty,	it
never	 becomes	 love.	 So	 whenever	 you	 talk	 to	 the	 Indian	 about	 love,	 he
immediately	 understands	 you	 to	 be	 talking	 about	 sex.	 "Love"	 is	 immediately,
automatically	translated	as	"sex."	It	is	impossible	to	talk	to	the	Indian	about	love.
This	is	my	experience	of	talking	to	millions	of	Indians	all	over	the	country.	Talk
about	 love,	 and	 by	 the	 time	 the	 word	 reaches	 them	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 love,	 it
becomes	sex.
They	 know	 only	 sex.	 Love	 has	 no	 other	 connotation	 for	 them.	 It	 is	 such	 a
misunderstanding	 --	 one	 feels	 almost	 helpless.	 Talking	 to	 Indians	 is	 really
troublesome.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
49
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
You	 can	 talk	 about	 God,	 you	 can	 talk	 about	 the	 soul,	 you	 can	 talk	 about
MOKSHA,	 NIRVANA,	 you	 can	 talk	 about	 the	 vedas,	 and	 there	 will	 be	 no
misunderstanding,	 because	 they	 are	 like	 parrots	 --	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 they
have	been	 reading	 those	words.	Not	 that	 they	will	understand	you,	but	at	 least
they	will	understand	 the	words.	When	you	say	"God,"	 they	know	 its	meaning.
They	don't	know	 the	experience,	but	at	 least	 the	meaning	 is	known.	But	when
you	talk	about	love,	even	the	meaning	is	not	known.	The	experience	of	it	is	far,
far	away.
She	had	just	finished	her	shower	when	the	doorbell	rang.	Tiptoeing	to	the	front
door,	shivering	in	plump,	pink	nudity,	she	called,	"Who	is	it?"
"The	blind	man,"	came	a	mournful	voice.
So	she	shrugged	and	opened	the	door	with	one	hand	while	reaching	for	her	purse
with	the	other.	When	she	turned	to	face	the	man,	he	was	grinning	from	ear	to	ear.
And	she	saw	that	he	was	holding	a	large	package	in	his	arms.
"You	can	see!"	she	exclaimed.
"Yeah,"	he	nodded	happily,	"and	mighty	pretty	 too.	Now,	where	do	you	want	I
should	put	these	blinds?"
The	romantic	young	man	sat	on	the	park	bench	with	a	first	date.	He	was	certain
his	charming	words	and	manner	would	win	her	as	they	had	so	many	others.
"Some	moon	out	tonight,"	he	cooed.
"There	certainly	is,"	she	agreed.
"Some	really	bright	stars	in	the	sky."
She	nodded.
"Some	dew	on	the	grass."
"Some	DO!"	she	said	indignantly.	"But	I	am	not	that	sort!"
It	 is	really	difficult	 to	talk	with	Indians	about	love	--	 they	have	never	lived	the
experience.
All	that	they	know	is	the	sexual	mechanism,	and	all	that	they	know	is	the	sexual
animality:	 that	 is	 their	experience.	They	cannot	understand	sex	as	 fun,	because
sex	cannot	be	fun,	only	love	can	be	fun.
Love	is	fun:	it	 is	a	play,	it	 is	playfulness.	And	at	the	ultimate	peak	of	love,	the
same	playfulness	becomes	prayerfulness.
These	are	the	three	stages:	need,	playfulness,	prayerfulness.	And	unless	you	have
experienced	love	at	its	ultimate,	utmost	peak	as	prayer,	you	have	not	really	lived
your	life;	you	have	missed	the	point.
You	say,	Mukesh	Bharti:
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
50
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
WHY	DO	 INDIANS	THINK	OF	 SEX	 IN	TERMS	OF	NEED	 INSTEAD	OF
FUN?
They	don't	know	anything	about	fun,	about	playfulness.	They	are	serious	people
--	 very	 holy,	 very	 spiritual.	 They	 are	 walking	 corpses.	 You	 cannot	 expect
playfulness	from	them,	you	can	expect	only	long	faces.
You	 cannot	 live	with	 saints	 for	 long.	 Even	 to	 be	with	 a	 saint	 for	 twenty-four
hours	 is	 a	 punishment;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 reward	because	within	 twenty-four	 hours	 he
will	make	you	so	bitter	towards	life,	he	will	make	you	so	sad,	he	will	make	you
so	 sour,	 he	 will	 make	 you	 feel	 so	 guilty,	 condemned...	 That	 is	 his	 only	 joy.
Religious	 people	 only	 enjoy	 one	 thing:	 making	 everybody	 sad,	 taking	 away
people's	laughter.
They	condemn	me	because	I	am	teaching	people	laughter,	I	am	teaching	people
love,	I	am	teaching	people	how	to	rejoice	in	the	moment,	in	the	very	ordinariness
of	life.	Because	there	is	no	other	kind	of	life	anywhere,	there	is	no	other	world,
this	is	the	only	world!	And	we	have	to	live	THIS	world.	We	have	not	to	sacrifice
this	world	for	some	other	world.
I	 am	 not	 teaching	 sacrifice,	 I	 am	 not	 teaching	 asceticism,	 I	 am	 not	 teaching
fasting,	 I	 am	 not	 teaching	 celibacy.	 I	 am	 teaching	 the	 celebration	 of	 life.	And
that's	what	they	have	been	missing	for	thousands	of	years.
They	cannot	understand	sex	as	fun;	it	is	a	misery.	And	if	they	cannot	understand
it	as	fun,	they	cannot	understand	it	as	prayer;	that	is	impossible.
You	say:
THEY	 ALSO	 THINK	 AT	 THE	 SAME	 TIME	 THAT	 THEY	 HAVE
TRANSCENDED
SEX,	BUT	IN	REALITY	IT	HAS	ONLY	BEEN	SUPPRESSED
Transcendence	 of	 sex	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 sex	 reaches	 to	 the	 flowering	 of
prayerfulness.
Before	that,	sex	cannot	be	transcended.	You	can	only	jump	beyond	sex	from	that
borderline.
But	 then	 it	 is	 not	 celibacy,	 it	 is	 simply	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the	 ego	 into	 the
whole.	 It	 is	 not	 really	 transcendence	 of	 sex	 but	 becoming	 part	 of	 the	 whole
orgasmic	universe.	It	is	reaching	to	the	ultimate	of	union	with	the	whole.
What	are	you	doing	when	you	are	making	love	to	a	woman?	You	are	trying	to
have	a	certain	union	with	the	opposite	pole.	For	a	moment	the	union	happens	--
rarely,	because	so	many	conditions	have	to	be	fulfilled.	Unless	all	conditions	are
fulfilled	you	may	simply	go	through	the	gestures	of	making	love.	Only	once	in	a
while	are	a	man	and	woman	really	in	tune
--	at-onement,	attunement	--	and	then	for	a	moment,	the	orgasmic	joy.
What	is	orgasmic	joy?	The	disappearance	of	the	ego	for	a	moment.	But	even	a
moment	 is	 tremendously	 significant,	 precious	 --	 far	 more	 precious	 than	 any
Kohinoor.	The	same	thing	happens	on	a	deeper	level	in	prayer.	With	prayer	you
are	not	trying	to	meet	with	the	other	person,	but	you	are	trying	to	meet	with	the
universe.	 The	 other	 person	 has	 become	 just	 a	 window.	 You	 are	 no	 longer
attached	to	the	window	frame.	You	are	going	through	the	window	into	the	world
of	the	stars,	clouds,	birds.	You	are	moving	beyond.	Love	teaches	you	how	to	go
beyond	the	window	and	to	search	for	the	stars.	Once	you	have	taken	flight,	the
window	is	left	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
51
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
far	 behind.	Once	you	 leave	 the	window,	 a	miracle	 happens.	Because	your	 ego
was	framed	by	the	window.	Once	you	leave	the	window	behind,	your	ego	is	also
left	behind.	The	ego	needs	the	other:	when	the	other	is	no	more	there,	the	ego	is
no	more	there.
Psychologists	say	the	ego	comes	later	on.	First,	you	start	feeling	the	presence	of
the	other.
The	 child	 first	 feels	 the	presence	of	 the	mother,	 father,	 brothers,	 sisters,	walls,
paintings	--
whatsoever	surrounds	him.	Slowly	slowly	he	becomes	aware	of	the	fact:	"I	am
separate	from	all	these.	Sometimes	the	mother	is	there	and	sometimes	she	is	not
there,	but	I	am	always	here."	First	enters	the	experience	of	the	other,	and	then	the
ego	arises.
It	is	the	same	in	prayer:	first	the	disappearance	of	the	other	--	the	reverse	order	--
and	then	the	ego	dissolves.	Once	you	have	left	the	frame,	the	small	frame	of	the
lover	 and	 the	 beloved,	 and	 you	 have	 taken	 yourself	 into	 the	 beyond,	 the
dissolution	 happens.	 Buddha	 calls	 it	 NIRVANA.	 The	 word	 is	 beautiful:
NIRVANA	simply	means	"cessation	of	the	flame."	Just	as	you	extinguish	a	lamp
and	suddenly	the	flame	disappears	into	the	whole,	so	it	is	in	the	ultimate	state	of
love.	 Then	 one	 knows	 transcendence.	 Transcendence	 of	 the	 ego	 becomes	 the
transcendence	of	sex.
But	 remember,	 it	 is	 not	 against	 sex.	 In	 fact,	 you	 have	 transformed	 your
momentary	 sex	 into	 a	 cosmic	 sex	 you	 have	 become	 one	 with	 the	 orgasm	 of
existence	itself.	Now	it	will	be	there	each	moment	--	you	cannot	lose	it.	Now	the
goose	is	really	out!	You	cannot	enter	the	bottle	again.
Transcendence	of	sex	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon	from	the	suppression	of
it.	But	suppression	can	give	you	the	feeling	that	you	have	transcended.
The	 old	 maid	 rushed	 up	 the	 policeman.	 "I	 have	 been	 raped!	 I	 have	 been
attacked,"	she	cried.	"He	ripped	off	my	clothing,	he	smothered	me	with	burning
kisses.	Then	he	made	mad	passionate	love	to	me!"
"Calm	yourself,	calm	yourself,	madam,"	said	the	officer.	"Just	when	did	all	this
take	place?"
"Twenty-three	years	ago	this	September,"	said	the	woman.
"Twenty-three	 years	 ago?"	 he	 exclaimed.	 "How	 do	 you	 expect	 me	 to	 arrest
anyone	for	something	he	did	twenty-three	years	ago?"
"Oh,	I	don't	want	you	to	arrest	anyone,	officer,"	said	the	woman.	"I	just	like	to
talk	about	it,	that's	all."
You	will	be	surprised	that	all	your	so-called	saints	continuously	talk	AGAINST
sex.	Why?
If	they	have	transcended,	why	this	obsession	with	sex?
In	 Indian	scriptures	you	will	 find	such	obscene	description	of	women	 that	you
will	 be	 surprised.	 Your	 PLAYBOYS	 and	 magazines	 like	 that	 are	 nothing	 in
comparison.	You	can	go	and	see	Khajuraho,	Konarak,	Puri	--	the	temples	--	and
you	 will	 see	 that	 your	 so-called	 obscene	 literature	 is	 only	 the	 beginning.
Khajuraho	has	the	most	obscene	sculpture	that	has	ever	existed	anywhere	in	the
world.	And	it	took	hundreds	of	years	to	do	because	it	is	stone	sculpture,	it	is	not
just	a	photograph	of	a	nude	model	in	a	PLAYBOY	magazine.	Hundreds	of	years
of	work,	 thousands	of	 sculptors	must	 have	worked	on	 it.	And	not	 one	 temple,
hundreds	 of	 temples.	And	why	 on	 the	 temples?	What	 have	 temples	 got	 to	 do
with	it?
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
52
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
They	have	something	to	do	with	it.	Saints	need	it,	religious	people	need	it.	These
are	their	fantasies,	these	are	what	they	are	seeing	inside	themselves.	They	want
them	to	be	projected.
And	in	Indian	scriptures	you	will	be	surprised	to	note	that	the	Indian	gods	are	the
most	 rapist	 gods	 in	 the	world.	They	 are	 not	 contented	with	heavenly	beauties,
they	go	on	descending	on	 the	earth	and	seducing,	 raping	earthly	women.	They
become	 tired	 of	 the	 heavenly	 beauties	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 heavenly
beauties	 are	 a	 little	 stale	 --	 stale	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 they	 never	 grow	 old,	 they
always	remain	the	same.	They	don't	perspire,	hence	they	don't	need	a	shower.
Their	bodies	are	not	ordinary;	they	are	made	of	gold	and	silver.	Now	what	can
you	 do	 with	 a	 woman	 with	 a	 body	 of	 gold	 and	 silver,	 eyes	 of	 emeralds	 and
diamonds?	Sooner	or	later	you	will	get	tired.	It	is	a	toy,	it	is	not	a	woman.	She
never	nags	you,	she	never	throws	pillows	at	you.	No	drama,	no	life!
They	descend	on	earth.	All	the	Indian	DEVAS,	the	Indian	gods,	are	very	sexual,
obsessively	 sexual.	 And	 your	 saints	 who	 have	 been	 writing	 these	 scriptures
describe	women	in	such	beautiful	words.	That	shows	their	minds.	But	 they	are
pretending	at	 the	 same	 time	 that	 they	are	condemning	sex	 they	are	 telling	you
these	things	so	that	you	can	remain	aware	of	them.
The	 elderly	 spinster	 hired	 a	 young	 lawyer	 to	 prepare	 her	 will.	 "I	 have	 ten
thousand	 rupees	 set	 aside,"	 she	 explained,	 "and	 I	want	 to	 spend	 it	 on	myself.
Nobody	in	this	town	has	ever	paid	any	attention	to	me,	but	they	will	sit	up	and
take	notice	when	I	die."
Warming	 to	 the	 subject	 she	 cackled,	 "I	 want	 to	 spend	 all	 of	 eight	 thousand
rupees	on	the	biggest,	fanciest	funeral	this	town	has	ever	seen."
"Well,"	said	 the	 lawyer,	"that's	a	 lot	 to	pay	for	burying	 in	 these	parts.	But	 it	 is
your	money,	madam,	 and	you	 are	 entitled	 to	 spend	 it	 any	way	you	 like.	Now,
what	about	the	other	two	thousand?"
"I'll	 take	 care	 of	 that,"	 the	 old	woman	 replied	with	 a	 broad	 smile.	 "I've	 never
been	to	bed	with	a	man	and	I	aim	to	try	that	at	least	once	before	I'm	through.	As
you	can	see	I'm	not	much	to	look	at,	but	I	figure	for	two	thousand	rupees	I	can
get	me	a	man	that	is	young	enough	and	handsome	enough	to	please	me."
That	night	 the	 lawyer	 reported	 the	conversation	 to	his	wife.	As	 they	discussed
the	situation,	the	wife	casually	mentioned	how	nice	it	would	be	to	have	the	two
thousand	rupees.
Minutes	later	they	were	on	their	way	to	the	spinster's	house,	the	wife	driving.	As
the	 lawyer	 stepped	 from	 the	 car	 he	 instructed	 his	 wife,	 "Pick	 me	 up	 in	 two
hours."
Returning	at	the	prescribed	hour,	the	wife	tooted	the	horn.	No	response	from	the
house.
She	then	blew	a	prolonged	blast.	An	upstairs	window	was	raised	and	the	lawyer
thrust	out	his	head.	"Come	back	in	four	days."	he	shouted.	"She's	decided	to	let
the	municipal	committee	bury	her."
These	 are	 the	 people,	 the	 real	 people.	Don't	 be	 deceived	 by	 their	 faces.	 Look
deep	 inside	 them	and	you	will	 find	a	 tremendous	madness.	Suppression	brings
madness,	transcendence	brings	Buddhahood.
Yes,	Mukesh	Bharti,	I	have	said	there	is	some	similarity	between	a	Buddha	and	a
madman.
The	 similarity	 is	 that	 a	 Buddha	 goes	 beyond	 the	mind,	 and	 the	madman	 falls
below	the	mind.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
53
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
And	the	same	similarity	exists	between	transcendence	of	sex	and	suppression	of
sex.
Transcendence	is	going	beyond	sex	--	and	to	go	beyond	one	has	to	go	through;
sex	has	to	be	used	as	a	ladder	--	and	suppression	is	falling	below	sex.
Suppression	creates	neurosis.	Transcendence	brings	flowering	--	flowering	of	all
that	is	best	in	you,	flowering	of	all	that	is	your	real	being.	It	is	the	release	of	the
hidden	splendor.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,
YOU	 SAID	 RECENTLY	 THAT	 YOU	 LOVED	WILHELM	 REICH.	 I	 HAVE
STUDIED
AND	WRITTEN	ABOUT	HIM	FOR	YEARS.	WHILE	YOUR	IDEAS	--	SEX
EQUALS
ENERGY,	LIVING	IN	THE	NOW	AND	GOD	IS	LIFE	--	AGREE	WITH	HIS,
YOU	GO
FAR	BEYOND	HIM.	IN	WHAT	WAY	WAS	HE	LIMITED?
Edward	Mann,	 I	 too	have	 read	your	book	on	Wilhelm	Reich.	 I	 also	 remember
you	quoted	me	in	that	book.
Wilhelm	Reich	and	my	ideas	have	a	certain	superficial	similarity,	but	remember,
it	 is	 superficial.	 Wilhelm	 Reich	 is	 a	 thinker,	 not	 a	 meditator,	 and	 sometimes
thinkers	groping	in	the	dark	can	find	a	few	things,	they	can	stumble	upon	a	few
things.	But	to	have	eyes	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
Yes,	 once	 in	 a	while	 you	 can	 find	 the	door	 also	by	groping	 in	 the	darkness	 --
even	 a	 blind	man	 can	 find	 it	 --	 but	 to	 have	 eyes	 and	 to	 have	 light	 and	 to	 go
directly	to	the	door	without	groping	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
Wilhelm	 Reich	 is	 certainly	 appreciated	 by	 me,	 appreciated	 for	 the	 simple
phenomenon	 that	 he	 is	 not	 a	 meditator	 yet	 he	 has	 stumbled	 upon	 something
which	only	meditators	can	come	across.	And	that	is	his	limitation	too:	he	is	only
a	thinker.	So	what	he	says	he	cannot	preach.
What	he	preaches	he	cannot	practice.	In	fact	he	does	just	the	opposite	of	it.	His
blindness	has	to	be	searched	for	in	his	life,	not	in	his	words.
Wilhelm	Reich's	wife	writes	about	him	that	he	was	a	most	jealous	man.	Now	that
is	impossible.	If	a	man	has	transcended	sex,	then	jealousy	is	impossible.	And	he
was	continuously	talking	about	getting	rid	of	possessiveness,	jealousy,	but	about
his	wife	he	was	very	suspicious.	Finally	 they	had	 to	separate,	and	 the	cause	of
separation	was	Wilhelm	Reich.
He	was	meddling	with	all	kinds	of	women.	He	was	having	many	love	affairs	in
the	name	of	freedom,	in	the	name	of	love,	in	the	name	of	non-possessiveness,	in
the	name	of	friendship	and	sharing,	but	the	same	was	not	allowed	to	his	wife.
Even	if	he	went	outside	his	town,	he	would	tell	his	friends	to	keep	an	eye	on	his
wife.	The	wife	of	Wilhelm	Reich	is	herself	a	psychoanalyst.	This	was	impossible
for	her	to	understand.
But	I	can	see	why	it	happened	--	he	was	only	a	thinker.
Thinkers	 are	 in	 a	 way	 cunning.	 For	 themselves	 they	 will	 find	 all	 kinds	 of
excuses,	but	for	others	there	will	be	a	totally	different	standard.	That's	where	he
is	limited.	And	because	he	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
54
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
was	not	a	meditator	he	could	not	transform	his	sexual	energy	into	a	playfulness,
a	prayerfulness,	and	ultimately	into	an	orgasmic	existence.
That's	 why	 he	 went	 mad.	 It	 is	 dangerous	 to	 play	 with	 fire.	 If	 you	 don't
understand	its	nature	it	is	better	to	leave	it	alone.	Sex	is	fire	because	it	is	life:	to
play	 with	 it	 without	 understanding	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 its	 transformation	 is
certainly	dangerous.	And	that	danger	happened	to	him.
He	was	on	the	right	lines	but	he	was	blind.	He	needed	a	grounding	in	meditation.
He	would	have	become	a	Buddha,	but	he	became	just	a	madman.
You	say,	Edward:
WHILE	YOUR	IDEAS	--	SEX	EQUALS	ENERGY...
These	are	not	my	ideas,	these	are	my	experiences.
And	a	clear-cut	distinction	has	to	be	remembered.	For	Wilhelm	Reich	these	are
ideas.	A	blind	man	can	have	ideas	about	light,	but	that	will	not	help	him.	A	deaf
man	can	have	ideas	about	music,	but	that	will	not	make	him	understand	music,
experience	music.	I	don't	have	any	ideas,	these	are	my	experiences.	Whatsoever
I	am	saying	to	you	I	am	not	saying	it	as	a	philosopher.
I	am	not	a	thinker	at	all;	to	me	thinking	is	a	very	low-quality	activity.	What	I	am
saying	 is	my	 experiencing.	 So	 these	 are	 not	my	 ideas	 on	 sex,	 these	 are	 actual
experiences.	And	I	am	not	trying	to	indoctrinate	you,	I	am	simply	inviting	you	to
experience	what	I	have	experienced.	So	I	don't	ask	you	to	believe	in	me.
Wilhelm	 Reich	 was	 a	 fanatic.	 He	 wanted	 his	 followers	 to	 believe	 in	 him,	 to
believe	in	him	absolutely.	He	was	very	dictatorial.	He	would	not	allow	any	doubt
in	anybody's	mind,	and	he	was	constantly	living	in	fear	--	the	fear	of	persecution,
as	 if	 he	 were	 being	 persecuted	 continuously,	 as	 if	 somebody	 were	 after	 him.
These	are	the	signs	of	a	fanatic	mind.
He	had	a	possibility	of	growing,	but	he	needed	the	right	soil.	That	was	missing.
Had	 he	 been	 one	 of	my	 sannyasins,	 there	would	 have	 been	 a	 totally	 different
kind	of	man	born	out	of	him.
He	 lived	 in	 the	 bottle.	 The	 goose	 could	 not	 come	 out.	 And	 he	 became	 too
attached	 to	 the	bottle	 --	his	 ideology,	his	philosophy.	And	 this	constant	 fear	of
persecution,	suspicion	drove	him	mad.
You	say:
...	YOUR	 IDEAS	 --	SEX	EQUALS	ENERGY,	LIVING	 IN	THE	NOW,	AND
GOD	IS
LIFE	--	AGREE	WITH	HIS...
They	only	appear	to	agree.
Living	in	the	now,	how	can	you	feel	persecuted?	Persecution	is	always	going	to
be	tomorrow.	Right	at	this	moment	how	can	you	feel	persecuted?	It	can	happen
only	in	the	next	moment.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
55
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
His	whole	life	he	was	talking	about	living	in	the	now,	but	it	was	only	talk,	mere
talk;	 he	 never	 lived	 in	 the	 now.	He	was	 thinking	 of	 himself	 in	 the	 old	 foolish
pattern,	as	being	a	prophet.
This	stupid	Judaic	idea	of	being	a	prophet	has	tortured	many	people	in	the	West.
Christians,	 Mohammedans,	 Jews	 --	 all	 the	 three	 religions	 which	 were	 born
outside	India,	have	revolved	around	the	idea	of	the	prophet.	Sigmund	Freud	has
the	 same	 attitude,	 and	Wilhelm	Reich	was	 a	 disciple	 of	Sigmund	Freud.	Then
Carl	Gustav	Jung	had	the	same	idea	--	he	was	also	a	follower	of	Sigmund	Freud.
Then	Adler	has	the	same	idea	--	he	was	also	a	follower	of	Sigmund	Freud.	All
by-products	of	the	Jewish	mind.	They	were	all	thinking	in	terms	of	the	salvation
of	the	whole	of	humanity	depending	on	them.
That	is	living	somewhere	else,	not	in	the	now.
Just	 the	other	day,	Sheela	brought	a	report	from	a	Christian	theologian	--	a	big
report	 against	me.	He	must	 have	 come	with	 preconceived	 ideas,	 and	 got	 very
confused.	He	could	not	manage	with	his	preconceived	ideas	and	he	could	not	let
go	of	them	either.	So	he	is	wishy-washy:	one	thing	he	says	against	me,	one	thing
he	says	for	me.	And	he	has	got	 into	such	a	mess.	But	I	 liked	one	thing	that	he
says	--	although	he	thinks	he	has	made	a	very	significant	criticism.
He	says:	the	moment	Osho	dies,	his	whole	movement	will	disappear	like	a	soap
bubble.
I	loved	it!	That's	how	it	should	be!	Why	should	it	continue?	For	what?	There	is
no	reason.
I	live	now,	I	am	not	interested	in	the	future	at	all.	How	does	it	matter	whether	my
movement	disappears	like	a	soap	bubble	or	not?	I	love	soap	bubbles!	They	look
beautiful	 in	 the	sun.	And	 they	should	disappear	so	 that	a	 few	other	people	can
make	 other	 soap	 bubbles.	 I	 have	 no	 monopoly	 over	 them.	 In	 fact,	 the	 world
would	 have	 been	 better	 if	 the	 soap	 bubble	 that	 was	 created	 by	 Jesus	 had
disappeared	with	him.	Then	these	Polack	Popes	would	not	be	here.	Now	they	are
making	 much	 fuss	 about	 a	 bubble	 which	 is	 not	 there.	 The	 soap	 bubble	 that
Buddha	 created,	 had	 it	 disappeared,	 would	 have	 been	 a	 great	 blessing	 to
humanity,	 because	 all	 these	Buddhist	monks	 and	 theologians,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
stupid	people...	We	would	have	been	saved	from	them!
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	was	 reading	 a	Buddhist	 scripture.	Buddhist	 scriptures	 say
that	 there	 are	 thirty-three	 thousand	 rules	 for	 each	 Buddhist	 monk	 to	 follow.
Thirty-three	thousand	rules!
Even	 to	 remember	 them	you	will	 need	 a	 computer.	And	what	 kind	of	 rules?	 I
will	tell	you	just	one	rule.	When	the	Buddhist	monk	goes	to	the	toilet	he	should
remove	 the	 lid	 of	 the	 toilet	 very	 slowly;	 no	 noise	 should	 be	 made.	 Why?	 --
because	there	are	always	hungry	ghosts	who	eat	shit.	And	if	they	eat	your	shit,
YOU	 are	 responsible;	 then	 you	will	 suffer	 in	 your	 future	 lives.	Great	 people!
Great	religious	rules!
But	this	idea	of	prophets	who	are	trying	to	solve	everybody's	misery,	who	come
for	the	salvation	of	humanity...	And	you	cannot	see	a	simple	fact	that	Jesus	came
and	Christians	still	go	on	bragging	 that	he	came	for	 the	salvation	of	humanity,
but	 the	 salvation	of	 humanity	has	 not	 happened	yet.	Two	 thousand	years	 have
passed.	 He	 proved	 a	 very	 impotent	 prophet.	 What	 kind	 of	 salvation	 has
happened?	Jainas	say	that	Mahavira	came	to	uplift	humanity.	Humanity	is	where
it	is.	Buddha	came	to	deliver	everybody...
I	want	 to	put	a	full	stop	to	all	 this	nonsense.	I	am	not	here	 to	deliver	anybody.
Why	 should	 I	 deliver	 you?	 Your	 parents	 have	 already	 done	 that!	 I	 have	 no
responsibility.	I	am	not	responsible	to	anybody	--	to	any	humanity,	to	any	future.
I	 am	 enjoying	 MY	 moment,	 and	 those	 who	 want	 to	 enjoy	 this	 moment,	 this
beautiful	soap	bubble	in	the	sun,	can	enjoy.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
56
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
But	he	thinks	--	the	Christian	theologian	who	came	from	Germany	just	to	study
what	is	happening	here	--	that	of	course	it	looks	beautiful	now,	but	when	Osho
dies	it	will	disappear.
It	should	disappear.	I	will	make	every	arrangement	for	it	to	disappear.	It	should
not	remain	even	for	a	single	moment,	because	that	will	be	a	dead	thing.
Wilhelm	Reich	lived	with	this	prophetic	mission.	And	all	prophets	are	in	a	way
mad,	 a	 little	 neurotic.	 Even	 good	 people,	 even	 people	 like	 Jesus,	 have	 a	 little
strain	of	neurosis:	"the	only	begotten	son	of	God."	Just	see	the	neurosis.	So	what
are	all	the	others	--	bastards?
Jesus	claims	that	he	is	born	of	a	virgin	mother.	What	nonsense!	Some	neurosis,
some	streak	of	neurosis!	The	slate	is	not	absolutely	clean...	some	hangover	from
the	past.	And	he	was	waiting	for	miracles.	At	the	very	last	moment	also,	on	the
cross,	he	was	waiting.	And	he	 shouted	at	God,	 "Why	have	you	 forsaken	me?"
You	 see	 the	 expectation?	 You	 see	 the	 demand?	 He	 is	 frustrated,	 he	 is	 angry:
"Why	 have	 you	 forsaken	 me?"	 He	 must	 have	 been	 waiting	 deep	 down	 for	 a
miracle	to	happen,	that	God	will	descend	and	save	his	only	begotten	son.	But	no
God	 descended	 because	 there	 is	 no	 God.	 It	 was	 not	 possible.	 And	 he	 was
continuously	 praying,	 raising	 his	 hands	 toward	 the	 sky,	 and	 calling,	 "ABBA,
Father."	These	are	childish	attitudes.	But	this	is	what	has	happened	in	the	past.
With	me	it	 is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	I	want	to	make	a	complete	break
from	the	past.	I	am	not	a	prophet,	I	am	not	a	messiah,	I	am	not	the	only	begotten
son	of	God,	I	have	not	come	to	make	arrangements	for	your	salvation.	There	is
no	need	--	the	goose	is	out!
Edward	 Mann,	 Wilhelm	 Reich	 lived	 in	 reaction,	 not	 in	 rebellion.	 And	 the
distinction	is	subtle.	He	was	reacting.	But	when	you	react	against	something	you
remain	 attached	 to	 it,	 you	 cannot	 be	 free	 of	 it.	 Reaction	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 negative
attachment.
I	 am	not	 reacting,	 I	 am	simply	disconnected.	 I	 am	discontinuous	with	 the	past
because	 that	 is	 the	only	way	 to	 live	NOW.	 I	 have	no	past	 and	no	 future.	This
moment	is	all!
The	last	question
Question	3
OSHO,	I	DON'T	HAVE	ANY	QUESTION.	STILL	THERE	IS	ONE...	COULD
YOU
SAY	SOMETHING	CRAZY	THAT	HAS	NO	PURPOSE?
Dhyan	Madia,	and	what	do	you	think	I	have	been	doing	all	along?	Do	you	think
there	is	any	purpose?	Can	you	find	a	crazier	man	than	me?
I	am	utterly	crazy,	and	I	have	no	purpose	at	all.	I	am	just	enjoying	myself.	I	love
to	 talk,	 so	 I	 love	 to	 talk...	Hence,	 I	have	a	 freedom	which	no	 thinker	can	ever
have,	because	he	has	to	be	consistent.	I	don't	care	at	all	about	any	consistency.
The	moment	I	have	said	anything,	 it	 is	 finished;	 then	I	don't	 look	back.	 I	have
never	read	any	of	my	books	--	I	don't	even	remember	the	names.
If	somebody	asks	me,	"Osho,	you	have	said	this	in	that	book..."	I	say,	"Really?	It
must	have	been	said	by	somebody	else.	That	man	died	long	ago."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
57
Chapter	 4	 -	 Transcendence	 brings
buddhahood
So	everything	that	I	am	saying	is	purposeless	--	as	purposeless	as	the	roses,	as	a
bird	on	the	wing,	as	 the	stars,	as	 the	dewdrops	in	 the	early	morning	sun.	What
purpose?	I	am	not	in	any	way	purposive.	It	is	sheer	joy.
Three	Polacks,	Madia,	are	standing	outside	a	brothel	discussing	what	prices	they
are	willing	to	pay	for	the	services	inside.	They	decide	that	one	of	them	should	go
inside	first	while	the	other	two	wait	outside.
Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 the	 one	who	went	 inside	 comes	out	with	 a	 gleaming	 smile
across	his	face.
"What	happened?	What	was	it	like?"	his	friends	ask.
"Well,	I	paid	five	zlotys,	went	into	a	room	and	this	tall	sexy	woman	was	waiting
for	me.
She	took	my	clothes	off,	put	two	pineapple	rings	over	my	prick	and	proceeded	to
slowly	eat	them	off.	It	was	great!"
The	second	Polack,	pleased	with	his	friend's	report,	goes	inside.	An	hour	later	he
comes	out,	a	big	Cheshire	cat	grin	on	his	face.
"What	happened?"	asked	the	other	two.
"Well	I	paid	ten	zlotys,	and	it	was	the	same	as	our	first	friend.	But	this	time	she
put	four	pineapple	rings	over	my	cock	and	ate	them	off	very	very	slowly."	The
third	 Polack,	 by	 this	 time	 very	 horny,	 rushes	 in	 to	 the	 brothel	 and	 comes	 out
fifteen	minutes	later	with	a	long,	sad	face.
"Well,"	ask	his	friends,	"what's	wrong?	What	happened?"
"Well,	begins	 the	sad	Polack,	"it	started	off	great.	 I	paid	 twenty	zlotys	and	she
put	six	rings	of	pineapple	over	my	cock,	plus	a	big	scoop	of	whipped	cream."
"Wow!"	the	friends	exclaim.
"That's	not	all,"	 continues	 the	 third,	 "a	handful	of	crushed	nuts,	 a	 sugar	wafer,
hot	chocolate	sauce,	and	topped	off	with	a	beautiful	red	cherry."
"That	sounds	great,"	one	of	the	others	said.	"What	could	possibly	make	you	so
sad	then?"
"Well,	it	looked	so	fucking	good,	I	ate	it	myself!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
58
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
5
Perfectly	imperfect
5	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	ARE	YOU	INFALLIBLE?
Thomas	 V.	 Kempis,	 I	 am	 infallibly	 fallible!	 First,	 I	 am	 not	 a	 perfectionist
because	 to	me	perfectionism	is	 the	root	cause	of	all	neurosis.	Unless	humanity
gets	rid	of	 the	 idea	of	perfection	 it	 is	never	going	to	be	sane.	The	very	 idea	of
perfection	has	driven	 the	whole	of	mankind	 to	a	 state	of	madness.	To	 think	 in
terms	of	perfection	means	you	are	 thinking	in	 terms	of	 ideology,	goals,	values,
shoulds,	should-nots.	You	have	a	certain	pattern	to	fulfill	and	if	you	fall	from	the
pattern	you	will	feel	immensely	guilty,	a	sinner.	And	the	pattern	is	bound	to	be
such	that	you	cannot	achieve	it.	If	you	can	achieve	it	then	it	will	not	be	of	much
value	to	the	ego.
So	the	intrinsic	quality	of	the	perfectionist	ideal	is	that	it	should	be	unattainable,
only	then	is	it	worth	attaining.	You	see	the	contradiction?	And	that	contradiction
creates	 a	 schizophrenia:	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 do	 the	 impossible,	which	 you	 know
perfectly	well	 is	not	going	 to	happen	 --	 it	 cannot	happen	 in	 the	very	nature	of
things.	If	it	can	happen	then	it	is	not	much	of	a	perfection;	then	anybody	can	do
it.	Then	 there	 is	 not	much	ego	nourishment	 in	 it:	 your	 ego	cannot	 chew	on	 it,
cannot	 grow	on	 it.	The	 ego	needs	 the	 impossible	 --	 and	 the	 impossible,	 by	 its
very	nature,	is	not	going	to	happen.	So	only	two	alternatives	are	left:	one	is,	you
start	feeling	guilty.	If	you	are	innocent,	simple,	intelligent,	you	will	start	feeling
guilty	--	and	guilt	is	a	state	of	sickness.
I	am	not	here	to	create	any	guilt	in	you.	My	whole	effort	is	to	help	you	to	get	rid
of	all	guilt.	The	moment	you	are	free	of	guilt,	rejoicing	bursts	forth.	And	guilt	is
rooted	in	the	idea	of	perfection.
The	second	alternative	is:	if	you	are	cunning	then	you	will	become	a	hypocrite,
you	will	start	pretending	that	you	have	achieved	it.	You	will	deceive	others	and
you	 will	 even	 try	 to	 deceive	 yourself.	 You	 will	 start	 living	 in	 illusions,
hallucinations,	and	 that	 is	very	unholy,	very	 irreligious,	very	unwholesome.	To
pretend,	 to	 live	a	 life	of	pretensions	 is	 far	worse	 than	 the	 life	of	a	guilty	man.
The	guilty	man	at	least	is	simple,	but	the	pretender,	the	hypocrite,	the	saint,	the
so-called	sage,	the	mahatma,	is	a	crook.	He	is	basically	inhuman	--	inhuman	to
himself	because	he	is	repressing;	that's	the	only	way	to	pretend.	Whatsoever	he
finds	 in	himself	which	goes	 against	perfection	has	 to	be	 repressed.	He	will	 be
boiling	within,	he	will	be	full	of	anger	and	rage.	His	anger	and	rage	will	come
out	in	thousands	of	ways;	in	subtle	ways,	indirect	ways,	it	will	surface.
Even	 people	 like	 Jesus	 --	 nice,	 good	 --	 are	 full	 of	 anger,	 rage:	 and	 they	 are
against	such	innocent	things	--	you	cannot	believe.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
59
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Jesus	comes	followed	by	his	followers	--	that	bunch	of	fools	they	call	apostles.
He	is	hungry,	 that	whole	bunch	is	hungry.	They	come	to	a	fig	 tree,	and	the	fig
tree	is	not	in	season.
It	is	not	its	fault,	but	Jesus	gets	so	angry	that	he	condemns	the	fig	tree,	he	curses
the	fig	tree.
Now,	 how	 is	 this	 possible?	 On	 the	 one	 hand	 he	 says,	 "Love	 thy	 enemy	 as
thyself."	On	the	other	hand	he	cannot	even	forgive	a	fig	tree	which	has	no	fruits
because	it	is	not	the	season.
This	dichotomy,	 this	 schizophrenia	has	prevailed	 in	humanity	 for	 thousands	of
years.
He	 says,	 "God	 is	 love,"	 but	 still	God	manages	 a	 hell.	 If	God	 is	 love,	 the	 first
thing	to	be	destroyed	should	be	hell;	hell	should	be	immediately	burnt,	removed.
The	very	idea	of	hell	is	of	a	very	jealous	God.	But	Jesus	was	born	a	Jew,	lived	a
Jew,	died	a	Jew;	he	was	not	a	Christian,	he	had	never	heard	the	word	"Christian."
And	the	Jewish	idea	of	God	is	not	a	very	beautiful	idea.
The	 Talmud	 says	 --	 the	 declaration	 is	 made	 in	 God's	 own	 words	 --	 "I	 am	 a
jealous	 God,	 very	 jealous.	 I	 am	 not	 nice!	 I	 am	 not	 your	 uncle!"	 This	 God	 is
bound	to	create	hell.	In	fact,	to	live	even	in	heaven	with	such	a	God	--	who	is	not
your	uncle,	who	is	not	nice,	who	is	jealous
--	will	be	hell.	What	kind	of	paradise	will	you	have	attained	by	living	with	him?
There	will	be	a	despotic,	dictatorial	atmosphere	--	no	freedom,	no	love.	Jealousy
and	love	cannot	exist	together.
So	even	 the	so-called	good	people	have	been	causes	of	human	misery.	 It	hurts
because	 we	 have	 never	 pondered	 over	 these	 things.	 We	 have	 never	 tried	 to
excavate	 our	 past,	 and	 all	 the	 root	 causes	 of	 our	misery	 are	 in	 our	 past.	And,
remember	 perfectly	 well,	 your	 past	 is	 more	 dominated	 by	 Jesus,	 Mahavira,
Confucius,	Krishna,	Rama,	Buddha,	than	by	Alexander	the	Great,	Julius	Caesar,
Tamburlaine,	Genghis	Khan,	Nadir	Shah.	History	books	talk	about	these	people,
but	they	are	not	part	of	your	unconscious.	They	may	be	part	of	history,	but	they
don't	make	 up	 your	 personality;	 your	 personality	 is	 formed	 by	 so-called	 good
people.	Certainly,	they	had	a	few	good	qualities	in	them,	but	side	by	side	there
was	a	duality,	and	the	duality	arose	from	the	idea	of	perfection.
Jainas	say	that	Mahavira	never	perspired.	How	can	a	perfect	man	perspire?	I	can
perspire
--	 I	 am	 not	 a	 perfect	 man!	 And	 perspiration	 in	 summer	 is	 so	 beautiful	 that	 I
would	rather	choose	perspiration	than	perfection!	Because	a	man	who	does	not
perspire	 simply	 has	 a	 plastic	 body,	 synthetic,	 non-breathing,	 non-porous.	 The
whole	body	breathes,	that's	why	you	perspire;	perspiration	is	a	natural	process	of
keeping	 your	 body	 temperature	 constantly	 the	 same.	 Now,	Mahavira	 must	 be
burning	 inside	 like	 hell!	 How	 will	 he	 manage	 to	 keep	 his	 body	 temperature
constant?	Without	perspiration	it	cannot	be	done,	it	is	impossible.
Jainas	 say	 that	 when	 a	 snake	 wounded	 Mahavira's	 feet,	 not	 blood	 but	 milk
flowed	out	of	 the	 feet.	Now,	milk	 is	 possible	only	 if	Mahavira's	 feet	were	not
feet	 but	 breasts	 --	 and	 a	man	 who	 has	 breasts	 on	 his	 feet	 should	 be	 put	 in	 a
circus!	This	 is	 their	 idea	of	perfection:	a	perfect	man	cannot	have	a	dirty	 thing
like	 blood,	 a	 bloody	 thing	 like	 blood,	 he	 is	 full	 of	 milk	 and	 honey.	 But	 just
imagine:	a	man	full	of	milk	and	honey	will	stink!	Milk	will	 turn	 into	curd	and
the	honey	will	 attract	 all	 kinds	 of	mosquitoes	 and	 flies;	 he	will	 be	 completely
covered	with	flies!	I	don't	like	this	kind	of	perfection.
Mahavira	 is	so	perfect	 that	he	does	not	urinate,	does	not	defecate;	 these	 things
are	for	imperfect	human	beings.	You	cannot	imagine	Mahavira	sitting	on	a	toilet
seat	--	impossible	--
but	then	where	does	all	his	shit	disappear	to?	Then	he	must	be	the	shittiest	man
in	the	world.
I	 have	 read	 in	 the	 medical	 journals	 about	 a	 man	 --	 the	 longest	 case	 of
constipation:	 eighteen	 months.	 But	 these	 medical	 people	 are	 not	 aware	 of
Mahavira	--	this	is	nothing	--
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
60
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
FORTY	years!	This	is	the	longest	period	that	any	man	has	been	able	to	control
his	bowels.
This	is	real	yoga!	The	greatest	case	of	constipation	in	the	whole	history	of	man...
and	I	don't	think	anybody	is	going	to	defeat	him.
These	stupid	 ideas	have	been	perpetuated	 just	 to	make	humanity	suffer.	 If	you
have	these	ideas	in	your	mind	then	you	will	feel	guilty	about	everything.	Pissing,
you	are	guilty	--	what	are	you	doing?	Sitting	on	a	toilet,	and	you	are	falling	into
hell!	If	blood	comes	out	of	your	body	--	a	deep	humiliation.
Jesus	walks	on	water,	tries	to	revive	a	dead	friend,	but	cannot	himself	survive	on
the	cross;	tries	to	cure	blind	people,	deaf	people,	but	cannot	make	a	single	stupid
man	enlightened,	cannot	help	a	single	fool	to	come	out	of	his	foolishness,	cannot
save	a	single	human	being	by	hitting	him	hard	on	the	head	and	saying,	"See,	the
goose	is	out!"
Thomas	V.	 Kempis,	 I	 am	 very	 fallible	 because	 I	 am	 not	 a	 neurotic,	 I	 am	 not
psychotic,	 I	 am	 not	 a	 perfectionist.	And	 I	 love	my	 imperfections...	 I	 love	 this
world	because	it	is	imperfect.
It	is	imperfect,	and	that's	why	it	is	growing;	if	it	was	perfect	it	would	have	been
dead.	Growth	 is	 possible	only	 if	 there	 is	 imperfection.	Perfection	means	 a	 full
stop,	perfection	means	ultimate	death;	then	there	is	no	way	to	go	beyond	it.
I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 remember	 again	 and	 again,	 I	 am	 imperfect,	 the	 whole
universe	 is	 imperfect,	 and	 to	 love	 this	 imperfection,	 to	 rejoice	 in	 this
imperfection	is	my	whole	message.
The	psychiatrist	leaned	back	and	placed	the	tips	of	his	fingers	together	while	he
soothed	 the	 deeply-troubled	 man	 who	 stood	 before	 him.	 "Calm	 yourself,	 my
good	fellow,"	he	gently	urged.	"I	have	helped	a	great	many	others	with	fixations
far	 more	 serious	 than	 yours.	 Now,	 let	 me	 see	 if	 I	 understand	 the	 problem
correctly.	You	indicate	that	in	moments	of	great	emotional	stress	you	believe	that
you	are	a	dog.	A	fox	terrier,	is	that	not	so?"
"Yes,	sir,"	mumbled	the	patient.	"A	small	fox	terrier	with	black	and	brown	spots.
Oh,	please	tell	me	you	can	help	me,	doctor.	If	this	keeps	up	much	longer,	I	don't
know	what	I'll	do..."
The	doctor	gestured	toward	the	couch.	"Now,	now,"	he	soothed,	"the	first	thing
to	do	is	lie	down	here,	and	we'll	see	if	we	can't	get	to	the	root	of	your	delusion."
"Oh,	 I	 couldn't	 do	 that,	 doctor,"	 said	 the	 patient.	 "I'm	 not	 allowed	 up	 on	 the
furniture."
Once	 you	 get	 an	 idea	 deep-rooted	 in	 you	 it	 starts	 becoming	 a	 reality.
Perfectionism	is	a	neurotic	idea.	Infallibility	is	good	for	stupid	Polack	popes	but
not	 for	 intelligent	 people.	An	 intelligent	 person	will	 understand	 that	 life	 is	 an
adventure,	a	constant	exploration	 through	trial	and	error.	That's	 its	very	 joy,	 its
very	juice!
I	 don't	want	 you	 to	 be	perfect.	 I	want	 you	 to	 be	 just	 as	 perfectly	 imperfect	 as
possible.
Rejoice	in	your	imperfections!	Rejoice	in	your	very	ordinariness!	Beware	of	so-
called	 "His	Holinesses"	 --	 they	 are	 all	 "His	Phoninesses."	 If	 you	 like	 such	big
words	like	"His	Holiness"
then	make	 a	 title	 such	 as	 "His	Very	Ordinariness"	 --	HVO,	 not	HH!	 I	 preach
ordinariness.	I	make	no	claims	for	any	miracles;	I	am	a	simple	man.	And	I	would
like	you	also	 to	be	very	simple	so	 that	you	can	get	 rid	of	 these	 two	polarities:
that	of	guilt	and	that	of	hypocrisy.
Exactly	in	the	middle	is	sanity.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
61
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
St	 Peter	 challenged	 the	 Archangel	 Gabriel	 to	 a	 game	 of	 golf.	 St.	 Peter's	 first
drive	resulted	in	a	hole-in-one.	Gabriel's	first	drive	produced	the	same	result	The
same	thing	happened	at	the	next	shot.
St.	Peter	looked	at	Gabriel	thoughtfully	and	then	said,	"What	do	you	say	we	cut
out	the	miracles	and	play	some	golf?"
I	am	not	infallible,	and	I	would	never	like	to	be	infallible	either,	because	that	is
suicidal.	I	would	like	to	commit	as	many	mistakes	as	possible	and	I	would	like	to
go	on	committing	mistakes	to	the	very	end	of	my	last	breath,	because	that	means
life.	If	you	are	capable	of	committing	mistakes	even	at	the	very	last	breath	you
have	conquered	death.
A	Zen	Master	was	dying...	and	I	have	a	deep	love	for	the	Zen	approach	for	the
simple	reason	that	they	also	rejoice	in	ordinariness.	That's	the	beauty	of	Zen:	no
religion	has	been	able	to	rise	to	such	heights	of	ordinariness.
The	Master	was	very	old,	nearabout	eighty.	He	gathered	his	disciples	and	said,
"Now	this	is	my	last	day.	I	don't	think	I	will	be	able	to	see	the	sunset,	and	the	sun
is	setting	on	the	horizon.	I	have	called	you	all	to	suggest	some	new	way	to	die."
They	were	a	little	puzzled.	They	said,	"What	do	you	mean	by	'new	way'?"
He	 said,	 "People	 have	 died	 in	 bed,	 people	 have	 died	 in	 the	 bathroom,	 people
have	 died	 this	 way	 and	 that.	 All	 those	 things	 have	 been	 done	 before,	 and	 I
always	 like	 to	 do	 things	 in	 a	 new	 way,	 in	 my	 own	 way.	 Can	 you	 suggest
something?	Have	you	ever	heard	of	somebody	dying	in	a	standing	posture?"
There	was	 silence.	One	man	said,	 "Yes,	 I	have	heard	about	a	Zen	Master	who
died	standing."
He	 said,	 "Then	 that	 is	 dropped!	 Have	 you	 heard	 of	 anybody	 dying	 standing
upside-down,	on	his	head,	doing	a	SIRSHASAN,	a	headstand?"
Everybody	said,	"We	have	not	heard	of	such	a	thing,	we	have	not	even	imagined
such	a	thing,	that	anybody	would	die	standing	on	his	head!"
So	he	 said,	 "That	will	 do!"	The	old	man	 stood	on	his	head,	 and	 it	 is	 said	 that
there	were	all	the	visible	signs	that	he	was	dead.	But	there	was	a	difficulty;	the
difficulty	was	that	the	Zen	disciples	were	in	a	very	puzzling	situation:	what	to	do
with	this	old	man	now?	They	had	never	heard	of	any	ritual	for	somebody	dying
standing	on	his	head.	What	had	to	be	done?	They	knew	perfectly	well	what	had
to	be	done	when	somebody	died	in	bed,	but	what	to	do	with	this	man?	And	he
was	standing	there	dead	on	his	head!
Somebody	suggested:	"We	should	run...	His	old	sister	lives	just	close	by;	she	is	a
nun.	She	may	be	able	 to	do	 something	or	 suggest	 something.	And	she	 is	 even
crazier	than	this	old	man!"
So	 they	 ran.	The	sister	came	and	shouted	at	her	brother	and	said,	 "Look,	your
whole	 life	 you	 have	 been	 a	 trouble!	At	 least	 die	 peacefully,	 don't	make	much
fuss	about	it!	And	why	are	you	driving	these	poor	disciples	crazy?	Get	up	and	lie
down	on	the	bed!"
The	old	man	laughed,	got	up	and	lay	down	on	the	bed,	and	he	said,	"Who	has
brought	this	crazy	sister	of	mine	here?	She	won't	even	let	me	die	in	an	improper
way!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
62
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
But	 he	 said,	 "Okay,	 you	 be	 happy.	 This	 is	 your	 last	 desire,	 and	 I	 have	 never
followed	any	advice	of	yours.	At	least	this	much	I	can	do	before	I	depart."
But	the	woman	did	not	stay	there	to	see	him	depart.	She	said,	"You	just	lie	down
there.	I	am	going.	And	die	on	the	bed	in	a	proper	way.	No	more	trouble."
And	she	left,	and	the	old	man	died	in	the	bed	in	a	proper	way.
This	is	how	life	should	be	lived.
I	 am	 not	 a	 saint,	 I	 am	 not	 a	 sage.	 All	 those	 hocus-pocus	 words	 don't	 mean
anything	to	me.	I	am	certainly	a	little	bit	crazy,	but	it	is	because	of	my	craziness
that	you	can	rely	on	me!	Never	 rely	on	saints,	never	 rely	on	sages	--	 they	will
drive	you	nuts!
It	was	teatime	in	the	pad,	and	the	air	hung	heavy	in	thick	blue	folds	as	the	beat
bunch	 and	 their	 tourist	 friends	 lit	 up.	 Suddenly,	 a	 loud	 voice	 in	 the	 hall
demanded	 that	 they	 open	 the	 door	 in	 the	 name	 of	 legality.	 The	 smokers
frantically	 gathered	 their	 still-smoking	 weeds	 and	 stuffed	 them	 in	 the	 cuckoo
clock.	The	police	entered,	searched	diligently,	found	nothing	and	left.	The	bunch
breathed	a	sigh	of	relief	and	made	for	the	cuckoo	clock	just	as	the	clock's	hands
announced	3	a.m.	The	little	door	popped	open,	the	bird	poked	his	head	out	and
said,	"Hey,	man,	what	time	is	it?"
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	THAT	BEHIND	EACH	SO-CALLED	GREAT	MAN	--	LIKE
JULIUS
CAESAR	 OR	 NAPOLEON,	 OR	 EVEN	 A	 REALLY	 GREAT	 MAN	 LIKE
SOCRATES	--
THERE	WAS	A	WOMAN	IN	CHARGE.
I	HAVE	ALWAYS	MANAGED	TO	TURN	FROM	BEING	AN	ADMIRER	OF
WOMEN
INTO	 A	WOMAN'S	 FOOL.	WHAT	 IS	 YOUR	 SECRET?	 YOU	 HAVE	 PUT
MORE
WOMEN	 IN	 CHARGE	 THAN	 IS	 REALLY	 POSSIBLE,	 AND	 YET	 YOU
HAVE
REMAINED	FREE	AND	LOVED	BY	THEM	ALL.	AND	I	LOVE	YOU	TOO.
Prem	Prasad,	the	so-called	great	men	--	Julius	Caesar,	Alexander,	Napoleon	and
others	--
were	certainly	driven	by	women;	they	were	trying	to	prove	themselves.
The	 woman	 has	 one	 very	 special	 quality	 about	 her:	 she	 is,	 in	 a	 way,	 very
contented	 with	 small	 things.	 Just	 because	 she	 is	 a	 woman	 she	 has	 a	 natural
capacity	to	create	children;	her	desire	for	creativity	is	fulfilled	--	she	becomes	a
creator	 naturally,	 biologically.	 There,	 man	 feels	 impotent:	 he	 cannot	 produce
children.	Something	like	an	empty	womb	hurts	inside.	He	wants	to	prove	before
the	woman,	particularly	the	woman	he	loves,	that	"I	can	also	create,"
that	 "I	 can	 also	 conquer,"	 that	 "I	 can	 also	 show	 the	 world	 that	 I	 am	 not	 just
useless,	 just	 like	an	appendix,"	 that	"I	have	also	something	to	contribute	 to	 the
world,	 to	 its	beauty,	 to	 its	power,	 to	 its	art,	 to	 its	music,	 to	 its	dance.	I	have	 to
prove	it!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
63
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
That	is	a	very	unconscious	longing	in	every	man	--	to	prove	something.	And	the
moment	a	person	falls	in	love	with	a	woman,	immediately	the	question	becomes
of	predominant	 importance.	He	starts	proving	himself	by	earning	more	money,
by	 becoming	 a	 president	 or	 prime	 minister,	 by	 conquering	 the	 world.	 But
whatsoever	he	does	still	remains	incomplete	--
he	 cannot	 compete	 with	 the	 woman.	 She	 remains	 so	 round,	 so	 centered	 and
grounded,	that	the	man	can	go	on	to	the	very	end	of	the	world,	but	still	he	will
not	be	grounded.	He	will	go	to	Everest,	he	will	go	to	the	moon,	he	will	become	a
world	conqueror,	he	will	discover	great	truths	of	science,	he	will	fight	wars,	he
will	 explore	 the	 unknown,	 but	 wherever	 he	 is	 he	 will	 find	 that	 something	 is
missing.	That	missing	link	is	biological.
Woman	has	 a	 balanced	biology;	 her	 chemistry	 is	 equally	 balanced.	Man	has	 a
biology	which	 is	a	 little	unbalanced:	one	part	 is	heavier	and	 the	other	part	 is	a
little	 lighter,	and	that	creates	an	inner	 tension	in	him.	That's	why	more	men	go
mad	 than	women,	more	men	 commit	 suicide	 than	women,	more	men	 commit
murder	than	women.	And	if	you	look	at	the	world	you	will	see	it	is	dominated	by
man	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	woman	is	not	interested	in	dominating;	there
is	no	need	--	she	feels	a	certain	kind	of	fulfillment	in	her	innermost	core.
Man	 is	 always	 rushing,	 going	 somewhere,	 always	 on	 the	 go.	 All	 men	 are
American,	tourists!
They	cannot	be	here	now.
And	it	starts	even	in	the	womb.	An	experienced	mother	who	has	given	birth	to
one	or	two	children	knows	perfectly	well	after	a	few	months	whether	inside	the
womb	 there	 is	 a	 boy	 or	 a	 girl.	 The	 boy	 starts	 kicking,	 he	 starts	 becoming	 an
Alexander	 the	Great!	The	 girl	 remains	 quiet,	 at	 ease,	meditative;	 she	 does	 not
create	much	disturbance.
It	is	because	of	this	that	woman	was	easily	dominated	by	man.	It	is	not	because
of	 the	 superiority	 of	man,	 it	 is	 not	 because	 of	 his	 power,	 that	 he	was	 able	 to
dominate	 the	 woman,	 it	 is	 just	 the	 opposite.	 The	 woman	 is	 superior	 in	many
ways,	and	because	man	suffers	from	inferiority	he	had	to	dominate	the	woman;
only	then	could	he	get	rid	of	a	little	bit	of	his	inferiority.
Man	has	dominated	the	whole	of	history,	he	has	 in	every	possible	way	tried	to
enslave	the	woman.	But	he	has	not	been	successful:	on	the	surface	it	may	look	as
if	he	has	succeeded,	but	each	husband	knows	perfectly	well	that	the	moment	he
enters	the	home	he	is	no	longer	the	lion	that	he	pretends	to	be	on	the	outside.	He
suddenly	becomes	a	dog,	a	poor	dog,	with	its	tail	between	its	legs!	When	he	goes
out	of	 the	home	he	goes	 like	 thunder,	when	he	comes	home	all	 the	gas	 is	 lost!
Somehow	he	enters	afraid,	trembling,	and	starts	reading	the	same	newspaper	he
has	been	reading	the	whole	day	just	to	avoid	the	woman.	That	newspaper	is	just
a	curtain.	Even	a	small	woman	is	enough	to	bring	any	Mohammed	Ali	the	Great
to	his	senses.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	the	life	of	the	Great	Indian	Emperor	Akbar:	One	day
one	of	his	friends,	Birbal,	told	him,	"As	far	as	I	know,	all	men	are	dominated	by
women,	whatsoever	they	may	pretend."	Akbar	was	offended.	He	said,	"You	will
have	 to	 prove	 it.	 There	 must	 be	 a	 few	 men	 who	 are	 not	 dominated;	 your
statement	cannot	be	taken	as	a	generalization.	So	I	will	give	you	two	beautiful
horses.	Go	around	--	and	take	a	few	hens	also	with	you.	If	you	find	a	man	who	is
henpecked,	present	him	with	a	hen;	if	you	find	a	man	who	is	not	henpecked,	then
give	him	a	choice	--	he	can	either	have	the	black	horse	or	the	white	horse.	These
are	the	most	beautiful	horses	I	have	got,	 the	most	costly."	In	those	days	horses
were	of	tremendous	value.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
64
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Birbal	went	around	Delhi,	and	wherever	he	went	he	had	to	present	a	hen.	Only	in
one	place	was	he	in	a	little	difficulty.	A	very	muscular	man	--	he	had	never	seen
such	a	strong,	muscular	body	--	was	sitting	in	the	sun,	massaging	his	muscles.
Birbal	asked	him,	"Are	you	a	henpecked	husband?"
He	simply	showed	his	muscles	to	Birbal	and	said,	"Just	hold	my	hand	and	I	will
show	 you!"	 He	 crushed	 Birbal's	 hand	 so	 that	 Birbal	 screamed,	 and	 he	 said,
"Now,	do	you	have	to	ask	me	again?	Then	I	will	hit	you!	The	very	question	is	an
insult!	Who	can	dominate	me?"
A	very	little	woman	was	cooking	food	inside	--	just	a	little	woman	that	the	man
could	have	crushed	with	a	single	hand.	No	cross	would	have	been	needed,	just	a
little	pressure	on	her	neck	and	she	would	have	kicked	the	bucket!
Birbal	asked,	"Where	is	your	wife?"
He	said,	"That	is	my	wife	cooking	inside.	You	can	look	at	her	and	you	can	look
at	me,	and	you	can	decide	who	is	the	master."
It	was	so	absolutely	clear	that	Birbal	said,	"Certainly	you	are	the	master,	so	I	will
have	 to	 take	my	 generalization	 back.	 You	 can	 choose	 as	 a	 gift	 from	 the	 king
either	of	the	horses,	black	or	white."
And	 the	 man	 looked	 at	 the	 woman	 and	 said,	 "Which	 horse	 should	 I	 choose,
black	or	white?"
And	the	woman	said,	"Let	it	be	white!"
And	Birbal	said,	"Now	you	have	a	hen!	It	 is	finished!	You	may	have	muscular
power,	but	that	does	not	prove	anything."
The	woman	has	a	psychological	grip.
Andrew	Carnegie,	one	of	the	great	wealthy	industrialists	of	the	world,	was	asked
on	the	last	day	of	his	life,	"How	did	you	manage	to	earn	so	much	money?	What
was	the	secret	behind	it?"
He	 said,	 "There	was	 no	 secret.	 I	was	 just	 trying	 to	 see	whether	 I	 can	 earn	 so
much	that	my	wife	could	not	spend	it,	but	I	failed,	she	succeeded."
Prasad,	you	ask	me:
I	HAVE	HEARD	THAT	BEHIND	EACH	SO-CALLED	GREAT	MAN	--	LIKE
JULIUS
CAESAR	 OR	 NAPOLEON,	 OR	 EVEN	 A	 REALLY	 GREAT	 MAN	 LIKE
SOCRATES	--
THERE	WAS	A	WOMAN	IN	CHARGE.
It	is	true.	About	the	so-called	great	men	it	is	true	because	they	were	trying	to	be
great	 just	 to	 compete	 with	 their	 wives,	 and	 about	 the	 really	 great	 men	 like
Socrates	it	is	also	true.
A	 young	 man	 asked	 Socrates,	 "I	 am	 thinking	 to	 get	 married.	 What	 is	 your
advice?"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
65
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
He	had	heard	all	 the	 stories	about	Socrates	and	his	wife,	Xanthippe.	She	must
have	 been	 a	 really	 dangerous	woman,	 an	Amazon!	 She	 used	 to	 beat	 Socrates.
Once	she	poured	hot	water,	boiling	hot	water	on	him;	she	was	boiling	it	for	tea
but	became	angry	and	poured	it	on	Socrates'	face.
Socrates	was	an	ugly	man,	very	ugly	 --	 snub-nosed,	nothing	worth	 looking	at,
disgusting.
Xanthippe	 made	 him	 more	 disgusting!	 Half	 of	 his	 face	 remained	 burned	 his
whole	life.
So	this	young	man	had	come	to	the	right	person	to	ask:	"You	have	experienced
what	it	 is	to	be	a	husband	more	than	anybody	else,	and	the	whole	of	Athens	is
full	of	stories	about	your	wife	and	you,	and	you	are	the	wisest	man,	declared	so
by	 the	Oracle	 of	 Delphi,	 so	 I	 have	 come	 to	 ask	 you	 --	 I	 am	 in	 a	 dilemma	 --
should	I	get	married	or	not?"
Socrates	said,	"You	should	get	married."
The	young	man	could	not	believe	it	--	he	had	not	expected	this	answer.	He	said,
"You	 are	 saying	 it	 after	 your	 whole	 experience	 of	 having	 Xanthippe	 as	 your
wife?"
He	said,	"Yes.	If	you	get	a	good	wife	she	will	make	you	succeed	in	life,	she	will
put	ambition	 in	you.	And	you	are	young;	you	will	need	some	ambition.	 If	you
get	a	wife	like	mine	then	you	will	become	a	philosopher.	My	wife	has	helped	me
immensely	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 remaining	 unaffected.	 Whatsoever	 happens	 --
success	or	failure,	misery	or	happiness	--	it	is	all	the	same	to	me.	She	has	made
me	centered.	Either	way	you	will	not	lose,	so	get	married."
There	 is	 a	 possibility	 --	 every	 possibility,	 in	 fact	 --	 that	 the	 whole	 credit	 for
Buddha	becoming	 enlightened	goes	 to	Yashodhara,	 his	wife.	The	whole	 credit
for	Mohammed	becoming	the	prophet	of	God	MUST	go	to	his	nine	wives.	There
is	every	possibility	 that	 these	people	were	trying	somehow	not	 to	be	disturbed,
not	 to	 be	 distracted,	 and	 they	 started	 searching	 for	 a	 beyond,	 they	 started
searching	 for	 a	within,	 the	 beyond	within,	 so	 that	 they	 could	 forget	 the	whole
world.	 The	 wife,	 the	 woman	 is	 really	 the	 closest	 world	 around	 you:	 she
surrounds	you	everywhere,	from	every	nook	and	corner.	So	your	so-called	great
men	are	indebted	to	women,	and	your	many	really	great	men	are	also	indebted	to
women,	although	they	have	not	accepted	it.	That	is	ugly.
Many	times	I	am	asked	why	women	don't	become	enlightened.	The	reason	is,	no
man	is	capable	of	driving	them	to	that	extreme!	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	women,
it	 is	 just	 the	 impotence	 of	 the	 man	 --	 he	 cannot	 drive	 them	 to	 that	 point.
Moreover,	 women	 are	 always	 grounded,	 centered,	 man	 is	 not	 grounded,	 not
centered.	He	remains	airy-fairy	and	he	needs	grounding,	he	needs	centering.
Strolling	 through	 London's	 Soho	 district,	 the	 young	 cockney	 noticed	 an
attractive	girl	furiously	struggling	to	hold	down	her	microskirt	in	the	brisk	wind.
Tipping	his	hat,	he	said,
"Airy,	ain't	it?"
"What	the	hell	did	you	expect?"	she	replied.	"Feathers?"
Sheila	and	George	were	spending	the	first	night	of	their	honeymoon	in	a	quaint
medieval	 town	 in	 France.	 To	 add	 piquancy	 to	 the	 evening,	 Sheila	 suggested
coyly	 that	 they	make	 love	 every	 time	 the	 old	 night	watchman	 rang	 his	 hourly
bell.	George	smiled	in	delight	at	this	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
66
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
prospect,	 but	 four	 rings	 later	 he	 pretended	 that	 he	 had	 to	 go	 out	 to	 get	 some
cigarettes	and	staggered	off	to	the	watchman's	tower.
"Listen,	old	man,"	he	wheezed	to	the	man,	"do	me	a	favor,	will	you?	For	the	rest
of	the	night	ring	that	bell	of	yours	at	two-hour	intervals	instead	of	hourly!"
"Ah,"	replied	the	ancient	watchman,	fingering	his	moustache,	"I	would	be	happy
to	oblige,	monsieur,	but	I	cannot	do	this."
"Why	 not?"	George	 demanded.	 "I'll	 give	 you	money,	 if	 that's	what's	 troubling
you!"
"Not	at	all,"	the	old	man	responded.	"You	see,	a	beautiful	young	lady	has	already
bribed	me	to	ring	the	bell	every	half	hour."
I	HAVE	ALWAYS	MANAGED	TO	TURN	FROM	BEING	AN	ADMIRER	OF
WOMEN
INTO	A	WOMAN'S	FOOL.
If	 you	 are	 an	 admirer	 of	women	you	will	 inevitably	 turn	 into	 a	woman's	 fool,
because	admiration	is	illusory;	admiration	is	possible	only	from	a	distance.	The
closer	you	come	the	more	foolish	you	will	look,	and	when	you	are	caught	by	the
woman	you	are	bound	to	be	turned	into	a	damned	fool.	And	you	were	trying	in
every	possible	way	to	be	caught,	so	you	cannot	easily	get	out	of	it	either.
A	 mousetrap	 never	 runs	 after	 a	 mouse;	 the	 mousetrap	 simply	 sits	 centered,
grounded.	 The	 mouse	 in	 his	 airy-fairy	 romanticism	 starts	 dreaming	 about	 the
coziness	inside	the	mousetrap,	the	smell	of	the	food	inside,	the	spaghetti	and	all
that,	and	gets	caught.	It	is	easy	to	get	caught,	it	is	very	difficult	to	be	out	again,
because	the	mousetrap	has	only	an	entrance	and	no	exit.
So,	Prasad,	it	is	going	to	happen	again	and	again!
I	don't	admire	any	woman:	I	am	not	a	romantic,	I	am	very	factual.	Whatsoever	I
say	about	men	or	women	is	simply	a	fact	--	no	fiction	about	it!	And	once	you	are
caught	you	will	be	constantly	in	difficulty	because	there	are	other	mousetraps	all
around	which	look	cozier,	warmer,	more	beautiful,	more	spicy.	In	fact,	the	word
"spicy"	 is	only	a	plural	of	"spouse."	And	marriage	 is	a	very	strange	affair:	 the
dessert	is	served	first	and	then	everything	goes	down	the	drain!
After	a	heart-transplant	operation	the	patient	was	receiving	instructions	from	his
doctor.
He	was	placed	on	a	strict	diet,	denied	tobacco	and	advised	to	get	at	 least	eight
hours	sleep	at	night.
Finally	the	patient	asked,	"What	about	my	sex	life,	doc?	Will	it	be	all	right	for
me	to	have	intercourse?"
"Just	 with	 your	 wife,"	 responded	 the	 doctor.	 "We	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 get	 too
excited."
A	 middle-aged	 husband	 went	 to	 a	 doctor	 and	 explained	 that	 his	 wife	 was
constantly	nagging	him	about	his	vanishing	potency.	After	giving	him	a	bottle	of
pills	the	doctor	assured	him	that	they	would	work	wonders.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
67
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
A	month	 later	 the	man	returned,	obviously	satisfied	with	 the	results.	"The	pills
are	terrific!"	he	said.	"I've	been	doing	it	three	times	a	night."
"Wonderful,"	 the	 doctor	 replied.	 "What	 does	 your	 wife	 say	 about	 your	 love-
making	now?"
"How	should	I	know?"	the	fellow	shrugged.	"I	haven't	been	home	yet!"
You	ask	me,	Prasad:
WHAT	IS	YOUR	SECRET?
In	my	life	there	is	no	secret	--	or	you	can	call	it	the	open	secret.	I	have	nothing
hidden:	 I	 don't	 live	 like	 a	 fist,	 I	 live	 like	 an	 open	 hand.	 Nothing	 is	 hidden,
nothing	is	esoteric,	nothing	is	secret;	all	is	simple	and	plain.
You	say:
YOU	 HAVE	 PUT	 MORE	 WOMEN	 IN	 CHARGE	 THAN	 IS	 REALLY
POSSIBLE,	AND
YET	YOU	HAVE	REMAINED	FREE	AND	LOVED	BY	THEM	ALL.
The	open	secret	 is	 that	you	can	be	free	only	 if	you	have	put	 too	many	women
around	you.
Then	they	are	so	concerned	with	each	other	that	they	leave	you	absolutely	alone;
in	fact	they	forget	all	about	you!	Their	jealousies,	their	envies	are	enough	to	keep
them	occupied.	If	one	wants	to	be	really	free	of	women,	that's	the	only	way.	This
is	my	open	secret!
And	they	all	love	me	for	the	simple	reason	that	I	am	not	possessed	by	anybody,
nor	do	I	possess	anybody.	If	you	possess	some	woman	then	there	will	be	trouble,
if	you	are	possessed	by	some	woman	then	there	will	be	trouble.	I	don't	possess
anybody,	I	am	not	possessed	by	anybody.	I	go	on	sitting	doing	my	own	business
--	which	is	nothing	--	and	I	keep	the	women	going	round	and	round.	And	they
have	so	many	problems,	they	can	afford	to	forget	all	about	me!
And	you	say:
YOU	 HAVE	 PUT	 MORE	 WOMEN	 IN	 CHARGE	 THAN	 IS	 REALLY
POSSIBLE...
No,	 you	 don't	 know	 the	 limit.	 Even	 the	 sky	 is	 not	 the	 limit!	 When	 the	 new
commune	happens	you	will	see:	I	will	put	so	many	women	in	charge	that	even	if
I	die	it	will	take	you	years	to	discover	that	the	man	is	no	longer	there!	They	will
make	so	much	fuss	and	dance	and	love	and	all	kinds	of	foolish	things	that	you
will	not	even	come	to	know	whether	I	am	still	here	or	gone.
And	I	have	put	them	in	charge	because	they	are	more	pragmatic	than	men,	they
have	 a	 greater	 capacity	 to	 cope	 with	 reality,	 they	 are	 earth-bound.	Man	 leans
more	towards	the	sky	and	the	woman	is	rooted	in	the	earth.	It	is	a	very	pragmatic
arrangement.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
68
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
If	the	woman	takes	charge	of	the	whole	world,	the	world	will	drop	many	stupid
things.	For	example,	wars	will	disappear.	Of	course	there	will	be	more	beautiful
clothes,	 fashion	 shows,	 modelling,	 but	 weapons,	 atomic	 bombs,	 hydrogen
bombs,	 etcetera,	 will	 disappear	 --	 no	 woman	 is	 interested	 in	 all	 these	 things.
Hiroshima	and	Nagasaki	will	not	happen	again;	 it	 is	only	 the	man	who	can	do
these	things.	Crusades	will	disappear,	religious	wars	will	disappear,	JIHADS	will
disappear.	No	woman	 is	 interested;	 her	 interest	 is	 very	 pragmatic,	 real.	 She	 is
more	interested	in	clothes,	in	cosmetics,	in	beauty;	and	those	concerns	are	good	-
-	 they	 keep	 you	 more	 alive.	 Man's	 concerns	 are	 very	 dangerous	 --	 political,
religious,	economic	--	and	they	make	more	and	more	mischief.
In	 the	name	of	serving	humanity	more	mischief	happens	than	anything	else:	 in
three	thousand	years,	five	thousand	wars	have	been	fought	and	the	whole	credit
goes	to	man.
Millions	of	people	are	killed	in	the	name	of	love,	in	the	name	of	democracy,	in
the	name	of	freedom,	in	the	name	of	 love.	Now,	no	woman	can	do	that.	And	I
don't	 think	 you	 can	 have	 a	 world	 war	 because	 of	 cosmetics	 or	 clothes	 and
designs	 and	 dramas	 and	 new	 dishes	 --	 you	 can't	 have	 world	 wars	 because	 of
these	things!
I	want	my	commune	to	be	very	earth-bound,	because	this	is	my	experience,	the
observation	of	many	 lives:	 that	 the	 tree	has	 first	 to	go	deep	 into	 the	earth;	 the
deeper	the	roots	go,	the	higher	the	branches	rise.	If	you	want	to	touch	the	stars
with	your	flowers	then	you	have	to	go	to	the	very	rock-bottom	of	the	earth.
All	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 have	 remained	 a	 little	 foggy,	 confused,	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	they	were	all	trying	to	reach	the	stars,	the	beyond,	to	the	far
away,	without	ever	thinking	about	the	roots.
Buddha	was	against	women,	he	was	not	willing	to	initiate	women.	He	said	that
his	religion	would	have	lasted	five	thousand	years,	but	because	finally	he	agreed
to	 initiate	women	 his	 religion	would	 disappear	within	 five	 hundred	 years.	My
own	observation	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	without	women	 it	would	 not	 have	 lasted
even	 five	hundred	years,	because	 the	moment	Buddha	died	all	 the	men	started
quarrelling	 --	 ideological	 wars.	 Thirty-two	 sects	 were	 immediately	 born,	 the
same	 day!	 Even	 Buddha's	 body	 was	 not	 yet	 totally	 burnt	 and	 thirty-two
philosophical	schools,	thirty-two	interpretations	arose.	The	war	had	started.
When	 Jesus	 was	 crucified,	 all	 those	 twelve	 fools	 disappeared.	 Three	 women
were	there	to	take	his	body	from	the	cross	but	not	a	single	man.	Mary	Magdalene
was	 there,	 the	prostitute,	her	 sister	was	 there,	Martha,	 and	 Jesus'	mother	Mary
was	 there.	 And	 all	 those	 apostles,	 those	 fanatics,	 where	 had	 they	 gone?	 They
were	 preparing	 for	 the	Vatican,	 they	were	 preparing	 for	 the	 future.	 Jesus	 was
finished!	Now	 the	question	was	of	 theology,	 the	philosophy,	 the	 ideology.	But
those	three	women	were	not	concerned	with	theology	or	philosophy,	they	were
concerned	 with	 his	 body.	 They	 were	 more	 pragmatic,	 they	 were	 more	 true,
honest,	sincere.
They	loved	the	man,	they	risked	for	the	man,	they	were	ready	to	be	condemned.
All	those	men	had	disappeared.
One	of	the	most	educated	of	Jesus'	disciples	was	Judas;	he	betrayed	him	for	only
thirty	 silver	 coins.	 No	 woman	 could	 have	 done	 that.	 And	 he	 was	 the	 most
intellectual	 amongst	 all	 of	 Jesus'	 disciples.	 But	 intellectuals	 can	 betray	 very
easily:	 they	are	 the	most	 renegade	people	 in	 the	world	because	 their	hearts	are
not	in	it,	only	their	head	--	and	the	head	is	cunning,	the	head	is	calculating.	The
woman	lives	through	the	heart.
Hence,	my	commune	is	functioning	in	a	totally	new	way:	it	has	to	be	rooted	first.
That's	the	way	of	all	gardeners:	first	you	have	to	give	soil,	manure,	roots	to	the
plant,	and	then	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
69
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
flowers	 come	 of	 their	 own	 accord.	 Flowers	 will	 come,	 but	 they	 cannot	 come
without	roots.
Roots	and	flowers	are	like	two	wings:	if	you	have	both	wings	then	the	whole	sky
is	yours.	But	the	most	important	thing,	the	first,	the	basic,	the	fundamental,	is	the
root.
The	woman	is	the	root	of	all	life;	man	can	at	the	most	be	a	branch,	a	flowering
branch,	 a	 beautiful	 branch	 --	 a	 longing,	 an	 aspiration	 to	 touch	 the	 stars.	 They
have	 to	go	 together.	That's	why,	Prasad,	 I	have	put	 so	many	women	here,	 and
slowly	slowly	they	will	take	over	the	whole	soil	and	leave	you	free,	leave	men
free	to	grow	into	flowers.
A	real	commune	will	have	men	and	women	in	a	deep	synchronicity.	All	the	past
communes	had	to	die	because	they	depended	only	on	men;	they	never	took	any
care	 of	 the	 women.	 And	 no	woman	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 create	 a	 commune
because	she	does	not	aspire	to	the	stars.
A	commune	means	an	aspiration,	a	 longing,	a	 tremendous	 longing	 to	grow,	an
immense	 urge	 to	 explore.	 No	 woman	 can	 find	 reasons	 to	 put	 down	 the
foundation	stone	for	a	commune.
Man	is	always	interested	in	 the	far	away,	so	he	becomes	the	original	source	of
communes,	but	no	man	is	capable	of	giving	roots.
And	this	has	been	the	problem	in	the	past:	the	woman	can	provide	roots	but	she
is	 not	 interested	 in	 flowers,	 and	 the	 man	 can	 provide	 flowers	 but	 he	 is	 not
interested	in	roots.	A	deep	synchronicity	is	needed,	a	deep	harmony.	That's	what
I	am	trying	to	fulfill	here.
Obsessed	with	the	idea	of	pleasing	all	manner	of	customers	with	girls	of	the	very
highest	order,	an	enterprising	madam	set	up	a	three-story	house	of	sport.	She	had
ex-secretaries,	selected	for	their	efficiency,	on	the	first	floor;	ex-models,	selected
for	 their	 beauty,	 on	 the	 second;	 and	 ex-schoolteachers,	 selected	 for	 their
intelligence,	on	the	third.	As	time	went	on	the	madam	noticed	that	almost	all	the
play	went	 to	 floor	number	 three.	She	asked	why,	and	 the	answer	 to	 the	puzzle
finally	came	from	one	of	the	steady	customers.
"Well,"	said	the	sporting	gentleman,	"you	know	how	those	school	teachers	are:
they	make	you	do	it	over	and	over,	until	you	get	it	right!"
And	this	is	the	real	open	secret:	my	women	sannyasins	are	really	doing	perfectly
well,	and	they	will	make	you	do	it	again	and	again	until	you	do	it	right!
The	 morning	 after	 the	 office	 Christmas	 party	 the	 husband	 woke	 up	 with	 an
agonizing	hangover.	"I	feel	terrible,"	he	complained.
"You	should,"	said	his	wife.	"You	really	made	a	fool	of	yourself	last	night."
"What	did	I	do?"
"You	got	into	a	quarrel	with	your	boss	and	he	fired	you."
"Well,	he	can	go	to	hell!"
"That's	exactly	what	you	told	him."
"I	did?"	he	said	incredulously.	"Then,	screw	the	old	goat!"
"That's	just	what	I	did,"	his	wife	replied.	"You	go	back	to	work	on	Monday."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
70
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Very	pragmatic!
Sam	told	his	wife,	Becky,	that	because	of	inflation	they	had	to	cut	expenses	--	no
more	 dining	 out,	 theater,	 concerts,	 etcetera.	 Becky	 chided	 him	 in	 reply,	 "But,
Sam,	if	you	would	just	learn	how	to	fuck,	we	could	get	rid	of	the	chauffeur!"
But	man	lives	in	a	totally	different	world!
A	 man	 returned	 from	 a	 convention	 and	 proudly	 showed	 his	 wife	 a	 gallon	 of
bourbon	he	had	won	for	having	the	largest	sex	organ	of	all	present.
"What!"	she	exclaimed.	"Do	you	mean	to	tell	me	you	exhibited	yourself	in	front
of	all	those	people?"
"Only	enough	to	win,	darling,"	he	replied.	"Only	enough	to	win!"
The	last	question
Question	3
OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 BEGUN	 TO	 ASK	 YOU	 SOME	 QUESTIONS	 THREE	 OR	 FOUR
TIMES
ALREADY.	 EVERY	 TIME	 I	 FINISHED	 A	 LETTER,	 I	 FELT	 THAT
EVERYTHING	 I	 WROTE	 WAS	 NONSENSE	 AND	 SO	 I	 THREW	 THEM
INTO	THE	WASTEPAPER
BASKET.	NEVERTHELESS,	I	WANT	YOU	TO	SPEAK	A	FEW	WORDS	TO
ME,	 ALTHOUGH	 I	 SELDOM	 LISTEN	 TO	 YOUR	 WORDS	 --	 JUST
HEARING,	BEING	CLOSE
TO	YOU.
SINCE	I	ARRIVED	HERE	I	HAVE	BEEN	REALLY	IRRITATED.	I	WAS	FINE
IN	THE
WEST	AND	HAD	NEVER	SEARCHED	FOR	A	MASTER.	NOW	I	AM	HERE
AND	HAVE
NO	DESIRE	TO	GO	BACK.	WHAT	HAS	HAPPENED	TO	ME?
Anneliese,	I	have	happened	to	you!	Now	there	is	no	going	back,	and	even	if	you
go	I	am	coming	with	you.	 I	will	haunt	you	everywhere!	I	can	understand	your
irritation.	That's	my	whole	joy	--	to	irritate	people!	Once	they	are	irritated	they
are	caught.
Of	course,	you	are	right	 that	you	were	fine	in	the	West;	now	you	can	never	be
fine	 anywhere	 else,	 but	 only	 now,	 here.	Now	no	West,	 no	East	 can	 be	 of	 any
help.	You	have	tasted	something	that	you	have	not	tasted	before,	and	once	you
have	 tasted	 something	 --	 something	 alcoholic,	 something	 like	LSD	 --	 you	 can
never	be	the	same	person	again.	That	taste	will	linger,	it	will	haunt	you.
And	 this	 is	 pure	 LSD	 that	 is	 happening	 here!	 It	 is	 not	 chemical	 LSD,	 it	 is
alchemical	--	far	more	refined	than	chemical	LSDs	can	ever	be.	It	is	real	soma!	It
is	what	has	always	happened	between	a	Master	and	a	disciple.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
71
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
There	is	no	need	to	listen	to	my	words,	Anneliese,	just	being	with	me	is	enough,
just	being	in	tune,	that's	enough.	Words	are	only	strategies	to	keep	you	attuned	to
me	so	that	you	don't	fall	asleep,	so	that	you	remain	awake.
You	say:
EVERY	 TIME	 I	 FINISHED	 A	 LETTER,	 I	 FELT	 THAT	 EVERYTHING	 I
WROTE	WAS
NONSENSE...
It	 is!	But	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 throw	 it	 away,	 otherwise	what	 am	 I	 going	 to	 do
here?	 Use	 me	 as	 a	 wastepaper	 basket,	 so	 whatsoever	 you	 write,	 sense,
nonsense...	it	is	all	nonsense	--	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	it	is	all	nonsense.	So	you
can	send	it	to	me,	and	I	will	make	some	crazy	thing	out	of	it.
After	 acquiring	 enough	 money	 from	 handouts,	 an	 inhabitant	 of	 the	 Bowery
decided	 to	 take	 his	 refreshment	 at	 one	 of	 Wall	 Street's	 better	 drinking
establishments.
A	financial	tycoon	seated	next	to	him	was	visibly	appalled	at	the	appearance	and
odor	of	the	down-and-outer,	so	much	so,	 in	fact,	 that	he	turned	to	the	man	and
pointedly	said,
"Cleanliness	is	next	to	godliness	--	John	Wesley."	His	words	were	ignored.
A	few	minutes	 later,	 the	 financier	again	 intoned	 loudly,	 "Cleanliness	 is	next	 to
godliness	--
John	Wesley."	Still	he	was	ignored.
Finally,	 the	visibly	 irritated	financier	shouted	 in	 the	man's	face,	"Cleanliness	 is
next	to	godliness	--	John	Wesley!"
To	 which	 the	 skid-row	 denizen	 calmly	 replied,	 "Screw	 you!	 --	 Tennessee
Williams."
You	can	ask	me	any	nonsense	thing,	and	I	will	give	you	a	bigger	nonsense.	I	am
an	 expert	 at	 that,	 the	 only	 expertise	 I	 can	 claim!	And	 the	more	 nonsensical	 a
question	is	the	more	I	enjoy	it,	because	it	expects	a	more	nonsensical	answer.	If
you	ask	something	crazy	that	means	you	are	asking	for	something	crazy,	and	I
am	the	last	one	to	be	defeated!
Anneliese...
A	 man	 went	 into	 a	 restaurant	 and	 ordered	 his	 breakfast.	 When	 the	 waitress
brought	his	coffee,	he	observed	that	her	thumb	was	stuck	in	the	coffee.	When	the
scrambled	eggs	arrived,	again	he	observed	that	her	thumb	was	in	the	eggs.
This	was	 too	much,	and	he	said,	"Lady,	I	didn't	say	anything	when	I	saw	your
thumb	in	my	coffee,	but	now	I	see	that	your	thumb	is	in	my	eggs,	too."
"Well,"	said	 the	waitress,	"I	have	a	painful	arthritis	 in	my	thumb-joint,	and	 the
doctor	told	me	to	put	it	into	something	warm	and	this	would	ease	the	pain."
The	man	was	angry	and	said,	"Well,	why	don't	you	stick	it	up	your	ass?"
"Oh,	I	do,	I	do,"	answered	the	waitress,	"but	only	when	I'm	in	the	kitchen!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
72
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
6
I	exalt	the	ordinary
6	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 I	 HAVE	 GOT	 ALL	 THE	 DEGREES	 THAT	 A	 UNIVERSITY	 CAN
OFFER.
WHY	AM	I	STILL	IGNORANT?
Dr.	Pritam	Singh,	knowledge	has	no	capacity	to	dispel	ignorance.	Knowledge	is
a	false	phenomenon;	it	is	not	wisdom	at	all,	it	is	just	the	opposite	of	wisdom.
Knowledge	is	borrowed,	wisdom	is	the	flowering	of	your	innermost	being.	You
can	 borrow	 a	 plastic	 flower,	 but	 if	 you	want	 real	 roses	 then	 you	will	 have	 to
grow	them	in	your	innermost	being.	No	university	can	offer	it,	no	scripture	can
offer	it,	no	scholarship	is	capable	of	doing	it.	They	are	all	impotent	efforts,	but
they	 have	 been	 deceiving	millions	 of	 people	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	Yes,	 they
can	make	you	knowledgeable.	To	be	knowledgeable	is	one	thing,	and	to	know	is
totally	different.
A	blind	man	can	be	knowledgeable	about	light,	but	he	knows	nothing	of	light,	he
has	not	experienced	it.	He	can	collect	all	kinds	of	information	about	light,	he	can
argue,	philosophize,	systematize,	he	can	write	great	treatises	on	light,	but	he	has
not	tasted	the	joy	of	light,	he	has	not	seen	even	a	single	ray	of	light.	He	has	not
seen	a	 rainbow,	 the	 colors	of	 the	 flowers,	 the	wings	of	 a	butterfly.	He	has	not
seen	the	green	trees,	he	has	not	seen	the	stars,	the	sun,	the	moon.	He	has	missed
all	that.	And	what	he	has	accumulated	is	simply	rubbish.
It	 is	 better	 to	 be	 ignorant	 and	have	 eyes	 than	 to	 be	very	knowledgeable	 about
light	and	be	blind.
But	the	universities	exist	specifically	for	that	purpose.	No	society	wants	you	to
become	wise:	it	is	against	the	investment	of	all	societies.	If	people	are	wise	they
cannot	 be	 exploited.	 If	 they	 are	 intelligent	 they	 cannot	 be	 subjugated,	 they
cannot	 be	 forced	 into	 a	 mechanical	 life,	 to	 live	 like	 robots.	 They	 will	 assert
themselves	--	they	will	assert	their	individuality.	They	will	have	the	fragrance	of
rebellion	around	them;	they	will	want	to	live	in	freedom.
Freedom	comes	with	wisdom,	intrinsically.	They	are	inseparable,	and	no	society
wants	people	to	be	free.	The	communist	society,	the	fascist	society,	the	capitalist
society,	the	Hindu,	the	Mohammedan,	the	Christian	--	no	society	likes	people	to
use	their	own	intelligence	because	the	moment	they	start	using	their	intelligence
they	 become	 dangerous	 --	 dangerous	 to	 the	 establishment,	 dangerous	 to	 the
people	who	 are	 in	 power,	 dangerous	 to	 the	 "haves";	 dangerous	 to	 all	 kinds	 of
oppression,	 exploitation,	 suppression;	 dangerous	 to	 the	 churches,	 dangerous	 to
the	states,	dangerous	to	the	nations.
In	fact,	a	wise	man	is	afire,	alive,	aflame.	He	would	like	rather	to	die	than	to	be
enslaved.
Death	will	 not	matter	much	 to	 him,	 but	 he	 cannot	 sell	 his	 life	 to	 all	 kinds	 of
stupidities,	to	all	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
73
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
kinds	of	stupid	people.	He	cannot	serve	them.	Hence,	the	societies	down	the	ages
have	been	 supplying	you	with	 false	knowing.	That's	 the	very	 function	of	your
schools,	colleges,	universities.
They	 don't	 serve	 YOU,	 remember,	 they	 serve	 the	 past,	 they	 serve	 the	 vested
interests.	Of	course,	they	go	on	puffing	your	ego	up	bigger	and	bigger,	they	go
on	giving	you	more	and	more	degrees.	Your	name	becomes	 longer	and	 longer,
but	 only	 the	 name	 --	 you	 go	 on	 becoming	 shorter	 and	 shorter.	A	 point	 comes
where	 there	 are	 only	 certificates	 and	 the	 man	 has	 disappeared.	 First	 the	 man
carries	the	certificates,	then	the	certificates	carry	the	man.	The	man	is	long	dead.
Dr.	 Pritam	 Singh,	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 become	 wise	 through	 the	 universities.
Wisdom	needs	 a	 totally	 different	 approach,	 a	 diametrically	 opposite	 approach.
Knowledge	is	of	the	mind,	wisdom	is	a	state	of	no-mind.	Knowledge	creates	the
bottle	 around	 the	 goose	 --	 a	 beautiful	 bottle,	 very	 beautifully	 painted,	 but	 it	 is
just	a	bottle.
And	inside	there	cannot	be	a	real	live	goose.	Inside	a	bottle	either	you	can	have	a
stuffed	goose	--	that's	what	your	scholars	are,	stuffed	tomatoes,	potatoes,	but	all
stuffed,	stuffed	with	junk	--	or	you	can	have	a	painted	goose	inside.	It	will	look
beautiful	from	the	outside,	but	in	fact	you	are	carrying	only	a	bottle.
And	 the	 bottle	 becomes	 heavier,	 because	 knowledge	 has	 its	 own	 way	 of
accumulating	 --	 it	 goes	 on	 reproducing	 itself.	 Knowledge	 does	 not	 believe	 in
birth	control	at	all.	 If	you	know	one	thing,	 it	will	drive	you	into	another	 thing,
because	with	each	question	answered	 ten	new	questions	arise.	Again	 the	 same
will	happen:	ten	questions	answered	and	you	have	a	hundred	questions	ready	for
you.	It	goes	on	spreading.	It	becomes	bigger	and	bigger	and	you	are	lost	in	it.
You	ask	me:
WHY	AM	I	STILL	IGNORANT?
This	 is	 why	 you	 are	 ignorant:	 you	 have	 not	 yet	 come	 out	 of	 the	 illusion	 of
knowledge,	the	illusion	of	the	mind.
Get	out	of	the	mind.	The	mind	is	the	bottle	I	am	talking	about.	The	moment	you
drop	the	mind...	and	mind	is	only	your	idea;	it	is	not	a	reality,	it	is	fictitious,	it	is
just	 a	 fantasy.	 It	 is	made	 of	 the	 same	 stuff	 that	 dreams	 are	made	 of.	You	 can
simply	step	out	of	it.
And	this	is	the	moment,	Dr.	Pritam	Singh,	because	this	is	a	great	insight,	in	fact,
to	recognize:	"Why	am	I	still	ignorant	when	I	am	carrying	all	the	degrees	of	the
university?"
Accept	 the	 fact	 that	 all	 those	 years	 of	 acquiring	knowledge	have	been	 a	 sheer
wastage.	Get	out	of	it!	And	the	moment	you	are	out	of	the	mind,	you	are	out	of
the	bottle.	See?...	 the	goose	 is	out!	And	 the	whole	freedom	of	 the	sky,	and	 the
whole	freedom	of	insightfulness...
Just	 the	other	day	I	was	reading:	What	does	a	degree	mean?	I	have	four:	B.A,
M.A.,	 Ph.D.,	 and	 LL.D.	 Put	 them	 all	 together	 and	 what	 have	 you	 got?	 --
BAMAPHDLLD!
A	YOUNG	MAN	AT	COLLEGE	NAMED	BREEZE,
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
74
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
WEIGHED	DOWN	BY	M.A.S	AND	LL.D.S
COLLAPSED	FROM	THE	STRAIN
SAID	HIS	DOCTOR,	"T'IS	PLAIN
YOU	ARE	KILLING	YOURSELF	BY	DEGREES!"
A	very	agitated	professor,	a	father-to-be,	desperate	for	a	son,	was	pacing	up	and
down	 in	 the	 waiting	 room	 at	 the	 maternity	 hospital.	 Eventually	 the	 midwife
came	 out	 of	 the	 delivery	 room	 and	 said	 to	 him,	 "It's	 all	 over,	 Dr.	 Jones.
Congratulations!"
Still	in	a	state	of	total	panic	he	replied,	"Am	I	a	father	or	a	mother?"
That's	what	it	means:	BAMAPHDLLD
A	professor-couple	 living	 in	 the	 country,	 received	 an	 invitation	 from	 the	 local
squire	to	a	fancy-dress	party.	They	decided	to	go	as	a	cow,	with	the	husband	at
the	front	and	the	wife	at	the	back.
The	party	was	to	be	held	in	the	squire's	mansion,	which	was	only	across	a	couple
of	fields,	so	they	thought	they	might	as	well	walk	across	in	costume.
They	had	only	got	half-way	across	the	first	field	when	the	husband	--	in	the	front
--	said	to	his	wife,	"Don't	panic,	darling,	but	there's	a	bull	looking	at	us."
So	they	kept	walking	and	the	bull	kept	looking.	Then	the	bull	started	pawing	the
ground	and	making	his	way	towards	them	in	a	meaningful	manner.
"He's	charging	us,	darling,	he's	charging!"	said	the	husband.
"What	are	we	going	to	do?"	yelled	the	wife.
So	the	husband	said,	"I	am	going	to	bend	down	and	eat	grass	--	you	had	better
brace	yourself!"
It	was	 the	 young	British	 professor's	 first	 visit	 to	 the	United	 States,	 and	 in	 his
innocence	he	sought	lodging	in	the	city's	red-light	district.	His	money,	however,
was	as	green	as	his	outlook,	and	the	madam	gladly	offered	him	a	room	for	 the
night.
When	 a	 friend	 questioned	 him	 about	 his	 accommodation	 over	 lunch	 the
following	day,	 the	young	Briton	replied,	"Well,	 the	room	was	very	pretentious,
you	know,	but	Gad,	what	maid	service!"
The	so-called	learned,	the	scholarly,	the	knowledgeable	go	on	living	in	a	world
of	 their	 own	 fictions.	 They	 have	 no	 concern	 for	 reality	 at	 all	 --	 they	 are
disconnected	from	the	real.
And	it	is	the	real	which	can	make	your	life	a	joy,	a	bliss.
The	 word	 "God"	 is	 not	 God,	 the	 word	 "love"	 is	 not	 love	 either.	 So	 the	 poor
people	who	go	on	thinking	about	the	word	"God"	or	the	word	"love"	are	simply
missing	a	great	opportunity.
They	may	have	known	what	God	is,	they	may	have	become	acquainted	with	the
mysteries	of	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
75
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
love,	but	the	word	is	hiding	the	truth;	the	word	is	covering	their	eyes.	The	eyes
of	 all	 knowledgeable	 people	 are	 so	 covered	with	 theories,	 theologies,	 dogmas,
creeds,	 that	 they	 cannot	 see.	 They	 are	 not	 transparent.	 And	 wisdom	 is	 a
transparency,	a	vision	unclouded	--
unclouded	by	all	thoughts,	unclouded	by	all	dust.
One	has	 to	cleanse	oneself	every	moment,	because	dust	 tends	 to	gather	on	 the
mirror	 every	 moment.	 It	 is	 a	 natural	 process.	While	 you	 are	 sitting	 here,	 the
mirror	 in	 your	 bathroom	 is	 gathering	 dust.	 Even	 in	 the	 night	when	 nothing	 is
happening	--	even	the	doors	of	the	bathroom	and	the	windows	are	closed	--	still
some	dust	is	gathering,	settling	on	the	mirror,	because	dust	particles	are	there	in
the	air	itself.	Every	day	in	the	morning	you	have	to	clean	the	mirror.
One	has	to	be	even	more	alert	about	the	inner	mind,	the	inner	mirror,	the	inner
capacity	of	reflection.	EACH	moment	you	have	to	clean	the	dust.	I	prefer	to	put
it	in	this	way:	EACH
moment	a	sannyasin	has	 to	die	 to	 the	past	and	be	born	anew.	Then	he	remains
transparent,	 then	his	mirror	remains	clear.	Then	there	 is	nothing	to	obstruct	his
perspective.	Then	he	is	neither	a	Christian	nor	a	Hindu,	nor	a	Mohammedan,	nor
a	Buddhist.	Then	he	is	simply	a	mirror,	just	a	mirror,	a	mirroring	--	mirroring	all
that	is,	within	and	without.	Out	of	that	mirroring,	wisdom	is	born.
Wisdom	 is	 the	 flowering	 of	 your	 transparency,	 of	 your	 translucency,	 of	 your
luminous	 being.	 That's	 what	 we	 are	 doing	 here.	 In	 fact,	 the	 function	 of	 the
Master	 is	 to	undo	what	 the	society	has	done	 to	you.	 It	 is	an	anti-university,	an
anti-school,	 an	 anti-college,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 here	 to	 impart	 knowledge	 to	you
but	to	impart	something	totally	different,	something	of	a	different	dimension.	It
is	here	to	create	a	triggering	process	in	you	so	that	you	can	get	out	of	your	so-
called	 scriptures,	words,	 theories,	 and	 you	 can	 become	 just	 ordinary.	You	 can
just	become	whatsoever	you	are	without	any	pretensions.
I	 exalt	 the	ordinariness	 of	 consciousness.	 I	 am	not	 teaching	you	 the	 superman
here.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	went	mad	simply	because	of	the	idea	of	the	superman.	And
in	India	also,	Sri	Aurobindo,	his	whole	life,	was	feeding	the	Indian	ego	with	the
idea	of	the	superman,	of	the	supermind,	of	the	supernatural.
All	this	esoteric	nonsense	has	become	such	a	heavy	burden	on	man	that	it	has	to
be	totally	burnt	--	less	than	that	won't	do.	A	fire	is	needed	so	that	all	that	can	be
burnt	can	be	burnt,	and	only	that	which	remains	will	be	your	true	self.
I	am	not	esoteric,	I	am	not	occult,	I	am	not	teaching	you	the	other	world,	I	am
not	teaching	you	the	supernatural,	 the	superman.	I	am	simply	exalting	the	very
ordinariness	 of	 every	 human	 being,	 the	 very	 ordinariness,	 not	 only	 of	 human
beings,	but	of	animals,	of	trees,	of	rivers,	and	rocks	--	this	very	ordinariness	of
godliness.	To	me,	godliness	and	ordinariness	are	equivalent,	synonymous.
If	 I	 have	 to	 choose	 I	will	 drop	 the	word	 "God,"	 because	 it	 has	 become	 really
goddamned.
Just	pure	ordinariness...	 and	 to	 live	 it	moment-to-moment,	 joyously,	dancingly,
celebratingly.
Then	wisdom	blooms.	Then	the	spring	comes	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself.
The	last	question
Question	2
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
76
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
OSHO,	 YOUR	 COMPASSION	 TOWARDS	 INDIA	 BRINGS,	 IN	 RETURN,
ANGER
AND	 CONDEMNATION	 TOWARDS	 YOU.	 EVERY	 DAY	 INDIAN
NEWSPAPERS	AND
MAGAZINES	 ARE	 FULL	 OF	 THIRD-RATE	 CRITICISM	 AGAINST	 YOU.
EVEN	SO,	YOU	KEEP	HAMMERING	THIS	ROTTEN	CULTURE.	WHAT	IS
THIS	BUSINESS?
DOES	INDIA	DESERVE	SO	MUCH	COMPASSION?
Chaitanya	 Keerti,	 it	 is	 because	 I	 am	 saying	 something	 which	 India	 has
completely	 forgotten.	 It	 hurts.	 India	 has	 forgotten	 the	 truth.	 For	 thousands	 of
years	 it	has	 lived	 in	a	 foggy	state	of	mind	 --	not	only	 that,	 it	has	also	become
very	attached	to	that	foggy	state	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	has	nothing	else	to
cling	to.	This	is	the	only	prop	for	its	ego.
For	 twenty-two	 centuries	 India	 has	 been	 in	 political	 slavery.	 Now,	 a	 country
existing	for	twenty-two	centuries	in	slavery	cannot	have	any	source	of	ego	as	far
as	 the	political	world	 is	concerned.	 It	cannot	brag	about	world	conquerors	 like
Alexander	the	Great.
For	five	 thousand	years,	 India	has	been	 living	 in	a	very	superstitious	way.	The
priests	have	dominated	India	more	than	any	country	ever,	and	they	are	the	most
cunning	people	in	the	world.	Because	of	their	exploitation,	oppression,	because
of	their	poisoning	of	the	Indian	soul	for	five	thousand	years,	India	has	not	been
able	to	find	any	way	into	truth.	They	were	standing	like	a	China	Wall	against	the
truth.
It	was	a	question	of	life	and	death	for	the	priesthood.	Either	the	truth	or	the	priest
--	 both	 cannot	 survive	 together,	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 their	 coexistence.	 If
truth	wins,	the	priest	disappears.	Hence,	the	truth	has	not	to	be	allowed	to	win	so
the	priest	can	go	on	dominating.
No	other	country	has	been	dominated	by	priests	like	India	has.	For	five	thousand
years	a	spiritual	slavery...
There	is	nothing	to	support	the	ego	of	the	nation	--	no	science,	no	technology,	no
richness,	 no	 political	 freedom,	 no	 democracy.	 You	 can	 see	 the	 problem.	 The
problem	is...	But	a	nation	has	to	depend	on	some	props,	because	a	nation	is	not	a
true	reality,	remember;	it	needs	props.
The	individual	can	exist	without	the	ego	because	the	individual	is	a	reality	and
the	reality	has	no	need	of	the	ego.	But	the	nation,	the	race,	the	church,	the	state	--
these	cannot	exist	without	egos.	Without	egos	 they	will	 fall	apart.	 It	 is	 the	ego
that	 functions	 as	 a	 false	 center	 and	keeps	 them	 together	Hence,	 a	Buddha	 can
exist	without	the	ego	but	Buddhists	cannot.	Krishna	can	exist	without	an	ego	but
Hindus	 cannot.	 Remember	 this	 always:	 a	 false	 entity	 needs	 a	 false	 center,
otherwise	it	will	wither	away.
India	as	a	country,	as	a	nation,	as	a	race,	was	 in	 tremendous	need	somehow	to
create	a	false	center.	And	there	was	no	ordinary	alternative	available	--	money,
technology,	science,	political	power	--	so	the	only	thing	to	fall	back	upon	was	a
spiritual	longing,	the	other	world.
And	 it	 is	easy,	because	 then	you	are	dealing	with	 invisible	goods.	Nobody	can
prove	it,	nobody	can	disprove	it.	It	is	very	easy	to	live	in	hope	of	the	other	world.
But	who	will	create	that	hope?	Then	you	have	to	depend	on	the	crafty	priests,	the
BRAHMINS	--	they	became	the	mediators.	They	started	talking	about	the	other
world.	They	have	even	given	you	maps	of	the	other	world;	they	don't	know	the
map	of	the	world,	this	world...	if	you	ask	them,	"Where	is	Timbuktu?"	they	may
not	be	able	to	answer,	but	they	can	tell	you	EVERY	detail	of	heaven	--
not	only	of	one	heaven	but	of	seven	heavens,	a	seven-storied	heaven.	They	can
tell	 you	 all	 the	 details,	 the	minute	 details	 of	 seven	 hells.	 There	 is	 no	 problem
about	it;	it	is	religious	fiction.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
77
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
Hindus	 believe	 in	 seven	 hells.	 Jainas	 believe	 in	 three	 hells	 and	 three	 heavens.
And	there	was	a	man	in	Mahavira's	time,	who	must	have	been	a	very	beautiful
man	--	his	name	was	Sanjaya	Vilethiputta.	He	said,	"This	is	all	nonsense.	There
are	 seven	 hundred	 hells	 and	 seven	 hundred	 heavens!"	 But	 people	 said,
"Mahavira	says	only	three,	Hindus	say	only	seven"
Sanjaya	Vilethiputta	said,	"Because	they	have	only	gone	that	far,	I	have	searched
the	whole	terrain."
Once	a	follower	of	Radhaswami	came	to	me.	They	believe	in	fourteen	heavens,
fourteen	stages	of	paradise.	Of	course,	the	founder	of	their	religion	has	reached
the	 fourteenth.	 Others	 are	 somewhere	 on	 the	 ladder:	 Rama	 and	 Krishna	 and
Buddha	 are	 somewhere	 on	 the	 seventh;	 Jesus,	 Mohammed	 and	 Zarathustra
somewhere	on	the	sixth;	Nanak,	Kabir,	Meera,	somewhere	on	the	fifth...	and	so
on	and	so	forth,	each	according	to	his	need,	and	each	according	to	his	capacity.
He	had	brought	the	whole	map.	He	wanted	my	approval:	what	did	I	think	about
this	map,	what	did	I	say	--	was	it	right	or	not.
I	said,	"It	is	absolutely	right"
He	was	a	little	shocked	because	people	had	told	him	not	to	go	to	me	because	I
would	 disturb	 him.	And	 I	 said,	 "It	 is	 absolutely	 right.	 I	 know.	Your	 guru	 has
reached	the	fourteenth	--
I	have	seen	him	there."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
I	said,	"I	am	in	the	fifteenth,	and	he	is	always	begging	me,	 'Pull	me	out	of	 the
fourteenth!"'
He	 was	 shocked,	 he	 was	 angry.	 But	 if	 there	 are	 fourteen,	 why	 not	 fifteen?
Nobody	can	prove	it,	nobody	can	disprove	it.
I	have	heard:	in	New	York	a	shopkeeper	was	selling	invisible	hairpins.	And,	of
course,	the	women	were	immensely	attracted	--	invisible	hairpins!
One	woman	 looked	 in	 a	 box...	Of	 course,	when	 the	 hairpins	 are	 invisible	 you
cannot	see	them	--	the	box	looked	empty.	She	said,	"Are	they	really	there?"
The	 shopkeeper	 said,	 "They	must	 be.	Nobody	has	 ever	 seen	 them.	 In	 fact,	 for
months	we	have	run	out	of	stock,	but	they	are	selling!"
When	something	is	invisible	you	can	go	on	selling	it;	there	is	no	problem	about
it.
India	has	been	selling	invisible	goods	to	the	world.	Visible	goods	are	not	there.
Naturally	 they	 become	 angry	 with	 me	 because	 I	 insist	 that	 goods	 should	 be
visible,	that	you	are	carrying	an	empty	box,	that	there	is	no	goose	in	your	bottle.
And	for	 five	 thousand	years	 they	have	been	doing	such	good	business	 --	and	I
am	destroying	their	very	foundation.
Chaitanya	Keerti,	it	is	natural	that	they	get	angry	at	me.	But	anger	simply	shows
fear,	remember	always:	anger	is	fear	standing	on	its	head.	It	is	always	fear	that
hides	behind	anger;	fear	is	the	other	side	of	anger.	Whenever	you	become	afraid,
the	only	way	to	hide	the	fear	is	to	be	angry	because	fear	will	expose	you.	Anger
will	create	a	curtain	around	you;	you	can	hide	behind	anger.	The	Indian	mind	is
becoming	really	afraid	of	me.	And	it	is	not	only	the	Indian	Osho	-	The	Goose	is
Out
78
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
mind	 but	 all	 the	 other	 minds	 in	 the	 world	 who	 are	 doing	 the	 same	 kind	 of
business	of	dealing	in	invisible	goods.	They	are	all	becoming	afraid.
When	they	become	angry	at	me	I	know	that	I	have	hit	the	right	point.	I	rejoice	in
it!	They	have	been	pretending	love,	compassion,	sympathy,	understanding,	and	I
am	exposing	them	to	their	very	core.	Without	knowing	what	they	are	doing,	they
are	doing	what	I	want	them	to	do.
They	are	in	my	hands.	Anybody	who	gets	angry	at	me	is	caught	by	me.	Now	he
will	 be	 in	 a	whirlwind.	 I	will	 churn	 him,	 I	will	 haunt	 him.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 he
himself	 will	 throw	 his	 clothes	 off	 and	 stand	 naked	 in	 the	 sun.	 That's	 what	 is
happening.	When	 they	are	 angry	 at	me	 they	are	 really	 showing	 that	 they	have
been	exposed.
And	the	only	way	to	defend	is	to	be	aggressive.	They	are	defending	themselves,
but	 they	can	defend	 themselves	only	 if	 they	become	aggressive.	Their	anger	 is
simply	showing	their	impotence.
I	have	heard	a	beautiful	story,	an	ancient	story:
A	man	came	to	China.	When	he	entered	the	country	--	it	must	be	an	old,	ancient
story	--
just	on	the	boundary	he	saw	a	crowd.	Two	people	were	almost	ready	to	kill	each
other.	They	were	shouting,	jumping,	making	all	kinds	of	angry	gestures,	swords
naked	in	their	hands.	But	nothing	real	was	happening,	as	if	it	was	a	movie,	as	if
it	was	just	a	play.	He	could	not	even	detect	any	anger	on	their	faces.	Their	eyes
were	 calm	and	quiet,	 their	 faces	were	 relaxed.	They	 looked	very	 centered	 and
grounded.	So	why	 all	 this	 shouting	 and	 swinging	of	 swords,	 and	 jumping	 and
jogging	 and	 running	 at	 each	 other?	 And	 nobody	 is	 being	 hit,	 and	 nobody	 is
preventing	you	either.	The	crowd	is	simply	standing	there	witnessing	the	whole
scene.
The	man	became	a	 little	 tired	after	a	while,	a	 little	bored	too.	One	needs	some
excitement,	 something	 should	 happen.	 Then	 one	 man	 became	 angry;	 his	 face
became	red,	his	eyes	became	flaming.	And	the	crowd	dispersed!	The	fight	ended
there.
The	 newcomer	 could	 not	 believe	 it,	 he	 could	 not	 understand	 what	 was
happening.	He	asked	one	person,	"What	is	the	matter?	I	cannot	follow	the	whole
sequence.	They	were	ready	to	kill,	but	when	the	time	for	real	action	came	--	one
man	had	become	really	angry,	had	lost	his	cool	--	why	did	the	crowd	disappear?"
The	 crowd	 said,	 "They	 are	 both	Taoists,	 followers	 of	Lao	Tzu,	 and	 this	 is	 the
criterion	 in	 Taoist	 schools;	 that	 the	 moment	 a	 person	 becomes	 angry	 he	 is
defeated.	There	is	no	need	to	fight	--	he	has	shown	his	impotence,	he	has	shown
his	 fear.	That's	enough!	His	anger	 shows	 that	he	 is	a	coward.	Now	 there	 is	no
point;	the	other	person	has	gained	the	victory,	he	is	the	conqueror	--	he	remained
cool.	He	could	not	be	distracted	from	his	center.	He	could	not	be	pulled	out	from
his	grounding.	He	remained	integrated."
Chaitanya	Keerti,	I	know	what	is	happening	all	over	India:	thousands	of	people
writing	against	me,	shouting	against	me.	They	are	losing	their	so-called	cool	--
which	was	phony,	because	only	a	phony	cool	can	be	 lost.	Their	whole	 idea	of
tolerance,	 their	whole	 idea	of	accepting	others,	of	accepting	different	points	of
view,	is	lost.	A	single	man,	who	never	even	moves	out	of	his	room	is	enough	to
create	a	turmoil	throughout	the	whole	country.
But	it	is	a	significant	phenomenon.	It	shows	that	all	those	five	thousand	years	of
bogus	spirituality	have	not	done	any	good	to	India.	That's	what	I	wanted	to	show
the	whole	world.
They	are	making	my	point	emphatical.	I	am	stating	the	point,	they	are	supporting
the	argument.	They	are	supporting	me!
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
79
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
One	man	has	suggested	that	I	should	be	given	shock	treatment,	electric	shocks.
This	is	real	Indian	culture.	Another	man	has	suggested	I	should	be	immediately
deported	 from	 the	 country.	 This	 is	 tolerance,	 acceptance	 of	 different	 points	 of
view.	A	 third	man	has	 suggested	 I	 should	be	 thrown	 in	 the	Arabian	Sea	 --	not
even	 in	 the	 Indian	 Ocean,	 because	 I	 may	 poison	 the	 Indian	 Ocean	 --	 in	 the
Arabian	 Sea.	 This	 is	 a	 non-violent	 country,	 the	 country	 of	 the	 seers	 and	 the
sages,	of	the	saints,	mahatmas...	and	all	kinds	of	dodos.
Creeping	around	to	the	bedroom	window,	the	Indian	private	detectives	saw	their
client's	wife	in	bed	with	another	man.
"Just	as	I	suspected,"	said	the	first	Indian.	"Let's	go	in	after	him."
"Great	 idea,"	 the	 other	 Indian	 replied.	 "How	 soon	 do	 you	 think	 he	 will	 be
finished?"
A	 travelling	 Indian	 guru,	 His	 Holiness	 Swami	 Etceterananda	 Paramahansa,
founder	of	Holy	Cow-Dung	Ashram,	Miami	Beach,	arrived	hot,	tired	and	thirsty
at	a	small	farm	and	asked	the	farmer,	of	his	charity,	for	a	drink.
"Would	ye	fancy	a	drop	of	ale,	reverend?"	asked	the	farmer.
The	 Indian	 guru	 blanched,	 "Nay,	 I	would	 not,	 brother,"	 he	 said	 sternly,	 "for	 I
have	taken	the	pledge.	Not	a	drop	of	the	demon	drink	shall	pass	my	lips.	A	glass
of	your	good,	fresh	milk	will	suffice	me."
So	the	farmer,	being	a	bit	of	a	wag,	fetched	a	glass	of	milk	and	splashed	a	liberal
lacing	of	rum	into	it.	He	handed	it	 to	the	guru,	who	drank	deeply,	smacked	his
lips,	raised	his	eyes	to	heaven,	and	said,	"Oh,	Lord!	What	a	cow!"
Vacation	 time	 was	 suntan	 time	 as	 far	 as	 Joan,	 an	 admirably	 proportioned
secretary,	was	concerned,	and	she	spent	almost	all	of	her	day	on	the	roof	of	the
Taj	 Mahal	 Hotel	 in	 Bombay,	 sopping	 up	 the	 warm	 sun's	 rays.	 She	 wore	 a
bathing-suit	the	first	day,	but	on	the	second	she	decided	that	no	one	could	see	her
way	up	there,	and	she	slipped	out	of	it	for	an	over-all	tan.
She	had	hardly	begun	when	she	heard	someone	running	up	 the	stairs.	She	was
lying	 on	 her	 stomach,	 so,	 pulling	 a	 towel	 over	 her	 derriere,	 she	 continued	 to
recline	as	before.	"Excuse	me,	miss,"	said	the	flustered	little	assistant	manager	of
the	hotel,	out	of	breath	from	running	up	the	stairs,	"the	hotel	does	not	mind	your
sunning	 on	 the	 roof,	 but	 we	 would	 very	 much	 appreciate	 your	 wearing	 your
bathing-suit	as	you	did	yesterday."
"What	difference	does	it	make?"	Joan	asked	rather	coolly.	"No	one	can	see	me
up	here,	and	besides	I	am	covered	with	a	towel."
"I	know,	I	know,"	said	the	embarrassed	little	Indian,	"but	unless	you	wear	your
bathing-suit,	the	dinner	cannot	start.	And	the	governor	of	Bombay	is	giving	a	big
dinner	to	all	the	respectables	of	the	city."
The	woman	could	not	understand.	"But	what	is	the	matter?"	she	said.	"I	don't	see
the	point.
Why	can't	the	dinner	start?	What	has	it	got	to	do	with	my	bathing-suit?"
"Right,	lady,"	said	the	embarrassed	little	man.	"You	are	lying	on	the	dining	room
skylight!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
80
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
Now,	how	can	the	dinner	start?	All	the	Indians	will	be	looking	towards	heaven	--
they	are	always	looking	towards	heaven.	And	such	a	sight!	They	cannot	miss	it.
But	they	will	pretend
--	they	will	be	on	their	knees	with	folded	hands	looking	towards	God.	They	will
not	 look	 at	 the	 skylight	 directly,	 they	 will	 not	 say	 that	 they	 are	 enjoying	 the
scene,	they	will	do	a	long	prayer,	so	long	that	they	will	forget	completely	about
the	 dinner.	 And	 everybody	 will	 be	 pretending	 that	 he	 is	 not	 looking	 at	 the
woman	lying	down	naked	on	the	roof.
This	country	 is	a	country	of	pretenders,	and	 I	am	hurting	 them.	And	I	want	 to
hurt	them,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	pull	the	pus	out	of	their	centuries-old
wounds.	They	are	angry	at	me,	they	are	condemning	me.	That	shows	that	I	am
on	the	right	track.	They	cannot	ignore	me.	Either	they	have	to	be	with	me	or	they
have	to	be	against	me	--	either	way	I	am	willing	--
but	I	would	like	it	to	be	a	decisive	phenomenon.
Even	if	a	few	intelligent	people	are	with	me	--	and	they	are	with	me	--	we	can
transform	this	whole	rotten	culture	and	give	it	a	new	life.	It	needs	compassion.
Five	thousand	years	of	spiritual,	political,	economic	slavery...	What	other	reason,
Chaitanya	Keerti,	 do	you	 think	 is	 needed	 for	me	 to	be	 compassionate	 towards
this	culture?
But	they	will	not	be	easily	ready	to	change.	Change	is	hard;	it	goes	against	your
grain,	 it	 goes	 against	 your	 habits,	 it	 goes	 against	 your	 hangover.	 And	 the
hangover	 of	 India	 is	 very	 long.	 They	 are	 suffering	 from	 the	 past	 --	 they	 only
have	the	past.
Remember	one	thing:	a	child	only	has	the	future,	he	has	no	past.	Hence,	a	child
never	 thinks	 in	 terms	of	nostalgia.	There	 is	nothing	at	his	back.	He	 is	 so	 fresh
that	he	has	no	memories.	The	young	man	lives	in	the	present.	The	present	is	so
beautiful;	the	past	was	only	childhood,	a	preparation	at	the	most.	And	the	young
man	does	not	bother	about	the	future	--
one	 starts	 thinking	 of	 the	 future	 when	 the	 present	 starts	 slipping	 out	 of	 one's
hands.
The	old	man	thinks	only	of	the	past;	he	has	no	future.	There	is	only	death,	a	dark
night	waiting	for	him.	He	wants	to	avoid	it.	The	only	way	is	to	turn	his	back	to
the	future	and	look	at	the	past.	The	child	looks	towards	the	future,	the	old	man
towards	the	past;	the	young	man	remains	in	the	present.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 cultures.	 When	 a	 culture	 is	 very	 new	 it	 looks	 to	 the
future.	It	has	a	tremendous	aspiration	for	the	stars,	it	grows,	it	expands.	When	a
culture	remains	really	young
--	which	very	rarely	happens,	in	fact,	it	has	not	happened	yet	--	then	the	culture
remains	 in	 the	present.	And	when	the	culture	becomes	old,	 it	starts	 thinking	 in
terms	of	nostalgia,	of	the	past,	the	golden	age	that	is	no	more.
Individually	also,	youth	is	a	new	phenomenon.	In	the	past	 the	child	used	to	go
from	childhood	 to	old	age;	youth	was	not	a	 stage	at	all.	 In	poor	countries	 it	 is
still	so.	You	can	see	in	the	aboriginal	tribes	of	poor	countries,	children	six	years
old,	five	years	old,	working	like	old	men.	Seven	years	old,	eight	years	old,	and
they	 are	 already	 burdened	 with	 worries.	 They	 will	 not	 have	 a	 chance	 to	 be
young.	Hence,	in	the	past	there	was	no	generation	gap.	The	generation	gap	is	a
new	phenomenon,	 a	 very	 significant	 phenomenon.	This	 is	 the	 first	 time	 it	 has
happened,	 this	 is	 the	first	 time	we	have	been	able	 to	afford	 it.	 It	belongs	 to	an
affluent	 society,	 it	 belongs	 to	 a	 certain	 richness,	 when	 the	 generation	 gap
appears.
The	 child	 and	 the	 old	man	 are	 facing	 each	 other	 --	 there	 is	 no	 gap.	The	 child
looks	to	the	future,	the	old	man	looks	to	the	past.	Hence,	you	will	always	find	a
great	friendship	between	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
81
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
children	and	old	people.	They	are	 facing	each	other.	That	has	always	been	 the
case	--	children	and	old	people	lived	together.	There	was	no	gap.
The	youth	 is	a	new	phenomenon	in	 the	world.	He	is	neither	a	child	nor	an	old
man.	 He	 is	 breaking	 new	 ice.	 He	 is	 trying	 to	 live	 now,	 here.	 Yes,	 a	 few
individuals	 in	 the	 past	 have	 lived	 in	 that	 constant	 youthfulness,	 but	 only
individuals,	not	cultures.	There	is	a	possibility	now	that	even	a	culture	may	start
living	in	the	present.	Many	individuals	will	be	needed	to	prepare	the	ground	for
cultures	to	live	in	the	present.
The	Indian	concept	of	time	will	show	you	many	things.	It	says	the	best	age	has
passed,	it	was	the	first	age,	the	golden	age;	they	call	it	SATYA	YUGA,	the	age	of
truth.	It	is	prehistoric.
At	that	time	life	was	the	most	beautiful,	it	was	the	golden	peak.	Time	walked	on
four	legs	--	it	was	very	stable.	Then	the	fall	began.
The	 Indian	 idea	 of	 time	 is	 just	 anti-Darwinian,	 unscientific,	 totally	 inhuman.
Then	the	fall	began	--	the	age	of	fall,	not	of	evolution,	not	of	progress	--	things
started	 shrinking.	 Time	 started	 walking	 on	 three	 legs.	 Things	 became	 hazy,
unbalanced	--	it	is	called	treta,	"three	legs."	Then	things	fell	more:	time	had	only
two	legs,	it	became	even	more	difficult.	It	is	called	dwapar,	"two-legged	time."
And	 now	 is	 the	 fourth	 and	 the	 last,	 the	 most	 condemned	 stage	 --	 it	 is	 called
KALI	YUGA.	Now	 all	 three	 legs	 have	 disappeared.	Time	 is	 standing	 only	 on
one	 leg,	 ready	at	 any	moment	 to	 fall,	 to	be	 toppled.	 Just	one-legged	 time,	 and
that	one	leg	is	already	in	the	grave.
This	is	a	very	dark	and	dismal	vision.	This	is	the	vision	of	an	old,	ancient,	rotten
country.
India	needs	a	rebirth,	it	needs	a	new	childhood.	It	will	protect	its	ideas	because	it
is	so	accustomed	to	those	ideas.	They	are	its	only	treasure!	So	when	I	hit	at	those
ideas	I	look	like	an	enemy.	The	friend	looks	like	an	enemy,	and	the	enemies	are
being	taken	for	friends.	But	this	is	natural,	this	is	logical.	It	can	be	understood.
A	 grave-digger,	 thoroughly	 absorbed	 in	 his	 work,	 dug	 a	 pit	 so	 deep	 one
afternoon	that	he	could	not	climb	out	when	he	had	finished.
Come	 nightfall	 and	 evening's	 chill,	 his	 predicament	 became	 more
uncomfortable.	He	shouted	for	help	and	at	last	attracted	the	attention	of	a	drunk
staggering	by.
"Get	me	out	of	here!"	the	digger	pleaded.	"I	am	cold!"
The	drunk	peered	into	the	open	grave	and	finally	spotted	the	shivering	digger	in
the	 darkness.	 "Well,	 no	 wonder	 you're	 cold,	 buddy,"	 said	 the	 drunk,	 kicking
some	of	the	loose	sod	into	the	hole,	"you	haven't	got	any	dirt	on	you!"
Now,	 if	 you	 ask	 a	 drunkard,	 he	 will	 have	 his	 own	 logic.	 He	 will	 see	 reality
through	his	own	drunkenness.
Indians	 get	 angry	 because	 they	 have	 become	 accustomed	 to	 being	 praised
continuously.
Nobody	has	ever	criticized	them.	Nobody	has	ever	pointed	out	to	them	that	"You
are	 living	 a	 death,	 not	 a	 life.	You	 are	 shrinking	 and	 dying.	You	 have	 lost	 the
fervor,	the	zest,	the	gusto	to	live	authentically,	to	live	totally."
They	 have	 been	 praised.	 Their	 paleness	 has	 been	 given	 the	 halo	 of	 holiness.
Their	 anti-life	 attitudes	 have	 been	 raised	 to	 great	 spiritual	 fantasies.	 Their
hysterical	 experiences	 have	 been	 called	 samadhi.	 Their	 madness	 has	 been
respected	as	if	something	of	the	beyond	has	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
82
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
descended	 in	 them.	 Their	 gibberish	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 esoteric;	 people	 go	 on
finding	meanings	in	it.
Fools	 have	 been	 worshipped,	 masochists	 have	 been	 thought	 to	 be	 ascetics,
sadists	have	been	thought	to	be	great	saints.	Perversions	of	all	kinds	have	been
given	 a	 spiritual	 connotation.	 Now,	 to	 expose	 this	 whole	 lie	 of	 thousands	 of
years	is	risky.
But	I	am	willing	to	take	the	risk	because	I	have	nothing	to	lose	--	 the	goose	is
out!	I	have	nothing	to	lose.	At	the	most	they	can	kill	me;	that	is	not	going	to	help
them.	Even	my	death	will	be	of	tremendous	help	to	them.	It	may	shock	them	out
of	their	nonsense.	It	may	bring	them	out	of	their	stupor,	their	sleepiness.
Hence,	Chaitanya	Keerti,	I	am	going	to	continue.	They	can	go	on	criticizing	me.
Their	criticism	is	basically	because	of	my	life-affirmative	approach.	They	have
lived	a	life-negative	philosophy.	They	are	against	all	that	gives	you	joy;	they	are
suppressive,	 repressive;	 they	 are	 boiling	 within,	 but	 they	 go	 on	 carrying	 a
blanket	cover.	Nobody	wants	to	show	his	nakedness.
And	when	your	blanket	is	worshipped	so	much,	and	not	only	in	India	but	all	over
the	world...
There	are	so	many	fools	in	the	world	that	any	Indian	can	find	disciples.	It	is	not	a
problem	at	all.	Just	your	being	Indian	is	enough,	and	you	are	a	guru.	I	have	seen
such	things	happening	before	my	eyes.
One	 of	 my	 disciples,	 Nirmala	 Srivastava,	 has	 now	 become	 a	 great	 spiritual
leader.	Now	her	name	 is	 long:	Her	Holiness	 Jagatjanani	 --	 "The	mother	of	 the
whole	world"	--	Mataji	Nirmalaji	Srivastavaji.
She	was	once	traveling	with	me	in	a	car,	and	I	passed	by	Muktananda's	ashram.
The	people	 staying	 in	Muktananda's	 ashram	 invited	me	 to	 be	 there	 for	 a	 five-
minute	stay,	just	to	take	a	cup	of	tea.	And	it	was	a	long	journey	so	I	said,	"There
is	no	harm	in	it."	Anyway	I	love	a	cup	of	tea!	So	I	stayed	for	five	minutes.
Nirmala	saw	Muktananda.	She	could	not	believe	that	this	stupid-looking	man	--
disgusting,	more	or	less	a	buffoon	--	had	become	a	great	spiritual	leader.
After	 the	 tea,	when	we	 re-entered	 the	 car	 she	 said,	 "If	 this	man	can	become	a
spiritual	leader,	then	why	can't	l?"
I	said,	"You	can."	And	she	has	become	one.
There	is	one	man	here	from	Australia	who	asked	me	a	question	--	because	now
she	 is	 in	Australia,	doing	great	 spiritual	work.	He	asked	me:	 "Once	 in	a	while
you	 talk	about	a	woman,	Rabiya	el-Adawiya.	What	do	you	 think	about	Mataji
Nirmala	Deviji?	 Is	 she	also	of	 the	same	category	as	Rabiya	el-Adawiya?"	The
man	is	here.
I	know	her	perfectly	well	--	for	ten	years	she	was	my	student.	There	is	nothing	in
it,	 no	 spirituality,	 no	meditativeness...	 but	 she	 got	 the	 idea	 from	Muktananda.
And	it	is	not	the	only	case.
You	must	have	heard	the	name	of	a	great	sardar	yogi	in	America,	Yogi	Bhajan.
He	was	 just	a	porter	at	Delhi	Airport.	He	saw	Muktananda	coming	with	seven
hundred	Americans...
Of	 course	 at	 that	 time	 his	 name	was	 Sardar	 Harbhajan	 Singh;	 he	 was	 a	 poor
porter,	but	certainly	he	looked	far	better	than	Muktananda,	more	impressive.	The
idea	came	into	his	mind,	"If	this	fool	can	be	a	PARAMAHANSA,	A	SATGURU,
etcetera,	 etcetera,	 then	 why	 should	 I	 waste	 my	 time	 just	 being	 a	 porter?"	 He
dropped	the	job,	went	to	America,	and	is	now	the	greatest	spiritual	leader	of	the
Sikh	hierarchy	in	the	Western	hemisphere.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
83
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 he	 was	 back	 in	 Delhi	 with	 all	 his	 disciples.	 One	 of	 his
bosses,	who	is	a	lover	of	me,	passed	by.	He	saw	him	sitting	on	the	lawn	of	the
Delhi	Taj	Mahal	Hotel	with	his	disciples.	He	could	not	 recognize	him,	he	had
changed	so	much.	He	thought,	"A	great	mahatma."
But	Yogi	Bhajan	 is	a	 simple	man	 in	 that	way,	 far	 simpler	 than	Muktananda	or
Nirmala	Devi.	He	sent	a	disciple	 to	 the	boss	 to	 tell	him,	"Come	to	my	room.	I
have	something	to	say	to	you."
The	 boss	 could	 not	 understand	 why	 the	 great	 yogi	 was	 calling	 him;	 he	 was
thrilled,	excited.	He	went	into	the	room,	Yogi	Bhajan	came	in	and	he	said,	"Boss,
don't	you	recognize	me?	I	am	just	that	poor	Sardar	Harbhajan	Singh,	your	porter.
Have	you	forgotten	me	completely?"
Then	he	could	recognize	the	face.	He	said,	"But	what	has	happened?	You	have
become	such	a	great	yogi	with	so	many	disciples!"
Then	he	told	the	story...	that	it	is	due	to	Muktananda.	The	whole	credit	goes	to
Muktananda!
Indians	cannot	drop	that	garbage	easily	because	that	is	the	only	garbage	they	are
capable	of	selling	to	the	world.	They	cannot	get	rid	of	that	crap.	It	stinks!	But	it
sells.	There	are	millions	of	people	in	the	world	who	are	hankering	for	it	and	they
don't	 know	 where	 to	 go.	 India	 has	 become	 their	 hope...	 and	 they	 will	 be
exploited.
They	 are	 angry	 at	me,	 all	 the	 gurus	 of	 India	 are	 angry	 at	me,	 because	 I	 don't
belong	to	their	tradition.	I	am	not	here	to	exploit	anybody,	I	am	not	here	to	force
indoctrination	on	you:	Indian	culture,	Indian	religion,	and	all	that	nonsense.	I	am
here	just	to	help	you	to	be	free	from	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Jainism,	Buddhism.
I	am	here	to	help	you	to	be	yourself,	just	to	be	yourself.
My	sannyasins	are	not	my	followers,	they	are	just	my	friends.	I	love	them,	they
love	me,	but	there	is	no	hierarchy.	I	am	not	holier	than	you,	or	higher	than	you.
That	 goes	 against	 the	 Indian	 investment.	 They	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 against	 me,
Chaitanya	Keerti.	I	am	affirming	life,	they	have	been	denying	it	all	along.
Nirmala	 met	 her	 friend	 Vimala	 on	 the	 street	 one	 afternoon	 and	 noticed	 that
Vimala	was	well	along	the	road	of	pregnancy.
"You	know,"	Nirmala	said,	"I	would	give	anything	to	have	a	baby.	But	I	guess
it's	hopeless."
"I	know	just	how	you	feel,"	Nirmala	said.	"My	husband	was	 that	way	 too,	but
everything	is	fine	now.	In	fact,	I	am	eight	months	pregnant."
"What	did	you	do?"
"I	went	to	Swami	Etceterananda."
"Oh,	 we	 tried	 that,"	 Nirmala	 replied.	 "My	 husband	 and	 I	 went	 there	 for	 six
months."
"Don't	be	silly,"	Vimala	told	her.	"Go	alone!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
84
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
And	 they	will	 find	 all	 kinds	of	 arguments	 against	me.	They	are	 argumentative
people.	For	centuries	they	have	done	nothing	else	but	argue.	But	their	arguments
are	 not	 going	 to	 help	 them	 because	 I	 am	 not	 arguing	 for	 any	 philosophy;
otherwise	 they	 would	 be	 able	 to	 confute	me.	 I	 am	 arguing	 for	 existence,	 and
there	they	are	at	a	loss.
If	 it	was	 only	 a	 philosophical	 argument	 there	would	 be	 no	 problem.	 India	 has
known	many	philosophies.	Buddha	argued	against	 the	Vedas	and	 there	was	no
problem.	 Mahavira	 argued	 against	 the	 Upanishads;	 there	 was	 no	 problem.
Shankara	 argued	 against	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira;	 there	 was	 no	 problem.
Ramanuja	argued	against	Shankara;	there	was	no	problem.	It	is	an	accepted	fact,
if	you	argue	only	for	a	philosophical	standpoint,	nobody	is	worried,	because	it	is
just	airy-fairy;	it	does	not	make	any	change	in	one's	life.
I	 am	 not	 arguing	 for	 a	 philosophy.	 I	 am	 not	 philosophical	 at	 all,	 I	 am	 totally
existential.
That's	where	they	are	finding	it	difficult.	They	are	finding	it	absolutely	difficult
to	decide	how	to	cope	with	me,	what	to	do	with	me.	Hence	the	anger,	hence	the
condemnation,	 hence	 all	 kinds	 of	 third-rate	 criticism.	 They	 simply	 show	 their
reality.	Those	third-rate	criticisms	that	they	go	on	making	against	me	are	simply
bringing	 their	 reality	 to	 the	 surface.	 They	 are	 showing	 their	 nakedness,	 their
ugliness.	And	that	serves	my	purpose.
The	 real-estate	 salesmen	 in	 Bombay	 lead	 lives	 entirely	 unbounded	 by	 mere
prosaic	fact.
One	of	 these	gentlemen	was	 showing	 some	property	 to	 a	 possible	 customer,	 a
rich	man,	and	he	was	pulling	out	all	the	stops.
He	finished	up	with,	"Why,	the	climate	is	the	best	in	the	country!	Do	you	know?
--	no	one	ever	dies	here."
And	just	then	a	funeral	procession	came	into	view,	wound	slowly	down	the	street
and	disappeared	from	sight.	The	real-estate	agent	was	taken	aback	for	a	second,
but	he	made	a	quick	recovery.
Removing	his	hat,	he	said	solemnly,	"Poor	old	undertaker	--	starved	to	death."
Indians	are	clever	at	argumentation.	 If	 I	was	arguing	 they	would	have	 found	a
thousand	and	one	arguments.	But	I	am	not	arguing,	I	am	simply	pointing	to	the
moon.	My	fingers	are	not	my	arguments	but	only	indicators.	Don't	cling	to	my
fingers,	see	the	moon.	And	it	is	time	that	the	moon	should	be	seen.
You	ask	me,	Chaitanya	Keerti:
EVEN	SO,	YOU	KEEP	HAMMERING	THIS	ROTTEN	CULTURE...
I	will	go	on	hammering.	It	is	so	rotten	that	there	is	every	hope	that	we	may	get
rid	of	 it.	 It	 is	 falling	 apart	 on	 its	 own;	 just	 a	 little	 hammering	 is	 needed.	 I	 am
going	to	hit	it	mercilessly.
And	you	ask:
WHAT	IS	THIS	BUSINESS?
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
85
Chapter	6	-	I	exalt	the	ordinary
This	is	the	business	of	people	like	me.	It	has	always	been	the	business	of	people
like	me.
Socrates	was	told	by	the	court	in	Athens,	"If	you	stop	talking	about	truth,	we	can
release	you.	You	will	not	be	put	 to	death."	Socrates	 refused,	and	 the	words	he
used	were	very	beautiful.	He	 said,	 "That	 is	my	business.	 I	 cannot	 stop	 talking
about	truth.	Just	as	I	breathe,	I	talk	about	truth.	It	is	my	business."
I	 am	going	 to	 continue.	My	hammering	will	 become	harder	 because	 I	 have	 to
bring	more	and	more	rubbish	to	the	surface.	My	hammering	will	go	deeper.	It	is
a	surgical	hammering	--
many	 rotten	 parts	 of	 this	 goddamned	 country	 have	 to	 be	 removed.	 It	 needs
nothing	 less	 than	 that.	Medicines	won't	 help,	 it	 needs	 an	 operation.	And	 I	 am
preparing	the	operating	table...
It	is	going	to	be	a	great	adventure.	But	even	if	the	patient	dies,	there	is	no	harm
done.	At	 least	 there	will	be	 some	space,	 at	 least	 there	will	be	 less	of	a	crowd.
And	the	patient	is	dead	anyway.	This	country	is	living	a	posthumous	existence.	It
died	long	ago:	the	day	it	started	the	idea	that	we	are	falling,	that	the	golden	age	is
lost,	 that	 we	 are	 falling	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 darkness	 and	 hell,	 it	 lost	 all
qualities	of	life.	Since	then	it	has	been	living	a	posthumous	existence.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 give	 this	 country	 a	 real	 death	 so	 that	 a	 real	 birth	 becomes
possible.
Resurrection	 is	possible	only	after	crucifixion.	There	 is	no	other	way.	Death	 is
the	way	for	life	to	come	back,	so	don't	be	afraid	of	death!	In	fact,	life	and	death
are	 not	 opposites,	 they	 are	 not	 contradictions	 to	 each	 other.	They	 are	 like	 two
wings	--	they	help	each	other,	they	are	complementaries.
I	teach	you	to	live	totally,	and	I	also	teach	you	to	die	totally.	Totality	has	to	be
the	taste	of	a	really	religious	person.	And	when	I	say	"a	really	religious	person"	I
don't	mean	anything	supernatural,	 anything	higher,	holier	 --	 I	 simply	mean	 the
innocent	 life,	 the	 ordinary	 life.	 I	 exalt	 the	 ordinary,	 I	 praise	 the	 ordinary,	 I
worship	the	ordinary.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
86
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
7
Only	one	time:	now
7	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 NOT	 TO	 ASK	 FOR	 ANYTHING	 IN	 OUR
PRAYERS.
THEN	WHY	DOES	JESUS	SAY	TO	US,	"WHEN	YOU	PRAY,	SAY:	GIVE	US
OUR
DAILY	BREAD.	FORGIVE	US	OUR	TRESPASSES.	LEAD	US	NOT	INTO
TEMPTATION,	 BUT	 DELIVER	 US	 FROM	 EVIL"?	 AND	 ALSO	 JESUS
HIMSELF
ASKED,	"MY	FATHER,	IF	IT	IS	POSSIBLE,	LET	THIS	CUP	PASS	ME	BY,
YET	NOT	AS
I	WILL,	BUT	AS	THOU	WILT."	PLEASE	EXPLAIN.
Dhyan	Prabodh,	religion	has	a	long	history.	Much	of	it	is	only	a	hangover	from
the	past.
The	 real	 religion,	 the	 essential	 religion	 is	 possible	only	now,	because	man	has
come	of	age.
The	past	of	humanity	was	very	childish	--	not	childlike,	remember,	but	childish.
And	 it	 was	 bound	 to	 be	 so;	 it	 was	 inevitable,	 unavoidable.	 So	 I	 am	 not
complaining	 about	 it,	 I	 am	 simply	 stating	 the	 fact	 that	whenever	 you	 think	 of
religion,	never	think	in	terms	of	the	past	otherwise	you	will	have	a	totally	wrong
orientation.	Think	more	in	terms	of	the	present.
When	 you	 think	 of	 the	 Theory	 of	 Relativity,	 you	 don't	 bring	Newton	 in.	 You
know	he	did	contribute	something	to	scientific	growth,	but	his	days	are	over.	We
are	 grateful	 for	 whatsoever	 he	 did,	 whatsoever	 he	 could	 do,	 but	 with	 Albert
Einstein,	Newton	was	finished.
He	will	remain	only	a	footnote	in	the	history	of	scientific	growth.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 religion,	 about	 every	 human	 endeavor.	When	 you	 are
going	 to	 the	moon	 in	 a	 spaceship,	 the	man	who	 invented	 the	 bullock	 cart	 has
certainly	 contributed	 immensely	 --	 without	 the	 bullock	 cart	 there	 would	 have
been	no	possibility	of	the	spaceship	--
but	 you	 don't	 go	 on	worshipping	 the	man	who	 invented	 the	 bullock	 cart.	You
don't	even	remember	his	name.	And	while	you	are	involved	with	a	spaceship,	it
is	 better	 to	 forget	 all	 about	 bullock	 carts.	 They	 are	 not	 going	 to	 help;	 their
mechanism	is	out	of	date.
But	about	religion	we	are	not	so	rational	--	about	religion	we	are	very	emotional.
About	 religion	we	 are	 not	 so	 scientific	 --	 about	 religion	we	 are	 very	 illogical,
superstitious.
Religion	has	passed	through	two	phases.	The	first	phase	was	that	of	prayer;	that
is	 the	 bullock	 cart	 era	 of	 religion.	 The	 second	 phase	 is	meditation,	 that	 is	 the
spaceship	 age	 of	 religion.	They	 are	 totally	 different	 dimensions.	Their	 sources
are	 different,	 their	workings	 are	 different,	 their	whole	milieu	 is	 different.	And
one	should	not	get	confused	between	the	two.
There	 is	much	 confusion	 around	 the	world,	 so	 let	me	 explain	 to	 you.	And	 be
very	 patient	 because	 we	 are	 all	 conditioned	 by	 the	 religions	 of	 prayer.	 Their
weight	 is	 heavy;	 every	 human	 being	 is	 crushed	 under	 a	 mountainous	 weight.
And	the	work	for	a	Master	has	become	more	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
87
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
and	 more	 difficult,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 only	 a	 question	 of	 helping	 you	 to	 be
meditative:	before	 that	 can	 start	much	has	 to	be	negated	 in	you,	much	 rubbish
has	to	be	shovelled	out,	much	dirt	has	to	be	cleaned	off.	The	whole	past	has	to	be
dismantled,	 only	 then	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 open	 your	 wings	 to	 the	 essential,
mature,	adult	dimension	of	religion.
Prayer	 means	 fear,	 hence	 all	 the	 old	 religions	 are	 fear	 oriented.	 Their	 Cod	 is
nothing	but	a	creation	of	 their	fear;	 it	 is	not	a	discovery,	 it	 is	 imagination,	 it	 is
projection.	They	are	full	of	fear;	they	need	a	father	figure	to	protect	them	from
all	 kinds	 of	 fear.	And	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 fears	 in	 life:	 there	 are	 anxieties,
anguishes,	 problems	 to	 be	 encountered,	 insoluble	 puzzles,	 unbridgeable	 gaps;
man	 is	 surrounded	 by	 great	 darkness.	 He	 needs	 a	 protective	 hand;	 he	 wants
somebody	as	a	security,	as	a	safety.
Each	 child	 is	 brought	 up	 by	 parents.	 His	 first	 experience	 with	 the	 parents
becomes	 very	 decisive,	 because	 he	 is	 protected,	 comforted,	 consoled;	 all	 his
needs	are	 fulfilled,	he	does	not	have	 to	worry,	he	has	no	 responsibilities,	he	 is
taken	care	of.	He	can	rely	on	the	parents.	But	this	is	not	going	to	be	so	forever.
Sooner	or	later	he	will	have	to	stand	on	his	own	feet.
The	moment	he	stands	on	his	own	feet	a	great	trembling	arises	in	him:	now	who
is	going	to	save	him?	Now	who	is	going	to	console	him?	And	the	problems	go
on	 becoming	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 every	 day.	As	 life	 progresses	 it	 starts	 coming
closer	 to	death,	which	 is	 the	ultimate	problem	 to	be	solved.	And	 there	 is	great
anxiety	about	death.
Each	child	starts	falling	back,	each	child	starts	going	back	to	the	childhood	state,
because	 that	seems	 to	be	 the	only	part	of	his	 life	where	 there	was	not	a	single
problem	at	all.	This	is	regression.
This	regression	has	been	thought	of	as	prayer;	it	is	not	prayer.	Then	he	falls	on
his	knees	and	starts	praying	to	a	god...
It	 is	not	accidental	 that	all	 the	 religions	call	God	"the	Father."	Yes,	 there	are	a
few	 other	 religions	 which	 call	 God	 "the	 Mother"	 --	 which	 is	 the	 same.	 In
matriarchal	 societies	 God	 is	 the	 Mother,	 in	 patriarchal	 societies	 Cod	 is	 the
Father.	One	thing	is	certain:	that	God	has	to	be	the	ultimate	parent.
And	then	every	community,	society,	civilization,	invents	its	own	Cod;	they	say,
"God	 created	 man	 in	 his	 own	 image."	 That	 is	 absolutely	 wrong	 --	 man	 has
created	God	in	his	own	image.	And	because	there	are	so	many	kinds	of	people	in
the	world,	there	are	so	many	images	of	God.
But	 that	 image	is	your	fabrication;	you	are	praying	before	your	own	invention.
Prayer	is	really	one	of	the	most	absurd	things	possible.	It	is	as	if	you	are	praying
before	a	mirror,	 seeing	your	own	face,	kneeling	down	before	your	own	 image,
asking	for	favors,	and	there	 is	nothing	in	 the	mirror	except	your	reflection.	All
prayers...	prayer	as	such	is	juvenile,	it	is	regressive.
It	will	hurt	you,	but	I	cannot	help	it.	I	have	to	say	the	truth	as	it	is.
Prabodh,	you	ask	me:
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 NOT	 TO	 ASK	 FOR	 ANYTHING	 IN	 OUR
PRAYERS.
In	 fact,	 the	moment	 you	 stop	 asking,	 you	will	 stop	 praying.	 That	 is	 a	 simple
methodology
--	I	sometimes	have	to	go	a	little	roundabout,	just	so	as	not	to	hurt	you	too	much.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
88
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
I	don't	see	that	there	is	any	God	who	created	the	world.	I	certainly	experience	a
quality	of	godliness	in	existence,	but	it	is	a	quality,	not	a	person.	It	is	more	like
love,	more	like	silence,	more	like	joy,	less	like	a	person.	You	are	never	going	to
meet	God	and	say	"Hello"	to	him,
"How	are	you?"	and	"I	have	been	looking	for	you	for	thousands	of	years.	Where
have	you	been	hiding?"
God	 is	 not	 a	 person	but	 only	 a	presence.	And	when	 I	 say	 "presence",	 be	very
attentive,	because	you	can	go	on	listening	according	to	your	own	conditioning.
You	can	even	make
"presence"	something	objective	--	you	have	again	fallen	into	the	same	trap.	God
is	a	presence	at	the	innermost	core	of	your	being:	it	is	your	OWN	presence.	It	is
not	a	meeting	with	somebody	else.
Martin	Buber,	one	of	the	great	Jewish	thinkers	of	this	age,	has	written	that	prayer
is	a	dialogue	between	"I"	and	"thou".	There	is	no	"thou",	hence	the	dialogue	is
impossible.	All	prayers	are	monologues.	And	because	there	is	no	"thou"	there	is
no	"I"	either;	they	can	exist	only	together,	they	cannot	exist	in	separation.	How
can	you	imagine	the	existence	of	"I"
without	"thous"?	"Thous"	are	needed	to	demark	the	line	of	the	"I".
But	Martin	Buber	in	a	sense	is	right	--	he	is	defining	the	whole	past	of	religion.
He	himself	is	burdened	with	the	past;	he	could	never	get	out	of	his	Jewish	skin.
He	 remained	 encaged,	 he	 remained	 a	 Jew	 --	 a	 nice,	 beautiful	 person,	 of	 great
intellectual	capacities,	but	still	in	bondage.
The	Jewish	idea	of	"I"	and	"thou"	is	the	basic	pattern	for	prayer.	Without	"I"	you
cannot	pray	because	there	is	nobody	to	pray	to.	Without	"thou"	you	cannot	pray,
because	whom	to	pray	to?	And	if	you	are	not	asking	for	anything,	then	for	what
are	you	praying?	Prayer	means	asking,	it	is	a	demand,	howsoever	camouflaged,
howsoever	subtly	hidden	behind	beautiful	garbs	and	masks.	It	is	asking:	you	are
demanding,	you	are	saying,	"Give	me	this!	Give	me	that!"
So	when	 I	 say	 there	 is	 no	Cod,	 remember	 this:	 I	 really	mean	 that	 existence	 is
enough	 unto	 itself.	 It	 needs	 no	 creator.	 There	 is	 creativity	 but	 no	 creator.	 The
division	between	creator	and	creativity	has	to	be	dissolved,	only	then	will	you	be
able	to	rise	to	the	peaks	of	meditation.
Otherwise	you	will	remain	confined	to	the	childish	patterns	of	the	past:	kneeling
down	before	images	in	temples,	in	synagogues,	in	churches,	and	doing	all	kinds
of	foolish	things.	But	those	foolish	things	are	being	done	by	thousands	of	others,
so	you	never	become	aware	that	they	are	foolish.	When	the	crowd	is	with	you,
when	the	multitudes	are	with	you,	you	feel	on	safe	ground.	You	feel	shaky	only
when	you	are	alone.
Meditation	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 aloneness.	 Only	 very	 courageous	 people	 can
enter	 into	 that	 dimension.	 Prayer	 is	 a	 crowd	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 part	 of	 the
collective	 mind.	 And	 when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 crowd,	 certainly	 a	 great	 confidence
arises	 in	you.	 It	 is	 infectious,	because	 so	many	people	cannot	be	wrong.	But	 I
would	like	to	tell	you:	it	 is	always	the	case	that	the	multitudes	are	bound	to	be
wrong.	Only	 rarely	 is	 there	 an	 individual	who	 is	 right,	 because	 truth	 is	 such	a
pinnacle,	such	a	peak,	like	Everest.	You	cannot	go	to	Everest	with	a	multitude;
there	 is	 not	 space	 enough.	 Only	 one	 person	 can	 stand	 on	 the	 highest	 peak	 --
alone.
Meditation	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 being	 totally	 alone,	 utterly	 alone.	 Prayer	 is	 a
crowd	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 a	 mob	 psychology.	 Hence	 Hinduism,	 Christianity,
Judaism,	Mohammedanism,	all	have	remained	religions	of	prayer.	Even	the	two
religions	which	 tried	 to	 become	 religions	 of	meditation	 fell	 back	 --	Buddhism
and	 Jainism,	 these	 two	 religions	 tried	 to	 be	 religions	 of	 meditation.	 But	 only
Buddha	and	Mahavira,	two	individuals,	could	manage.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
89
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
The	moment	 they	died	 their	 religions	started	falling	back	 to	 the	old,	 regressive
pattern;	they	both	became	religions	of	prayer.
Now	Jainas	are	praying	before	Mahavira.	That	is	even	worse,	because	Christians
can	have	 some	 support	 from	Jesus	but	 Jainas	have	no	 support	 from	Mahavira.
Buddhists,	millions	of	Buddhists,	are	praying	before	the	statue	of	Buddha.	That
is	 ridiculous,	unbelievable,	because	Buddha's	 last	words	were	 "Be	a	 light	unto
yourself."	And	it	is	a	strange	phenomenon	that	Buddha's	statues	were	the	first	to
be	made	in	the	world;	his	statues	were	the	first	to	be	installed	in	temples.
There	are	temples	of	Buddha	with	thousands	of	statues.	One	temple	in	China	is
called	The	Temple	of	Ten	Thousand	Buddhas	--	ten-thousand	statues	of	Buddha
in	 one	 temple.	The	whole	mountain	 has	 been	 carved	 into	 a	 temple.	 If	Buddha
comes	back	he	will	start	beating	his	head,	he	will	commit	suicide.
The	 first	 thing	 to	be	 remembered,	Prabodh:	 I	 believe	 in	 an	orgasmic	universe.
There	 are	 no	 such	 divisions	 as	 the	 creator	 and	 the	 created,	 the	 higher	 and	 the
lower,	the	sacred	and	the	profane,	this	and	that.	I	believe	in	one	organism.
Existence	has	not	to	be	thought	of	in	terms	of	a	painter	and	his	painting,	because
the	moment	 the	 painting	 is	 finished,	 the	 painter	 and	 the	 painting	 become	 two
separate	entities.
Existence	 has	 to	 be	 thought	 of	 only	 in	 terms	 of	 a	 dancer	 and	 his	 dance.	 You
cannot	separate	them;	the	dancer	and	the	dance	are	one.	At	the	highest	peak	of
dancing,	 the	 dancer	 disappears	 into	 the	 dance	 --	 there	 is	 no	 dancer	 but	 only
dance.
That	is	the	experience	of	meditation:	when	you	dissolve	yourself	into	existence,
when	the	dewdrop	slips	into	the	ocean	and	becomes	the	ocean.	And	vice	versa	is
also	 true:	 the	 ocean	 slips	 into	 the	 dewdrop	 and	 becomes	 the	 dewdrop.	 They
cannot	be	conceived	of	as	two	entities	any	more.
So	when	 I	 say	God	 is	not	 a	presence,	 I	mean	he's	not	 anything	outside	you	 --
neither	 a	 person	 nor	 a	 presence	 as	 conceived	 in	 the	 language	 of	 objectivity.
When	I	say	God	is	a	presence,	I	simply	mean	he	is	 the	innermost	core	of	your
being	--	that	silent	core,	that	space	where	nobody	else	can	enter	you;	that	private,
that	absolutely	intimate	virgin	space,	your	interiority,	is	God.
But	 the	 word	 "God"	 can	 create	 trouble	 for	 you.	Words	 are	 very	 troublesome
because	words	carry	the	past;	they	are	made	by	the	past,	they	are	overburdened
by	the	past.	Any	word	is	dangerous,	because	its	meaning	comes	from	the	past.
And	 for	 me	 the	 problem	 is:	 to	 use	 the	 words	 which	 come	 from	 the	 past	 --
because	there	are	no	other	words	--	but	to	give	them	such	a	twist	and	turn	that
they	 can	 give	 you	 a	 little	 insight	 into	 a	 new	meaning.	 The	words	 are	 old,	 the
bottles	are	old,	but	the	wine	is	new.
An	old	lady	who	was	walking	her	dog	decided	to	go	into	the	local	supermarket,
which	did	not	allow	dogs.	She	tied	the	animal	to	a	fire	hydrant.	No	sooner	was
the	 dog	 tied	 than	 every	 loose	 dog	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 started	 sniffing	 this
defenseless	animal.	The	cop	on	the	corner,	observing	what	was	happening,	called
to	the	old	woman	and	told	her	that	she	could	not	leave	her	dog	there	alone.
She	asked	him	why	and	he	replied,	"Lady,	your	dog	is	in	heat."
She	answered,	"Eat,	she'll	eat	anything."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
90
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
He	countered,	"The	dog	should	be	bred."
The	old	lady	replied,	"She'll	eat	bread,	cake	--	anything	you	give	her	she'll	eat."
In	complete	frustration,	he	said,	"That	dog	should	be	laid!"
The	old	woman	stared	directly	into	his	eyes	and	answered,	"So	lay	her!	I	always
wanted	a	police	dog."
Words	ARE	dangerous...	every	possibility	of	being	misunderstood.
You	say,	Prabodh:
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 NOT	 TO	 ASK	 FOR	 ANYTHING	 IN	 OUR
PRAYERS.
In	fact,	that	is	my	way	to	prevent	you	from	praying.	If	you	have	nothing	to	ask
for,	why	should	you	pray?	Then	what	is	the	rationale	of	it?
Even	 a	man	 like	 Jesus	 is	 in	many	ways	 childish.	 But	 it	 cannot	 be	 helped:	 he
belonged	to	the	bullock	cart	age	of	religion,	he	belonged	to	the	Judaic	tradition.
He	 lived	 as	 a	 Jew,	 he	 talked	 as	 a	 Jew,	 he	 died	 as	 a	 Jew.	 His	 whole	 way	 of
thinking,	looking,	observing,	was	purely	Jewish.
He	was	not	really	in	rebellion,	he	was	not	a	rebel	in	the	true	sense	of	the	word.
On	the	contrary,	he	was	trying	to	prove	that	he	belonged	to	the	tradition,	he	was
trying	 to	 prove	 that	 he	 was	 the	 person	 that	 had	 been	 predicted	 by	 the	 old
prophets,	 that	 he	 had	 come	 to	 fulfill	 all	 their	 prophecies.	 Now	 this	 is	 sheer
nonsense!	Nobody	can	predict	for	anybody	else;	the	past	is	absolutely	impotent
to	know	anything	of	the	future.	The	future	is	that	which	remains	open.	If	it	can
be	predicted	it	becomes	closed,	it	is	no	longer	the	future;	if	you	can	predict	the
future	 it	 is	already	past.	You	have	already	cancelled	its	opening,	 it	has	become
closed.
He	 was	 trying	 to	 convince	 the	 Jews	 that	 "I	 am	 the	 messiah	 you	 have	 been
waiting	for."	He	was	 trying	 in	every	way	to	fulfill	 their	expectations:	doing	all
kinds	of	miracles,	trying	in	every	possible	way	to	argue	his	case.	This	is	not	the
way	of	a	 revolutionary.	The	revolutionary	simply	disconnects	himself	 from	the
past;	he	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	past.
He	was	still	trying	to	be	a	prophet	in	the	Jewish	sense.	A	prophet	is	a	religious
man	with	 political	 tendencies,	 and	 religion	 and	 politics	 are	 unmixable.	 If	 you
mix	them,	you	will	create	a	hotch-potch.	And	that's	what	Jesus	did:	on	the	one
hand	he	was	trying	to	be	religious,	on	the	other	hand	he	was	trying	to	prove	that
he	was	a	prophet	like	the	old	prophets.	This	political	tendency	with	his	religious
leaning	became	a	very	confused	phenomenon	in	him.	He	was	utterly	confused.
I	don't	see	much	clarity	in	him,	he's	not	transparent,	he's	very	clouded.	You	can
see	it	in	his	own	statement.	He	says,	"My	Father,	if	it	is	possible,	let	this	cup	pass
me	 by..."	 That	 is	 his	 innermost	 desire.	 Otherwise,	 why	 should	 he	 say,	 "My
Father,	 if	 it	 is	 possible,	 let	 this	 cup	 pass	me	 by,	 yet	 not	 as	 I	will,	 but	 as	 thou
wilt?"	This	is	a	contradiction,	a	clear-cut	contradiction.
This	 is	 not	 said	 by	 a	 truly	 surrendered	person.	A	 truly	 surrendered	person	has
nothing	to	say	--
whatsoever	is	happening	is	happening.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
91
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
From	where	does	this	"if"	come	--	"if	it	is	possible"?	This	desire	is	there	that	"if
you	 can	 manage,	 please...	 but	 if	 you	 cannot	 manage	 then	 it	 is	 okay,	 then
whatsoever	happens	I	will	accept."	But	there	is	reluctance,	there	is	contradiction.
His	own	desire	is	that	this	cup	should	pass	by	--	this	agony,	this	crucifixion,	this
death,	 should	pass	by.	He	was	 really	deep	down	waiting	 for	a	miracle,	he	was
hoping	for	a	miracle.	He	was	not	very	different	from	the	crowd	that	had	gathered
there	 to	observe	 the	crucifixion.	He	was	not	very	different	 from	the	rabbis	and
the	 priests	 and	 the	 government	 who	 were	 all	 conspiring	 to	 kill	 him;	 their
philosophical	background	was	the	same.
The	rabbis	and	 the	high	priest	of	 the	 temple	of	Jerusalem	were	 trying	 to	prove
that	 this	man	was	 a	 fake.	And	he	was	 trying	 to	 prove	 that	 "No,	 I	 am	 the	 true
messiah	--	and	at	the	last	moment	you	will	see,	when	God	himself	descends	to
save	 his	 only	 begotten	 son."	 And	 time	 started	 passing:	 he	 is	 nailed,	 he	 is
crucified,	 he	 is	waiting	 for	 the	miracle.	Nothing	 is	 happening,	 all	 expectations
are	turning	sour.	In	that	moment	of	agony	he	screams,	"Why	have	you	forsaken
me?"
But	 there	 is	nobody	 to	whom	he	 is	calling.	There	 is	nobody	who	has	 forsaken
him.	It	is	his	own	idea,	it	is	his	own	projection,	it	is	his	own	hallucination.	This
state	is	hysterical!	But	he	is	waiting	up	to	the	last	moment.	And	when	he	says,
"If	it	is	not	possible,	then	let	thy	will	be	done,"	that	is	surrender,	but	not	true	--
with	reluctance,	just	a	face-saving	device.
Nothing	 is	happening,	all	 is	 finished.	The	crowd	 is	 jeering	and	 laughing	at	 the
whole	scene,	people	are	throwing	stones,	insulting	him,	hurting	him,	people	are
returning	home	very	frustrated	because	nothing	has	happened,	convinced	that	he
was	a	fake.	Even	his	own	disciples	have	escaped,	seeing	that	now	it	is	dangerous
to	be	 there.	 If	 they	are	caught...	 if	 Jesus	 is	not	 saved	by	God,	who	 is	going	 to
save	them?	Poor	fellows	--	they	escaped.	And	it	is	logical.
Jesus	saying,	"Let	thy	will	be	done,"	is	just	making	a	last	effort	to	save	his	face.
This	is	not	the	way	of	a	surrendered	man.	How	can	you	surrender	to	your	own
projection?
Hence,	I	don't	teach	you	prayer;	prayer	is	bound	to	be	diametrically	opposite.	Its
expectation	is	basically	contradictory:	it	requires	you	to	surrender,	only	then	can
it	be	fulfilled.
And	when	you	surrender,	then	what	is	there	left	to	be	fulfilled?	If	there	is	some
demand	still	to	be	fulfilled,	you	are	not	surrendered.	Please	see	the	contradiction.
Prayer	is	asking	something	impossible	from	you.	You	can	ask	God	anything,	but
first	you	have	to	surrender	totally.	But	if	you	are	surrendered	totally	then	there	is
no	point	in	asking.
From	 where	 will	 the	 asking	 come?	 Who	 will	 demand?	 And	 if	 you	 are	 still
demanding,	the	surrender	is	missing,	so	the	prayer	cannot	be	fulfilled.
You	see	the	simple	mechanism	of	it?	The	prayer	can	be	fulfilled	only	if	you	don't
ask	anything.	But	then	what	is	there	to	be	fulfilled?	You	had	not	asked	anything
in	the	first	place.
I	teach	you	a	totally	different	kind	of	religiousness.	It	is	that	of	meditation.	You
are	not	to	worship,	you	are	not	to	pray;	you	have	to	go	deep	within	your	own	self
--	a	journey	of	self-discovery.	It	is	not	a	question	of	discovering	God.	Why	are
you	after	God?	What	wrong	has	he	done	to	you?	Forgive	him,	forget	him!
The	 first	 and	 the	 only	worthwhile	 inquiry	 is	 to	 know:	 "Who	 am	 I	within	 this
body-mind	 mechanism?	 What	 is	 this	 consciousness,	 this	 miracle	 of
consciousness?"	This	miracle	 of	 awareness	 has	 to	 be	 discovered.	You	 have	 to
peel	 your	 being	 as	 one	 peels	 an	 onion.	 Go	 on	 peeling...	 You	 will	 find	 layers
within	layers.	And	finally,	when	all	the	layers	are	discarded,	Osho	-	The	Goose	is
Out
92
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
eliminated,	 you	 will	 find	 in	 your	 hands	 pure	 nothingness,	 emptiness,
SHUNYATA.	That	is	your	essential	core,	the	center	of	the	cyclone.
Discarding	the	layers	of	the	onion	you	have	discarded	the	bottle	that	was	created
by	you,	by	the	society,	by	the	culture,	by	the	past,	by	the	tradition,	and	when	you
have	 discarded	 the	 bottle,	 the	 goose	 is	 out.	 Then	 you	 are	 as	 infinite	 as	 the
universe	itself,	as	eternal	as	timelessness	itself.
You	 can	 call	 it	 godliness	 --	 it	 IS	 godliness.	 It	 is	 the	 highest,	 the	 greatest
flowering	of	being.
But	it	is	not	a	God	somewhere	outside	you.	You	cannot	pray	to	it.	You	can	be	it,
but	you	cannot	pray	to	it,	because	it	is	not	separate.
You	ask	me:
THEN	WHY	DOES	JESUS	SAY	TO	US,	"WHEN	YOU	PRAY,	SAY...	"?
Jesus	never	 said	 this	 to	you.	He	was	 talking	 to	other	kinds	of	people.	 If	 Jesus
comes	 to	 you,	 remember	 one	 thing:	 there	 will	 be	 no	 possibility	 of	 any
communication	 between	 you	 and	 him.	 There	 will	 be	 a	 gap	 of	 two	 thousand
years.	And	you	know	very	well	 that	even	 the	small	gap	between	you	and	your
father	is	almost	unbridgeable.	Talk	to	your	father,	and	you	are	talking	to	a	wall.
Your	father	feels	the	same:	talking	to	a	child	is	impossible;	there	seems	to	be	no
communication.
Two	thousand	years	 is	a	big	gap.	 If	Jesus	comes	right	now,	he	will	 look	 like	a
pygmy	 to	 you.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 why	 this	 man	 has	 been
worshipped	 for	 two	 thousand	 years...	 for	 what?	 You	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
appreciate	him	at	all.	You	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	faults	in	him,	very	easily.
Even	the	most	stupid	of	you	will	be	able	to	see:	"Is	this	the	man	we	have	been
worshipping	in	thousands	of	churches,	millions	of	people	praying	to	him?	Is	this
the	man?"
But	 two	 thousand	 years	 of	 continuous	 painting...	 and	 that	 is	 the	 work	 of	 the
church,	theologians,	philosophers,	priests	--	they	go	on	making	it	up-to-date,	as
far	as	they	can,	they	go	on	putting	on	new	layers	of	paint.	If	you	dig	deep	into
these	thick	layers	of	paint,	you	will	be	really	at	a	loss.	When	you	discover	Jesus,
you	will	be	very	frustrated.	You	will	find	a	very	ordinary	man.	Yes,	in	those	days
he	 was	 extraordinary	 --	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 time.	 In	 those	 days	 he	 was
extraordinary	because	the	people	were	even	far	more	backward	than	he	was.
But	 now	you	 are	 two	 thousand	years	 ahead	 of	 him.	The	way	he	 talks	 and	 the
things	he	says	are	not	addressed	to	you,	Prabodh.
You	say:
HE	SAYS	TO	US...
No,	he	has	no	idea	of	you.	What	I	am	saying	I	am	saying	to	you,	but	what	Jesus
is	saying	he	is	saying	to	the	people	of	his	time.	He	is	not	contemporary	to	you,
how	can	he	say	anything	to	you?
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
93
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
And	this	 is	one	of	 the	problems	 that	 I	am	encountering	every	day,	because	 the
people	who	come	to	me,	either	they	are	living	with	the	hangover	of	Jesus	or	of
Buddha	 or	 of	Mahavira	 or	 of	Krishna	 or	 of	 Zarathustra.	 They	 have	 their	 past
hangovers,	and	I	am	a	contemporary	man!	I	am	simply	talking	to	the	twentieth-
century,	and	not	only	to	the	twentieth-century	crowd	but	to	the	twentieth-century
elite	--	the	people	of	the	highest	intelligence.	Hence,	it	is	difficult	to	understand
what	I	am	saying.
You	 live	 thousands	 of	 years	 back.	 It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 find	 a	 contemporary	man.
Somebody	is	one	thousand	years	old,	somebody	two	thousand,	somebody	three
thousand...	And	the	older	they	are,	the	more	valuable	they	think	they	are.	Hindus
try	 to	 prove	 that	 their	 Vedas	 are	 the	 oldest	 scriptures,	 as	 if	 this	 is	 something
creditable.	 The	 oldest	 scriptures	 simply	means	 that	 you	 have	 not	moved	 since
then,	you	are	still	carrying	 the	burden.	Historians	say	 that	 the	scriptures	of	 the
Hindus,	 the	 Vedas,	 are	 five	 thousand	 years	 old.	 But	 Hindus	 are	 not	 ready	 to
accept	 it	--	 they	say	they	are	at	 least	ninety	thousand	years	old.	The	older	 they
are	the	better.
The	same	is	true	about	other	religions,	as	if	all	that	is	old	is	gold.	In	fact,	life	is
always	new,	 fresh,	 as	 fresh	as	dewdrops	 in	 the	early	morning	 sun	on	 the	 lotus
leaf,	as	fresh	as	the	stars,	as	fresh	as	the	eyes	of	a	newly-born	baby,	as	fresh	as
the	song	of	the	birds	right	now.
Life	knows	only	one	time,	that	is	now.
Jesus	was	not	talking	to	you,	he	could	not	--	he	had	no	idea	about	you,	he	could
not	conceive	of	you.	But	he	was	talking	to	his	own	people,	and	his	people	lived
with	these	ideas.
He	was	paraphrasing	the	Jewish	concept	of	religion.
He	 was	 saying,	 "GIVE	 US	 OUR	 DAILY	 BREAD.	 FORGIVE	 US	 OUR
TRESPASSES.
LEAD	US	NOT	INTO	TEMPTATION,	BUT	DELIVER	US	FROM	EVIL."
Now,	to	me	all	that	is	just	sheer	rubbish.
"GIVE	US	OUR	DAILY	BREAD."
In	the	past,	humanity	has	been	very	poor.	The	whole	past	has	been	one	of	long
starvation,	hunger,	illness,	famine,	floods	--	all	kinds	of	diseases.	It	is	a	miracle
how	man	has	survived	somehow.
In	 countries	 like	 India,	 that	 is	 the	 case	 still.	 Hence,	 you	 will	 see	 one	 thing
happening:	 the	 intelligent	 core	 of	 Western	 youth	 is	 turning	 more	 and	 more
towards	meditation,	but	the	Eastern	masses	are	turning	more	and	more	towards
things	 like	Christianity.	 Indians	would	 like	more	Mother	Teresas	 in	 India	 than
me.	Naturally,	because	bread	 is	needed.	 If	you	 look	around	India	you	will	 find
only	 the	 poor	 people	 being	 converted	 to	Christianity;	 not	 a	 single	 rich	man	 is
converted	 to	 Christianity.	 Beggars,	 orphans,	 widows,	 aborigines,	 who	 cannot
manage	even	one	meal	every	day	--	they	are	being	converted	to	Christianity.	It
appeals	to	them	because	bread	is	their	problem.
Jesus	says,	"GIVE	US	OUR	DAILY	BREAD."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
94
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
We	have	to	create	it;	there	is	nobody	to	give	it	to	us.	That	is	the	work	of	science;
religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	it.	We	should	start	demarking	lines:	what	can	be
done	 by	 science	 should	 be	 done	 by	 science,	what	 can	 be	 done	 by	 technology
should	be	done	by	technology.	If	your	car	has	stopped	and	you	have	run	out	of
gas,	you	don't	just	kneel	down	by	your	car	and	start	praying,	"Give	us	our	daily
gas."	That	will	be	as	stupid	as	this	prayer.	You	know	you	have	to	search	for	a	gas
pump!	This	is	not	the	way	--	it	is	not	going	to	happen.
But	priests	have	been	trying	all	along	to	make	religion	dominate	your	whole	life
--	 from	 bread	 to	God.	 They	 are	 very	much	 afraid	 to	 divide;	 hence,	 they	were
against	science,	against	technology.
Bertrand	Russell	 is	 right	when	he	 says,	 "If	 the	whole	of	humanity	 is	well-fed,
well-nourished,	 prayers	 like	 this	 --	 'Give	 us	 our	 daily	 bread'	 --	 will	 become
absolutely	futile."
There	will	be	no	need	at	all!	And	with	 that,	your	churches,	your	 temples,	your
priests,	 will	 start	 losing	 their	 power.	 They	 have	 possessed	 humanity	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 they	 have	 not	 allowed	 science	 and	 technology	 to	 improve
your	lot.
In	 India,	Mahatma	Gandhi	was	against	 science,	against	very	necessary	 science
too.	He	was	against	the	railway	trains,	the	telegraph,	the	post	office,	electricity.
He	wanted	this	country	to	live	at	least	as	primitively	as	people	used	to	live	ten
thousand	 years	 ago.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 he	 accepted	 as	 the	 greatest	 scientific
invention	was	the	spinning	wheel.	And	he	was	worshipped	as	a	mahatma.
To	me,	he	is	committing	a	crime,	a	far	bigger	crime	than	Adolf	Hitler's.	But	his
crime	 is	 very	 subtle.	 You	 cannot	 detect	 it	 because	 he	 is	 talking	 in	 religious
verbiage:	"One	should	trust	God	--	why	should	one	trust	science?"
My	emphasis	is:	life	is	a	multi-dimensional	phenomenon,	and	we	should	be	very
clear-cut	 about	 divisions.	Music	 should	 be	 taken	 care	 of	 by	musicians,	 not	 by
mathematicians.	Dancing	should	be	 taken	care	of	by	dancers,	not	by	chemists.
Poetry	 should	 be	 taken	 care	 of	 by	 poets,	 not	 by	 physiologists.	 Science	 has	 its
own	contribution	--	it	is	man's	intelligence.	There	is	no	need	for	any	prayer,	we
can	provide	this	earth	with	a	paradise,	but	we	will	not	be	able	to	unless	we	stop
all	kinds	of	nonsense	that	we	are	stuffed	with.
But	this	has	been	a	strategy	of	the	priest.	He	can	dominate	you	only	if	you	are
poor,	he	can	dominate	you	only	if	you	are	starving	--	because	when	you	are	poor
and	 starving	and	miserable,	you	are	bound	 to	 fall	 at	his	 feet	because	he	 is	 the
mediator	between	God	and	you.
You	don't	know	any	address	for	where	God	lives,	what	language	he	speaks.	That
is	 the	 expertise	 of	 the	priest.	He	knows	God	 speaks	Sanskrit,	 and	he	does	not
allow	you	to	learn	Sanskrit	either,	because	if	YOU	learn	Sanskrit	then	he	will	not
be	needed.	He	knows	God	 speaks	Aramaic,	Hebrew;	 he	will	 not	 allow	you	 to
learn	Aramaic	and	Hebrew.	If	you	learn	them	then	he	will	be	exposed,	because
there	is	nothing	in	Aramaic	or	Hebrew	or	Sanskrit,	nothing	of	any	value.
But	 if	 you	 don't	 know	 those	 languages	 you	 remain	 ignorant;	 and	 he	 goes	 on
pretending	 to	 be	 the	wise	man.	He	 can	 go	 on	 leading	 you	 --	 blind	 people	 are
leading	other	blind	people.	And	his	power	depends	on	you,	and	he	has	become
very	cunning.	Centuries	of	exploitation	have	given	him	the	whole	craft,	the	art,
the	knack	of	exploiting	you.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
95
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
Sigmund	 Steinberg,	 the	 well-known	 importer	 of	 ladies'	 gloves,	 paid	 an
unexpected	call	on	the	rabbi	of	his	temple.	That	worthy	was	more	than	pleased
to	 see	 his	 fabulously	 wealthy	 congregationer,	 who	 more	 than	 made	 up	 in
contributions	 for	 what	 he	 lacked	 in	 attendance	 and	 religious	 zeal.	 This	 time,
however,	 the	 trip	 to	 temple	 was	 for	 a	 completely	 religious,	 if	 rather	 unusual,
reason.
"Rabbi,"	Steinberg	commenced	after	the	usual	amenities,	"I	am	here	to	see	you
about	someone	most	near	and	dear	to	me.	Mine	own,	mine	darling,	mine	three-
times-a-champion,	Westminster	 Abbey	 the	 Third,	 mine	 little	 poodlelah	 is	 this
coming	Tisha	B'Av	thirteen	years	old,	and	I	want,	Rabbi,	you	should	bar	mitzvah
him."
The	 rabbi	 was	 completely	 taken	 aback.	 "But	 my	 dear	 Mr.	 Steinberg,	 that	 is
impossible.
There	has	never	been	in	the	history	of	the	Jewish	religion	such	a	thing.	It	would
be	a	scandal.
The	 temple	 would	 be	 a	 laughing-stock.	 My	 orders	 would	 be	 revoked.	 The
sisterhood	 would	 be	 disbanded.	 The	 building	 campaign	 would	 be	 halted.	 The
gentiles	would	be	hysterical.	And	the	board	of	directors	would	have	my	neck."
Steinberg	was	unmoved.	Without	so	much	as	the	bat	of	an	eyelash,	he	addressed
the	 rabbi	again.	 "For	 the	occasion,	 I	am	donating	 to	 the	 temple	 the	amount,	 in
cash,	of	five	thousand	dollars."
"Mr.	Steinberg;'	the	rabbi	beamed,	"why	didn't	you	tell	me	in	the	first	place	that
the	dog	is	Jewish?"
These	 people	 have	 become	 really	 cunning.	 Their	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 remain	 in
power,	 and	 the	 most	 necessary	 thing	 to	 remain	 in	 power,	 to	 remain	 rich,	 to
remain	in	domination,	 is	 to	keep	humanity	suffering.	That	 is	a	simple	strategy;
anybody	who	has	eyes	can	see	it.	Just	think	of	a	world	where	people	are	blissful,
ecstatic,	where	 people	 are	 living	moment-to-moment	with	 a	 dance	 and	with	 a
song...	How	much	of	your	old	religion	will	remain?	How	many	of	your	temples
and	 churches	 and	 synagogues	 will	 be	 able	 to	 survive?	 They	 will	 start
disappearing	like	smoke.
As	your	suffering	disappears,	your	so-called	religions	will	disappear.	They	ARE
opium	for	the	people;	they	have	been	keeping	you	in	a	subtle	unconscious	state.
They	are	giving	you	great	hopes.	Those	hopes	are	nothing	but	drugs,	 far	more
dangerous	 than	 any	 chemical	 drug	 can	 be.	 They	 have	 drugged	 the	 whole	 of
humanity.
Jesus	 says,	 "GIVE	 US	 OUR	 DAILY	 BREAD.	 FORGIVE	 US	 OUR
TRESPASSES."
What	trespasses?	But	the	whole	of	religion	has	lived	with	the	idea	of	sin.
And	what	was	the	sin	of	Adam	and	Eve?	--	that	they	disobeyed.	Disobedience	is
not	a	sin,	disobedience	is	part	of	growth.	Each	child	has	to	disobey	his	parents,
sooner	or	later	--	and	the	sooner	the	better,	because	life	is	short.	You	should	not
waste	your	time.	One	has	to	learn	to	say	no	definitively,	only	then	does	a	point
arise	where	one	can	say	yes.	Without	being	able	to	say	no,	nobody	is	capable	of
saying	yes.	Disobedience	is	the	background	in	which	real	obedience	blossoms.
And	if	anybody	was	responsible	for	the	original	sin	then	it	was	God,	not	the	poor
serpent	--
he	 is	 the	 greatest	 benefactor	 of	 humanity,	 the	 first	 true	 messiah,	 because	 he
seduced	Adam	and	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
96
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
Eve	and	told	them	to	disobey.	He	was	the	first	Master	Without	him	there	would
have	been	no	humanity,	no	 Jesus,	no	Buddha,	no	Confucius,	no	Lao	Tzu.	The
whole	credit	goes	to	the	poor	serpent.	And	the	cause	of	the	whole	sin	was	God
himself	--	he	prohibited...
The	Garden	of	Eden	was	a	big	garden.	There	were	only	two	trees;	he	was	afraid
Adam	and	Eve	may	start	eating	their	fruit.	One	was	the	tree	of	knowledge	and
the	other	was	the	tree	of	life.	Now,	why	should	God	be	afraid	of	them	knowing
and	living?
You	can	see	the	whole	strategy	of	the	priest.	He	is	afraid	of	two	things:	knowing
and	 living.	He	 prevents	 you	 from	 knowing	 so	 he	 remains	 the	 knower,	 and	 he
prevents	you	from	living	so	that	you	are	always	falling	at	his	feet	begging:	"Give
us	our	daily	bread."	He	does	not	allow	you	to	live	totally,	intensely.	He	hinders
you	 in	 every	 possible	way;	 he	 cripples	 you,	 he	 paralyzes	 you.	And	 the	whole
story	begins	in	the	Garden	of	Eden.
God	seems	to	be	the	first	priest.	Why	should	he	be	afraid	of	them	knowing?	He
should	have	blessed	them	really;	he	should	have	told	Adam	and	Eve,	"The	first
thing	you	have	to	do	is	go	to	these	two	trees;	they	are	the	most	valuable.	Know	--
know	life	in	its	totality,	know	its	mysteries,	explore.	Go	from	the	known	to	the
unknown,	from	the	unknown	to	the	unknowable
--	go	on	a	long	pilgrimage.	Nothing	should	be	left	unknown.	You	should	become
part	 of	 the	 whole	 mystery	 of	 the	 universe."	 That	 should	 have	 been	 his	 first
advice	if	he	had	been	really	loving,	compassionate.
And	he	should	have	 told	 them,	"Live	 --	and	 live	passionately,	and	 live	 totally!
Live	intensely,	live	ecstatically!	These	are	the	two	trees	you	should	not	miss."
If	 I	had	been	 in	his	place,	 this	would	have	been	my	advice:	 "Live	under	 these
trees.	You	can	enjoy	other	trees	whenever	you	want	--	just	for	a	change	you	can
go	anywhere	 --	but	 these	 two	 trees	 should	not	be	 forgotten."	 Instead	of	 telling
them	this,	God	says,	"Don't	eat	from	the	tree	of	knowledge."	Why?	Is	he	afraid
that	if	Adam	and	Eve	become	knowers	then	they	will	become	equal	to	him?	Is
he	afraid	of	Adam	and	Eve	becoming	Buddhas,	awakened?
Knowing	comes	through	meditation,	remember.	The	tree	of	knowing	is	the	tree
of	 meditation,	 and	 God	 prohibits	 meditation.	 Knowing	 comes	 as	 you	 enter
deeper	 into	 your	 being;	 when	 you	 have	 reached	 to	 the	 very	 core,	 knowing
explodes.	You	become	flooded	with	infinite	light.
And	 the	 same	 is	 true	about	 living:	 the	more	you	know,	 the	more	you	 live;	 the
more	 you	 live,	 the	more	 you	 know.	 They	 go	 together,	 hand	 in	 hand,	 dancing.
Knowing	 and	 living	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin;	 both	 happen	 to	 the
meditator.	But	a	religion	which	is	based	on	fear	is	afraid	of	both.
And	 this	 is	my	whole	 teaching	 here:	 know	 and	 live.	 Live	without	 fear,	 know
without	hesitation.
And	the	serpent	seems	to	be	absolutely	right	because	he	says	to	Adam	and	Eve,
"God	is	afraid.	If	you	eat	from	this	tree	you	will	become	like	gods	--	then	there
will	be	no	superiority,	you	will	be	equal	to	God.	And	if	you	eat	from	the	tree	of
life	 you	 will	 become	 immortals,	 just	 as	 the	 gods	 are	 immortals.	 And	 God	 is
afraid.	He	wants	to	keep	you	in	subjugation."
Now	who	has	committed	the	sin?	Who	has	trespassed	--	God,	or	Adam	and	Eve?
But	Jesus	thinks	still	in	terms	of	a	rotten	past.	He	is	still	thinking	that	man	has
trespassed.
I	 don't	 see...	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 natural.	 What	 trespasses	 are	 you
committing?
The	 instincts	 that	 you	 are	 living	 are	 given	 by	 nature.	 Your	 sex	 is	 a	 gift	 from
nature,	your	joy	in	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
97
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
nourishing	 food	 is	part	 of	your	nature.	You	would	 like	 to	 live	beautifully,	 you
would	 love	 to	 live	 comfortably.	 You	 would	 like	 to	 have	 a	 beautiful	 garden
around	your	house,	you	would	like	a	warm	swimming	pool.	You	would	like	to
love	a	man	or	a	woman.	I	don't	see	there	is	any	trespass.	You	are	not	committing
any	sin,	you	are	simply	following	your	nature,	your	spontaneous	tendencies.
But	 the	 religions	 have	 condemned	 you,	 utterly	 condemned	 you.	 They	 have
condemned	everything	that	is	natural,	and	through	that	condemnation	they	have
created	great	guilt	in	you.
Your	whole	heart	is	full	of	guilt.	That	guilt	pulls	you	back;	it	does	not	allow	you
to	 live	 anything	 totally.	 It	 does	 not	 allow	 your	 dance	 to	 reach	 its	 peak,	 its
crescendo.	It	does	not	allow	you	to	sing	and	shout	and	rejoice.	It	represses	you.
I	cannot	support	any	such	kind	of	ideas.
Jesus	says,	"LEAD	US	NOT	INTO	TEMPTATION..."
What	 temptation	 is	 he	 talking	 about?	 What	 temptations	 are	 there?	 Life	 is	 so
simple!	But	you	can	label	things	as	temptations,	then	they	become	temptations.
For	example,	 I	was	born	 in	a	Jaina	 family	 --	unfortunately,	but	nothing	can	be
done	 about	 it.	 One	 has	 to	 choose	 one	 unfortunate	 state	 or	 another.	 Up	 to	my
eighteenth	year	I	had	not	tasted	the	poor	tomatoes,	because	Jainas	are	absolutely
vegetarian	and	the	poor	tomato	has	the	color	of	meat	--	just	the	color!	There	is
nothing	in	it,	but	the	very	color	is	enough	for	Jainas	to	feel	repulsion.	Tomatoes
were	not	brought	into	my	house;	I	had	not	tasted	them.
When	 I	 was	 eighteen	 years	 old,	 I	 went	 for	 a	 picnic	with	 a	 few	 of	my	Hindu
friends.	I	was	the	only	Jaina	and	they	were	all	Hindus.	And	up	to	that	time	I	had
not	eaten	in	the	night	either,	because	Jainas	don't	eat	in	the	night	--	that	is	a	great
sin	because	in	the	night	a	mosquito	may	fall	in	your	food,	some	insect	may	crawl
in,	and	unknowingly	you	may	eat	something	live.
That	 will	 drag	 you	 to	 hell.	 So	 one	 has	 to	 eat	 in	 the	 day	 when	 the	 light	 is
absolutely	 clear.	One	 has	 not	 even	 to	 drink	water	 in	 the	 night,	 because	 in	 the
night	 --	 who	 knows?	 --	 without	 any	 conscious	 effort	 on	 your	 part,	 something
may	be	killed.
So	I	had	not	eaten	in	the	night	and	I	had	not	tasted	tomatoes	up	to	my	eighteenth
year.
They	were	great	temptations.	I	had	seen	tomatoes	in	the	market,	and	they	were
really	tempting
--	sitting	so	meditatively,	so	centered,	so	grounded.	Potatoes	are	also	not	allowed
in	Jaina	families	because	they	grow	beneath	the	ground,	and	anything	that	grows
in	darkness	is	dangerous	to	eat	because	it	will	bring	darkness	to	your	soul.
When	 I	 went	 for	 this	 picnic	 to	 a	 hill	 station,	 all	 my	 friends	 were	 so	 much
enjoying	the	mountains	and	the	beauty	and	the	castles	that	nobody	was	in	a	hurry
to	prepare	food.	And	I	have	been	a	lazy	man	from	the	very	beginning	--	I	cannot
cook	food.	I	can	cook	many	other	things...	but	I	cannot	cook	food,	not	even	my
tea.	So	I	had	to	wait	for	whenever	they	decided.
I	was	feeling	hungry	--	the	journey,	the	travelling,	and	the	mountains'	fresh	air.	I
was	 feeling	 hungry	 and	 the	 night	was	 coming	 closer,	 and	 I	was	 feeling	 afraid
also:	"What	is	going	to	happen?	If	they	cook	food	in	the	night,	then	I	will	have
to	sleep	without	food."	And	my	stomach	was	hurting.
Then	they	started	cooking	food.	And	great	temptations:	tomatoes,	potatoes,	and
the	beautiful	smell	of	 the	food.	 I	was	wavering	between	temptation	and	virtue.
One	moment	I	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
98
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
would	decide	 "It	 is	 better	 to	 sleep	one	night	without	 food	 --	 one	 cannot	die	 --
rather	than	suffer	hell	and	hellfire	just	for	a	few	tomatoes	and	a	few	potatoes."
But	then	the	hunger	was	too	much.	And	then	the	argument	started	coming	to	me:
if	all	my	friends	are	going	to	hell,	what	am	I	going	to	do	in	heaven?	It	is	better	to
be	with	 friends	 in	hell	 than	 to	be	with	 those	 foolish	 Jaina	 saints	 in	heaven.	At
least	in	hell	you	can	cook	tomatoes,	potatoes,	you	can	eat	well,	there	is	enough
fire.	Even	I	can	cook	there!
And	 they	all	 tried	 to	persuade	me:	"There	 is	nobody	else	here,	and	we	are	not
going	to	tell	your	family	either.	Nobody	will	ever	come	to	know	that	you	have
eaten	in	the	night,	that	you	have	eaten	tomatoes	or	potatoes."
Reluctantly,	 hesitatingly,	 I	 agreed.	But	 I	 could	not	 sleep	until	 I	 vomited	 in	 the
middle	of	the	night.	Nobody	else	vomited	--	they	were	all	fast	asleep	and	snoring
--	only	I	vomited.	It	was	my	psychology,	because	I	was	suffering	from	the	idea
that	 I	 had	 committed	 a	 sin.	 It	was	 not	 the	 tomatoes	 that	 I	 vomited,	 it	was	my
attitude.	 And	 that	 day	 it	 became	 clear,	 absolutely	 clear,	 that	 you	 can	 live	 life
totally	only	if	you	drop	all	attitudes.	Otherwise	you	will	live	partially,	and	to	live
partially	is	not	to	live	at	all.
I	cannot	support	this	prayer.
Jesus	says,	"LEAD	US	NOT	INTO	TEMPTATION..."
One	 thing	 is	 certain:	 that	 Jesus	 is	 feeling	 the	 temptation,	 otherwise	 why	 this
prayer?	He	 is	 feeling	 that	 God	 is	 leading	 him	 into	 temptation.	 And	 if	 God	 is
leading,	why	not	surrender?
Then	 the	 real	 prayer	 would	 have	 been:	 "Lead	 us	 really	 into	 total	 temptation.
When	you	are	leading,	why	do	it	half-heartedly?	When	you	have	decided	to	lead,
then	lead	us	totally!"
He	is	tempted;	his	prayer	is	an	absolute	confirmation	of	his	temptation.	And	it	is
natural	--
he	was	a	human	being	just	like	you,	as	alive	as	you	are.	And	he	must	have	felt	all
natural	likes,	dislikes.	He	must	have	loved	things,	he	must	have	preferred	things.
But	he	is	afraid	--	the	past	is	heavy	on	him.
"LEAD	US	NOT	INTO	TEMPTATION,	BUT	DELIVER	US	FROM	EVIL."
There	is	no	evil,	hence	there	is	no	need	to	be	delivered	from	anything.	There	is
only	one	thing	and	that	is	a	state	of	unconsciousness,	unknowing,	unawareness.	I
will	not	call	it	evil	--
it	 is	 a	 situation,	 a	 challenge,	 an	 adventure.	 It	 is	 not	 evil.	Existence	 is	 not	 evil,
existence	is	an	opportunity	to	grow.	And,	of	course,	 the	opportunity	to	grow	is
possible	only	if	you	are	tempted	in	thousands	of	ways,	if	you	are	called	forth	by
unknown	aspirations,	 if	a	tremendous	desire	in	you	arises	to	explore...	And	the
only	thing	that	can	prevent	you	is	unconsciousness,	unawareness.	That	 too	is	a
great	 challenge	 --	 to	 conquer	 Become	 more	 conscious,	 become	 more	 aware,
become	more	alive.	Let	all	your	juices	flow.
Don't	 hold	 yourself	 back.	 Respect	 your	 nature,	 love	 yourself,	 and	 don't	 be
worried	 about	 unnecessary	 things.	 Unworried,	 move	 into	 the	 thick	 of	 life,
explore	it.	Yes,	you	will	commit	many	mistakes	--	so	what?	One	learns	through
committing	mistakes.	Yes,	you	will	go	into	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
99
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
many	errors	--	so	what?	It	is	only	by	going	into	errors	that	one	comes	to	the	right
door.	 Before	 one	 knocks	 at	 the	 right	 door,	 one	 has	 to	 knock	 on	 thousands	 of
wrong	doors.	That	is	part	of	the	game,	part	of	the	play.
Mr.	and	Mrs.	Goldberg	had	scrimped	and	saved	to	put	 their	eldest	son	through
college.	At	last,	they	had	the	money	and	decided	to	send	him	to	a	fine	high-brow
Eastern	boarding-school.
They	saw	him	off	on	the	train,	and	tearfully	bade	him	farewell.
A	 few	months	 later,	he	 returned	home	 for	 the	Christmas	holidays.	The	parents
were	overjoyed	 to	have	 their	 son	Sammy	back	with	 them.	The	mother	greeted
him	with:	"Samelah,	oh,	it's	so	good	to	see	you."
"Mother'	he	replied,	"stop	calling	me	Samelah.	After	all,	I'm	a	grown	man	now,
and	I	do	wish	you	would	refer	to	me	as	Samuel."
She	 apologized	 and	 asked,	 "I	 hope	 you	 only	 ate	 kosher	 foods	while	 you	were
away?"
"Mother,	we	are	living	in	the	modern	age,	and	it's	preposterous	to	hang	on	to	old
world	 traditions.	 I	 indulged	 in	 all	 types	 of	 food,	 kosher	 and	 non-kosher,	 and
believe	me,	you	would	be	better	off	if	you	did."
"Well,	 tell	me,	did	you	at	 least	go	to	the	synagogue	to	offer	a	prayer	of	 thanks
occasionally?"
The	son	replied,	"Really,	do	you	honestly	feel	going	 to	a	synagogue	when	you
are	 associating	with	 a	 large	 percentage	of	 non-Jews	 is	 the	 proper	 thing	 to	 do?
Honestly,	Mother,	it	is	unfair	to	ask	it	of	me	really."
At	 this	point,	Mrs.	Goldberg,	 fighting	back	anger,	 looked	at	her	eldest	son	and
said,	"Tell	me,	Samuel,	are	you	still	circumcised?"
The	past	goes	on	hanging	around	you.	It	is	an	imprisonment.	If	you	are	a	Jew	or
a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Jaina	or	a	Buddhist,	you	are	not	really	a	man.	You	are
dead,	you	are	a	corpse	--	circumcised	or	not	circumcised.
One	 becomes	 alive	 only	 when	 one	 is	 totally	 free	 from	 the	 past.	 To	 be	 in	 the
present	is	the	only	way	to	be	alive.
Prabodh,	 these	 prayers	 are	 nothing	 but	 fear-oriented	 people's	 projections	 and
desires.	I	teach	you	love	not	fear.
In	all	the	languages	of	the	world,	the	religious	person	is	called	god-fearing.	That
is	 an	 ugly	 expression;	 it	 should	 be	 dropped.	 It	 is	 impossible	 for	 a	 religious
person	to	be	god-fearing	because	he	cannot	have	fear.	A	religious	person	simply
lives	lovingly	--	not	out	of	fear.
These	are	all	prayers	out	of	fear:
"GIVE	US	OUR	DAILY	BREAD.	FORGIVE	US	OUR	TRESPASSES.	LEAD
US	NOT
INTO	TEMPTATION,	BUT	DELIVER	US	FROM	EVIL."
Drop	all	this.	Be	a	little	more	alive,	a	little	more	contemporary.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
100
Chapter	7	-	Only	one	time:	now
Henry	went	on	his	first	hunting	trip.	When	he	got	back	to	his	office	his	partner
Morris	could	not	wait	 to	hear	all	about	 the	 trip.	Henry	 told	him,	"Well,	 I	went
into	 the	woods	with	 the	guide.	You	know	me,	 two	minutes	 in	 the	woods,	 I	get
lost.	I	am	walking	extra	quiet,	when	all	of	a	sudden	the	biggest	bear	you	ever	did
see	is	standing	right	in	front	of	me.	I	turn	around	and	run	just	as	fast	as	I	can	and
that	bear,	he	is	running	even	faster.
"Just	when	I	feel	his	hot	breath	on	my	neck,	he	slipped	and	fell.	I	jumped	over	a
brook	and	kept	running,	but	I	was	losing	my	breath	and	sure	enough	there	was
that	bear	getting	close	to	me	again.	He	was	almost	on	top	of	me,	when	he	slipped
again	and	fell.	I	kept	on	running	and	finally	I	found	myself	in	the	clearing	of	the
woods.	 The	 bear	was	 running	 as	 fast	 as	 he	 could	 and	 I	 knew	 I	 didn't	 stand	 a
chance.	 I	 saw	 the	 other	 hunters	 and	 shouted	 for	 help	 and	 just	 then	 the	 bear
slipped	and	fell	again.	My	guide	was	able	to	take	aim	and	he	shot	the	bear	and
killed	him."
Morris	said,	"Henry,	that	was	quite	a	story.	You	are	a	very	brave	man.	If	that	had
happened	to	me,	I	would	have	made	in	my	pants."
Henry	 looked	 at	 him	 and	 shrugged,	 "Morris,	 what	 do	 you	 think	 the	 bear	was
slipping	on?"
Man	has	lived	in	fear	--	it	is	time	to	put	a	full	stop	to	it.	Humanity	needs	a	new
dawn,	a	totally	new	vision.
Jesus	says	God	is	love.	I	would	like	to	change	it.	I	would	like	to	say	love	is	God.
When	you	say	God	is	love,	love	is	only	one	of	the	qualities	of	God;	he	may	have
other	qualities:	wisdom,	justice,	etcetera.	To	me,	love	is	God;	godliness	is	only
one	of	the	qualities	of	love.
There	 is	 no	 other	God	 than	 the	 fragrance	 of	 love.	But	 the	 fragrance	 can	 arise
only	in	deep	meditation,	not	in	prayer.	Prayer	stinks	of	fear.
I	know	perfectly	well	 that	 to	 say	anything	against	 Jesus	or	Buddha	or	Krishna
hurts	you,	but	I	cannot	help	it.	If	 it	hurts,	 it	hurts.	And	rather	than	feeling	sour
about	what	I	say,	ponder	over	it,	meditate	over	it.	Because	I	am	not	interested	in
arguing	against	anybody.	I	have	tremendous	love	for	Jesus,	Buddha,	Mahavira,
Krishna.	They	were	beautiful	people,	but	their	days	are	finished.
We	 need	 new	 insights,	 new	 pastures,	 new	 dimensions.	 And	 those	 new
dimensions	 are	 bound	 to	 go	 against	 our	 old,	 rotten	 mind.	 So	 when	 it	 hurts,
remember:	it	is	not	the	truth	that	is	hurting	you	--	it	is	your	own	lie	that	you	have
been	clinging	to	which	hurts.	Whenever	you	have	to	choose	between	truth	and	a
lie,	be	courageous	and	choose	the	truth,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	live,	the
only	way	to	know,	the	only	way	to	be.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
101
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
8
The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
8	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 ACCORDING	 TO	 A	 VERY	 RECENT	 THEORY	 IN	 ASTRONOMIC
PHYSICS,	 EVERY	 ATOM	 WHICH	 EXISTS	 IN	 THE	 BODY	 OR	 WHICH
BUILDS	UP	ALL
MATERIAL	THINGS	AROUND	US	COMES	OUT	OF	A	COSMIC	CIRCLE
THROUGH
WHICH	 IT	 MUST	 GO	 AT	 LEAST	 TWICE.	 HOWEVER,	 THIS	 FACT
DOESN'T	HELP	ME
TO	FEEL	PART	OF	THE	COSMOS.	OSHO,	AS	A	SCIENTIST,	DO	 I	EVER
STAND	A	CHANCE	OF	EXPERIENCING	MYSTERY?
Walter	Hultzsch,	science	is	a	demystification	of	existence,	hence	it	is	absolutely
impossible	to	feel	any	sense	of	the	mysterious	through	science;	the	very	method
of	science	prohibits	it.	It	is	just	like	somebody	who	is	blind	trying	to	see	through
the	ears,	or	somebody	who	is	deaf	trying	to	listen	to	music	through	the	eyes:	the
very	method	becomes	the	barrier.
Science	 has	 a	 definite	 methodology	 and	 that	 makes	 it	 limited;	 it	 gives	 it	 a
demarcation,	 a	 definition.	 And	 it	 is	 absolutely	 necessary	 for	 science	 to	 be
defined,	 otherwise	 there	 would	 be	 no	 difference	 at	 all	 between	 science	 and
meditation,	between	science	and	religious	consciousness.
Science	means	being	definite,	being	absolutely	definite,	about	facts.	And	if	you
are	very	definite	about	facts	then	you	cannot	feel	mysterious	--	the	more	definite
you	 are	 the	 more	 mystery	 evaporates.	 Mystery	 needs	 a	 certain	 vagueness;
mystery	needs	something	undefined,	undemarcated.	Science	is	factual;	mystery
is	not	factual,	it	is	existential.
A	fact	is	only	a	part	of	existence,	a	very	small	part,	and	science	deals	with	parts
because	it	 is	easier	 to	deal	with	parts.	They	are	smaller,	you	can	analyze	them,
you	are	not	overwhelmed	by	them,	you	can	possess	them	in	your	hands,	you	can
dissect	 them,	 you	 can	 label	 them,	 you	 can	 be	 absolutely	 certain	 about	 their
qualities,	 quantities,	 possibilities	 --	 but	 in	 that	 very	 process	 mystery	 is	 being
killed.
Science	is	the	murder	of	mystery.
If	you	want	to	experience	the	mysterious	you	will	have	to	enter	through	another
door,	 from	 a	 totally	 different	 dimension.	 The	 dimension	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 the
dimension	of	science,	and	 the	dimension	of	meditation	 is	 the	dimension	of	 the
miraculous,	the	mysterious.
Meditation	makes	everything	undefined.	Meditation	takes	you	into	the	unknown,
the	 uncharted.	 Meditation	 takes	 you	 slowly	 slowly	 into	 a	 kind	 of	 dissolution
where	 the	observer	and	 the	observed	become	one.	Now,	 that	 is	not	possible	 in
science.	 The	 observer	 has	 to	 be	 the	 observer	 and	 the	 observed	 has	 to	 be	 the
observed	and	a	clear-cut	distinction	has	to	be	maintained	continuously.	Not	even
for	a	single	moment	should	you	forget	yourself,	not	even	Osho	-	The	Goose	is
Out
102
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
for	 a	 single	 moment	 should	 you	 become	 interested,	 dissolved,	 overwhelmed,
passionate,	loving	towards	the	object	of	your	inquiry.	You	have	to	be	detached,
you	have	to	be	very	cold
--	cold,	absolutely	indifferent.	And	indifference	kills	mystery.
Between	 the	world	of	meditation	and	 the	mind	 there	 is	a	bridge;	 that	bridge	 is
called	 the	heart.	The	heart	 is	 just	 exactly	 in	 between	 the	 two.	Hence,	 the	poet
lives	in	a	twilight	land:	something	of	him	can	be	scientific	and	something	of	him
can	be	mystic.	But	 that	 is	 the	anxiety	of	 the	poet	also,	because	he	 lives	 in	 two
dimensions,	diametrically	opposite	to	each	other.
Hence,	poets	tend	to	go	mad,	tend	to	commit	suicide;	they	are	always	known	as
a	 little	 bit	 crazy,	 outlandish.	 Something	 about	 them	 remains	 berserk	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	they	are	not	settled	anywhere.	They	are	neither	in	the	world	of
facts	nor	in	the	world	of	existentials;	they	are	in	a	limbo.
The	poet	can	have	a	certain	 taste	of	 the	mysterious,	but	 that	 too	only	rarely;	 it
comes	and	goes.	The	mystic	LIVES	 there,	 the	poet	only	 jumps	once	 in	awhile
and	feels	the	joy	of	jumping	beyond	gravitation.	But	within	a	minute	or	within
seconds	he	is	back,	crushed	against	the	forces	of	gravitation.
Poetry	is	a	kind	of	hopping.	Once	in	awhile	you	are	in	the	sky,	for	a	moment	you
feel	as	if	you	have	wings,	but	only	for	a	moment.	Hence,	the	despair	of	the	poet,
because	 he	 falls	 again	 and	 again	 from	his	 peaks.	He	 gathers	 a	 few	glimpses...
The	 greatest	 poets	 too	 have	 been	 able	 to	 gather	 only	 a	 few	 glimpses	 of	 the
beyond.
But	 the	 mystic	 lives	 in	 the	 world	 of	 mystery.	 His	 approach	 is	 absolutely
transcendental	 to	science.	He	is	neither	 in	 the	mind	nor	 in	 the	heart,	but	 in	 the
beyond;	he	has	transcended	both.
Walter,	if	you	really	want	the	experience	of	the	mysterious	then	you	will	have	to
open	 a	 new	 door	 in	 your	 being.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 stop	 being	 a	 scientist,	 I	 am
simply	saying	that	science	can	remain	a	peripheral	activity	to	you.	When	in	the
lab	 be	 a	 scientist,	 but	when	 you	 come	 out	 of	 the	 lab	 forget	 all	 about	 science.
Then	listen	to	the	birds	--	and	not	in	a	scientific	way!	Look	at	the	flowers	--	and
not	in	a	scientific	way,	because	when	you	look	at	a	rose	in	a	scientific	way	it	is	a
totally	different	kind	of	thing	that	you	are	looking	at.	It	is	not	the	same	rose	that
a	poet	experiences.
The	 experience	 does	 not	 depend	 on	 the	 object,	 the	 experience	 depends	 on	 the
experiencer,	on	the	quality	of	experiencing.	When	the	scientist	looks	at	the	rose
he	thinks	of	colors,	chemistry,	physics,	atoms,	electrons,	neutrons	and	whatnot	--
except	beauty.	Beauty	does	not	come	into	his	vision,	and	that's	what	the	rose	is.
To	the	poet,	to	the	painter,	the	rose	is	a	totally	different	experience:	the	rose	is	a
manifestation	of	the	unknown,	of	the	transcendental,	of	the	secret	of	life	itself.	It
represents	something	of	the	divine,	it	brings	into	existence	something	of	the	sky,
something	of	faraway	stars.	It	grows	on	the	earth,	it	is	rooted	in	the	earth,	but	it
is	not	just	part	of	the	earth;	it	contains	far	more	than	that.	It	is	not	the	sum	total
of	its	constituent	parts.	The	scientist	only	comes	to	know	it	as	a	sum	total	of	its
constituent	 parts	 --	 there	 is	 nothing	 more	 to	 it	 --	 but	 the	 poet	 starts	 feeling
something	plus.
The	moment	you	dissect	 the	rose,	 the	beauty	disappears.	The	rose	was	only	an
opportunity	 for	 the	 beauty	 to	 descend,	 a	 receptivity	 of	 the	 earth	 to	 the	 sky,	 a
receptivity	of	the	gross	to	the	subtle.	The	poet	feels	that;	but	it	is	a	feeling,	it	is
not	a	thought.
So	when	you	come	out	of	your	 lab,	forget	all	about	atoms,	forget	all	about	 the
cosmos;	 rather,	 start	 looking	 afresh,	 with	 a	 different	 vision	 --	 the	 vision	 of	 a
child,	the	vision	of	a	poet,	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
103
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
the	vision	of	a	lover.	When	you	look	at	the	woman	you	love	never	think	of	her	in
terms	 of	 biology,	 otherwise	 you	will	 have	missed	 the	whole	 point.	 She	 is	 not
biology,	she	has	a	being	far	greater	than	any	biology	can	contain.	When	you	kiss
your	woman	don't	 think	 in	 terms	of	what	 is	being	 transferred	 from	 lips	 to	 lips
chemically,	otherwise	you	will	be	disgusted!	You	won't	see	any	poetry,	you	will
be	 puzzled	 by	 what	 all	 these	 poets	 have	 been	 talking	 about.	 It	 is	 only	 an
exchange	 of	 bacteria,	 germs,	 millions	 of	 germs	 --	 dangerous	 too.	 It	 can	 be	 a
matter	of	life	and	death	--	beware!
When	 you	 are	making	 love	 to	 your	woman	 don't	 think	 in	 terms	 of	 hormones,
avoid	 that	nonsense,	otherwise	 the	whole	 love	act	will	simply	be	a	mechanical
phenomenon.	You	will	be	there	and	yet	not	there.	You	will	be	just	an	observer,
not	a	participant.	And	the	poet's	whole	secret	is	participation.
Looking	at	a	 flower,	become	the	flower,	dance	around	 the	flower,	sing	a	song.
The	wind	is	cool	and	crisp,	the	sun	is	warm,	and	the	flower	is	in	its	prime;	the
flower	 is	 dancing	 in	 the	 wind,	 rejoicing,	 singing	 a	 song,	 singing	 alleluia.
Participate	 with	 it!	 Drop	 indifference,	 objectivity,	 detachment.	 Drop	 all	 your
scientific	attitudes.	Become	a	little	more	fluid,	more	melting,	more	merging.	Let
the	flower	speak	to	your	heart,	let	the	flower	enter	your	being.
Invite	him	--	he	is	a	guest!	And	then	you	will	have	some	taste	of	mystery.
This	is	the	first	step	towards	the	mysterious,	and	the	ultimate	step	is:	if	you	can
be	a	participant	for	a	moment,	you	have	known	the	key,	the	secret.	Then	become
a	 participant	 in	 everything	 that	 you	 are	 doing.	 Walking,	 don't	 just	 do	 it
mechanically,	 don't	 just	 go	 on	 watching	 it	 --	 be	 it.	 Dancing,	 don't	 do	 it
technically;	 technique	 is	 irrelevant	You	may	be	 technically	correct	and	yet	you
will	miss	the	whole	joy	of	it.	Dissolve	yourself	in	the	dance,	become	the	dance,
forget	about	the	dancer.
When	such	deep	unity	starts	happening	in	many	many	phases	of	your	life;	when
all	 around	 you	 start	 having	 such	 tremendous	 experiences	 of	 disappearance,
egolessness,	nothingness;	when	the	flower	is	there	and	you	are	not,	the	rainbow
is	there	and	you	are	not;	when	the	clouds	are	roaming	in	the	sky	both	within	and
without	and	you	are	not;	when	there	is	utter	silence	as	far	as	you	are	concerned;
when	there	 is	nobody	in	you,	 just	a	pure	silence,	a	virgin	silence,	undistracted,
undisturbed	 by	 logic,	 thought,	 emotion,	 feeling,	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 of
meditation.	Mind	is	gone,	and	when	mind	is	gone	mystery	enters.
Mystery	 and	 mind	 cannot	 exist	 together;	 they	 are	 not,	 by	 their	 very	 nature,
coexistential.
Just	 like	 darkness	 and	 light:	 you	 cannot	 have	 both	 in	 your	 room.	 If	 you	want
darkness	you	have	to	extinguish	the	light;	if	you	want	light	then	you	have	to	lose
darkness.	You	can	only	have	one,	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	presence	of	light
is	the	absence	of	darkness,	the	presence	of	darkness	is	the	absence	of	light;	they
are	not	 two	 things,	 in	 fact.	The	 same	phenomenon,	 present,	 is	 light;	 absent,	 is
darkness.	Now	you	cannot	manage	both,	to	be	present	and	absent	together.
Mind	 is	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 non-mysterious,	 the	 logical,	 and	meditation	 is	 the
presence	of	the	mysterious,	the	miraculous.
Hence,	 move	 from	 the	 mind.	 Let	 art,	 poetry,	 painting,	 dancing	 become	 more
important	--
they	will	 bring	 you	 closer	 to	meditation	 --	 and	 finally	 take	 the	 plunge.	 If	 you
have	 tasted	 something	 of	 poetry	 you	 will	 gather	 enough	 courage	 to	 take	 the
ultimate	plunge.
Hence,	to	me	religion	consists	of	three	layers;	the	first	layer	is	of	science.	Just	as
your	body	consists	of	material,	atomic	constituents,	so	religion	consists	first,	the
most	peripheral	part,	of	science.	I	am	not	against	science	--	science	is	an	absolute
need	--	but	it	is	only	a	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
104
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
peripheral	 phenomenon,	 the	most	 superficial,	 the	 first	 concentric	 circle	 around
your	center.
Then	comes	the	second	concentric	circle,	which	is	deeper	than	science;	that	is	of
art,	 aesthetics.	And	 then	 the	 third;	 that	 is	meditation.	And	 if	 you	have	 entered
these	three	concentric	circles,	slowly	slowly	you	will	attain	to	the	fourth.
The	 fourth	 in	 the	East	 is	 called	TURIYA;	we	have	not	 given	 it	 any	name,	we
have	simply	given	it	a	number,	"the	fourth."	Nothing	can	be	said	about	it,	that's
why	no	name	has	been	given	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 even	beyond	mystery.	Meditation	will
take	you	into	the	mysterious,	but	there	is	still	something	more	than	that;	that	is
inexpressible.	Nothing	can	be	said	about	it,	nothing	has	ever	been	said	about	it,
nothing	will	ever	be	said	about	it,	but	it	has	been	experienced.
Only	 at	 that	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 experience,	 in	 that	 ultimate	 ecstasy,	Walter,	will
you	know	what	it	is	to	be.
You	ask	me:
OSHO,	 ACCORDING	 TO	 A	 VERY	 RECENT	 THEORY	 IN	 ASTRONOMIC
PHYSICS,	 EVERY	 ATOM	 WHICH	 EXISTS	 IN	 THE	 BODY	 OR	 WHICH
BUILDS	UP	ALL
MATERIAL	THINGS	AROUND	US	COMES	OUT	OF	A	COSMIC	CIRCLE
THROUGH
WHICH	IT	MUST	GO	AT	LEAST	TWICE.
Whether	it	goes	twice	or	thrice,	how	can	it	help	you	to	feel	that	you	are	part	of
the	cosmos?	It	may	go	thousands	of	times	--	it	is	irrelevant!
You	say:
HOWEVER,	 THIS	 FACT	DOES	 NOT	HELP	ME	 TO	 FEEL	 PART	OF	 THE
COSMOS.
No	 fact	 can	 help	 you.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 travel	 the	 whole	 terrain	 in	 a	 totally
different	dimension.
You	also	ask:
OSHO,	 AS	 A	 SCIENTIST,	 DO	 I	 EVER	 STAND	 A	 CHANCE	 OF
EXPERIENCING
MYSTERY?
Not	as	a	scientist,	there	is	no	chance.	I	cannot	give	you	false	hope.	As	a	scientist
you	 have	 no	 chance	 to	 know	 the	mysterious;	 but	 that	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you
have	to	stop	being	a	scientist,	that	simply	means	that	you	can	let	science	be	one
of	 the	 aspects	 of	 your	 life.	 Why	 make	 it	 your	 whole	 life?	 Why	 become
synonymous	 with	 it?	 It	 is	 perfectly	 good	 to	 use	 your	 logical	 mind,	 your
analytical	 mind	 --	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good,	 it	 is	 beneficial.	 The	 world	 needs
technology,	 the	 world	 needs	 science,	 and	 you	 can	 be	 of	 immense	 service	 to
humanity,	but	that	is	a	totally	different	matter.
You	 should	 not	 think	 that	 this	 can	 be	 your	whole	 life,	 otherwise	 you	will	 live
only	on	the	porch	of	the	palace	and	you	will	think	that	this	is	the	palace	and	you
will	 suffer	 all	 kinds	of	 things	on	 the	porch.	Sometimes	 it	will	 be	 too	cold	and
sometimes	it	will	be	too	hot,	and	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
105
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
sometimes	 the	 rain	 will	 start	 coming	 in	 --	 it	 is	 only	 an	 open	 porch!	 And	 the
palace	is	there,	available;	you	could	have	entered	the	palace.	I	am	not	against	the
porch,	remember,	I	am	not	 telling	you	to	demolish	it.	The	porch	is	a	necessity,
but	a	porch	is	a	porch.	Pass	through	it,	use	it,	but	you	have	a	beautiful	palace	--
why	not	explore	the	whole	palace	of	your	being?
Explore	 poetry,	 explore	 music,	 explore	 dance,	 explore	 meditation,	 and	 finally
and	ultimately	disappear	into	the	fourth.	Then,	and	only	then,	the	goose	is	out!
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 WHEN	 SERIOUS,	 SAD	 PEOPLE	 BECOME	 ENLIGHTENED,	 DO
THEY
REMAIN	 SERIOUS	 AND	 SAD	 OR	 DO	 THEY	 BECOME	 FUNNY	 LIKE
YOU?
Prem	 Jyoti,	who	 has	 ever	 heard	 of	 serious	 people	 becoming	 enlightened?	The
serious	 person	 cannot	 become	 enlightened.	 Seriousness	 is	 a	 disease;	 it	 is	 the
cancer	of	the	soul.
Seriousness	 is	 a	wrong,	 utterly	wrong	 approach	 to	 life.	How	can	you	 come	 to
truth	through	a	wrong	approach?	The	serious	person	is	simply	ill,	pathological.
Of	course,	for	thousands	of	years	serious	people	have	dominated	us	because	that
is	their	only	joy	in	life,	there	is	no	other	joy	for	them	--	the	joy	of	dominating.
There	is	a	beautiful	parable	of	Kahlil	Gibran:
Every	 day	 he	 goes	 for	 a	 morning	 walk	 and	 he	 comes	 across	 a	 field	 where	 a
scarecrow	has	 been	 put.	The	 scarecrow	has	 a	 purpose:	 he	 drives	wild	 animals
away,	birds	away	from	the	crops.
One	day	Kahlil	Gibran	asks	the	scarecrow,	"You	have	been	standing	here	year	in,
year	out
--	you	must	be	getting	very	tired,	very	bored?"
And	the	scarecrow	says,	"No,	I	may	look	bored,	I	may	look	very	serious,	but	I
am	enjoying	my	job."
Kahlil	Gibran	says,	"What	kind	of	enjoyment	can	you	have?	I	don't	see	anything
here	for	you	to	enjoy."
He	says,	"The	very	joy	of	making	people	afraid	gives	me	such	a	thrill.	Day	in,
day	out,	 I	 am	driving	animals,	birds	 crazy!	They	 run	away	 from	me.	 I	 am	 the
supreme-most	around	here,	I	am	the	most	powerful	person.	Everybody	is	afraid
of	me.	Don't	you	think	that's	more	than	one	can	expect	from	life?"
The	serious	person	has	been	doing	that	for	centuries.	In	the	name	of	politics,	in
the	name	of	religion,	in	the	name	of	education,	in	the	name	of	morality,	he	has
been	torturing	people;	that	is	his	only	joy.	He	is	basically	a	sado-masochist.
No	sado-masochist	can	become	enlightened,	and	out	of	one	hundred	people	that
you	 think	 have	 become	 enlightened,	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 percent	 are	 not
enlightened.	Just	the	traditional	idea,	and	you	go	on	carrying	it.	You	have	been
told	that	this	man	is	"enlightened."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
106
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
No	criterion	exists	for	you	to	judge	him	by	--	because	Jesus	is	enlightened	to	the
Christians,	 to	 the	 Jainas	 he	 is	 not;	 they	 have	 a	 different	 criterion.	You	will	 be
surprised:	to	the	Christians,	Mahavira	may	not	look	enlightened	at	all;	they	have
a	different	criterion.
Christians	 say	 Jesus	never	 laughed	 in	his	whole	 life.	This	must	be	an	absolute
lie.	 I	 cannot	believe	 it,	 that	he	never	 laughed;	his	whole	 life	 shows	a	different
flavor.	It	is	impossible	to	think	that	he	never	laughed,	but	Christians	say	that	he
never	 laughed.	Why?	 --	 because	 an	 enlightened	person	has	 to	be	 serious,	 very
serious,	burdened	with	all	 the	problems	of	 the	world.	He	has	come	to	solve	all
the	problems,	he	has	come	 to	save	humanity.	He	 is	 the	savior,	 the	messiah;	he
has	to	save	you	from	your	past	sins,	and	the	future	possibilities	too.	Naturally
--	he	is	carrying	on	his	shoulders	a	Himalayan	weight	--	how	can	he	laugh?	It	is
impossible.
But	 the	 whole	 idea	 that	 somebody	 has	 to	 save	 you	 is	 ugly;	 the	 whole	 idea
destroys	 your	 freedom.	 You	 are	 not	 even	 allowed	 to	 suffer	 for	 your	 sins,
somebody	else	has	to	suffer	Your	whole	responsibility	is	taken	away.
That	 is	 not	 the	 vision	 of	 other	 traditions.	 For	 example,	Buddha	will	 not	 agree
with	it.	He	says,	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself.	Nobody	else	can	save	you."	Hence,
Buddha	is	not	so	serious;	there	is	no	need,	there	is	no	reason	to	be	serious.	He	is
free	from	all	his	own	problems,	he	is	released.	There	is	a	subtle	joy	in	him.
But	Christians	will	 think	that	Buddha	is	selfish,	he	 is	only	thinking	of	himself.
And	how	can	an	enlightened	person	be	selfish?	Jesus	is	enlightened	because	he
is	thinking	of	the	whole	of	humanity.
Mahavira	lived	naked.	That	is	the	Jainas'	concept	of	an	enlightened	man:	that	the
enlightened	person	will	renounce	everything,	he	will	live	naked,	and	because	he
is	completely	free	from	all	sins	he	cannot	suffer.	And	Jesus	suffers	much	on	the
cross.	Now,	according	to	Jaina	philosophy	you	suffer	only	because	of	your	past
bad	karmas.	 If	 Jesus	had	 to	suffer	on	 the	cross	 that	simply	shows	 that	his	past
karmas	were	still	there	--	he	had	to	pay	for	it;	each	act	has	to	be	paid	for.
For	Mahavira,	they	say	that	if	Mahavira	walks	--	and	he	walks	naked,	barefoot	--
and	if	on	the	path	there	is	a	thorn,	the	thorn	will	immediately	turn	upside	down,
seeing	that	Mahavira	is	coming,	because	Mahavira	has	no	more	sins	left,	hence
the	 thorn	cannot	give	any	pain	 to	Mahavira,	 so	what	 to	 say	about	 crucifixion?
But	Mahavira	is	serious.
Krishna	is	not	serious.	Krishna	is	dancing,	singing,	playing	on	his	flute.
When	 Bodhidharma	 became	 enlightened,	 for	 seven	 days	 he	 could	 not	 stop
laughing.	Asked	again	and	again,	he	only	said	this	much:	"I	am	laughing	because
the	whole	thing	was	ridiculous.	The	goose	has	always	been	out,	and	I	was	trying
to	bring	 it	out	of	 the	bottle,	and	 the	bottle	never	existed.	The	whole	effort	was
sheer	 absurdity,	 ridiculous!	 I	 am	 laughing	 at	myself	 and	 I	 am	 laughing	 at	 the
whole	world,	because	people	are	trying	to	do	something	which	need	not	be	done
at	 all.	 People	 are	 trying	 hard,	 and	 the	 harder	 they	 try	 the	 more	 difficult	 it
becomes.	Their	very	effort	is	the	barrier!"
How	are	you	going	to	decide	who	is	enlightened	and	who	is	not?
Just	the	other	day	I	received	a	letter	saying:	"If	you	are	really	enlightened	then
you	should	hide	yourself	 in	 the	Himalayas,	because	enlightened	people	always
remain	in	hiding.	They	remain	unknown,	they	remain	unsung."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
107
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
Now,	 if	 this	 man	 is	 right,	 then	 Mahavira,	 Buddha,	 Jesus,	 Krishna,	 Rama,
Zarathustra,	 Mohammed	 --	 none	 of	 them	 is	 enlightened,	 because	 they	 are	 all
well-known,	world-known.
They	were	not	hiding	in	the	Himalayas,	they	did	not	live	anonymously,	they	did
not	die	unsung.
And	then	one	more	question	arises:	how	has	this	man	come	to	know	about	a	few
people	who	have	lived	hiding	in	the	Himalayas,	unsung,	unknown,	the	people	he
thinks	 are	 the	 real	 enlightened	people?	Then	how	has	 he	 come	 to	 know	about
them?	And	if	he	knows,	then	they	are	not	unknown	--	unless	he	is	the	only	one
who	is	allowed	to	know	the	secret!
But	these	fools	abound;	they	go	on	parading	their	own	prejudices.
I	will	not	tell	you	who	is	enlightened	and	who	is	not	enlightened,	but	I	will	tell
you	of	a	simple	phenomenon	which	you	can	understand	and	which	can	become	a
light	for	you.	One	thing	is	absolutely	certain:	that	the	sado-masochist	cannot	be
enlightened.	 One	 who	 tortures	 himself	 and	 tortures	 others,	 enjoys	 torturing,
cannot	be	enlightened.
Enlightenment	 is	 blissfulness,	 it	 cannot	 be	 serious.	 It	 can	 be	 sincere	 but	 not
serious.	It	will	be	sheer	joy!	It	will	be	pure	ecstasy!
Prem	Jyoti,	you	ask	me:
OSHO,	WHEN	SERIOUS,	SAD	PEOPLE	BECOME	ENLIGHTENED...
I	have	never	heard	of	any!	And	if	you	have	heard	of	any	sad	and	serious	people
becoming	 enlightened,	 then	 either	 they	were	 not	 sad	 and	 serious	 or	 you	 have
heard	wrong.	Serious	and	sad	people	become	something	else,	they	don't	become
enlightened.	 They	 become	 popes,	Mother	 Teresas,	Mahatma	Gandhis,	Morarji
Desais,	SHANKARACHARYAS,	Ayatollah	Khomaniacs,	IMAMS,	priests.	The
churches,	 the	 synagogues,	 the	 temples,	 the	 mosques,	 the	 GURUDWARAS	 --
they	 are	 full	 of	 these	 people;	 they	 are	 serious	 people.	 They	 gather	 around	 an
enlightened	 person	 and	 they	 start	 destroying	 all	 that	 he	 has	 brought	 into	 the
springtime.
They	 start	 creating	 a	 dead	 tradition	 --	 and	 the	 tradition	 has	 to	 be	 serious,	 the
tradition	cannot	be	non-serious.
The	enlightened	person	is	always	joyous,	but	the	tradition,	the	convention	cannot
be	joyous.	The	whole	structure	of	a	tradition	is	basically	political;	 it	 is	 there	to
dominate,	 it	 is	 there	 to	 oppress,	 it	 is	 there	 to	 exploit.	And	 you	 cannot	 exploit
people	playfully,	you	have	to	be	very	serious.	You	have	to	make	them	so	sad,	so
afraid	of	life	itself,	you	have	to	create	so	much	trembling	in	their	being,	that	out
of	that	fear	they	fall	into	your	hands;	they	become	objects	of	your	manipulation.
A	man	like	me	cannot	exploit	you,	because	this	whole	place	is	more	like	a	tavern
than	 a	 temple.	 It	 is	 more	 playful	 than	 serious.	We	 are	 engaged	 in	 a	 beautiful
game!	The	moment	you	think	of	it	as	a	game,	all	seriousness	disappears,	things
become	lighter.	You	can	walk	in	a	dancing	way;	there	is	no	weight	on	you.
But	 the	priests	 cannot	do	 it;	 their	whole	prestige	depends	on	 their	 seriousness.
The	 more	 serious	 they	 are,	 the	 more	 somber-looking,	 the	 more	 "holier-than-
thou"	 they	 can	pretend	 to	 be...	And	 they	will	 do	 everything	 --	 they	will	 fast...
naturally,	when	a	person	fasts	he	becomes	serious,	he	cannot	 laugh.	When	you
are	hungry,	starving,	you	cannot	 laugh	--	and	you	cannot	Osho	-	The	Goose	 is
Out
108
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
allow	anybody	else	to	laugh	either.	It	is	not	a	laughing	matter!	You	are	starving,
sacrificing,	crucifying	yourself,	and	people	are	laughing!	It	cannot	be	pardoned,
it	cannot	be	forgiven.
Naturally,	when	you	go	to	a	fasting	person	you	become	serious	--	you	have	to	be
serious.
That	 is	 simple	 manners.	 Now,	 a	 person	 who	 is	 distorting	 his	 body	 in	 every
possible	way,	who	 is	 torturing	his	body	 in	every	possible	way	 --	how	can	you
laugh?	The	very	scene	 is	sad;	you	feel	burdened.	 It	 is	very	difficult	 to	be	with
these	so-called	saints.	That's	why	people	just	go	to	pay	their	respects	and	escape
immediately,	because	to	sit	with	them	means	they	will	make	you	burdened,	they
will	create	guilt	in	you.
For	 example,	 if	 they	 are	 fasting	 and	 you	 are	 well-fed,	 guilt	 is	 bound	 to	 be
created.	If	they	are	standing	on	their	heads	and	you	are	simply	standing	on	your
feet,	you	are	doing	 something	wrong.	Naturally,	you	will	 feel,	 "I	 am	not	yet	 a
perfect	man	--	this	man	who	is	standing	on	his	head	is	perfect."	You	see	the	sheer
stupidity	 of	 it	 all?	 If	 God	 wanted	 you	 to	 stand	 on	 your	 head	 he	 would	 have
managed	it!
If	God	had	wanted	homosexuality	in	the	world	he	would	have	created	Adam	and
Bruce	--
it	is	so	simple!	Why	bring	in	Eve?	Unnecessary	trouble!	But	these	stupid	people
go	 on	 doing	 the	 unnatural,	 and	 their	 very	 unnatural	 approach	 to	 life	 naturally
makes	 them	 serious.	 They	 are	 going	 against	 the	 current,	 they	 are	 exhausted,
tired,	bored,	but	their	only	joy	is	that	they	can	also	bore	you.
Moishe	cannot	decide	about	his	son's	future.	So	he	goes	to	the	rabbi	and	asks	his
advice.
The	 rabbi	 says,	 "That's	 very	 easy.	 We	 put	 the	 Talmud,	 the	 Torah	 and	 some
money	on	the	table,	and	let	him	choose.	If	he	takes	the	Talmud	he	will	become	a
rabbi.	If	he	takes	the	Torah	he	will	become	a	lawyer.	If	he	takes	the	money	he
will	become	a	shopkeeper."
Moishe	agrees	and	they	call	his	son.	The	son	looks	at	all	the	things	on	the	table
and	then	takes	them	all.
Moishe	is	perplexed.	"What	will	happen	now?"	he	asks	the	rabbi.
"He	will	become	a	Catholic	priest,"	replied	the	rabbi.
These	 sad	 people	 become	 Catholic	 priests,	 Hindu	 SHANKARACHARYAS,
Mohammedan	IMAM,	and	what-not.	These	serious	people	lose	their	humanity;
they	become	parrots.	But	 it	pays.	You	need	not	have	much	intelligence	to	be	a
parrot,	you	need	not	have	much	courage	to	be	a	parrot;	if	you	just	have	a	little	bit
of	 memory	 and	 you	 can	 recite	 the	 Vedas,	 the	 Gita,	 the	 Koran,	 you	 will	 be
respected	and	honored.	You	are	not	doing	anything	creative,	you	are	not	adding
anything	to	the	beauty	of	the	world,	you	are	not	contributing	to	the	earth	and	its
joys,	on	the	contrary,	you	are	destroying.	But	people	have	been	conditioned	for
thousands	of	years,	and	they	go	on	doing	things	according	to	their	conditioning.
Parrots	are	worshipped.
A	farmer	owns	a	parrot	who	always	screams,	"Heil	Hitler!"
One	day	the	farmer	gets	fed	up	with	the	parrot	and	locks	it	in	the	hen-house.	The
cock	walks	over	to	the	parrot	and	asks,	"Tell	me,	why	did	the	farmer	lock	you	in
here?"	The	parrot	remains	silent.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
109
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
"I'll	give	you	four	of	my	hens	if	you	tell	me,"	continues	the	cock,	but	the	parrot
remains	silent.
"Listen,	if	you	tell	me	why	he	locked	you	in	here,	I'll	give	you	ten	of	my	hens."
The	parrot	turns	around	and	screams,	"Can't	you	leave	me	alone?	I'm	a	political
prisoner!"
These	sad	people,	they	either	become	priests	or	politicians	or	they	become	great
pedagogues,	 professors,	 philosophers,	 theologians.	 But	 they	 never	 become
enlightened;	 that	much	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 --	 that	 cannot	 happen	 in	 the	 very
nature	of	things.
To	 become	 enlightened	 one	 needs	 the	 lightness	 of	 a	 flower,	 the	 lightness	 of	 a
feather,	the	multi-dimensional	colors	of	a	rainbow.	One	needs	the	joy	of	the	birds
in	the	morning,	one	needs	the	freedom	of	the	clouds.	One	needs	only	one	thing:
a	heart	full	of	ecstasy	--	not	the	ecstasy	of	something	ultimate,	not	the	ecstasy	of
something	 in	 paradise,	 but	 ecstasy	 here	 and	 now,	 ecstasy	 this	 very	 moment,
when	your	eyes	are	full	of	this	very	moment,	when	there	is	nothing	else,	no	past,
no	 future,	 when	 this	 moment	 pervades	 you	 so	 totally,	 so	 intensely,	 so
passionately	 that	 nothing	 is	 left	 behind.	 Only	 these	 few	 people	 have	 become
enlightened.
Hence,	I	say,	if	you	live	in	joyous	ordinariness	you	are	enlightened.	There	is	no
need	for	any	spiritual	nonsense,	for	any	esoteric	nonsense.
The	 toilet	 seat	 in	 the	 Rabinowitz	 home	 was	 chipped.	 On	 his	 day	 off,	 Sidney
promised	 to	paint	 it.	He	had	 some	nice	bright	green	 enamel	 in	 the	garage	 and
applied	a	fresh	shiny	coat.
Ethel	went	in	with	a	magazine,	sat	down	to	meditate	and	read.	When	she	tried	to
get	up	she	found	she	was	stuck!	She	yelled	for	Sid.
He	tugged	and	tugged	but	could	not	pry	her	 loose.	Ethel,	 in	desperation,	cried,
"So	what	are	you	standing	there	for!	Call	me	a	doctor!	If	plaster	gets	stuck,	he	at
least	knows	how	to	remove	it	without	tearing	off	the	skin!"
Sidney	dashed	to	the	telephone	and	pleaded	with	the	doctor	to	come	right	over.
This	was	a	 real	 emergency!	The	doctor	 explained	 that	he	had	an	office	 full	of
patients	and	that	he	could	not	possibly	get	there	for	at	least	two	hours.
Sid	had	a	bright	idea.	He	would	unscrew	the	hinges	and	she	could	lie	on	the	bed
on	her	stomach	and	wait	for	the	doctor.	The	two	hours	seemed	like	four	but	the
doctor	finally	arrived.
Sidney	directed	him	into	the	bedroom	and	pointing	to	his	wife	said,	"Doc,	ain't
that	something?	What	d'ya	think	of	that?"
The	doctor	looked	thoughtfully	and	declared,	"Very	nice...	but	why	such	a	cheap
frame?"
Life	has	to	be	taken	hilariously!	Life	is	so	full	of	laughter,	it	is	so	ridiculous,	it	is
so	funny	that	unless	your	juices	have	gone	completely	dry	you	cannot	be	serious.
I	 have	 looked	 around	 at	 life	 in	 every	 possible	 way	 and	 it	 is	 always	 funny,
whatever	way	you	look	at	it!	It	gets	funnier	and	funnier!	It	is	such	a	beautiful	gift
of	the	beyond.
Prem	Jyoti,	 I	am	against	all	 seriousness.	My	whole	approach	 is	 that	of	humor,
and	the	greatest	religious	quality	 is	a	sense	of	humor	--	not	 truth,	not	God,	not
virtue,	but	a	sense	of	humor.	 If	we	can	fill	 the	whole	earth	with	 laughter,	with
dancing	and	singing	--	people	singing	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
110
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
and	swinging!	--	if	we	can	make	the	earth	a	carnival	of	joy,	a	festival	of	lights,
we	will	have	brought	for	the	first	time	a	true	sense	of	religiousness	to	the	earth.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,
SPIEGEL,	 THE	 BIGGEST	 NEWS	 MAGAZINE	 IN	 GERMANY,	 HAS
FINALLY
STARTED	A	SERIES	ON	YOU,	YOUR	SANNYASINS	AND	THE	ASHRAM.
THE
WRITER	 SAYS	MANY	 NICE	 AND	 INCREDIBLE	 THINGS	 ABOUT	 YOU
AND	EVEN
COMPARES	YOU	WITH	THE	POLACK	POPE.	HE	SAYS:	 "THE	MASSES
WHO
SURRENDER	 TO	 THE	 CHARISMA	 OF	 JOHN	 PAUL	 II	 DO	 NOTHING
DIFFERENT
THAN	THAT	WHICH	THE	POONA	PILGRIMS	DO	IN	THEIR	SURRENDER
TO	OSHO.
ONLY	 THE	CHURCHES	AND	 THEIR	 SECT	 EXPERTS	CANNOT	AGREE
WITH	THAT."
OSHO,	DO	YOU	FEEL	OFFENDED	OR	PLEASED	BY	THIS	STATEMENT?
I	 am	 amused!	 The	 Polacks	 I	 have	 always	 loved.	 The	 Pope	 is	 secondary,	 the
Polack	is	the	real	thing.	The	Polack	is	the	elephant	and	the	Pope	is	just	the	last
part	of	the	elephant,	the	tail	part!
I	am	certainly	not	a	pope,	I	cannot	be	--	I	am	not	that	serious	a	man,	I	am	not	that
religious	 either.	 I	 am	 very	 ordinary!	 To	 be	 a	 pope	 one	 needs	 to	 be	 very
extraordinary.	As	far	as	charisma	is	concerned,	I	have	none.	I	am	just	as	ordinary
as	 anybody	 else	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 whole	 idea	 of	 charisma	 is	 anti-human,	 it
divides	people.	And	the	whole	strategy	of	creating	a	charisma	is	nothing	but	the
process	of	conditioning.
If	you	go	to	see	a	naked	Jaina	monk	you	will	not	see	any	charisma	because	you
are	 not	 conditioned	 for	 that.	 You	 will	 simply	 see	 an	 ugly,	 disgusting-looking
person,	 pale,	 ill,	 ill	 at	 ease,	 eyes	 almost	 dead,	 no	 intelligence	 in	 the	 face,	 the
whole	body	shrunken.	Yes,	one	thing	will	be	big	--	the	belly	--	because	the	Jaina
monk	eats	only	once	a	day	so	he	has	to	eat	too	much.	The	whole	figure	of	a	Jaina
monk,	 if	 you	 are	 not	 conditioned	 by	 Jaina	 ideas,	 will	 appear	 to	 you	 like	 a
caricature,	 a	 cartoon,	 but	 to	 the	 Jainas	 themselves	 there	 is	 charisma,	 great
charisma.
Jaina	monks,	particularly	the	DIGAMBARA	Jaina	monks	who	live	naked,	every
year	tear	their	hair	out	with	their	own	hands.	If	you	look	at	it,	it	will	look	insane,
ugly,	violent,	but	 the	Jainas	watch	with	great	 respect	 --	 something	of	 immense
value	is	happening.	The	man	is	simply	tearing	his	hair	out!	You	must	have	seen
your	wife	sometimes	in	anger,	or	if	you	go	to	a	mad	asylum	you	will	find	people
tearing	 their	 hair	 out	 --	 just	 angry	 at	 themselves,	 violent	 with	 themselves,
repressed	anger	and	nothing	else.	But	to	the	Jaina	mind	it	is	charismatic:
"What	sacrifice!"
If	 you	 go	 to	 a	 Christian	 church	 and	 see	 the	 cross,	 if	 you	 are	 conditioned	 by
Christianity	then	you	will	not	see	that	death	is	being	worshipped	--	but	the	cross
represents	death.	There	is	every	possibility	if	Jesus	had	not	been	crucified	there
would	 have	 been	 no	Christianity	 at	 all.	 It	 is	 not	 Jesus	who	 has	 dominated	 the
Christian	mind,	 it	 is	 the	 cross.	Hence,	 I	 don't	 call	Christianity	 "Christianity,"	 I
call	 it	 "Crossianity"!	 The	 cross	 simply	 symbolizes	 death,	 suicide;	 Osho	 -	 The
Goose	is	Out
111
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
it	 is	 not	 a	 life-affirmative	 symbol.	But	 to	 the	Christian	 it	 symbolizes	 the	 great
sacrifice	of	Jesus	for	the	whole	of	humanity.
Charisma	 is	 created	 by	 a	 certain	 conditioning.	 The	 same	 Pope	 was	 not
charismatic	two	years	ago	--	suddenly	he	has	become	charismatic.	What	miracle
has	 happened?	 Just	 because	 he	was	 chosen	 to	 be	 the	 pope,	 he	 has	 been	 voted
pope,	and	he	has	become	charismatic.	Now	millions	of	people	are	impressed	by
him;	nobody	would	have	 cared...	The	 same	man	has	been	 there	 for	more	 than
sixty	years;	nobody	had	ever	bothered	about	him.	This	is	just	a	created	illusion.
The	same	man,	if	he	becomes	the	president	of	a	country,	starts	having	charisma,
and	once	he	is	no	longer	a	president	he	loses	all	charisma;	then	he	is	nobody.
When	 the	 revolution	 in	 Russia	 happened	 there	was	 a	 very	 charismatic	 leader,
Kerensky;	 he	 was	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 of	 Russia.	 During	 the	 revolution	 he
escaped,	 and	 for	 fifty	 years	 nothing	 was	 heard	 about	 that	 charismatic	 leader.
People	had	completely	forgotten	about	him,	and	before	Lenin	he	was	 the	most
important	man	in	Russia;	he	had	dominated	the	whole	scene.	After	fifty	years	he
died	in	New	York	as	a	grocer!	When	he	died	it	was	found	that	he	was	none	other
than	Kerensky.	For	fifty	years	he	was	tending	a	grocery	store	and	nobody	ever
thought	of	him	as	charismatic.
I	am	not	charismatic,	and	I	don't	believe	 in	all	 such	nonsensical	 things.	 I	exalt
the	 simple,	 the	 unconditioned,	 the	 innocent,	 the	 ordinary,	 and	 I	 want	 all
categories	 to	be	dissolved:	 the	category	of	 the	 sinner	and	 the	 saint,	 the	unholy
and	the	holy,	 the	profane	and	 the	sacred,	 the	moral	and	 the	 immoral.	 I	want	 to
dissolve	ALL	categories!	Man	is	simply	man.
So	 I	 would	 not	 like	 to	 be	 compared	 with	 the	 Pope.	 In	 fact,	 I	 don't	 like	 any
comparison	 at	 all	 because	 comparison	 is	 basically	 a	 wrong	 approach.	 I	 am
myself!	I	don't	want	to	be	compared	even	with	Jesus,	what	to	say	about	the	Pope.
I	 don't	 want	 to	 be	 compared	 with	 Buddha,	 with	 Zarathustra,	 with	 Lao	 Tzu,
because	all	comparison	is	basically	wrong.	Lao	Tzu	is	Lao	Tzu,	I	am	who	I	am;
there	is	no	question	of	comparison.
How	 can	 you	 compare	 a	 rose	 bush	 with	 a	 cedar	 of	 Lebanon?	 There	 is	 no
question	of	comparison.	How	can	you	compare	the	lotus	with	the	marigold?	In
fact,	two	lotus	flowers	cannot	even	be	compared	with	each	other;	they	have	their
own	uniqueness.
But	we	have	been	living	with	this	idea	of	comparison	for	centuries.	We	always
compare,	we	always	put	people	into	categories,	we	always	put	people	into	boxes
--	who	is	who,	to	what	category	one	belongs.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	dissolve	all	categories	and	to	declare	the	uniqueness
of	 the	 individual.	Never	 compare	me	with	 anybody	 else.	 I	 am	 simply	myself.
Good,	bad,	holy,	unholy,	whatsoever	I	am,	I	am	simply	myself.	The	very	idea	is
disgusting,	to	be	compared	with	anybody	else.	God	never	creates	carbon	copies,
he	always	creates	originals,	and	everybody	comes	with	his	own	original	face.
But	Polacks	I	love	--	that	much	I	have	to	concede!
A	Polack	walks	into	the	office	of	a	circus	and	offers	to	jump	to	the	ground	from
ten	meters	 up,	 head	 first,	without	 a	 net.	The	manager	 does	 not	 believe	 this	 so
they	go	to	the	stage.	The	Polack	gets	up	to	about	ten	meters	height,	takes	a	deep
breath	 and	 jumps	 head	 first.	He	 crashes	 down	on	 his	 head,	 lies	 still	 for	 a	 few
moments	and	then	gets	up.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
112
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
The	manager	 is	 fascinated.	 "That's	 incredible!"	 he	 exclaims.	 "I'll	 pay	 you	 one
hundred	dollars	a	night."
The	Polack	shakes	his	head.
"Okay,	okay,	I'll	pay	you	three	hundred	dollars	a	night."
"No,"	replies	the	Polack.
"I'll	pay	you	a	thousand	dollars!"	says	the	manager.
"No,"	says	the	Polack,	"I've	changed	my	mind	--	I	don't	want	to	jump	anymore.	I
didn't	know	it	would	hurt	so	much!"
A	 Polack	 discovered	 that	 he	 had	 three	 balls.	 He	 was	 so	 anxious	 to	 tell	 it	 to
someone	that	he	stopped	the	first	man	he	met	on	the	road	and	told	him,	"Do	you
want	to	bet	that	together	we	have	five	balls?"
He	lost	his	bet...	the	other	guy	had	only	one	ball!
The	Polack	woman	was	dying.	With	her	 last	 breath	 she	 turned	 to	her	husband
and	asked,
"Before	I	die,	make	love	to	me	just	one	more	time."
The	Polack	husband	answered,	 "How	could	you	ask	me	 to	do	such	a	 thing?	 It
will	kill	you!"
The	wife	pleaded,	"Everyone	is	entitled	to	one	last	request	before	they	die,	you
should	grant	me	this	last	wish."
The	Polack	replied,	"Okay."	He	got	into	bed	and	made	love	to	her.	No	sooner	did
he	finish	 than	she	hopped	out	of	bed	completely	cured	and	ran	downstairs	and
started	to	flick	a	chicken	and	yell	into	the	living	room,	where	her	children	were
sitting,	that	dinner	would	be	ready	in	an	hour.
The	children	were	astounded	and	ran	up	the	stairs	to	their	father	who	was	sitting
in	 a	 chair	 and	 crying.	 They	 said,	 "Papa,	 why	 are	 you	 crying?	 It's	 a	 miracle!
Mama	is	completely	cured!"
He	 replied,	 "I	 know,	 but	 when	 I	 think	 what	 I	 could	 have	 done	 for	 Eleanor
Roosevelt!"
The	Polack	mind	has	its	own	way	of	working!	It	is	the	most	intriguing	mind	in
the	world!
SPIEGEL	has	done	one	good	thing	--	it	has	reminded	me	of	the	Polack	Pope.
The	old	Polack	general	lived	with	his	young	wife	in	a	lonely	villa.	They	kept	two
guards	in	front	of	the	house	to	protect	them	against	intruders.
One	night	the	guards	saw	that	the	lights	in	the	general's	bedroom	were	on	for	a
very	 long	 time.	 Suspicious,	 they	 snuck	 up	 to	 the	window	 and	 peeped	 in.	 The
general's	 wife	 was	 lying	 on	 the	 bed	 naked,	 looking	 quite	 bored.	 The	 Polack
general,	also	naked,	was	anxiously	walking	around	the	room	with	a	pistol	in	his
hand.
Suddenly	 he	 stopped,	 looked	 down	 at	 his	 groin	 and	 shouted,	 "Stand	 up	 like	 a
man	or	I'll	shoot!"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
113
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
Do	you	remember	the	famous	proverb:	"The	bread	never	falls	but	on	its	buttered
side?"
However,	there	is	a	story	of	a	Polack	whose	bread	fell	and	landed	buttered	side
up.	He	ran	straight	away	to	the	Polack	Pope	to	report	this	deviance	from	one	of
the	basic	rules	of	the	universe.
At	first	the	Pope	would	not	believe	him,	but	finally	became	convinced	that	it	had
happened.	However,	he	didn't	 feel	 immediately	ready	to	deal	with	 the	question
and	asked	 for	 time.	He	 studied	hard	 the	old	 scriptures	about	 it,	 prayed	 to	God
and	did	all	kinds	of	things	to	find	an	infallible	answer.
After	 months	 of	 waiting	 he	 finally	 came	 up	 with	 an	 answer.	 He	 said	 to	 the
Polack,	"The	bread	must	have	been	buttered	on	the	wrong	side."
Deva	Yachana,	you	ask	me:
SPIEGEL,	 THE	 BIGGEST	 NEWS	 MAGAZINE	 IN	 GERMANY,	 HAS
FINALLY
STARTED	A	SERIES	ON	YOU,	YOUR	SANNYASINS	AND	THE	ASHRAM.
THE
WRITER	 SAYS	MANY	 NICE	 AND	 INCREDIBLE	 THINGS	 ABOUT	 YOU
AND	EVEN
COMPARES	YOU	WITH	THE	POLACK	POPE.	HE	SAYS:	 "THE	MASSES
WHO
SURRENDER	 TO	 THE	 CHARISMA	 OF	 JOHN	 PAUL	 II	 DO	 NOTHING
DIFFERENT
THAN	THAT	WHICH	THE	POONA	PILGRIMS	DO	IN	THEIR	SURRENDER
TO	OSHO."
That	is	absolutely	wrong	because	I	am	not	here	to	help	you	to	surrender	to	me.	I
don't	want	to	stand	between	you	and	the	whole.	It	is	not	a	question	of	surrender.
It	 is	 a	 question	of	 surrender	when	you	go	 to	 the	Pope,	 here	 it	 is	 a	 love	 affair.
There	you	surrender	to	the	Pope	because	he	represents	God,	represents	the	only
begotten	son	of	God,	Jesus	Christ.	I	don't	represent	anybody!
When	you	 are	with	me	you	 are	 living	 in	 a	 love	 affair;	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
surrender.
You	are	simply	learning	ways	to	relate	with	existence.	I	am	only	an	opportunity,
a	device	--	a	catalytic	agent	at	the	most.
My	 sannyasins	 are	not	my	 followers.	 I	 am	not	 creating	 a	 church,	 I	 am	 simply
imparting	 what	 I	 have	 seen.	 I	 am	 simply	 sharing	 my	 love,	 my	 joy,	 my
experience.	Those	who	are	here	are	fellow-travellers.	You	are	not	surrendered	to
me;	but	living	with	me,	slowly	slowly	you	will	start	enjoying	a	deep	surrender	to
existence.	 That	 is	 a	 totally	 different	matter;	 I	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 it.	 The
credit	will	go	to	you,	not	to	me.	My	presence	can	only	help	in	one	thing:	to	see
the	pattern	of	stupidity	in	which	you	are	caught.
The	Pope	is	simply	enforcing	the	same	stupid	pattern	in	you.	For	 thousands	of
years	people	have	been	surrendering	to	these	popes	and	priests	and	nothing	has
happened.
I	am	not	a	priest	and	I	am	not	interested	in	gathering	crowds.	I	am	not	interested
in	creating	a	 tradition,	I	am	simply	enjoying	myself!	Those	who	want	 to	enjoy
themselves,	they	are	welcome.	It	is	a	place	of	joy.	The	very	word	"surrender"	is
irrelevant	 here!	 Nobody	 is	 surrendering	 to	 anybody	 else.	 You	 have	 to	 be
yourself,	authentically	yourself,	sincerely	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
114
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
yourself,	 and	 then	 a	 miracle	 starts	 happening:	 the	 moment	 you	 discover	 your
original	face	you	enter	into	a	communion	with	the	whole.
SPIEGEL	 IS	 not	 right	 in	 saying	 that	 the	 same	 thing	 is	 happening	 to	 Poona
pilgrims,	 but	 when	 people	 come	 and	 watch	 from	 the	 outside,	 these
misunderstandings	are	bound	to	happen.
They	are	just	onlookers.
To	 understand	 what	 is	 going	 on	 here	 one	 has	 to	 be	 a	 participant,	 not	 just	 an
observer.	Only	then	will	some	taste	on	your	tongue	reveal	the	secret.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 every	 year	 as	 part	 of	 the	 splendid	 Easter	 ceremonials	 at	 St.
Peter's	in	Rome,	the	Chief	Rabbi	of	the	city	would	enter	the	Basilica	in	solemn
procession	during	High	Mass	and	present	 the	Pope	with	an	ancient	scroll.	And
every	year	the	Pope	would	take	this	scroll,	bow	to	the	Rabbi	and	hand	it	back,
whereupon	the	Rabbi	would	return	the	bow,	turn	and	leave.
This	mysterious	 rite	had	been	going	on	 for	 so	many	hundreds	of	years	 that	no
one	 could	 remember	 the	 origins	 of	 it	 nor	 what	 it	 symbolized.	 But	 the	 first
Eastertide	 of	 the	 Polack	 Pope's	 reign	 he	 decided	 to	 put	 an	 end	 to	 what	 had
become	a	totally	meaningless	ritual,	and	so	when	the	Chief	Rabbi	duly	presented
the	scroll,	His	Holiness	--	to	the	consternation	of	the	entire	Curia	--	opened	it	up.
It	was	a	bill	for	the	Last	Supper.
The	last	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 I	 AM	 GOING	 NUTS!	 I	 KEEP	 LAUGHING	 AT	 A	 JOKE.	 I	 EVEN
WOKE	UP
ONCE	LAUGHING	AT	IT.	AND	I	DON'T	EVEN	KNOW	WHAT	THE	JOKE
IS!
Yoga	Lalita,	then	I	will	have	to	tell	it	again!	In	fact,	there	are	four	jokes.	Three	I
will	 tell	 you	 today	and	 the	 fourth	you	have	 to	discover	 --	 the	TURIYA!	 I	will
give	you	forty-eight	hours	to	discover	it.	If	you	cannot	discover	it	then	I	will	tell
it	too.
The	first	joke	that	I	have	been	telling	to	you	in	your	SUSHUPTI,	the	dreamless
sleep...
Naturally,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 remember	 it.	And	Yoga	Lalita	 is	my	 librarian,	 so	 I
have	to	remind	her	continuously	of	jokes	so	she	goes	on	collecting	jokes	for	me.
I	never	see	her,	I	never	go	to	the	library,	so	the	only	way	to	convey	the	message
is	while	she	is	asleep.
The	first	joke:
A	minister,	a	priest	and	a	rabbi	were	discussing	how	they	"divined"	what	part	of
the	collection	money	each	retained	for	personal	needs	and	what	part	was	turned
in	to	their	respective	institutions.
"I	draw	a	line,"	said	the	minister,	"on	the	floor.	All	the	money	I	toss	in	the	air	--
what	lands	to	the	right	of	the	line	I	keep,	to	the	left	of	the	line	is	the	Lord's."
The	 priest	 nodded,	 saying,	 "My	 system	 is	 essentially	 the	 same,	 only	 I	 use	 a
circle.	What	lands	inside	is	mine,	outside	is	his."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
115
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
The	rabbi	smiled	and	said,	"I	do	the	same	thing.	I	toss	all	the	money	into	the	air
and	whatever	God	grabs	is	his!"
The	second	joke,	Lalita,	has	been	told	to	you	in	the	state	of	SWAPNA,	the	dream
state.
Something	of	it	you	may	remember	--	just	a	few	fragments	here	and	there.
The	distraught	young	man	was	perched	on	the	fortieth-floor	ledge	of	a	midtown
hotel	and	threatening	to	jump.	The	closest	the	police	could	get	was	the	roof	of	an
adjacent	building	a	 few	 feet	below.	However,	 all	 pleas	 to	 the	man	 to	 return	 to
safety	were	of	no	avail.	A	priest	from	the	nearest	parish	was	summoned,	and	he
hastened	to	the	scene.
"Think,	my	son,"	he	intoned	to	the	would-be	suicide.	"Think	of	your	mother	and
father	who	love	you."
"Aw,	they	don't	love	me,"	the	man	replied.	"I'm	jumping!"	"No!	Stop!"	cried	the
priest.
"Think	of	the	woman	who	loves	you!"
"Nobody	loves	me!	I'm	jumping!"	came	the	response.
"But	think,"	the	priest	implored,	"think	of	Jesus	and	Mary	and	Joseph	who	love
you!"
"Jesus,	Mary	and	Joseph?"	the	man	queried,	"who	are	they?"
At	which	point	the	cleric	yelled	back,	"Jump,	you	Jew	bastard,	jump!"
And	the	third	has	been	told	to	you	in	JAGRUTI,	the	so-called	awakening	state	--
which	 is	 not	much	of	 an	 awakening	 state.	Maybe	 that's	what	 goes	 on	keeping
you	laughing.
Lalita	says:
I'M	GOING	NUTS!	 I	 KEEP	 LAUGHING	AT	A	 JOKE.	 I	 EVEN	WOKE	UP
ONCE
LAUGHING	AT	IT.	AND	I	DON'T	EVEN	KNOW	WHAT	THE	JOKE	IS!
This	may	be	the	joke:
The	 family	managed	 to	bring	 the	patriarchal	grandfather	 from	Hungary	and	he
came	 to	 live	with	his	daughter	and	her	 family.	The	old	man	was	 fascinated	by
New	York	and	all	it	had	to	offer.	One	day,	his	grandson	Yankel	took	him	to	the
zoo	in	Central	Park.	Most	of	the	animals	were	familiar	to	the	old	man.	However,
they	came	to	the	cage	where	the	laughing	hyena	was	confined	and	the	old	man
became	 curious.	 "Yankel,	 in	 the	 old	 country	 I	 never	 heard	 of	 an	 animal	 that
laughed."
Yankel	noticed	the	keeper	standing	nearby	and	approached	him.	"My	grandfather
recently	came	here	from	Europe.	He	says	they	don't	have	laughing	hyenas	there.
Could	you	tell	me	something	about	it	so	that	I	can,	in	turn,	tell	him?"
The	keeper	said,	"Well,	he	eats	once	a	day."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
116
Chapter	8	-	The	dimension	of	the	mysterious
Yankel	turned	to	his	grandfather	and	in	Yiddish	translated,	"Zayda,	he	eats	once
a	day."
The	keeper	continued,	"He	takes	a	bath	once	a	week."
"Zayda,	he	bathes	once	a	week."
The	old	man	listened	intently.
The	keeper	added,	"He	mates	once	a	year."
"Zayda,	he	mates	once	a	year."
The	old	man	shook	his	head	up	and	down	and	said	 thoughtfully,	"All	 right,	he
eats	once	a	day,	he	bathes	once	a	week,	but	if	he	mates	only	once	a	year,	why	is
he	laughing?"
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
117
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
9
Rejoice	to	abandon!
9	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 IS	 IT	 IMPORTANT	 TO	 HAVE	 SOME	 KIND	 OF	 ATTITUDE
TOWARDS	LIFE?
Margrit,	 the	 best	 way	 to	 miss	 life	 is	 to	 have	 a	 certain	 attitude	 towards	 it.
Attitudes	 originate	 in	 the	 mind,	 and	 life	 is	 beyond	 mind.	 Attitudes	 are	 our
fabrications,	 our	 prejudices,	 our	 inventions.	 Life	 is	 not	 our	 fabrication;	 on	 the
contrary,	we	are	just	ripples	in	the	lake	of	life.
What	kind	of	attitude	can	a	 ripple	 in	 the	ocean	have	 towards	 the	ocean?	What
kind	of	attitude	can	a	grass	 leaf	have	towards	 the	earth,	 the	moon,	 the	sun,	 the
stars?	All	attitudes	are	egoistic,	all	attitudes	are	stupid.
Life	is	not	a	philosophy,	it	is	not	a	problem;	it	is	a	mystery.	You	have	to	live	it
not	according	 to	a	certain	pattern,	not	according	 to	a	conditioning	 --	what	you
have	been	told	about	it	--	you	have	to	start	afresh,	from	the	very	scratch.
Each	human	 individual	 should	 think	as	 if	he	 is	 the	 first	on	 the	earth;	he	 is	 the
Adam	 or	 the	 Eve.	 Then	 you	 can	 open;	 you	 can	 open	 to	 infinite	 possibilities.
Then	 you	will	 be	 vulnerable,	 available;	 and	 the	more	 vulnerable	 you	 are,	 the
more	available	you	are,	the	greater	the	possibility	of	life	happening	to	you.	Your
attitudes	function	like	barriers;	then	life	never	reaches	to	you	as	it	is	--	it	has	to
fit	your	philosophy,	religion,	ideology,	and	in	that	very	fitting,	something	dies	in
it.	What	you	get	out	of	it	is	a	corpse:	it	may	look	like	life	but	it	is	not.
That's	 what	 people	 have	 been	 doing	 down	 the	 ages.	 The	 Hindus	 are	 living
according	 to	 the	 Hindu	 attitude,	 the	 Mohammedans	 according	 to	 the
Mohammedan	attitude,	and	the	communists	according	to	the	communist	attitude.
But	 remember	 a	 basic,	 fundamental	 truth:	 the	 attitude	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to
come	in	contact	with	life	as	it	is;	it	distorts,	it	interprets.
There	is	an	old	Greek	story:
A	fanatic	king	had	a	beautiful	golden	bed,	very	precious,	studded	with	thousands
of	diamonds,	and	whenever	 there	was	a	guest	 in	 the	palace	he	would	offer	 the
bed	to	the	guest.
But	he	had	a	certain	attitude:	the	guest	had	to	fit	with	the	bed.	If	the	guest	was	a
little	longer	then	the	king	would	cut	him	down	to	size.	Of	course,	the	bed	was	so
valuable	it	could	not	be	changed,	but	the	guest	had	to	be	put	according	to	the	bed
--	as	if	the	bed	did	not	exist	for	the	guest	but	the	guest	existed	for	the	bed!
And	it	is	very	rare,	almost	impossible,	to	find	a	man	to	fit	a	ready-made	bed.	The
average	person	does	not	exist,	remember;	the	average	person	is	a	fiction,	and	the
bed	was	made	for	the	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
118
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
average	person.	The	king	was	a	mathematician	--	great	calculation	had	gone	into
it.	 He	 had	measured	 the	 height	 of	 all	 the	 citizens	 of	 his	 capital,	 and	 then	 the
height	was	 divided	 by	 the	 number	 of	 all	 the	 citizens;	 he	 had	 come	 to	 a	 fixed
average.	Now,	there	were	small	children	in	the	capital,	young	people,	old	people,
pygmies,	giants,	but	the	average	was	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	There	was
not	 a	 single	 person	 in	 his	whole	 capital	who	was	 really	 average.	 I	 have	 never
come	across	the	average	person	--	the	average	person	is	a	fiction.
So	whosoever	was	going	to	be	 the	guest	was	 in	 trouble.	 If	he	was	shorter	 than
the	bed,	then	the	king	had	great	wrestlers	who	would	pull	the	man	to	size.	That
must	have	been	the	beginning	of	Rolfing!	Ida	Rolf	must	have	learnt	it	from	that
king.	Of	course,	each	guest	died,	but	that	was	not	the	king's	fault	--	he	was	doing
everything	with	the	best	intentions	in	the	world!
When	you	have	a	certain	attitude	towards	life,	Margrit,	you	will	miss	life	itself.
Life	is	vast,	uncontainable	by	any	attitude;	it	is	impossible	to	put	it	into	a	certain
definition.	Yes,	your	attitude	may	cover	a	certain	aspect,	but	 it	will	be	only	an
aspect.	And	the	tendency	of	the	mind	is	to	proclaim	its	aspect	as	the	whole,	and
the	 moment	 the	 aspect	 is	 claimed	 as	 the	 whole	 you	 have	 missed	 the	 very
connection	with	life.	Then	you	will	live	surrounded	by	your	attitude	in	a	kind	of
cocoon,	 encapsulated,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 miserable.	 Then	 all	 your	 so-called
religions	will	be	very	happy	because	 that's	what	 they	have	been	 telling	 to	you:
that	life	is	misery.
Buddha	says	birth	is	misery,	youth	is	misery,	old	age	is	misery,	death	is	misery	--
the	whole	of	 life	 is	nothing	but	a	 long,	 long	tragedy.	If	you	start	with	attitudes
you	will	find	Buddha	absolutely	correct;	you	will	be	a	proof	of	it.
But	I	want	to	tell	you	that	life	is	not	misery,	and	I	don't	agree	with	Buddha	at	all.
Life	becomes	a	misery,	but	that	is	your	doing;	otherwise	life	is	eternal	joy.	But	to
know	that	eternal	joy	you	have	to	come	open-hearted,	open-handed.
Don't	approach	life	with	your	fists	closed,	clenched.	Open	your	hands.	Go	into
life	with	 immense	 innocence.	Attitudes	are	cunning:	you	have	already	decided
without	 tasting,	without	experiencing,	without	 living.	You	have	already	arrived
at	certain	conclusions,	and	of	course	if	those	conclusions	are	there	already	in	you
A	PRIORI,	you	will	find	them	confirmed	by	life.	It	is	not	that	life	confirms	them,
but	 your	whole	mind	will	 try	 to	 find	 out	ways	 and	means,	 arguments,	 data	 to
support	them.
Mind	is	like	a	sponge:	it	goes	on	sucking.	It	is	a	parasite.	Once	there	is	the	center
of	a	certain	A	PRIORI	conclusion	then	that	center	starts	becoming	crystallized.
A	man	came	to	me	who	had	been	working	for	years	on	a	certain	hypothesis	 in
many	countries	of	 the	world:	particularly	 in	 the	West,	and	more	particularly	 in
America,	 the	 number	 thirteen	 is	 not	 thought	 to	 be	 good.	 There	 are	 hotels	 in
America	where	 the	 thirteenth	 floor	 does	 not	 exist;	 from	 the	 twelfth	 floor	 you
simply	come	to	the	fourteenth.	The	number	thirteen	is	avoided,	no	room	has	the
number	thirteen;	from	the	twelfth	you	immediately	reach	the	fourteenth,	because
nobody	wants	 to	 live	 in	 the	 thirteenth	 room	or	 on	 the	 thirteenth	 floor.	A	great
fear	--	the	idea	that	the	number	thirteen	has	something	evil	in	it.
And	this	man	was	working	and	collecting	all	kinds	of	data,	and	he	had	collected
a	really	huge,	mountainous	support	how	many	accidents	happen	on	the	thirteenth
of	every	month,	how	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
119
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
many	people	die	on	the	thirteenth,	how	many	people	commit	suicide,	how	many
people	murder,	how	many	people	go	mad.
And	he	was	showing	his	great	thesis	to	me,	and	he	said,	"What	do	you	say?"
I	said,	"You	do	one	 thing	more.	You	have	put	so	much	energy	 into	 it,	now	try
one	thing	more.	Now	find	out	what	happens	on	the	twelfth!	And	you	will	come
to	 the	 same	data,	 because	 on	 the	 twelfth	 also	 people	 go	mad,	 commit	 suicide,
murder,	 rob.	 Everything	 happens	 every	 day,	 but	 if	 you	 have	 a	 certain	 fixed
attitude	then	you	will	choose	according	to	that	attitude.	And	of	course	when	you
have	 so	much	 information	 and	 argument	 you	 feel	 certain	 that	 your	 attitude	 is
right."
Margrit,	I	teach	you	a	life	without	any	attitudes.	This	is	one	of	the	fundamentals
of	 my	 experience:	 if	 you	 really	 want	 to	 know	 that	 which	 is	 then	 drop	 all
philosophy,	 all	 "ism".	Then	go	open-handed,	utterly	naked	 into	 the	 sun,	 to	 see
what	it	is.
In	the	past,	it	was	thought	that	our	senses	are	doors,	that	the	reality	reaches	from
our	 senses	 to	 our	 innermost	 being.	 Now	 the	 latest	 research	 shows	 something
else:	 our	 senses	 are	 not	 just	 doors,	 they	 are	 guards	 also.	Only	 two	 percent	 of
information	 is	 allowed	 to	 pass	 in,	 ninety-eight	 is	 prevented	 outside.	 Anything
that	goes	against	your	idea	of	life	is	prevented	and	only	two	percent	filters	in.
Now,	to	live	a	life	of	only	two	percent	is	not	to	live	at	all.	When	one	can	live	a
hundred	percent,	why	decide	to	live	for	only	two	percent?
Margrit,	you	ask	me:
IS	 IT	 IMPORTANT	 TO	 HAVE	 SOME	 KIND	 OF	 ATTITUDE	 TOWARDS
LIFE?
Not	 only	 is	 it	 not	 important,	 it	 is	 dangerous	 to	 have	 any	 attitude	 towards	 life.
Why	not	allow	life	 to	have	 its	dance,	 its	song,	without	any	expectations?	Why
can't	we	live	without	expectations?	Why	can't	we	see	that	which	is	in	its	purity?
Why	should	we	impose	ourselves	upon	it?	And	nobody	is	going	to	be	the	loser.
If	you	impose	upon	life	you	are	the	only	loser.
From	London	 comes	 the	 story	 of	 the	 three	 professors	 of	 literature	who,	while
returning	 from	 luncheon,	 encountered	 several	 ladies	 of	 pleasure	 who	 were
patrolling	the	street	--	en	masse.
"What	 might	 one	 call	 such	 a	 congregation?"	 mused	 the	 first	 professor,	 a
Shakespearean	specialist.	"A	flourish	of	strumpets?"
The	 second	 professor,	 being	 an	 authority	 on	 the	 novels	 of	 Anthony	 Trollope,
naturally	contributed,	"A	chapter	of	trollops."
But	the	best	description	came	from	the	youngest	and	the	least	specialized	of	the
professors.
He	called	the	ladies	"an	anthology	of	pros."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
120
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
It	 is	 better	 not	 to	 label	 life,	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	give	 it	 a	 structure,	 it	 is	 better	 to
leave	it	open-ended,	it	is	better	not	to	categorize	it,	not	to	label	it.	You	will	have
a	more	beautiful	experience	of	things;	you	will	have	a	more	cosmic	experience
of	 things,	 because	 things	 are	 not	 really	 divided.	 Existence	 is	 one	 orgasmic
whole;	it	is	one	organic	unity.	The	smallest	blade	of	grass,	the	smallest	leaf	in	a
poor	 tree	 is	 as	 significant	 as	 the	 biggest	 star.	 The	 smallest	 thing	 is	 also	 the
biggest,	 because	 it	 is	 all	 oneness;	 it	 is	 one	 spectrum.	 The	 moment	 you	 start
dividing	 you	 start	 creating	 arbitrary	 lines,	 definitions,	 and	 that's	 the	 way	 one
goes	on	missing	life	and	the	mystery	of	it.
We	all	have	attitudes;	that	is	our	anguish.	We	all	look	from	a	certain	standpoint,
hence	our	life	becomes	poor;	because	every	aspect	at	the	most	can	only	be	one-
dimensional	 and	 life	 is	 multi-dimensional.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 more	 liquid,	 more
fluid,	more	melting	and	merging;	you	are	not	to	be	an	observer.	There	is	nothing
to	be	solved!	Don't	take	life	as	a	problem,	it	is	a	tremendously	beautiful	mystery.
Drink	of	it	--	it	is	pure	wine!	Be	a	drunkard	with	it!
A	 successful	 cloak-and-suiter	 had	 finally	 found	 the	 girl	 of	 his	 dreams	 and	 he
made	 preparations	 for	 a	wedding	 the	 garment	 district	would	 never	 forget.	His
designers	prepared	for	the	bride	a	wedding	gown	of	the	finest	imported	silks	and
satins,	and	his	own	marital	raiment	was	truly	a	sight	to	behold.
The	 affair	 was	 nothing	 less	 than	 breathtaking;	 no	 expense	 had	 been	 spared.
Then,	 as	 the	 newly-weds	 were	 about	 to	 embark	 on	 their	 honeymoon	 trip	 to
Canada,	an	urgent	message	arrived	in	the	form	of	a	telegram.
"It's	from	my	partner,"	the	groom	explained.	"Urgent	business.	I'll	have	to	attend
to	it	immediately."
"But	what	about	our	honeymoon?"	the	bride	asked	tearfully.
"Business	comes	first,"	he	said.	"But	you	go	ahead.	I'll	catch	a	later	plane	and	be
there	by	tonight."
"But	what	if	you	can't	make	it	by	tonight?"	she	moaned.
"Then,"	he	blustered,	"start	without	me."
A	businessman	has	his	own	philosophy,	his	own	attitudes.	The	scientist	has	his
own	attitudes.	Everybody	is	living	in	a	small	prison	of	his	own	attitudes.
My	effort	here	is	to	bring	you	out	of	your	imprisonment,	hence	I	don't	teach	you
any	doctrine,	I	don't	give	you	any	dogma,	I	don't	give	you	any	creed	to	live	by.	I
am	 simply	 trying	 to	help	you	 to	be	unburdened	of	 all	 the	nonsense	which	has
been	 imposed	 upon	 you	 for	 centuries.	 If	 you	 can	 put	 aside	 the	 mountainous
weight	of	the	past,	if	you	can	start	living	as	if	you	are	the	first	man,	only	then	is
there	a	possibility	that	you	may	come	to	know	what	godliness	is,	what	freedom
is,	what	joy	is.	Otherwise,	misery	is	going	to	be	your	lot,	and	naturally,	sooner	or
later,	you	will	agree	with	the	pessimistic	attitude	of	Buddha:	that	all	is	suffering,
all	is	pain.
I	absolutely	deny	it,	because	my	own	experience	is	just	the	opposite:	all	is	bliss,
all	is	benediction.	But	it	depends	on	you,	how	you	approach	life:	guarded,	with
certain	spectacles	on	your	eyes,	or	unguarded,	in	deep	trust,	in	love.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
121
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 IN	 THE	 PAST	 ALL	 FAMOUS	 ARTISTS	 HAVE	 BEEN	 WELL-
KNOWN	FOR
THEIR	 BOHEMIAN	 SIDE	 OF	 LIFE.	 OSHO,	 PLEASE	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY
SOMETHING
ABOUT	CREATIVITY	AND	DISCIPLINE?
Santosh	Sneh,	the	bohemian	life	is	the	only	life	worth	living!	All	other	kinds	of
lives	 are	only	 lukewarm;	 they	are	more	ways	of	 committing	 slow	suicide	 than
ways	of	 living	 life	passionately	and	 intensely.	 In	 the	past	 it	was	 inevitable	 that
the	artist	had	 to	 live	 in	 rebellion,	because	creativity	 is	 the	greatest	 rebellion	 in
existence.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 create	 you	 have	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 conditionings,
otherwise	 your	 creativity	will	 be	 nothing	 but	 copying,	 it	will	 be	 just	 a	 carbon
copy.	You	can	be	creative	only	if	you	are	an	individual,	you	cannot	create	as	a
part	of	the	mob	psychology.	The	mob	psychology	is	uncreative;	it	lives	a	life	of
drag,	it	knows	no	dance,	no	song,	no	joy;	it	is	mechanical.
Of	course,	 there	are	a	 few	things	you	will	get	 from	the	society	only	 if	you	are
mechanical:	 respectability	 you	will	 get,	 honors	 you	will	 get.	 Universities	 will
confer	 D.Litts	 on	 you,	 countries	 will	 give	 you	 gold	 medals,	 you	 may	 finally
become	a	Nobel	laureate,	but	this	whole	thing	is	ugly.
A	 real	 man	 of	 genius	 will	 discard	 all	 this	 nonsense,	 because	 this	 is	 bribery.
Giving	 the	 Nobel	 prize	 to	 a	 person	 simply	 means	 that	 your	 services	 to	 the
establishment	are	respected,	that	you	are	honored	because	you	have	been	a	good
slave,	obedient,	that	you	have	not	gone	astray,	that	you	have	followed	the	well-
trodden	path.
The	creator	 cannot	 follow	 the	well-trodden	path,	 he	has	 to	 search	out	his	own
way,	he	has	 to	 inquire	 in	 the	 jungles	of	 life,	he	has	 to	go	alone,	he	has	 to	be	a
dropout	from	the	mob	mind,	from	the	collective	psychology.	The	collective	mind
is	 the	 lowest	 mind	 in	 the	 world;	 even	 the	 so-called	 idiots	 are	 a	 little	 more
superior	 than	 the	 collective	 idiocy.	 But	 the	 collectivity	 has	 its	 own	 bribes:	 it
respects	 people,	 honors	 people,	 if	 they	 go	 on	 insisting	 that	 the	 way	 of	 the
collective	mind	is	the	only	right	way.
It	was	out	of	sheer	necessity	that	in	the	past,	creators	of	all	kinds	--	the	painters,
the	 dancers,	 the	 musicians,	 the	 poets,	 the	 sculptors	 --	 had	 to	 renounce
respectability.	They	had	to	live	a	kind	of	bohemian	life,	the	life	of	a	vagabond;
that	was	the	only	possibility	for	them	to	be	creative.	This	need	not	be	so	in	the
future.	If	you	understand	me,	if	you	feel	what	I	am	saying	has	truth	in	it,	then	in
the	 future	 everybody	 should	 live	 individually	 and	 there	will	 be	 no	 need	 for	 a
bohemian	 life.	 The	 bohemian	 life	 is	 the	 by-product	 of	 a	 fixed,	 orthodox,
conventional,	respectable	life.
My	effort	is	to	destroy	the	collective	mind	and	to	make	each	individual	free	to	be
himself	or	herself.	Then	there	 is	no	problem;	 then	you	can	 live	as	you	want	 to
live.	In	fact,	humanity	will	really	only	be	born	the	day	the	individual	is	respected
in	his	rebellion.	Humanity	has	still	not	been	born;	it	 is	still	 in	the	womb.	What
you	 see	as	humanity	 is	only	a	very	hocus-pocus	phenomenon.	Unless	we	give
individual	freedom	to	each	person,	absolute	freedom	to	each	Osho	-	The	Goose
is	Out
122
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
person	 to	 be	 himself,	 to	 exist	 in	 his	 own	way...	And,	 of	 course,	 he	 has	 not	 to
interfere	with	anybody	--	that	is	part	of	freedom.	Nobody	should	interfere	with
anybody.
But	in	the	past	everybody	has	been	poking	his	nose	into	everybody	else's	affairs
--	even	into	things	which	are	absolutely	private,	which	have	nothing	to	do	with
the	society.	For	example,	you	fall	in	love	with	a	woman	--	what	has	that	got	to	do
with	 the	 society?	 It	 is	 purely	 a	 personal	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 not	 of	 the
marketplace.	If	two	persons	are	agreeing	to	commune	in	love,	the	society	should
not	come	into	it,	but	the	society	comes	into	it	with	all	its	paraphernalia,	in	direct
ways,	 in	 indirect	 ways.	 The	 policeman	 will	 stand	 between	 the	 lovers;	 the
magistrate	 will	 stand	 between	 the	 lovers;	 and	 if	 that	 is	 not	 enough	 then	 the
societies	have	created	a	super-policeman,	God,	who	will	take	care	of	you.
The	idea	of	God	is	that	of	a	peeping	Tom	who	does	not	even	allow	you	privacy
in	your	bathroom,	who	goes	on	looking	through	the	keyhole,	watching	what	you
are	 doing.	 This	 is	 ugly.	 All	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 say	 God	 continuously
watches	 you	 --	 this	 is	 ugly.	 What	 kind	 of	 God	 is	 this?	 Has	 he	 got	 no	 other
business	but	to	watch	everybody,	follow	everybody?
Seems	to	be	the	supreme-most	detective!
Humanity	needs	a	new	soil	--	the	soil	of	freedom.	Bohemianism	was	a	reaction,
a	 necessary	 reaction,	 but	 if	 my	 vision	 succeeds	 then	 there	 will	 be	 no
bohemianism	 because	 there	 will	 be	 no	 so-called	 collective	 mind	 trying	 to
dominate	people.	Then	everybody	will	be	at	ease	with	himself.	Of	course,	you
have	not	to	interfere	with	anybody,	but	as	far	as	your	life	is	concerned	you	have
to	 live	 it	 on	 your	 own	 terms.	 Then	 only	 is	 there	 creativity.	 Creativity	 is	 the
fragrance	of	individual	freedom.
You	ask	me,	Sneh:
OSHO,	PLEASE	CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	CREATIVITY	AND
DISCIPLINE?
"Discipline"	 is	 a	beautiful	word,	but	 it	 has	been	misused	as	 all	 other	beautiful
words	 have	 been	 misused	 in	 the	 past.	 The	 word	 "discipline"	 comes	 from	 the
same	root	as	the	word
"disciple";	the	root	meaning	of	the	word	is	"a	process	of	learning."	One	who	is
ready	to	learn	is	a	disciple,	and	the	process	of	being	ready	to	learn	is	discipline.
The	knowledgeable	person	is	never	ready	to	learn,	because	he	already	thinks	he
knows;	he	is	very	centered	in	his	so-called	knowledge.	His	knowledge	is	nothing
but	 a	 nourishment	 for	 his	 ego.	 He	 cannot	 be	 a	 disciple,	 he	 cannot	 be	 in	 true
discipline.
Socrates	 says:	 "I	 know	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 I	 know	 nothing."	 That	 is	 the
beginning	 of	 discipline.	 When	 you	 don't	 know	 anything,	 of	 course,	 a	 great
longing	 to	 inquire,	 explore,	 investigate	 arises.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 start
learning,	another	factor	follows	inevitably:	whatsoever	you	have	learned	has	to
be	 dropped	 continuously,	 otherwise	 it	 will	 become	 knowledge	 and	 knowledge
will	prevent	further	learning.
The	 real	 man	 of	 discipline	 never	 accumulates;	 each	 moment	 he	 dies	 to
whatsoever	he	has	come	to	know	and	again	becomes	ignorant.	That	ignorance	is
really	luminous.	I	agree	with	Dionysius	when	he	calls	ignorance	luminous.	It	is
one	of	 the	most	beautiful	experiences	 in	existence	 to	be	 in	a	state	of	 luminous
not-knowing.	When	you	are	in	that	state	of	not-knowing	you	are	open,	 there	is
no	barrier,	you	are	ready	to	explore.	The	Hindus	cannot	do	it	--	they	are	Osho	-
The	Goose	is	Out
123
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
already	knowledgeable.	The	Mohammedans	cannot	do	 it,	 the	Christians	cannot
do	it.	My	sannyasins	CAN	do	it,	 for	 the	simple	reason	that	I	am	not	 imparting
knowledge;	on	the	contrary,	I	am	destroying	your	knowledge.
Hence	it	happens	every	day...	Every	day	I	receive	many	letters,	many	questions.
One	friend	has	come	from	the	West.	He	says,	for	three,	four	years	he	has	been
reading	my	books	and	he	was	so	excited,	he	was	in	such	great	love	with	me,	that
he	wanted	 to	 come	 somehow	as	quickly	 as	possible.	Now	he	has	been	able	 to
manage	to	come,	but	here	he	feels	frustrated.	For	four	years	he	was	in	deep	love
with	me,	and	now	he	says,	"I	cannot	say	the	same	because	you	are	so	shocking
to	me.	You	irritate	me,	you	annoy	me;	you	go	on	hammering	on	my	cherished
ideas."
It	 is	 easy	 to	 read	 a	 book	because	 the	 book	 is	 in	 your	 hands.	 I	 am	not	 in	 your
hands!	You	can	interpret	the	book	according	to	your	ideas,	you	cannot	interpret
me	according	to	your	ideas	--	I	will	make	so	much	trouble	for	you!	He	was	not
in	love	with	me,	he	was	in	love	with	his	own	ideas,	and	because	he	was	finding
support	from	my	books	he	lived	in	an	illusion.
But	with	me	illusions	are	bound	to	be	shattered.	I	am	here	to	shatter	all	illusions.
Yes,	 it	will	 irritate	 you,	 it	will	 annoy	you	 --	 that's	my	way	of	 functioning	 and
working.	 I	 will	 sabotage	 you	 from	 your	 very	 roots!	 Unless	 you	 are	 totally
destroyed	as	a	mind,	there	is	no	hope	for	you.
Discipline	has	been	misinterpreted.	People	have	been	telling	others	to	discipline
their	life,	to	do	this,	not	to	do	that.	Thousands	of	shoulds	and	should-nots	have
been	 imposed	 on	man,	 and	 when	 a	 man	 lives	 with	 thousands	 of	 shoulds	 and
should-nots	 he	 cannot	 be	 creative.	He	 is	 a	 prisoner;	 everywhere	 he	will	 come
across	a	wall.
The	 creative	 person	 has	 to	 dissolve	 all	 shoulds	 and	 should-nots.	 He	 needs
freedom	and	 space,	 vast	 space,	 he	 needs	 the	whole	 sky	 and	 all	 the	 stars,	 only
then	can	his	innermost	spontaneity	start	growing.
So	remember,	my	meaning	of	discipline	is	not	that	of	any	Ten	Commandments;	I
am	 not	 giving	 you	 any	 discipline;	 I	 am	 simply	 giving	 you	 an	 insight	 how	 to
remain	learning	and	never	become	knowledgeable.	Your	discipline	has	to	come
from	 your	 very	 heart,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 YOURS	 --	 and	 there	 is	 a	 great	 difference.
When	somebody	else	gives	you	the	discipline	it	can	never	fit	you;	it	will	be	like
wearing	somebody	else's	clothes.	Either	they	will	be	too	loose	or	too	tight,	and
you	will	always	feel	a	little	bit	silly	in	them.
Mohammed	has	given	a	discipline	to	the	Mohammedans;	it	may	have	been	good
for	him,	but	it	cannot	be	good	for	anybody	else.	Buddha	has	given	a	discipline	to
millions	of	Buddhists;	it	may	have	been	good	for	him,	but	it	cannot	be	good	for
anybody	else.	A	discipline	is	an	individual	phenomenon;	whenever	you	borrow	it
you	 start	 living	 according	 to	 set	 principles,	 dead	 principles.	 And	 life	 is	 never
dead;	life	is	constantly	changing	each	moment.	Life	is	a	flux.
Heraclitus	 is	 right:	 you	 cannot	 step	 in	 the	 same	 river	 twice.	 In	 fact,	 I	 myself
would	 like	 to	 say	you	 cannot	 step	 in	 the	 same	 river	 even	once,	 the	 river	 is	 so
fast-moving!	One	has	to	be	alert	to,	watchful	of,	each	situation	and	its	nuances,
and	one	has	to	respond	to	the	situation	according	to	the	moment,	not	according
to	any	readymade	answers	given	by	others.
Do	you	 see	 the	 stupidity	of	 humanity?	Five	 thousand	years	 ago,	Manu	gave	 a
discipline	to	the	Hindus	and	they	are	still	following	it.	Three	thousand	years	ago
Moses	gave	a	discipline	to	the	Jews	and	they	are	still	following	it.	Five	thousand
years	ago	Adinatha	gave	his	discipline	to	the	Jainas	and	they	are	still	following
it.	The	whole	world	is	being	driven	crazy	by	these	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
124
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
disciplines!	They	are	out	of	date,	 they	should	have	been	buried	 long	 long	ago.
You	 are	 carrying	 corpses	 and	 those	 corpses	 are	 stinking.	 And	 when	 you	 live
surrounded	by	corpses,	what	kind	of	life	can	you	have?
I	teach	you	the	moment	and	the	freedom	of	the	moment	and	the	responsibility	of
the	moment.	One	 thing	may	be	 right	 this	moment	and	may	become	wrong	 the
next	moment.	Don't	try	to	be	consistent,	otherwise	you	will	be	dead.	Only	dead
people	are	consistent.	Try	to	be	alive,	with	all	its	inconsistencies,	and	live	each
moment	without	 any	 reference	 to	 the	 past,	without	 any	 reference	 to	 the	 future
either.	Live	the	moment	in	the	context	of	the	moment,	and	your	response	will	be
total.	And	that	totality	has	beauty	and	that	totality	is	creativity.	Then	whatsoever
you	do	will	have	a	beauty	of	its	own.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	I	HAVE	DISCOVERED	THAT	I	AM	JUST	BORED	WITH	MYSELF
AND	 I	 FEEL	 NO	 JUICE.	 YOU	 HAVE	 SAID	 TO	 ACCEPT	 OURSELVES,
WHATEVER	WE	ARE.
I	AM	NOT	ABLE	TO	ACCEPT	LIFE	 --	KNOWING	THAT	 I	AM	MISSING
SOMETHING
OF	JOY	INSIDE.	WHAT	TO	DO?
Bob	Luka,	we	hear	 there	 is	a	new	type	of	 tranquilizer	 that	doesn't	 relax	you	--
just	makes	you	dig	being	tense.
Try	it!	Try	it	and	try	it	and	try	it	again	--	be	an	American!	--	but	not	more	than
three	times.
Try	 it,	 try	 it,	 and	 try	 it	 again,	and	 then	stop	because	 there	 is	no	point	 in	being
silly.
You	ask	me:
I	HAVE	DISCOVERED	THAT	I	AM	JUST	BORED	WITH	MYSELF...
This	is	a	great	discovery.	Yes,	I	mean	it!	Very	few	people	are	aware	that	they	are
bored,	 and	 they	 are	 bored,	 utterly	 bored.	 Everybody	 else	 knows	 it	 except
themselves.	 To	 know	 that	 one	 is	 bored	 is	 a	 great	 beginning;	 now	 a	 few
implications	have	to	be	understood.
Man	is	the	only	animal	who	feels	boredom;	it	is	a	great	prerogative,	it	is	part	of
the	 dignity	 of	 human	 beings.	 Have	 you	 seen	 any	 buffalo	 bored,	 any	 donkey
bored?	They	are	not	bored.
Boredom	 simply	 means	 that	 the	 way	 you	 are	 living	 is	 wrong;	 hence	 it	 can
become	a	great	event,	the	understanding	that	"I	am	bored	and	something	has	to
be	done,	some	transformation	is	needed."	So	don't	think	that	it	is	bad	that	you	are
feeling	bored	--	it	is	a	good	sign,	a	good	beginning,	a	very	auspicious	beginning.
But	don't	stop	there.
Why	does	one	feel	bored?	One	feels	bored	because	one	has	been	living	in	dead
patterns	 given	 to	 you	 by	 others.	 Renounce	 those	 patterns,	 come	 out	 of	 those
patterns!	Start	living	on	your	own.
Only	the	authentic	person	is	not	bored,	the	pseudo	person	is	bound	to	be	bored.
The	Christian	will	be	bored,	the	Jaina	will	be	bored,	the	Parsi	will	be	bored,	the
communist	will	be	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
125
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
bored,	because	 they	are	dividing	 their	 life	 in	 two	parts.	Their	 real	 life	 remains
repressed	 and	 they	 start	 pretending	 an	 unreal	 life.	 It	 is	 unreal	 life	 that	 creates
boredom.	If	you	are	doing	the	thing	you	are	meant	to	do	you	will	never	be	bored.
The	 day	 I	 left	 my	 home	 for	 the	 university	my	 parents,	 my	 father,	 my	 family
people,	all	wanted	me	to	become	a	scientist	--	there	was	much	more	of	a	future
for	a	scientist	--	or	a	doctor	at	least,	or	an	engineer.	I	refused	absolutely.	I	said,
"I'm	going	to	do	what	I	want	to	do,	because	I	don't	want	to	live	a	boring	life.	As
a	scientist	I	may	succeed	--	I	may	have	respectability,	money,	power,	prestige	--
but	deep	down	I	will	remain	bored	because	that	is	not	what	I	ever	wanted	to	do."
They	were	 shocked	 because	 they	 could	 not	 see	 any	 prospects	 in	 the	 study	 of
philosophy;	 philosophy	 is	 the	 poorest	 subject	 in	 the	 universities.	 Reluctantly
they	 agreed,	 knowing	 that	 I	 would	 be	 wasting	 my	 future,	 but	 finally	 they
recognized	they	were	wrong.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 money,	 power	 and	 prestige;	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 what
intrinsically	you	want	to	do.	Do	it,	irrespective	of	the	results,	and	your	boredom
will	disappear.	You	must	be	following	others'	ideas,	you	must	be	doing	things	in
a	 right	way,	 you	must	 be	 doing	 things	 as	 they	 should	 be	 done.	 These	 are	 the
foundation-stones	of	boredom.
The	 whole	 of	 humanity	 is	 bored	 because	 the	 person	 who	 would	 have	 been	 a
mystic	is	a	mathematician,	the	person	who	would	have	been	a	mathematician	is	a
politician,	the	person	who	would	have	been	a	poet	is	a	businessman.	Everybody
is	somewhere	else;	nobody	is	where	he	should	be.	One	has	to	risk.	Boredom	can
disappear	in	a	single	moment	if	you	are	ready	to	risk.
You	ask	me,	Bob	Luka:
I	HAVE	DISCOVERED	THAT	I	AM	JUST	BORED	WITH	MYSELF...
You	are	bored	with	yourself	 because	you	have	not	been	 sincere	with	yourself,
you	have	not	 been	honest	with	 yourself,	 you	have	not	 been	 respectful	 to	 your
own	being.
And	you	say:
I	FEEL	NO	JUICE.
How	 to	 feel	 juice?	 Juice	 flows	 only	 when	 you	 are	 doing	 the	 thing	 that	 you
wanted	to	do,	whatsoever	it	is.
Vincent	Van	Gogh	was	immensely	happy	just	painting.	Not	a	single	painting	was
sold,	nobody	ever	appreciated	him,	and	he	was	hungry,	he	was	dying,	because
his	brother	was	giving	him	only	 a	 small	 amount	of	money	 so	 that	he	 could	 at
least	manage	to	survive.	Four	days	a	week	he	would	fast	and	three	days	a	week
he	would	 eat.	He	 had	 to	 fast	 for	 those	 four	 days	 because	 from	where	was	 he
going	to	get	his	canvases	and	paints	and	brushes?	But	he	was	immensely	happy	-
-	his	juices	were	flowing.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
126
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
He	died	when	he	was	only	thirty-three;	he	committed	suicide;	but	his	suicide	is
far	better,	Bob	Luka,	than	your	so-called	life,	because	he	committed	suicide	only
when	he	had	painted	the	thing	that	he	wanted	to	paint.
The	day	he	finished	a	painting	of	the	sunset	which	had	been	his	longest	desire,
he	 wrote	 a	 letter	 saying:	 "My	work	 is	 done,	 I	 am	 fulfilled.	 I	 am	 leaving	 this
world	immensely	contented."
He	committed	suicide,	but	I	will	not	call	 it	suicide.	He	lived	totally,	he	burned
life's	candle	from	both	ends	together	in	tremendous	intensity.
Bob	Luka,	you	may	live	a	hundred	years,	but	your	life	will	be	just	a	dry	bone,	a
weight,	dead	weight.
You	say:
OSHO...	 YOU	 HAVE	 SAID	 TO	 ACCEPT	 OURSELVES,	 WHATEVER	 WE
ARE.	I	AM
NOT	 ABLE	 TO	 ACCEPT	 LIFE	 --	 KNOWING	 THAT	 I	 AM	 MISSING
SOMETHING	OF
JOY	INSIDE.
When	I	say	accept	yourself,	I	am	not	saying	accept	your	pattern	of	life	--	don't
try	 to	 misunderstand	 me.	 When	 I	 say	 accept	 yourself,	 I	 am	 saying	 reject
everything	else	--	ACCEPT
YOURSELF.	 But	 you	 must	 have	 interpreted	 it	 in	 your	 own	 way.	 That's	 how
things	go...
The	Martian	 landed	his	 saucer	 in	Manhattan	and,	 immediately	upon	emerging,
was	approached	by	a	panhandler.	"Mister,"	said	the	man,	"can	I	have	a	dime?"
The	Martian	asked,	"What's	a	dime?"
The	panhandler	thought	a	minute,	then	said,	"You're	right.	Can	I	have	a	quarter?"
I	have	not	said	what	you	have	understood.	Reject	all	that	has	been	imposed	upon
you	 --	 I	 am	not	 saying	 accept	 it.	Accept	 your	 innermost	 core	which	 you	have
brought	 from	 the	 beyond	 and	 then	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 missing
something.	The	moment	 you	 accept	 yourself	without	 any	 conditions,	 suddenly
an	 outburst	 of	 joy	 happens.	 Your	 juices	 start	 flowing,	 life	 really	 becomes
ecstatic.
A	certain	young	man's	friends	thought	he	was	dead,	but	he	was	only	in	a	state	of
coma.
When	just	 in	time	to	avoid	being	buried	he	showed	signs	of	life,	he	was	asked
how	it	felt	to	be	dead.
"Dead!"	 he	 exclaimed.	 "I	wasn't	 dead.	 I	 knew	 all	 the	 time	what	was	 goin'	 on.
And	I	knew	I	wasn't	dead,	too,	because	my	feet	were	cold	and	I	was	hungry."
"But	how	did	 that	 fact	make	you	 think	you	were	 still	 alive?"	asked	one	of	 the
curious.
"Well,	 I	knew	that	 if	I	was	in	heaven	I	wouldn't	be	hungry,	and	if	I	was	in	 the
other	place	my	feet	wouldn't	be	cold."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
127
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
One	can	be	certain,	Bob	Luka,	that	you	are	still	not	dead:	you	are	hungry,	your
feet	are	cold.	Just	get	up	and	do	a	little	jogging!
A	 poor	 man,	 lacking	 education	 and	 all	 social	 graces,	 fell	 in	 love	 with	 the
daughter	 of	 a	 millionaire.	 She	 invited	 him	 home	 to	 meet	 her	 parents	 at	 their
elegant	mansion.	The	man	was	intimidated	by	the	rich	furnishings,	the	servants
and	all	the	other	signs	of	wealth,	but	somehow	he	managed	to	appear	relaxed	--
until	it	came	to	dinner	time.	Seated	at	the	massive	dinner	table,	mellow	with	the
effects	of	wine,	he	farted	loudly.
The	 girl's	 father	 looked	 up	 and	 stared	 at	 his	 dog	which	was	 lying	 at	 the	 poor
man's	feet.
"Rover!"	he	said	in	a	menacing	tone.
The	poor	man	was	relieved	that	the	blame	had	been	put	on	the	dog,	and	so	a	few
minutes	later	he	farted	again.
His	host	looked	at	the	dog	and	again	said,	"Rover!"	in	a	louder	voice.
A	few	minutes	later	he	farted	a	third	time.	The	rich	man's	face	wrinkled	in	rage.
He	bellowed,	"Rover,	get	the	hell	out	of	here	before	he	shits	all	over	you!"
Bob	Luka,	 there	 is	still	 time	--	get	out	of	 the	 imprisonment	 in	which	you	have
lived	 up	 to	 now!	 It	 only	 needs	 a	 little	 courage,	 just	 a	 little	 courage	 of	 the
gambler.	And	there	is	nothing	to	lose,	remember.	You	can	only	lose	your	chains	-
-	you	can	lose	your	boredom,	you	can	lose	this	constant	feeling	inside	you	that
something	 is	missing.	What	else	 is	 there	 to	 lose?	Get	out	of	 the	rut	and	accept
your	own	being	--	against	Moses,	Jesus,	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Krishna.
Accept	 yourself.	 Your	 responsibility	 is	 not	 towards	 Buddha	 or	 Zarathustra	 or
Kabir	or	Nanak;	your	responsibility	is	only	towards	yourself.
Be	responsible	--	and	when	I	use	the	word	"responsible,"	please	remember	not	to
misinterpret	it.	I	am	not	talking	about	duties,	responsibilities,	I	am	simply	using
the	word	in	the	literal	sense:	respond	to	reality,	be	responsible.
You	must	have	lived	an	irresponsible	 life,	fulfilling	all	kinds	of	responsibilities
which	others	are	expecting	you	to	fulfill.	What	is	there	to	lose?	You	are	bored	--
this	is	a	good	situation.	You	are	missing	the	juice,	what	more	do	you	need	to	get
out	of	the	prison?	Jump	out	of	it,	don't	look	back!
They	say:	Think	twice	before	you	jump.	I	say:	Jump	first	and	then	think	as	much
as	you	want!
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	CAN	A	MADMAN	BECOME	A	BUDDHA?
Anand	 Navaneet,	 only	 a	 madman	 can	 become	 a	 Buddha!	 The	 so-called	 sane
people	 at	 the	most	 can	 become	Buddhists	 but	 not	 Buddhas,	 they	 can	 become
Christians	but	not	Christs.
Only	a	madman...
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
128
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
My	 invitation	 is	 for	 the	mad	 people	 of	 the	 world.	 I	 am	 a	madman's	 guide	 to
enlightenment!
A	group	of	philosophers	 from	a	Russian	prison	decided	 to	escape.	They	had	a
duplicate	key,	so	they	waited	for	the	night	to	make	their	escape.	At	midnight	one
of	them	went	to	open	the	door	but	came	back	after	a	few	minutes	with	a	long	sad
face.
"What	happened?"	asked	all	the	others.
"Well,	 our	 plan	 is	 useless.	 We	 can't	 escape	 --	 the	 crazy	 night-watchman	 has
forgotten	to	close	the	door	and	I	can't	use	the	key!"
Philosophers	cannot	become	Buddhas!	It	needs	guts	to	become	a	Buddha.
Jesus	 was	 hanging	 on	 the	 cross	 when	 a	 philosopher	 passed	 by.	 He	 stopped,
looked	at	Jesus	and	asked,	"What	are	you	doing	up	there?"
Jesus	 nodded	 his	 head	 to	 the	 left	 and	 right	 and	 said,	 "I'm	 hanging	 out	 with
friends!"
The	philosopher	continued,	"Well,	if	you	want,	I	could	get	a	ladder	and	take	you
down."
"I	would	appreciate	that,"	Jesus	replied.
Half	an	hour	 later	 the	philosopher	came	back	with	a	 ladder,	 climbed	up	 to	 the
cross,	screwed	the	nails	out	of	the	right	hand,	then	out	of	the	left	hand.
Jesus	fell	headlong,	screaming,	"You	idiot!	Next	time	start	with	the	feet!"
The	last	question
Question	5
OSHO,	 I	 WANT	 TO	 GET	 LOST	 UTTERLY	 AND	 ULTIMATELY	 INTO
ABSOLUTE
LOVE.	WHAT	SHOULD	I	DO?
Dharmo,	the	very	idea	of	getting	lost	utterly,	ultimately,	absolutely,	is	demanding
too	much.	Be	a	little	more	human,	don't	aspire	to	the	impossible.	The	impossible
has	 been	 driving	 people	 to	 unnecessary	 hysteria,	 and	we	 have	 been	 burdened
with	impossible	values	for	centuries.	We	have	learned	these	words	and	we	go	on
repeating	these	words	parrot-like	without	even	taking	in	the	significance.
Be	 human,	 don't	 aspire	 to	 perfection	 in	 any	 way	 because	 all	 perfectionism	 is
neurosis.	Be	human	and	accept	all	the	frailties	and	limitations	of	human	beings.
Why	should	you	want	to	be	lost	utterly?	For	what?	What	are	you	going	to	gain
from	it?	If	it	CAN	be	managed	--	it	is	good	that	it	cannot	be	managed	--	but	for
argument's	 sake	 I	 am	 saying	 if	 it	 can	 be	managed,	 you	will	 come	 again	with:
"Now	I	am	feeling	very	lonely,	utterly	lost,	absolutely	lost,	ultimately	lost!"	You
will	start	hankering	to	go	back,	to	have	a	little	more	of	the	spice	of	life.
It	is	good	to	meet	and	merge,	but	why	make	it	something	ultimate?	Why	bring	in
such	meaningless	words?	Is	it	not	enough	to	melt	for	a	moment	and	then	be	back
home?	Then	there	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
129
Chapter	9	-	Rejoice	to	abandon!
is	a	rhythm:	you	melt,	you	enjoy	the	melting,	then	again	you	are	back.	It	creates
a	rhythm,	and	rhythm	is	always	richer.	If	you	are	simply	dissolved	forever	there
will	be	no	rhythm,	no	music,	no	dance.	It	will	really	be	death,	not	life.
My	whole	approach	 is	 to	 teach	you	 to	be	human.	For	centuries	you	have	been
told	 to	 be	 superhuman.	 I	 rejoice	 in	 your	 human-ness.	 To	 me,	 human-ness	 is
synonymous	with	godliness.
It	 is	perfectly	beautiful	 to	be	 lost	once	 in	a	while	and	found	again,	so	 that	you
can	 lose	 yourself	 again.	 Create	 a	 rhythm	 of	 getting	 lost,	 of	 finding	 yourself
again.	Life	 is	 a	music,	 and	 the	music	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 both	 things	 continue,
otherwise	it	will	be	monotonous.
Dharmo,	 I	 cannot	help	you	 to	get	 lost	 absolutely,	ultimately,	utterly.	 I	 love	 the
moment,	I	love	the	IMMEDIACY	of	the	moment.	I	am	very	averse	to	words	like
"ultimate";	they	are	faraway	words,	they	don't	have	much	meaning	in	them;	they
are	pretentious	words.
The	absolute	is	not	of	any	significance;	a	rose	flower	is	of	far	more	significance,
it	 is	not	absolute:	 in	 the	morning	 it	grows,	by	 the	evening	 it	 is	gone.	That's	 its
beauty	 --	 it	 is	momentary.	 It	 is	 a	miracle!	The	ultimate	 rose	will	 be	 synthetic,
plastic;	it	will	be	there	forever,	but	because	it	will	not	be	able	to	die	it	will	not	be
alive	either.
You	have	to	learn	this	losing	yourself,	then	coming	back	to	yourself	and	losing
yourself	 again	 --	 the	 closeness	of	 love	 and	 the	distance.	Each	distance	 in	 love
again	 creates	 a	 longing	 to	 be	 close.	 If	 you	 are	 stuck	 together	 and	 you	 cannot
separate,	your	love	life	will	become	a	nightmare.
Meditate	over	this	story,	Dharmo;	it	is	a	beautiful	parable.	Only	I	can	say	it	is	a
parable.
Rosalie	Mazzolli,	 nee	Adelstein,	 had	married	 a	midget.	For	 a	while	 they	were
getting	along	all	right,	but	one	day	Rosalie	showed	up	in	the	domestic	relations
court	and	demanded	she	be	granted	a	divorce	from	little	Harry.
"Surely,	Mrs.	Mazolli,	you	knew	your	husband	was	a	midget	when	you	married
him,"
questioned	 the	 judge.	 "Why	 are	 you	 now	desirous	 of	 leaving	 him?	Didn't	 you
anticipate	the	problems	this	marriage	would	encounter?"
"Oh,	 Your	 Honor,"	 sobbed	 Rosalie,	 "how	 was	 I	 to	 know?	 Everything	 is
wonderful,	except	for	sex."
"Sex?"	repeated	the	judge.	"What	has	his	being	a	midget	got	to	do	with	sex?"
"Well,"	she	continued	tearfully,	"when	we're	nose	to	nose	his	toes	are	in	it;	when
we're	toes	to	toes,	his	nose	is	in	it,	and	when	he's	in	it	he	disappears	altogether,
and	oh,	Your	Honor,	I	get	so	lonely!"
There	is	no	need	to	be	utterly,	ultimately,	absolutely	lost.	Be	relaxed	--	once	in	a
while	get	lost	and	that	is	good.	Lose	yourself	and	find	yourself	again	and	again.
This	 is	 a	 beautiful	 drama,	 this	 existence,	 of	 losing	 and	 finding	 yourself.	 And
drop	all	these	words	like	"ultimate,"
"absolute,"	"perfect";	all	these	words	are	the	inventions	of	the	philosophers.	Life
is	 immediate,	 life	 is	 always	now	and	here.	And	 live	 it	with	 all	 the	 frailty	of	 a
human	being,	with	all	the	frailty	of	a	rose	flower,	and	you	will	come	to	know	the
greatest	 splendor	 IN	 the	moment	 --	 not	 in	 eternity.	 It	 is	 always	 now	 and	 it	 is
always	here!	Don't	condemn	the	momentary,	rejoice	in	it,	rejoice	to	abandon.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
130
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
10
Dissolve	in	my	people
10	March	1981	am	in	Buddha	Hall
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
I	 FREQUENTLY	 HEAR	 A	 QUESTION	 BEING	 ASKED	 ABOUT	 THE
ASHRAM...
THERE	 IS	 SO	 MUCH	 VITALITY	 HERE	 NOW	 AND	 SO	 MUCH
CREATIVITY	WITH
ALL	 THESE	 SHOWS	 AND	 MUSIC	 AND	 FASHIONS	 AND	 CRAFTS,	 AS
WELL	AS
EVENTS	 HAPPENING	 ABROAD,	 THAT	 PEOPLE	 ARE	 WONDERING
WHAT	WILL
HAPPEN	WHEN	YOU	ARE	GONE.
WHEN	 YOU	 LEAVE	 YOUR	 BODY	 WILL	 THE	 ASHRAM	 BECOME	 A
DEAD
INSTITUTION,	 AND	 WILL	 YOU	 JUST	 BECOME	 DEIFIED	 AND
FORGOTTEN?
Binoy	Thomas,	my	concern	is	the	immediate,	this	moment.	Beyond	this	moment
nothing	exists.	The	only	 time	 that	 is	existential	 is	now	and	 the	only	space	 that
matters	is	here.	So	I	don't	care	what	happens	in	the	future	--	neither	the	past	nor
the	future	have	any	validity.
But	 that	 is	 the	way	of	 the	mind:	 the	mind	can	only	 think	 in	 terms	of	past	 and
future,	 the	 mind	 cannot	 experience	 the	 present;	 it	 deviates	 from	 the	 present
continuously.	The	mind	is	like	a	pendulum:	it	moves	to	the	left,	the	far	left,	or	to
the	right,	the	far	right.	Either	it	is	leftist	or	rightist	--	and	my	whole	approach	is
to	be	exactly	in	the	middle.
The	word	for	the	middle	which	Gautam	Buddha	used	is	very	beautiful:	he	called
MAJJIM
NIKAYA,	"the	way	of	 the	exact	middle."	 If	you	can	keep	 the	pendulum	in	 the
middle,	 the	clock	stops.	The	clock	 represents	 the	mind	--	and	not	 just	 literally,
not	just	as	a	metaphor;	mind	is	time.	Time	consists	of	two	tenses,	not	three.	The
present	is	not	part	of	time;	the	past	is	time,	the	future	is	time.	The	present	is	the
penetration	of	the	beyond	into	the	world	of	time.
You	can	think	of	time	as	a	horizontal	line.	A	is	followed	by	B,	B	is	followed	by
C,	 C	 is	 followed	 by	 D,	 and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth:	 it	 is	 a	 linear	 progression.
Existence	 is	not	horizontal,	 existence	 is	vertical.	Existence	does	not	move	 in	a
line	--	from	A	to	B,	from	B	to	C	--
existence	moves	in	intensity:	from	A	to	a	deeper	A,	from	the	deeper	A	to	an	even
deeper	A.	It	is	diving	into	the	moment.
Time	conceived	of	as	past	and	future	is	the	language	of	the	mind	--	and	the	mind
can	only	create	problems,	it	knows	no	solutions.	All	the	problems	that	humanity
is	 burdened	 with	 are	 the	 mind's	 inventions.	 Existence	 is	 a	 mystery,	 not	 a
problem.	It	has	not	to	be	solved,	it	has	to	be	lived.
I	am	living	my	moment.	 I	don't	care	a	bit	about	what	happens	 later	on.	 It	may
look	 very	 irresponsible	 to	 you	 because	 my	 criterion	 of	 responsibility	 is
diametrically	opposite	to	people's	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
131
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
idea	of	so-called	responsibility.	I	am	responsible	to	the	moment,	to	existence	--
and	 responsible	not	 in	 the	sense	of	being	dutiful	 to	 it,	 responsible	 in	 the	sense
that	I	respond	totally,	spontaneously.	Whatsoever	the	situation	is,	I	am	utterly	in
tune	with	it.	While	I	am	alive	I	am	alive,	when	I	am	dead	I	will	be	dead.	I	don't
see	any	question	at	all.
But	I	can	understand	your	question,	Binoy	Thomas.
You	say:
I	 FREQUENTLY	 HEAR	 A	 QUESTION	 BEING	 ASKED	 ABOUT	 THE
ASHRAM...
The	people	who	are	asking	you	are	dead,	otherwise	why	should	they	be	worried
about	 the	 future?	They	don't	 come	 to	 the	ashram,	 they	don't	 come	 to	me,	 they
have	no	participation	in	all	that	is	going	on	here	--	they	are	concerned	about	the
future!	They	are	showing	much	worry	about	the	future	--	what	will	happen?	The
question	is:	what	is	happening?
And	the	people	who	are	asking	such	questions	are	stupid	too.	Are	they	going	to
live	forever?	They	are	worried	about	me	and	my	work	as	if	they	were	going	to
be	 here	 forever.	 I	 am	here	 for	 the	moment,	 you	 are	 here	 for	 the	moment.	 If	 a
meeting	 is	 possible,	 something	 of	 tremendous	 beauty	 can	 happen.	 But	 these
fools	go	on	thinking	in	such	cunning	ways	that	they	not	only	deceive	others,	they
even	manage	to	deceive	themselves.	Right	now	they	are	condemning	me,	right
now	they	are	criticizing	me,	and	still	they	are	showing	great	love	--
what	will	happen	when	I	am	no	longer	here?
The	 moment	 I	 die,	 the	 whole	 world	 dies	 for	 me;	 then	 whatsoever	 happens,
happens.	 I	 have	 not	 taken	 on	 the	whole	 responsibility	 for	 existence.	Who	 can
take	 it?	But	 there	have	been	people	who	have	 tried	 it	and	 they	have	all	utterly
failed.
For	example,	Gautam	the	Buddha	--	one	of	the	most	beautiful	men	who	has	ever
walked	on	the	earth	--	was	very	concerned	that	no	religion	should	arise	when	he
left	the	world,	that	he	should	not	be	worshipped,	that	statues	of	him	should	not
be	made.	He	emphasized	 it	 again	and	again	his	whole	 life.	Forty-two	years	of
constant	sermonizing	to	people,	that	"There	is	no	need	to	worship	me,"	brought
about	just	the	opposite	result.	The	more	he	emphasized	"Don't	worship	me,"	the
more	people	felt	"This	is	the	man	to	be	worshipped."
This	is	the	law	of	reverse	effect.	There	are	more	statues	of	Buddha	in	the	world
than	 of	 anybody	 else,	 and	 he	was	 against	 statues.	 So	many	 statues	 have	 been
made	of	Buddha	 that	 in	Urdu,	Arabic,	 and	other	Mohammedan	 languages,	 the
very	word	BUDDHA	has	become	synonymous	with	statue,	with	a	little	change:
BUDH.	BUDH	means	statue,	but	BUDH	comes	from	BUDDHA.	Thousands	of
statues...	and	the	man	was	emphasizing	"Don't	make	statues!"
In	 fact,	 there	 was	 no	 need	 to	 emphasize	 it.	 The	 very	 emphasizing	 of	 it	 was
wrong.	Why	should	he	have	been	concerned	about	the	future?	When	you	are	no
longer	 there,	 the	 very	 desire	 to	 control	 the	 future	 according	 to	 your	 ideas	 is
political.	People	are	trying	to	control	humanity	while	they	are	alive	and	they	go
on	insisting	that	they	would	like	to	control	humanity	even	when	they	are	gone.
I	am	not	controlling	anybody	--	I	am	not	a	politician.	I	am	not	interested	at	all
that	anybody	should	be	controlled	by	me	today	or	tomorrow.
Now,	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 thing	 is	 being	 done	 by	 J.	 Krishnamurti:	 continuously
emphasizing	for	fifty	years	that	"I	am	not	your	guru."	But	if	you	are	not	the	guru,
why	go	on	emphasizing	it	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
132
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
for	 fifty	years?	There	must	be	 something	 in	 it.	He	 is	 afraid,	 there	 is	 fear	 --	he
knows	that	he	will	be	worshipped,	he	knows	that	 there	are	already	people	who
think	of	him	as	their	guru.
The	more	he	freaks	out,	the	more	those	fools	think,	"This	is	the	real	guru!	Look
how	humble	 he	 is	 --	 no	 pretensions,	 no	 desire,	 no	 ambition	 to	 be	 holier-than-
thou."	Ponder	over	it.
Krishnamurti	 is	 doing	 the	 same	 thing	 again	 that	 Buddha	 did.	 He	 is	 not	 at	 all
original	about	it;	it	is	an	old	game.	In	fact,	people's	minds	work	in	a	strange	way.
God	said	to	Adam	and	Eve,
"Don't	eat	the	fruit	of	the	tree	of	knowledge,"	and	they	ate	it.	The	moment	you
say	no,	 something	deep	 in	 the	heart	of	man	starts	becoming	 interested;	a	great
curiosity	arises.	So	I	am	not	saying	to	anybody,	"Please	don't	worship	me."
And	when	I	am	not	there,	what	can	I	do?	Fools	are	fools.	Whether	they	worship
me	or	 somebody	 else	will	 not	make	much	 difference.	 If	 they	want	 to	worship
they	will	worship.
And,	Binoy	Thomas,	have	you	pondered	who	these	people	are	who	ask	you	this
question?
They	 must	 be	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans,	 Christians,	 Jainas,	 Buddhists,
Krishnamurti-ites.	Who	 are	 these	 people?	 If	 they	 are	 so	 concerned	 about	me,
have	they	dropped	Krishna?	Have	they	dropped	Mohammed?	Have	they	dropped
Buddha?	 If	 they	 were	 honest	 and	 sincere,	 they	 would	 have	 dropped	 all	 the
religions.	But	 they	go	on	 carrying	 their	Bibles,	 their	Zendavestas,	 their	Vedas,
their	Mahaviras,	their	Zarathustras,	and	still	they	are	concerned	only	about	me.
And	 what	 are	 their	 institutions?	What	 is	 Hinduism?	 or	 Islam?	 or	 Jainism?	 or
communism	for	that	matter?
Every	 institution	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 dead,	 only	 a	man	 is	 alive.	No	 institutions	 are
ever	alive.
How	can	an	institution	be	alive?	By	its	very	nature,	it	is	going	to	be	dead.
So	next	time	these	people	ask	you	the	question,	you	ask	them:	who	are	you?	Do
you	 belong	 to	 any	 institution,	 to	 any	 religion,	 to	 any	 theology,	 to	 any
philosophy?	If	you	belong,	then	you	don't	have	the	right	to	ask	the	question.	And
if	you	don't	belong,	then	you	will	not	need	to	ask	the	question,	you	will	see	the
point	 that	 the	 intelligent	 people	 will	 never	 fall	 for	 dead	 institutions.	 But	 the
unintelligent	are	bound	to	live	in	institutions	--	there	is	no	way	you	can	change
the	label.	And	you	are	living	in	a	thousand	and	one	kinds	of	institutions.
What	is	marriage?	--	an	institution.	And	only	insane	people	live	in	institutions.
Marriage	 is	 dead.	What	 is	 your	 family?	 and	what	 is	 your	 nation?	 and	what	 is
your	race?	--	all	institutions.
But	this	is	a	strange	thing:	that	people	go	on	asking	these	questions	without	ever
thinking	that	these	questions	are	pointing	towards	themselves.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	not	at	all	interested	in	the	next	moment.	Even	if
this	sentence	remains	incomplete,	I	will	not	make	any	effort	to	complete	it.	I	will
not	even	put	a	full	point	to	it.	I	have	no	desire	to	dominate,	but	I	cannot	go	on
saying	to	people,	"Don't	worship	me,"	because	that	is	the	way	to	create	worship.
People	 have	 to	 be	 understood	 within	 their	 whole	 insane	 mechanism.	 For
example,	Jesus	says,	"Blessed	are	the	poor...	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	God."
Now,	 for	 these	 two	 thousand	years	many	have	 tried	 to	be	poor	 for	 this	 simple
reason	and	motive:	so	that	they	can	attain	to	the	kingdom	of	God.	Do	you	see	the
contradiction?	"Blessed	are	 the	poor...	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	kingdom	of	God."	Then
what	kind	of	poverty	is	this	if	it	brings	the	kingdom	of	God	to	you?
Then	 this	 is	a	good	 incentive,	a	great	motivation	 for	greed.	 If	 Jesus	was	 really
right,	he	should	only	have	said	this:	Blessed	are	the	poor	because	they	are	poor.
Then	why	make	this	statement
"...	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	God"?	Everybody	wants	to	have	the	kingdom	of
God;	everybody	wants	to	possess	eternal	treasures.	And	if	one	has	to	be	poor	and
sacrifice	for	that,	it	is	worth	it.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
133
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
People	have	been	doing	 this	 all	 along.	 It	 is	 time	 that	man	should	 start	 looking
more	clearly,	more	 transparently	at	what	has	been	told	 to	him	and	what	he	has
done.
People	always	misunderstand.	While	 the	Master	 is	alive,	 they	will	not	come	to
him,	because	while	the	Master	is	alive,	they	cannot	be	allowed	to	misunderstand.
They	will	come	to	him	only	when	he	is	no	longer	there,	because	a	dead	Master
can	be	controlled,	manipulated.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 a	 so-called	 Jaina	 saint,	 Kanjiswami	 died.	 He	 was
worshipped	by	the	Jainas	so	much	so	that	the	Jainas	had	been	declaring:	"In	the
next	 circle	 of	 existence,	 in	 the	 next	 creation,	 he	 will	 be	 the	 first
TEERTHANKARA,	the	first	founder	of	Jainism,	again."
When	 he	 died	 --	 I	 have	 seen	 the	 pictures,	 somebody	 sent	 the	 pictures	 --	 the
Jainas	were	trying	to	fix	his	posture,	because	a	TEERTHANKARA	or	a	would-
be	TEERTHANKARA	should	die	 in	 the	 lotus	posture.	They	must	have	broken
some	of	 his	 bones.	At	 least	 a	 dozen	people	were	 forcing	his	 dead	body	 into	 a
certain	yoga	posture.	Now,	you	cannot	do	this	while	a	man	is	alive	--	he	will	go
through	a	primal	scream!
While	 he	was	 alive	 he	 used	 to	wear	 clothes,	 but	 according	 to	 the	 Jainas,	 one
attains	to	the	ultimate	freedom	only	when	one	dies	naked,	so	they	removed	the
clothes.	 Now,	 the	 corpse	 cannot	 prevent	 it.	 The	 clothes	 are	 removed,	 a	 lotus
posture	is	fixed,	and	the	followers	are	happy.
This	goes	on	happening.
A	maid	who	seemed	to	enjoy	her	work,	gave	notice	one	day	without	warning.
"Why	 do	 you	 wish	 to	 leave?"	 the	 lady	 of	 the	 house	 asked	 her.	 "Is	 anything
wrong?"
"I	just	can't	stand	the	suspense	in	this	house	a	minute	more,"	the	maid	replied.
"Suspense?	What	do	you	mean?"
"It's	the	sign	over	my	bed	that	says:	'Watch	ye,	for	ye	know	not	when	the	master
cometh.'"
The	 moment	 the	 Master	 is	 gone,	 you	 have	 only	 the	 words.	 Words	 can	 be
manipulated,	 words	 can	 be	 interpreted,	 words	 can	 be	 colored	 and	 painted
according	 to	your	prejudices.	But,	Binoy	Thomas,	as	 far	as	 I	 am	concerned,	 it
will	be	impossible	--	for	many	reasons	it	will	be	impossible.
First,	I	am	a	man	who	is	consistently	inconsistent.	It	will	not	be	possible	to	make
a	dogma	out	of	my	words;	anybody	trying	to	make	a	creed	or	dogma	out	of	my
words	 will	 go	 nuts!	 You	 can	make	 a	 dogma	 out	 of	Mahavira	 --	 he	 is	 a	 very
consistent	man,	very	logical.	You	can	make	a	philosophy	out	of	Buddha	--	he	is
very	mathematical.	You	can	make	a	philosophy	out	of	Krishnamurti	--	for	fifty
years	he	has	simply	been	repeating	the	same	thing	again	and	again;	you	cannot
find	 a	 single	 inconsistency	 in	 him.	 On	 the	 one	 hand	 he	 says,	 "I	 am	 not	 your
Master,	your	guru.	Don't	depend	on	me,"	but	in	a	subtle	way	he	is	creating	the
whole	philosophy	--
which	 is	 so	 consistent,	 so	 utterly	 consistent,	 that	 everybody	 would	 like	 to	 be
imprisoned	in	it,	it	is	so	sane.
It	is	impossible	with	me:	I	live	in	the	moment,	and	whatsoever	I	am	saying	right
now	is	true	only	for	this	moment.	I	have	no	reference	with	my	past,	and	I	don't
think	 of	 the	 future	 at	 all.	 So	my	 statements	 are	 atomic;	 they	 are	 not	 part	 of	 a
system.	And	 you	 can	make	 a	 dead	 institution	 only	when	 a	 philosophy	 is	 very
systematic,	when	there	are	no	more	flaws,	when	no	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
134
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
fault	can	be	found,	when	all	doubts	are	solved,	all	questions	dissolved,	and	you
are	given	a	ready-made	answer	to	everything	in	life.
I	am	so	inconsistent	that	it	is	impossible	to	create	a	dead	institution	around	me,
because	a	dead	institution	will	need	the	infrastructure	of	a	dead	philosophy.	I	am
not	 teaching	 you	 any	 doctrine,	 I	 am	 not	 giving	 you	 any	 principles;	 on	 the
contrary,	I	am	trying	to	take	away	all	the	philosophies	that	you	have	carried	all
along.	 I	 am	 destroying	 your	 ideologies,	 creeds,	 cults,	 dogmas,	 and	 I	 am	 not
replacing	 them	with	anything	else.	My	process	 is	of	pure	deconditioning.	 I	am
not	trying	to	recondition	you.	I	will	leave	you	open.
Hence,	you	can	see	it	here,	all	my	sannyasins	are	unique	individuals.	There	is	no
certain	 pattern	 into	 which	 they	 have	 to	 fit	 themselves.	 There	 is	 no	 "should,"
"should	not,"	there	is	no	rigid	structure,	but	only	a	liquidity.	I	am	not	giving	you
the	Ten	Commandments,	 I	 am	 not	 giving	 you	 detailed	 information	 on	 how	 to
live,	 because	 I	 believe	 in	 the	 individual	 and	 the	 individual's	 dignity	 and	 his
freedom.	I	am	sharing	my	vision	--	that	is	my	joy	--	but	it	is	not	being	shared	in
order	that	you	should	try	to	live	up	to	it.
Krishnamurti	 goes	on	 saying,	 "Don't	 follow	me.	Don't	 imitate	me,"	but	on	 the
other	hand,	when	people	don't	follow	him,	he	becomes	very	irritated,	annoyed.	It
is	 a	 little	 subtle.	 For	 example,	 he	 says,	 "Don't	 follow	me,"	 and	 people	 follow
him.	Then	he	becomes	annoyed.	If	you	are	truly	sincere,	then	you	can	say	"Don't
follow	me,"	but	if	people	want	to	follow	you,	who	are	you	to	prevent	them?	You
have	said	your	thing,	now	it	is	up	to	them	what	to	do	or	not	to	do.	You	are	not
their	Master,	 so	 if	 they	 want	 to	 follow	 you,	 you	 cannot	 prevent	 them.	 If	 you
prevent	 them,	 that	 means	 you	 are	 forcing	 them	 to	 follow	 your	 idea	 of	 not
following.
He	becomes	very	annoyed...
Just	a	few	days	ago	he	was	in	Bombay,	and	I	tell	my	sannyasins	that	wherever	he
is,	 they	should	go	 there	and	sit	 in	 the	front	 rows.	And	 the	moment	he	sees	 the
orange	people,	he	becomes	unenlightened	immediately!	He	starts	shouting.
Now,	why	this	annoyance?	There	must	be	some	deep	desire	to	control.	Now	who
are	you	to	tell	somebody	not	to	wear	orange?	If	somebody	wants	to	wear	orange
then	it	is	his	choice.
A	 subtle	 strategy,	 a	 very	 indirect	 strategy	 to	 manipulate,	 to	 dominate,	 to
possess...
I	am	simply	sharing	my	vision,	my	joy.	I	am	enjoying	it,	and	whosoever	wants	to
enjoy	 it	with	me	 is	welcome.	Naturally,	when	 I	 am	 gone	 there	may	 be	 a	 few
fools	who	will	 try	 to	 figure	 it	out,	 to	make	a	 system,	although	 I	 am	making	 it
almost	impossible.	But	fools	are	fools.	They	can	try	to	do	the	impossible.
Bertrand	Russell	has	said,	"It	is	a	strange	fact	of	history	that	not	a	single	religion
has	been	founded	by	a	man	who	had	a	sense	of	humor."	In	fact,	to	have	a	sense
of	humor	and	to	create	a	religion	is	contradictory.	Religions	are	created	by	sad
people	--	very	long	faces,	almost	dead.
Bertrand	 Russell	 is	 no	 longer	 alive,	 otherwise	 I	 would	 have	 told	 him,	 "Then
come	and	see."
It	may	not	have	happened	 in	 the	past,	 and	 I	agree	with	him	because	Mahavira
was	 serious,	 Jesus	 was	 serious,	Mohammed	was	 serious,	 Shankaracharya	 was
serious...	And	Russell	seems	to	be	right;	these	sad	people	have	created	the	dead
institutions	of	all	the	religions.
But	here	something	totally	new	is	happening.	I	am	not	trying	to	create	a	religion,
I	 cannot	 do	 it,	 because	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 creating	 a	 religion	 is	 ugly.	 But	 I	 am
releasing	 a	 sense	 of	 humor	 in	 you,	 a	 deep	 laughter	 in	 you.	 To	me	 laughter	 is
more	 sacred	 than	prayer,	 dancing	more	 spiritual	 than	 chanting	mantras,	 loving
existence	 far	 more	 cosmic	 than	 going	 to	 a	 church	 or	 to	 a	 temple.	 Becoming
utterly	nobody,	a	pure	nothingness,	is	far	more	significant	than	becoming	Osho	-
The	Goose	is	Out
135
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
a	saint.	Innocence,	a	sense	of	humor,	a	joyous	participation	in	life...	you	cannot
create	 a	 dead	 institution	 around	 such	 tremendously	 alive	 experiences.	 A	 dead
institution	needs	something	dead	to	be	made	out	of.	It	is	made	out	of	the	corpses
of	your	saints.	My	whole	approach	is	nonserious	--	sincere,	but	non-serious.
A	salesman	stopped	at	a	small-town	hotel	and	had	difficulty	getting	a	room.
He	was	about	to	leave	when	the	clerk	said,	"I	think	I	may	be	able	to	put	you	up.
There	are	two	beds	up	in	room	ten	and	one	is	occupied	by	a	woman.	But	there	is
a	screen	around	her	bed	and	she	is	sleeping	soundly.	Just	go	to	your	bed	quietly
and	everything	will	be	fine."
The	 offer	 was	 quickly	 accepted.	 About	 twenty	 minutes	 later	 the	 salesman
returned,	greatly	excited.
"Good	heavens!"	he	cried.	"The	woman	in	the	other	bed	is	dead!"
"I	know	that,"	said	the	clerk,	"but	how	the	hell	did	you	find	out?"
People	are	curious,	very	curious.
Binoy	Thomas,	you	say:
I	 FREQUENTLY	 HEAR	 A	 QUESTION	 BEING	 ASKED	 ABOUT	 THE
ASHRAM...
THERE	 IS	 SO	 MUCH	 VITALITY	 HERE	 NOW	 AND	 SO	 MUCH
CREATIVITY	WITH
ALL	 THESE	 SHOWS	 AND	 MUSIC	 AND	 FASHIONS	 AND	 CRAFTS,	 AS
WELL	AS
EVENTS	 HAPPENING	 ABROAD,	 THAT	 PEOPLE	 ARE	 WONDERING
WHAT	WILL
HAPPEN	WHEN	YOU	ARE	GONE.
Tell	those	fools	to	come	here	while	the	thing	is	alive.	When	you	see	a	beautiful
rose	 flower	 you	 don't	 start	 thinking,	 "What	will	 happen	when	 the	 rose	 flower
withers	away	by	the	evening.
When	its	petals	fall	and	go	back	to	the	earth,	to	their	original	source	--	what	will
happen	 then?"	You	don't	 bother	 about	 it.	You	 rejoice	 in	 the	 flower,	 you	dance
with	the	flower	in	the	wind,	in	the	rain,	in	the	sun.	You	see	a	bird	on	the	wing,
soaring	 high	 towards	 the	 sky,	 towards	 the	 stars.	 You	 don't	 think,	 "What	 will
happen	when	the	bird	is	dead?"	You	enjoy	it.
And,	strangely,	these	are	the	people	who	create	dead	institutions,	because	when
the	 bird	 is	 alive	 and	 singing	 and	 soaring	 high	 they	 are	 afraid	 to	 come	 close.
When	the	bird	is	dead	then	they	can	make	a	beautiful	golden	cage	--	a	temple,	a
synagogue,	 a	 church	 --	 and	 then	 they	 can	 worship.	 The	 dead	 word	 is	 not
dangerous.
These	 people	who	 are	wondering	what	will	 happen,	 are	 the	 same	 people	who
will	create	a	dead	institution.	My	people	cannot	create	a	dead	institution	--	it	is
impossible.	Those	who	have	been	 in	communion	with	me	will	have	 learnt	one
thing	absolutely,	categorically:	that	life	cannot	be	confined	into	institutions;	the
moment	you	try	to	confine	it	into	institutions	you	destroy	it.	So	while	I	am	alive
they	will	celebrate.	When	I	am	gone	they	will	still	celebrate.
They	will	celebrate	my	life,	 they	will	celebrate	my	death,	and	they	will	remain
alive.
Remember,	religions	are	created	by	guilty	people,	and	I	am	not	creating	any	guilt
here.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
136
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
There	 are	 certain	 mechanisms...	 If	 Jesus	 had	 not	 been	 crucified,	 there	 would
have	been	no	Christianity	at	all.	The	real	founder	of	Christianity	was	not	Jesus
Christ	but	the	high	priest	of	Jerusalem,	the	rabbi,	and	Pontius	Pilate.	These	two
persons,	 in	 conspiracy	 with	 Judas,	 created	 Christianity.	 This	 is	 the	 real	 "holy
trinity";	Jesus	Christ	is	just	an	excuse.
Crucify	 a	man	 like	 Jesus,	 and	 then	you	will	 never	be	 able	 to	 forgive	yourself,
you	will	feel	guilty.	Your	hands	will	look	red	with	the	blood	of	Jesus.	Now,	what
should	be	done	to	remove	those	wounds,	those	guilt	feelings?	The	only	way	is	to
move	to	the	opposite:	worship.
I	am	not	sacrificing,	hence	there	is	no	possibility	of	worshipping	me.	I	am	living
joyously
--	 nobody	need	 feel	 guilty	 about	me;	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 If	 I	 start	 living
naked,	if	I	start	fasting,	if	I	start	moving	barefoot	on	the	roads,	if	I	start	begging
for	 my	 food,	 then	 I	 will	 create	 guilt,	 then	 I	 will	 create	 in	 you	 a	 subtle
mechanism.	 Something	 will	 be	 triggered	 in	 you	 and	 finally	 you	 will	 find
consolation	only	in	worshipping	me.
Mahavira	 is	worshipped	because	he	moved	around	naked;	he	 tortured	himself,
fasted.
Buddha	is	worshipped	because	he	was	a	king	and	he	renounced	all	his	pleasures.
I	have	not	renounced	anything.	In	fact,	I	was	born	a	poor	man	and	I	live	like	a
king.	There	 is	no	need	 to	worship	me	because	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 compensate
me.	I	am	not	creating	any	guilt	in	anybody.	I	am	not	torturing	myself.
You	can	easily	forgive	yourself.	There	is	no	point	in	going	on	carrying	guilt.
The	whole	question	of	what	will	happen	in	the	future	is	political.	The	politician
is	always	concerned	with	the	future.
A	great	politician	had	been	bitten	by	a	dog	but	didn't	give	it	much	thought	until
he	noticed	that	the	wound	was	taking	a	remarkably	long	time	to	heal.	Finally	he
consulted	a	doctor	who	took	one	look	at	it	and	ordered	the	dog	brought	in.	Just
as	he	had	suspected,	the	dog	had	rabies.	Since	it	was	too	late	to	give	the	patient
serum,	the	doctor	felt	he	had	to	prepare	him	for	the	worst.
The	politician	 sat	down	at	 the	doctor's	 desk	and	began	 to	write.	His	physician
tried	to	comfort	him.	"Perhaps	 it	won't	be	so	bad,"	he	said.	"You	needn't	make
out	your	will	right	now."	"I'm	not	making	any	will,"	replied	the	politician.	"I'm
just	writing	out	a	list	of	people	I'm	going	to	bite!"
I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 the	 future	 at	 all.	 This	 moment	 is	 too	 much,	 too
overwhelming.	I	am	rejoicing	in	it.	And	this	is	my	way	of	life:	to	live	moment	to
moment.	I	am	not	a	prophet,	I	have	not	come	here	to	determine	the	whole	course
of	 humanity	 in	 the	 future	 --	 that	 kind	of	 bullshit	 does	 not	 appeal	 to	me	 at	 all.
Who	am	I	to	decide	the	whole	course	of	humanity	in	the	future?	I	am	living	my
moment	 joyously;	 that's	enough.	And	 the	people	who	will	be	coming	will	 find
their	 own	 ways	 to	 live.	 To	 suffer	 or	 to	 rejoice	 --	 it	 all	 depends	 on	 their
intelligence.
I	cannot	determine	anything,	but	my	way	of	working	is	such	that	it	is	impossible
to	create	a	philosophy,	a	dogma,	a	creed,	a	church,	absolutely	impossible.
Eighty-five-year-old	Will	Jones	hobbled	down	to	the	local	bar	to	have	a	cold	one
and	shoot	the	breeze	with	his	friends.	Mr.	Jones	was	the	talk	of	the	town	as	he
had	 recently	 married	 a	 beautiful	 nineteen-year-old	 girl.	 Several	 of	 the	 boys
bought	the	old	man	a	drink	in	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
137
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
an	effort	to	get	him	to	tell	of	his	wedding	night.	Sure	enough	the	old	rascal	fell
right	in	with	their	plans.
"My	youngest	son	carried	me	in	and	lifted	me	onto	the	bed	with	my	young	bride.
We	spent	the	night	together	and	then	my	three	sons	carried	me	off	the	bed."
The	small	circle	of	men	scratched	their	heads	and	asked	the	old	boy	why	it	took
his	 three	other	sons	 to	 take	him	off,	when	it	only	 took	his	youngest	boy	to	put
him	on.
Proudly	he	replied,	"I	fought	them."
Live	each	moment	totally.
You	ask	me,	Binoy	Thomas:
THERE	IS	SO	MUCH	VITALITY	HERE	NOW...
The	vitality	 is	because	we	are	 living	herenow,	our	whole	vision	 is	of	herenow.
We	 don't	 look	 beyond	 that	 because	 beyond	 that	 nothing	 exists;	 whatsoever
comes	is	always	now.
Time	is	an	invention.	Now	is	a	reality.	So	much	creativity	is	happening	for	the
simple	reason	that	we	have	withdrawn	ourselves	from	past	and	future.
Our	whole	energy	remains	blocked	either	in	the	past	or	in	the	future.	When	you
withdraw	all	your	energy	from	past	and	future	a	tremendous	explosion	happens.
That	explosion	 is	creativity.	And	 this	 is	only	 the	beginning	--	every	day,	every
moment,	 things	 are	 becoming	 more	 intense,	 more	 passionate.	 But	 we	 are	 not
trying	in	any	way	to	control	the	future.
I	am	not	a	prophet,	neither	am	I	a	messiah.	To	me,	the	claims	of	Jesus	Christ	and
people	 like	 him,	 look	 childish:	 that	 they	 have	 come	 to	 deliver	 the	 whole
humanity	from	their	sins.
Krishna	says	in	the	Gita,	"Whenever	religion	will	be	lost,	I	will	come	back."	To
me,	this	is	all	crap.	There	is	no	need	for	anybody	to	come;	the	people	who	will
be	here	will	take	care	of	themselves.
I	am	preparing	my	people	to	live	joyously,	ecstatically.	So	when	I	am	not	here,	it
won't	make	any	difference	 to	 them.	They	will	still	 live	 in	 the	same	way	--	and
maybe	my	death	will	bring	them	more	intensity.
Death	is	always	a	beautiful	background	which	makes	your	life	more	intense.	But
my	ashram	is	never	going	to	become	a	dead	institution.	And	if	it	does,	it	won't	be
my	ashram.
You	ask	me:
WHEN	 YOU	 LEAVE	 YOUR	 BODY	 WILL	 THE	 ASHRAM	 BECOME	 A
DEAD
INSTITUTION	 AND	 WILL	 YOU	 JUST	 BECOME	 DEIFIED	 AND
FORGOTTEN?
I	am	not	leaving	anything	to	anybody.	I	have	declared	myself	Bhagwan.	I	am	not
leaving	anything	to	anybody.	Why	should	I	leave	it	to	anybody?	I	know	I	am	the
Blessed	One	--	and	only	I	can	know.	How	can	anybody	else	know	it?	And	I	am
trying	to	seduce	my	people	into	Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
138
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
understanding	 this	 immensity:	 that	 they	 are	 also	 the	 blessed	 ones.	 It	 is
impossible	to	deify	me
--	 I	 have	 already	 done	 it!	What	 else	 is	 there	 left	 for	 you?	 I	 don't	 depend	 on
anybody.
Before	I	leave	the	world,	one	thing	I	am	certainly	going	to	do	--	it	is	private,	so
please	don't	tell	anybody	else	--	before	I	leave	the	world,	I	am	going	to	declare
all	of	my	sannyasins	blessed	ones.	Thousands	of	Bhagwans	all	over	the	world!
There	will	 be	 no	 need	 to	make	 any	 special	 nook	 and	 corner	 for	me,	 I	will	 be
dissolved	 in	my	people.	 Just	 as	you	 can	 taste	 the	 sea	 from	any	place	 and	 it	 is
salty,	you	will	be	able	to	taste	any	of	my	sannyasins	and	you	will	find	the	same
taste:	the	taste	of	Bhagwan,	the	taste	of	the	Blessed	One.
I	am	waiting	for	the	right	moment.
Once	 the	 new	 commune	 is	 established,	 all	 my	 sannyasins	 will	 be	 called
Bhagwans.	Then	it	really	will	be	a	Bhagwan	movement.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 IF	 LIFE	 IS	 SO	 BEAUTIFUL,	 THEN	 WHAT	 IS	 THE	 POINT	 OF
BEING
ENLIGHTENED	AND	NOT	BEING	REBORN?
Deva	Vipul,	there	is	no	point	at	all.	That's	what	I	have	been	telling	you,	but	you
don't	listen.	Your	question	shows	that	you	have	still	not	listened.
The	question	begins:
IF	LIFE	IS	SO	BEAUTIFUL...
"Ifs"	 and	 "buts"	won't	 do.	 If	 life	 is	 beautiful	 then	you	need	 to	 be	 enlightened.
Life	is	beautiful,	so	there	is	no	need	to	be	enlightened.
Vipul,	are	you	a	Polack	or	something?
A	lady	was	looking	in	a	bookstall	for	a	gift	for	a	sick	Polack	friend.
When	 asked	 if	 she	 would	 like	 something	 religious,	 she	 replied,	 "Oh,	 no.	My
Polack	friend	is	well	on	the	way	to	recovery!"
If	you	can	drop	that	"if,"	you	will	be	on	the	way	to	recovery.	But	that	"if"	is	there
--	I	can	see	it,	sitting	on	you	like	a	huge	mountain.
I	don't	see	any	point	in	being	enlightened.	Things	are	perfectly	beautiful	as	they
are.	But	if	you	start	with	a	hypothetical	question,	then	you	have	not	tasted	life.
Drop	the	"if"	and	you	are	enlightened.	There	is	not	much	to	enlightenment.	It	is	a
simple	recognition	that	I	have	been	unnecessarily	chasing	my	own	tail.	The	day
you	get	 it,	you	stop	chasing	your	tail,	you	just	simply	sit	 in	 the	sun	and	take	a
sunbath.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
139
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
A	Polack	landowner	has	been	wondering	for	quite	a	while	about	the	quietness	of
his	barnyard	during	 the	mid-day	breaks.	One	day	he	decides	 to	find	out	what's
behind	it	all,	so	he	steps	out	discreetly	and	sees	his	farmhand	crossing	the	yard
with	pants	open	and	disappearing	into	the	barn.	The	landowner	calls	his	servant
back	and	asks	him	what's	going	on	inside	the	barn.
"Well,	 sir,	we've	got	quite	 a	 jolly	game	going	on	 in	 there.	The	girls	 hide	 their
heads	in	the	hay	and	then	have	to	guess	who	did	it!"
"That	sounds	like	fun,"	replies	the	Polack	landowner.	"Can	I	join	you?"
"I	guess	so,"	says	the	farmhand.	"Your	wife	has	been	at	it	for	six	weeks	already!"
You	can	 join,	but	drop	 the	"if."	Those	who	have	dropped	the	"if"	have	already
joined.	The	Buddhas	and	the	Krishnas	and	the	Zarathustras	--	 they	have	joined
the	game	just	by	dropping	the	"if."
But,	Vipul,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 drop	 "ifs"	 and	 "buts"	 --	 the	mind	 consists	 of
them;	these	are	the	bricks	of	the	mind.	And	all	minds	are	Polack,	remember.
The	Polack	Pope	was	finally	persuaded	by	his	cardinals	to	find	a	woman,	so	that
he	could	better	understand	the	problems	of	mankind.
"Well-a,	 okay,"	 said	 the	 Polack	 Pope,	 "but-a	 she's-a	 gotta	 have	 certain
qualifications.
First-a,	 she's-a	gotta	be	blind,	 so	 she	 cannot	 see-a	what-a	 I	 am-a	doing	 to	her.
Second-a,	she's-a	gotta	be	deaf,	so	she	cannot	hear-a	what	I	say-a.	And	third-a,
she's-a	gotta	have-a	the	biggest	tits-a	in	Italy!"
People	are	trying	to	play	the	game	of	life	but	with	many	conditions	--	and	those
conditions	prevent	them.
Life	is	a	beautiful	game	if	you	don't	have	any	conditions	to	it.	If	you	can	simply
plunge	 into	 it	 with	 no	 "ifs,"	 with	 no	 "buts,"	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for
enlightenment.
What	is	actually	meant	by	enlightenment?	--	a	relaxed,	restful	approach	to	life,	a
deep	synchronicity	with	existence,	an	egoless	communion	with	the	whole.
A	Polack	stripteaser	goes	to	a	theater	manager	for	an	audition.	Before	beginning
her	performance,	she	puts	a	big	red	apple	in	the	middle	of	the	stage	and	to	the
accompaniment	of	soft	sexy	music,	she	begins	her	number.
The	music	comes	to	a	crescendo...	she	is	almost	naked.	With	a	crash	of	cymbals
and	 a	 roll	 of	 the	 drums,	 to	 the	 gaping	 eyes	 of	 the	 theater	manager,	 she	 leaps
across	 the	 stage,	 does	 three	 impressive	 pirouettes	 and	 to	 the	 final	 crash	of	 the
drums	dives	down	in	the	splits	and	lands	on	top	of	the	big	red	apple.
When	she	gets	up	to	bow,	the	apple	has	disappeared.
After	a	moment	of	deathly	hush,	the	theater	manager	applauds	her	ecstatically.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
140
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
"You	will	become	famous	all	over	the	world.	I	will	book	you	for	the	best	theaters
in	Tokyo,	London,	Hamburg,	New	York	and	Paris."
"No!	Paris	no!"	replies	the	stripteaser	in	a	worried	tone.
"Why	not	Paris?"	asks	the	manager.	"It's	one	of	 the	best	cities	 in	the	world	for
your	number."
"No,	not	Paris!	In	Paris	my	mother	does	this	number	with	a	watermelon!"
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	WHAT	MAKES	THE	FISH	JUMP	OUT	OF	THE	WATER?
Stephen	Lyons,	it	is	a	strange	question...	it	is	fishy!	Have	you	been	a	fish	in	your
past	life,	or	are	you	planning	to	be	born	as	a	fish	in	the	future?
I	don't	know	much	about	fish	and	their	minds,	but	I	guess	that	they	must	be	just
like	you:	getting	tired	of	the	same	ocean,	the	same	water,	the	obvious.	They	must
be	jumping	out	of	the	water	just	to	see	what	is	beyond.	They	must	be	in	search	of
enlightenment,	NIRVANA.	Or	perhaps,	 trying	 to	get	out	of	 the	known	 to	have
some	taste	of	the	unknown.
Indian	mythology	says	that	the	first	incarnation	of	God	happened	in	the	form	of
a	fish.
That	seems	to	be	very	relevant,	because	that's	what	biologists	say:	that	life	must
have	started	in	the	ocean	with	a	fish.	The	fish	is	the	most	primitive	form	of	life.
Then	 compare...	 Even	 the	 fish	 is	 curious,	 inquiring.	And	 there	 are	millions	 of
men	who	are	not	curious	at	all,	not	inquiring	at	all,	who	are	living	with	stuffed
ideas	--	borrowed	rubbish	from	others	--	who	are	not	explorers.	The	fish	jumping
out	of	the	water	shows	you	that	you	have	fallen	even	below	that.
A	 Christian	 remains	 a	 Christian,	 a	 Hindu	 remains	 a	 Hindu,	 a	 Mohammedan
remains	a	Mohammed	--	and	not	only	that,	they	brag	about	it.	They	are	far	worse
than	 the	most	 primitive	 form	 of	 life,	 the	 fish.	One	 should	 inquire,	 one	 should
explore.	It	 is	accidental	 that	you	are	born	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan;	 it	 is	not
your	destiny.	Explore,	jump	out	of	the	water,	look	around.	There	are	millions	of
possibilities	 available,	 and	 the	more	you	 explore,	 the	more	you	 are.	The	more
you	go	into	the	unknown,	the	more	integrated	you	become.	The	challenge	of	the
unknown	is	the	most	centering	phenomenon	in	life.
Perhaps	the	fish	are	jumping	out	of	the	water	just	to	listen	to	a	few	of	my	jokes.
Mrs.	Cantor	suspected	her	husband	of	playing	around	with	the	maid.
Having	to	spend	a	few	days	with	her	sick	mother,	she	told	her	small	son,	Harvey,
to	keep	an	eye	on	Poppa	and	the	maid.
As	soon	as	she	returned,	she	asked,	"Harvey,	did	anything	happen?"
"Well,"	said	 the	boy,	"Poppa	and	the	maid	went	 into	 the	bedroom	and	took	off
their	clothes	and..."
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
141
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
"Stop!	Stop!"	shouted	Mrs.	Cantor.	"We	will	wait	until	Poppa	comes	home."
Poppa	was	met	 at	 the	door	by	his	 irate	wife,	 cringing	maid	and	confused	 son.
"Harvey,	tell	me	what	happened	with	Poppa	and	the	maid,"	stormed	Mrs.	Cantor.
"As	I	 told	you,	Ma,"	said	Harvey,	"Poppa	and	the	maid	went	into	the	bedroom
and	took	off	their	clothes."
"Yes!	 Yes!	 Go	 on,	 Harvey,"	 said	Mrs.	 Cantor	 impatiently,	 "what	 did	 they	 do
then?"
Replied	Harvey,	 "Why,	Mother,	 they	did	 the	 same	 thing	you	and	uncle	Bernie
did	when	Poppa	was	in	Chicago."
So,	Stephen	Lyons,	when	you	see	a	fish	jumping	out	of	the	water	again,	please
tell	it	a	joke.
A	pretty	girl	walked	up	to	a	tall	handsome	man.
"Ohhh,"	she	sighed,	"you	have	such	big	muscular	arms!"
"Yes,"	he	responded,	making	a	fist	with	one	hand.	He	then	pointed	with	the	other
hand	to	his	muscles	and	said,	"Eighteen	inches!	I	measured	them	this	morning."
"Ohhh,"	said	the	girl	with	admiration,	"and	you	have	such	a	big	beautiful	chest!"
The	man	 laughed,	 stretched	his	 arms	 in	 the	 air,	 and	 said,	 "Forty-five	 inches!	 I
measured	it	this	morning."
The	girl	was	amazed.	She	looked	down	at	him,	pointed	her	finger	at	his	cock	and
asked,
"How	long?"
"Two	inches,"	he	replied.
"Only?"	the	girl	asked	disappointed.
The	he-man	took	a	deep	breath,	looked	at	the	girl	and	said,	"Measured	from	the
floor,	of	course!"
Now,	Binoy	Thomas,	can	you	make	a	religion	out	of	my	jokes?	Can	you	make	a
dead	institution	out	of	my	jokes?	It	is	impossible.
The	last	question
Question	4
OSHO,	YES,	OSHO,	YES.	THERE	IS	NO	MORE	BOTTLE,	NO	MORE	YOU,
NO
MORE	I,	ONLY	THIS	DRUNKEN	JOY	THAT	MAKES	MY	TOES	CURL	IN
ECSTASY.
BUT,	OSHO...	WHAT	WAS	THE	JOKE?
Yoga	Lalita,	the	ultimate	joke,	the	only	joke...
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
142
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
The	official,	Riko,	once	asked	Nansen	to	explain	to	him	the	old	problem	of	the
goose	in	the	bottle.
"If	a	man	puts	a	gosling	into	a	bottle,"	said	Riko,	"and	feeds	him	until	he	is	full-
grown,	 how	 can	 the	man	 get	 the	 goose	 out	 without	 killing	 it	 or	 breaking	 the
bottle?"
Nansen	gave	a	great	clap	with	his	hands	and	shouted,	"Riko!"
"Yes,	Master,"	said	the	official	with	a	start.
"See,"	said	Nansen,	"the	goose	is	out."
This	 is	 the	 only	 ultimate	 joke	 in	 existence.	 You	 are	 enlightened.	 You	 are
Buddhas	--
pretending	not	to	be,	pretending	to	be	somebody	else.	And	my	whole	work	here
is	to	expose	you.
See,	Lalita,	 the	goose	is	out!	You	will	make	every	effort	to	put	it	back	into	the
bottle,	because	once	the	goose	is	out	then	you	don't	have	any	problems.	And	man
only	knows	how	 to	 live	with	problems,	he	does	not	know	how	 to	 live	without
problems,	so	he	goes	on	putting	the	goose	back	into	the	bottle.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	of	Rabindranath	Tagore.
He	says:	I	was	searching	for	God	for	thousands	of	lives.	I	saw	him...	sometimes
far	away,	close	to	a	distant	star.	I	rushed...	by	the	time	I	had	reached	there	he	had
gone	further	ahead.	It	went	on	and	on.	Finally	I	arrived	at	a	door,	and	on	the	door
there	was	a	signboard:	"This	is	the	house	where	God	lives	--	Lao	Tzu	House."
Rabindranath	 says,	 I	 became	 very	 worried	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 I	 became	 very
troubled.
Trembling,	 I	 went	 up	 the	 stairs.	 I	 was	 just	 going	 to	 knock	 on	 the	 door	 and
suddenly,	in	a	flash,	I	saw	the	whole	point.	If	I	knock	on	the	door	and	God	opens
the	door,	then	what?	Then	everything	is	finished,	my	journeys,	my	pilgrimages,
my	great	adventures,	my	philosophy,	my	poetry	--	all	the	longing	of	my	heart	--
all	is	finished!	It	will	be	suicide.
Seeing	the	point	so	crystal	clear,	Rabindranath	says:	I	removed	my	shoes	from
my	feet	because	going	back	down	might	create	some	noise	--	he	might	open	the
door!	Then	what?
And	from	the	moment	I	reached	the	bottom	of	the	steps	I	have	not	looked	back.
Since	 then	 I	 have	 been	 running	 and	 running	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 I	 am	 still
searching	for	God,	although	now	I	know	where	he	lives.	So	I	only	have	to	avoid
that	Lao	Tazu	House	and	I	can	go	on	searching	for	him	everywhere	else.	There	is
no	fear...	But	I	have	to	avoid	that	house	--	that	house	haunts	me;	I	remember	it
perfectly.	If	by	chance	I	accidentally	enter	that	house,	then	all	is	finished.
It	is	a	beautiful	insight.
Man	 lives	 in	 problems,	man	 lives	 in	misery.	To	 live	without	 problems,	 to	 live
without	misery,	needs	real	courage.
I	have	lived	without	any	problems	for	twenty-five	years,	and	I	know	it	is	a	kind
of	suicide.
I	simply	go	on	sitting	in	my	room	doing	nothing.	There	is	nothing	to	do!
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
143
Chapter	10	-	Dissolve	in	my	people
If	you	can	allow	that	much	silence	to	penetrate	your	very	being,	only	then	will
you	be	able	to	let	the	goose	out	of	the	bottle.	Otherwise,	for	a	moment	maybe...
and	 again	 you	will	 push	 the	 goose	 back	 into	 the	 bottle.	 That	 gives	 you	 some
occupation;	it	keeps	you	occupied,	keeps	you	concerned,	worried,	anxious.	The
moment	 there	 are	 no	 problems,	 there	 is	 no	 mind.	 The	 moment	 there	 are	 no
problems,	there	is	no	ego.	The	ego	and	the	mind	can	exist	only	in	the	turmoil	of
problems.
As	 I	 see	 it,	 man	 creates	 problems	 to	 nourish	 his	 ego.	 If	 there	 are	 not	 real
problems	 he	 will	 invent	 them.	 But	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 invent	 them,	 otherwise	 his
mind	cannot	function	anymore.
So,	 Lalita,	 this	 is	my	 simple	 declaration:	 that	 all	 is	 divine.	 The	 trees,	 and	 the
rocks	and	the	stones,	and	the	mountains,	and	the	stars	--	all	are	divine.	The	goose
has	never	been	in	the	bottle.	It	is	only	the	man	who	cannot	live	without	problems
who	forces	the	goose	into	the	bottle	and	then	starts	asking	how	to	get	it	out.	And
then	he	makes	impossible	conditions:	first,	the	bottle	should	not	be	broken,	then
the	goose	should	not	be	killed.
Now	 the	 goose	 is	 big	 --	 it	 fills	 the	whole	 bottle.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 fulfill	 the
conditions.
Either	the	bottle	has	to	be	broken	--	 that	 is	not	allowed,	or	the	goose	has	to	be
killed	--	 that	 is	not	allowed.	You	have	 to	bring	 the	goose	out	without	killing	 it
and	 without	 destroying	 the	 bottle.	 That	 is	 not	 possible	 in	 the	 very	 nature	 of
things.	 AIS	 DHAMMO	 SANANTANO	 --	 this	 IS	 how	 life's	 law	 is,	 it	 is	 not
possible.	 So	 man	 remains	 happy	 because	 it	 is	 not	 possible,	 so	 he	 can	 go	 on
carrying	the	bottle.
I	see	Lalita	carrying	the	bottle	with	the	goose...	But	the	truth	is	that	the	bottle	is
only	our	imagination,	fantasy,	just	made	of	the	same	stuff	that	dreams	are	made
of.
This	 is	 the	 most	 difficult	 thing	 for	 humanity	 to	 accept.	 Hence,	 so	 much
opposition	 to	 me,	 because	 I	 am	 telling	 you	 that	 you	 are	 Gods,	 that	 you	 are
Buddhas,	that	there	is	no	other	God	than	you.	That	is	the	most	difficult	thing	to
accept.	You	would	like	to	be	a	sinner,	you	would	like	to	be	guilty,	you	would	like
to	 be	 thrown	 into	 hell,	 but	 you	 cannot	 accept	 that	 you	 are	 a	 Buddha,	 an
awakened	 one,	 because	 then	 all	 problems	 are	 solved.	And	when	 problems	 are
solved,	 YOU	 start	 disappearing.	 And	 to	 disappear	 into	 the	 whole	 is	 the	 only
thing	of	any	worth,	is	the	only	thing	of	any	significance.
What	 I	 am	 telling	 to	 you	 is	 not	 a	 teaching.	 This	 place	 is	 a	 device,	 this	 is	 a
Buddhafield.	I	have	to	take	away	things	which	you	don't	have,	and	I	have	to	give
you	 things	 which	 you	 already	 have.	 You	 need	 not	 be	 grateful	 to	 me	 at	 all,
because	 I	 am	 not	 giving	 you	 anything	 new,	 I	 am	 simply	 helping	 you	 to
remember.
You	have	forgotten	the	language	of	your	being.	I	have	come	to	recognize	it	--	I
have	remembered	myself.	And	since	the	day	I	remembered	myself	I	have	been	in
a	 strange	 situation:	 I	 feel	 compassion	 for	 you,	 and	deep	down	 I	 also	giggle	 at
you,	because	you	are	not	really	in	trouble.	You	don't	need	compassion,	you	need
hammering,	 you	 need	 to	 be	 hit	 hard	 on	 the	 head.	 Your	 suffering	 is	 bogus.
Ecstasy	is	your	very	nature.
You	are	truth.
You	are	love.
You	are	bliss.
You	are	freedom.
Osho	-	The	Goose	is	Out
144
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	2	-	Just	see	it
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	4	-	Transcendence	brings	buddhahood
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
Chapter	5	-	Perfectly	imperfect
