
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Talks	on	Kabir
Talks	given	from	11/04/79	am	to	25/04/79	am
English	Discourse	series
15	Chapters
Year	published:	1980
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	But	Man	Is
11	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904110
ShortTitle:
FISH01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
106
mins
I	LAUGH	WHEN	I	HEAR	THAT	THE	FISH	IN	THE	WATER
IS	THIRSTY.
YOU	DON'T	GRASP	THE	FACT	THAT	WHAT	IS	MOST
ALIVE	OF	ALL	IS	INSIDE	YOUR	OWN	HOUSE;
AND	SO	YOU	WALK	FROM	ONE	HOLY	CITY	TO	THE	NEXT
WITH	A	CONFUSED	LOOK!
KABIR	WILL	TELL	YOU	THE	TRUTH:	GO	WHEREVER	YOU
LIKE,	TO	CALCUTTA	OR	TIBET;
IF	YOU	CAN'T	FIND	WHERE	YOUR	SOUL	IS	HIDDEN,
FOR	YOU	THE	WORLD	WILL	NEVER	BE	REAL!
I	DON'T	KNOW	WHAT	SORT	OF	A	GOD	WE	HAVE	BEEN
TALKING	ABOUT.
THE	CALLER	CALLS	IN	A	LOUD	VOICE	TO	THE	HOLY	ONE
AT	DUSK.
WHY?	SURELY	THE	HOLY	ONE	IS	NOT	DEAF.
HE	HEARS	THE	DELICATE	ANKLETS	THAT	RING	ON	THE
FEET	OF	AN	INSECT	AS	IT	WALKS.
GO	OVER	AND	OVER	YOUR	BEADS,	PAINT	WEIRD	DESIGNS
ON	YOUR	FOREHEAD,
WEAR	YOUR	HAIR	MATTED,	LONG,	AND	OSTENTATIOUS,
BUT	WHEN	DEEP	INSIDE	YOU	THERE	IS	A	LOADED	GUN,
HOW	CAN	YOU	HAVE	GOD?
The	 fish	 in	 the	 sea	 is	 not	 thirsty	 --	 but	 man	 is.	 Man	 lives	 in	 God,	 and	 is
absolutely	unaware	of	it.	Man	is	born	in	God,	breathes	in	God,	and	one	day	will
dissolve	in	God.
MAN	IS	GOD,	made	of	the	stuff	called	God,	and	yet	completely	oblivious	of	the
fact.
The	fish	is	not	thirsty	in	the	sea,	but	man	is.	God	is	the	sea	--	God	surrounds	you,
within	and	without.	All	that	is	is	divine.	God	is	not	a	person:	God	is	the	presence
that	 is	 overflowing	 everywhere	 in	 all	 directions.	 The	 radiance,	 the	 beauty	 of
existence,	 the	 splendour,	 the	 majestic,	 the	 miraculous,	 the	 mysterious	 --	 the
whole	magic	of	life	is	God.
God	has	not	to	be	worshipped:	God	has	to	be	lived.	And	to	live	God	you	need
not	go	anywhere	--	you	are	already	in	him.	To	live	God	you	need	not	cultivate
any	character.
God	is	already	the	case.	He	is	your	consciousness.
To	live	God	you	need	not	become	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Christian	--
you	are	already	in	it,	he	is	already	in	you.	It	is	not	a	question	of	the	future.	THIS
very	moment	God	is	showering	on	you.	But	you	are	closed.	He	comes,	but	you
don't	receive	him.	He	knocks	on	your	doors,	but	you	don't	listen	to	him.	And	he
has	been	knocking	for	ages.
The	 old	 biblical	 story	 is:	 when	 Adam	 disobeyed	 God,	 he	 was	 frightened,
obviously.	God	came	in	search	of	him.	Afraid,	he	went	behind	a	bush	just	to	hide
from	God.	he	was	not	courageous	enough	to	face	him,	to	encounter	him.	And	the
story	says	God	called	in	the	Garden	of	Eden,	"Adam,	where	are	you?"
Adam	heard	it,	yet	did	not	respond.
This	 is	not	 just	 a	 story,	 this	 is	not	 something	 that	happened	 in	 the	past:	 this	 is
what	is	happening	with	EACH	of	you.	God	calls	you	--	either	you	don't	hear,	or,
even	if	sometimes	you	hear,	you	don't	respond.	You	are	hiding!	You	are	hiding
from	the	truth	of	your	own	being;	you	are	hiding	from	yourself.	You	don't	want
to	 see	 your	 original	 face:	God	 IS	 your	 original	 face.	 and	 unless	 you	 see	 your
original	face,	you	will	live	in	misery.
Misery	is	nothing	but	remaining	ignorant	of	one's	own	being.	To	be	alert,	to	be
conscious,	of	all	that	has	been	given	to	you,	to	be	conscious	of	all	that	has	been
bestowed	 upon	 you,	 to	 be	 conscious	 of	 the	 treasures	 that	 are	 hidden	 in	 your
being,	is	to	be	blissful.
Man	is	very	strange,	the	strangest	animal	on	the	earth.	no	other	animal	lives	in
such	 anguish	 --	 even	 trees	 are	 far	more	 blissful,	 even	 rocks	 have	more	 of	 the
heart	than	man.
They	are	in	tune	with	God,	or	in	tune	with	totality.	man	has	lost	the	connection.
Man	has	broken	the	bridge.
Why	has	it	happened?	It	has	to	be	understood.	And	it	has	happened	to	almost	all.
Only	once	 in	a	while	does	 there	happen	a	person	who	reconnects	himself	with
God	--	a	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Kabir	--	but	only	once	in	a	while.	and	these	people
are	so	few	that	they	cannot	be	believed.
People	go	on	talking	about	Jesus,	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Zarathustra,	Mohammed,
but	deep	down	they	doubt	 their	very	existence.	They	HAVE	to	doubt!	Nothing
like	that	has	happened	to	you.	You	have	not	tasted	any	of	the	nectar	that	they	talk
about.	your	life	is	 just	bitter,	your	life	is	nauseous,	your	life	is	sick	--	and	they
talk	of	wholeness	and	of	health,	and	of	great	bliss	and	of	eternal	peace...	and	you
know	nothing	of	these	things!
Your	only	experience	is	that	of	a	very	poisoned	life,	a	very	poisoned	spirit.	Your
experience	 is	 so	much	 opposed	 to	what	 these	 few	 people	 say	 --	 how	 can	 you
believe	 in	 them?	And	you	 are	 the	majority.	Millions	 and	millions	will	 support
your	experience	that	life	is	hell.
And	Krishna	sings	songs	celestial	on	his	flute,	songs	of	the	beyond.	And	Kabir
sings	 songs	 unbelievable!	 You	 may	 listen	 out	 of	 courtesy;	 you	 may	 not	 say
anything	out	of	formality;	or	maybe	just	the	presence	of	a	Jesus,	of	a	Kabir,	of	a
Bayazid,	is	so	enchanting,	so	charming,	it	has	such	a	charisma	that	it	overpowers
you,	that	you	become	dumb,	that	you	cannot	say	no.	But	your	not	saying	no	does
not	mean	that	you	are	saying	yes.	They	are	two	totally	different	things.
Not	to	say	no	is	one	thing,	and	to	say	yes	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	Not
to	 say	 no	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change	 you.	 The	 no	 will	 remain	 in	 you	 --	 silent,
unspoken.	The	no	will	surround	your	being	like	a	transparent	capsule.	You	may
not	be	able	to	see	it,	you	may	be	able	to	see	through	it,	but	it	will	not	allow	you
to	meet	and	merge	with	existence	--	unless	your	are	capable	of	saying	YES!	That
single	word,	'yes',	contains	all	the	religions;	all	the	Vedas	and	the	Bibles	and	the
Korans	are	contained	in	the	single	word	'yes'.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	Christians,	Jews	and	Mohammedans	have	been
using	to	complete	their	prayers	--	AMEN.	AMEN	means,	"yes,	God,	yes	--	I	say
to	total	yes	to	you."
You	may	not	argue	with	Kabir	--	it	is	difficult	to	argue	with	a	man	like	Kabir.	His
presence	 has	 such	 weight;	 his	 eyes,	 his	 fragrance,	 are	 hypnotic.	 Even	 in	 you
want	to	argue	you	would	not	like	to	argue.	But	the	argument	remains.	And	once
Kabir	is	gone,	Jesus	is	gone,	the	argument	surfaces,	the	no	comes	to	the	surface,
and	the	formal	silence	is	found	to	be	impotent.
People	go	 to	 the	churches	and	 to	 the	 temples	and	 to	 the	mosques,	 and	 it	 is	 all
formality.	It	is	nothing	but	Sunday	religion.	It	is	a	social	phenomenon;	they	are
not	 individually	 committed,	 they	 are	 not	 involved.	 They	 are	 not	 going	 to	 the
church	or	the	temple	to	be	transformed.	It	has	a	social	utility;	it	is	a	kind	of	club
--	you	can	call	it	a	religious	club,	where	people	can	meet	and	gossip	and	talk.	It
is	a	meeting-place,	but	not	a	meeting-place	between	you	and	God.	That's	what	it
is	supposed	to	be,	but	it	is	not.
You	 go	 to	 the	 temple	 empty-handed,	 you	 come	 back	 from	 the	 temple	 empty-
handed.
Nothing	 has	 been	 happening	 there.	 It	 cannot	 happen	 this	 way.	 God	 needs
commitment,	involvement;	God	asks	for	your	totality,	your	surrender,	your	yes.
And	when	you	say	yes,	with	no	strings	attached	to	it,	with	no	conditions,	when
the	yes	is	unconditional,	and	has	not	been	said	out	of	coercion	but	has	welled	up
spontaneously	 within	 you,	 it	 has	 a	 tremendous	 beauty	 to	 it,	 and	 tremendous
power	 too.	 Its	very	fire	 transforms	you	from	the	base	metal	 into	gold,	 from	an
ordinary	human	being	into	an	extraordinary	divine	existence.
But,	remember,	your	yes	should	not	come	out	of	any	sort	of	coercion,	physical	or
psychological.	Somebody	 is	 a	Christian	because	he	has	been	 coerced	 from	his
very	childhood	 to	be	a	Christian,	and	somebody	 is	a	 Jew	because	he	has	been
coerced	from	the	very	beginning	to	be	a	Jew.	A	great	psychological	conditioning
is	 going	 on.	 Children	 are	 being	 exploited;	 children	 are	 being	 forced	 to	 be
Hindus,	 Jainas,	 Buddhists.	 The	 parents	 are	 not	 even	 aware	 of	 what	 they	 are
doing	 to	 their	 children:	 they	 are	preventing	 their	 children	 from	ever	 becoming
religious.	Yes,	that's	what	they	are	doing	to	their	children.
In	the	name	of	religion	they	are	poisoning	their	innocent	souls.	They	think,	they
may	even	believe,	that	they	are	helping	their	children	towards	God.	The	truth	is
just	the	contrary:	they	are	creating	great	barriers.
Once	a	man	has	said	yes	under	coercion,	once	a	man	has	yielded	because	he	was
forced	 to	 yield,	 you	 have	 destroyed	 his	 capacity	 to	 say	 yes	 spontaneously	 for
ever.	He	will	say	yes	only	when	he	is	coerced.
Children	are	helpless.	They	depend	on	you,	they	cannot	survive	without	you	--
you	can	exploit	their	vulnerability,	you	can	exploit	their	helplessness.	And	that's
what	has	been	done	on	the	earth	for	centuries	and	centuries.	Hence,	so	much	talk
of	God,	and	you	cannot	see	God	anywhere;	so	much	talk	of	religion,	so	much	of
theology,	but	nothing	of	the	existential.
Everybody	 is	 religious	 in	 a	 way	 --	 somebody	 is	 Hindu,	 somebody	 is
Mohammedan,	somebody	 is	Christian	 --	and	nobody	 is	 religious	 in	 reality.	We
have	created	a	fiction	of	being	religious,	and	the	fiction	is	so	cheap,	is	so	easily
available,	who	is	going	then	on	the	adventure	to	seek	and	search	for	God?	That
is	arduous.	One	has	 to	 risk	 --	one	has	 to	 risk	one's	ego,	and	 that	 is	 the	MOST
arduous	thing	in	life.
UNLESS	ONE	 IS	READY	TO	DISSOLVE	ONE'S	EGO,	 the	 fish	 is	 going	 to
remain	 thirsty.	Dissolve	 the	 ego	 and	 all	 thirst	 disappears,	 because	 the	moment
you	dissolve	the	ego,	the	wall	between	you	and	the	ocean	disappears;	then	you
are	part	of	the	ocean.	How	can	you	be	thirsty	then?
And	man	is	certainly	 thirsty!	hungry,	 in	deep	anguish.	Man	lives	a	very	phony
life,	 inauthentic.	 He	 only	 pretends	 to	 live;	 he	 does	 not	 really	 live.	 He	 goes
through	 all	 the	 empty	 gestures	 of	 living,	 but	 look	 at	 people,	 look	 at	 yourself,
look	at	others	--	you	will	not	see	the	dance.	People	are	dragging;	life	seems	to	be
a	burden,	a	great	burden,	somehow	to	be	tolerated.	Life	is	not	a	celebration,	and
that's	what	it	should	be.
Your	 steps	 don't	 have	 the	 quality	 of	 dance.	 Your	 heart	 is	 not	 throbbing	 with
ecstasy.	 You	 are	 not	 pulsating	 and	 vibrating	 with	 joy,	 with	 love.	 You	 are	 not
overflowing	with	energy.What	kind	of	life	is	this?	Just	going	round	and	round	in
circles,	 dead,	 dull,	 stupid	 routines.	 Just	 hoping	 that	 tomorrow	 something	 will
happen...	and	the	tomorrow	never	comes,	and	nothing	ever	happens.	Waiting	for
Godot,	and	Godot	never	comes.	You	go	on	waiting	and	waiting	and	waiting	and
all	that	ever	comes	is	death.
But	life	is	so	miserable	that	even	death	feels	like	a	relief.	Life	is	so	empty	that	it
is	very	rare	to	find	a	human	being	who	has	not	contemplated,	some	time	or	other,
committing	suicide.	Life	is	so	empty	that	we	go	on	keeping	ourselves	occupied	-
-	with	any	rubbish,	just	to	remain	occupied	so	that	we	don't	see	the	emptiness,	so
we	don't	see	the	inner	vacuum,	the	inner	darkness.
Just	watch	and	you	will	see	that	man	is	living	in	great	anguish,	anxiety.	Man	is
already	in	hell.	When	somebody	asks	me,	"Osho,	do	you	believe	there	is	a	hell?"
I	always	say,
"There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 believing	 --	 you	 are	 living	 in	 it."	 Hell	 cannot	 be
doubted;	heaven	can	be	doubted	but	not	hell.	Hell	 is	such	a	day-to-day	reality!
But	why?	--	why	should	it	be	so?	Why	did	it	happen	in	the	first	place?	We	will
have	to	understand	something	special	about	human	beings.
Man	 is	 the	only	 animal	on	 the	 earth,	 in	 fact	 in	 the	whole	of	 existence,	who	 is
dual.	 Other	 animals	 are	 not	 dual:	 they	 are	 what	 they	 are,	 hence	 there	 is	 no
problem.	A	tiger	is	a	tiger,	and	a	peacock	is	a	peacock,	and	a	dog	is	a	dog.	With
man	there	is	something	special.	That	is	the	glory	of	man,	if	we	understand	it.	If
we	don't	understand	it,	this	becomes	the	agony.
Man	 is	not	what	he	 is:	he	can	be	more.	Man	 is	not	 finished:	man	 is	a	growth.
Man	 is	 the	 only	 growing	 being	 in	 existence,	 the	 only	 evolving	 being	 in
existence.	Man	is	a	potential	and	much	has	to	become	actual	in	him.	And	unless
you	start	transforming	your	potential	into	the	actual,	your	life	will	remain	empty.
The	seed	is	empty.	If	the	seed	remains	a	seed	it	will	remain	in	anguish;	it	will	not
feel	the	joy	of	fulfillment,	the	contentment	that	comes	when	the	seed	has	become
the	tree	and	the	tree	has	bloomed.
Man	 is	a	 seed	 --	 the	 seed	of	God.	When	man	blooms,	God	becomes	manifest.
That's	why	we	have	called	Buddha	'Bhagwan';	Mahavira,	Krishna,	'Bhagwan'.	It
simply	means	that	their	seed	is	no	more	a	seed;	the	seed	has	disappeared	in	the
soil	 of	 existence,	 and	 they	 have	 come	 to	 their	 ultimate	 blossoming.	Godliness
has	bloomed	 in	 them.	The	fragrance	of	divineness	has	been	released.	They	are
fulfilled,	utterly	 fulfilled.	Joyous	 they	are	because	 they	have	come	home.	Now
there	is	nowhere	to	go.
Man	is	the	only	animal	who	is	an	unfinished	product.	Nature	HAS	brought	man
to	a	certain	point,	and	from	that	point	man	has	been	made	responsible.	Now	you
are	 responsible	 for	 your	 growth.	Nature	 cannot	 do	 any	more;	whatsoever	was
possible	 through	 nature	 has	 already	 happened	 --	 it	 has	 brought	 you	 to	 the
threshold.	 You	 have	 to	 take	 the	 further	 journey	 now;	 you	 have	 to	 become	 a
pilgrim.
If	you	don't	become	a	pilgrim,	if	your	life	does	not	take	the	quality	of	adventure,
of	search,	of	enquiry,	you	will	remain	empty	--	and	you	will	remain	thirsty,	and
you	will	remain	hungry.	You	will	remain	spiritually	starved.	Don't	take	yourself
for	granted	--	that	is	the	problem,	exactly	that	is	the	very	crux	of	the	problem:	we
take	ourselves	for	granted,	we	think	as	if	we	are	what	we	are	supposed	to	be.
Man	 is	 a	 paradox.	Man	 is	 not	what	 he	 thinks	 he	 is	 --	man	 is	 far	more.	Man's
capacities	are	immense.	In	fact,	there	are	no	limits	to	man's	growth.	One	can	go
on	 and	 on	 and	 on...	 It	 is	 an	 infinite	 journey.	 There	 is	 no	 goal!	 There	 is	 a
beginning	of	the	pilgrimage	but	no	end.
To	know	God	is	to	know	that	life	is	an	eternal	pilgrimage.	What	is	the	meaning
when	we	say	God	 is	 infinite.	You	can	go	ON	attaining,	but	you	can	never	 say
that	now	the	dead	end	has	come.
This	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 existence	 --	 it	 goes	 on	 giving	 you	 more	 and	 more
opportunities.
When	you	have	climbed	one	peak,	another	peak	starts	giving	you	challenges.
The	misery	of	man	is	that	he	thinks	he	is	what	he	is	supposed	to	be.	He	thinks
that	 he	 is	 already	 that	 which	 he	 can	 be.	 Man	 remains	 satisfied	 with	 the
superficial;	 then	 there	will	 remain	 a	 deep	 discontent	 in	 your	 soul.	That's	what
Kabir	is	trying	to	say	Kabir	is	one	of	the	greatest	revolutionaries	who	has	ever
walked	 on	 the	 earth.	 His	 insight	 is	 of	 tremendous	 value.	 If	 you	 can	 fall	 en
rapport	with	his	vision	you	will	be	enriched	--
you	will	be	enriched	beyond	all	your	expectations.
I	LAUGH,	says	Kabir,	WHEN	I	HEAR	THAT	THE	FISH	IN	THE	WATER	IS
THIRSTY.
HE	 IS	TALKING	ABOUT	YOU,	not	 about	 the	 fish	 --	 you	 are	 the	 fish.	Kabir
says	"I	laugh..."	The	Buddhas	have	always	been	laughing.
It	is	said	of	Hotei,	a	Japanese	Buddha	--	he	is	known	as	the	laughing	Buddha	--
that	 the	 day	 he	 became	 enlightened	 he	 started	 laughing	 and	 then	 he	 never
stopped	 laughing.	 Many	 years	 he	 lived;	 he	 would	 move	 from	 one	 town	 to
another,	laughing,	from	one	marketplace	to	another,	laughing.	He	would	stand	in
the	 marketplace	 and	 his	 laughter	 was	 catching,	 infectious,	 and	 people	 would
gather	 and	 people	 would	 start	 laughing.	 And	 the	 laughter	 would	 go	 on
spreading...	and	soon	the	whole	village	would	be	involved	in	it.
People	 used	 to	 ask	Hotei,	 "What	 is	 your	message?"	He	 said,	 "Laughter	 is	my
message."
People	used	to	ask	him,	"Why	do	you	laugh	so	much?"
He	said,	"What	else	can	I	do?	Man	is	so	ridiculous,	man	is	so	absurd!"
That's	exactly	what	Kabir	is	saying:
I	LAUGH	WHEN	I	HEAR	THAT	THE	FISH	IN	THE	WATER	IS	THIRSTY.
Life	 surrounds	 you	with	 all	 its	 joys,	with	 immense	 possibilities,	 opportunities.
And	 you	 go	 on	 crying	 and	weeping!	Your	 anguish	 goes	 on	 deepening	 as	 you
grow	older.	Children	can	laugh,	but	the	older	you	become,	the	more	the	laughter
disappears.	And	whenever	you	laugh,	it	is	phony;	it	is	just	a	painted	laughter.	It
has	no	roots	in	your	heart.
Why	have	people	become	so	serious?	They	know	 they	are	missing	something.
They	know	that	life	is	slipping	out	of	their	hands.	They	know	that	this	should	not
be	so,	but	it	is	so	--	they	are	miserable.	And	when	someone	attains,	like	Kabir,	he
is	bound	to	laugh.
If	a	fish	comes	to	you	and	says,	"I	am	thirsty,"	what	will	you	do?	Will	you	feel
any	sympathy	for	the	fish?	Will	you	feel	any	kind	of	empathy	for	the	fish?	You
will	 simply	 laugh,	 and	 you	 will	 say,	 "If	 you	 are	 thirsty	 then	 you	 are	 simply
stupid.	There	 is	no	need	 to	be	 thirsty!	You	are	 in	 the	 sea	already.	Why	should
you	be	thirsty?"
Man	is	in	anguish,	great	anguish.	We	go	on	hiding	it,	because	what	is	the	point
of	bringing	it	to	others?	Nobody	can	help.	We	go	on	carrying	dark	nights	in	our
beings,	great	turmoil,	great	pain,	great	wounds.	We	go	on	hiding!	It	is	pointless
to	 tell	anybody;	nobody	can	help.	 It	 is	better	not	 to	 talk	about	 the	wounds	 that
you	are	carrying	in	your	soul;	it	is	better	to	forget	about	all	those	wounds.
That's	why	intoxicants	have	been	so	important	down	the	ages.	There	has	never
been	a	 time	when	something	or	other	was	not	used	by	man	 to	 forget	 the	 inner
wounds,	to	forget	this	whole	nonsense	that	we	have	made	out	of	life.	People	go
on	 talking	 against	 alcohol,	 against	 drugs,	 but	 they	 don't	 understand	 the
psychology	 behind	 it.Just	 talking	 against	 them	 is	 not	 going	 to	 prevent	 people.
You	can	legalize,	you	can	prohibit,	but	still	intoxicants	will	be	used.
Unless	man	becomes	blissful,	they	cannot	be	prevented.	If	man	lives	in	misery,
he	will	need	 something	or	other	 to	 forget	 the	misery.	Otherwise,	 it	will	be	 too
much!	 In	 fact,	 my	 own	 insight	 is	 this:	 if	 all	 the	 drugs	 and	 all	 the	 intoxicants
could	be	simply	removed	from	the	world,	man	would	immediately	go	mad.	The
whole	world	would	be	a	madhouse.
People	are	somehow	keeping	themselves	 together.	They	can	drink	alcohol,	and
for	a	few	hours	they	can	forget	the	world	and	the	misery	that	the	world	brings	to
them;	 they	 can	 forget	 their	 own	 selves.	 They	 can	 be	 lost	 into	 oblivion.	 They
know	perfectly	well	it	is	not	going	to	change	anything.	But	then	nothing	seems
to	change	anything.	At	least	for	a	few	hours	one	can	forget	all	about	it.
Intoxicants	will	 disappear	 from	 the	world	only	when	meditation	has	become	a
world-wide	 phenomenon,	 when	 each	 single	 individual	 has	 created	 some
meditativeness	 in	 his	 being;	 when	 each	 single	 individual	 has	 become	 aware,
"There	is	no	need	to	be	miserable.
Misery	 is	 created	 by	 me.	 Life	 is	 not	 misery:	 life's	 nature	 is	 bliss.	 It	 is	 my
stupidity	that	I	am	creating	misery	out	of	it."
Misery	 needs	 great	 efforts,	 bliss	 is	 natural	 --	 you	 cannot	 create	 bliss,	 you	 can
only	create	misery.	And	if	you	don't	create	misery,	bliss	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Bliss	 comes	 effortlessly	 --	 you	 cannot	 practise	 it.	 But	 for	misery	 you	 have	 to
make	 great	 efforts	 --	 and	 you	ARE	making	 great	 efforts	 to	 remain	miserable.
You	have	invested	much	in	your	misery.
Kabir	is	right;	he	says,	"I	laugh..."	It	looks	a	little	hard,	looks	a	little	cruel,	that	a
man	like	Kabir	should	say:
I	LAUGH	WHEN	I	HEAR	THAT	THE.FISH	IN	THE	WATER	IS	THIRSTY.
It	is	not	cruel,	it	is	not	hard.	It's	simply	how	it	should	be.	All	the	Buddhas	have
been	laughing;	they	may	have	said	so,	they	may	not	have	said	so.	Hotei	laughed
publicly;	Gautam	Buddha	must	have	laughed	privately,	but	laughter	is	bound	to
be	there.
I	am	saying	it	because	this	is	my	own	experience	too.	When	you	come	with	all
your	miseries	to	me,	I	listen	very	sympathetically	--	I	don't	laugh.	But	deep	down
there	is	laughter.	I	listen,	very	patiently	and	very	attentively...	I	don't	want	to	hurt
you,	I	don't	want	to	be	impolite	to	you.	But	if	you	want	to	know	the	truth,	then
the	 reality	 is	 that	 you	 are	 simply	 showing	how	 ridiculous	you	 are,	 how	 stupid
you	are.
And	God	is	not	responsible	for	your	stupidity.	It	is	your	own	work.	God	creates
every	 human	 being	with	 great	 intelligence.	You	 can	 see	 in	 children's	 eyes:	 all
children	are	intelligent.	It	is	very	difficult	to	find	a	stupid	child.	If	you	can	find	a
stupid	child,	that	simply	means	he	is	already	old.
Children	 are	 so	overflowing	with	 intelligence.	Where	does	 all	 this	 intelligence
disappear	 to?	 What	 happens	 to	 this	 intelligence?	 The	 society	 is	 against
intelligence;	the	society	does	not	want	intelligent	people	to	be	around.	Intelligent
people	seem	to	he	dangerous	to	the	society.
The	society	wants	stupid	people	because	stupid	people	are	easy	to	manage,	easy
to	 dominate,	 easy	 to	 manipulate,	 easy	 to	 order.	 Stupid	 people	 are	 obedient	 --
even	where	obedience	 is	 sin	 they	are	obedient.	Stupid	people	can	be	 forced	 to
become	machines,	and	the	society	needs	machines,	not	men.	The	society	is	not
interested	in	you;	it	is	interested	in	your	efficiency.	And	machines	certainly	are
more	efficient	 than	men.	The	machine	is	 the	model,	and	man	has	to	follow	the
model.	Make	man	more	and	more	stupid	and	he	will	come	closer	and	closer	to
the	machine.	He	will	be	a	good	clerk,	a	good	station	master,	a	good	teacher	in	a
school,	a	good	collector...	but	unintelligent.
If	 he	 is	 intelligent,	 he	may	 not	 be	 a	 clerk	 at	 all;	 he	may	 not	waste	 his	 life	 in
writing	stupid	documents,	collecting	garbage	in	files.	He	may	be	more	respectful
towards	his	own	being.	He	may	choose	some	other	way	to	live.	He	will	not	be
just	 a	 deputy	 collector.	 How	 can	 you	 ask	 an	 intelligent	 man	 to	 be	 just	 a
policeman?	 Impossible!	And	where	will	you	 find	 the	 thousands	and	 thousands
for	 your	 armies?	 Intelligent	 people	 are	 not	 cattle;	 intelligent	 people	 cannot	 be
told	to	do	stupid	things.	They	will	say,	"No!"
Just	 think:	 the	man	who	dropped	the	atom	bomb	on	Hiroshima,	 if	he	had	been
intelligent	he	would	have	simply	said	"No!"	Even	at	the	risk	of	his	own	life	he
would	have	said	no.
He	would	have	said,	"If	you	want	to	kill	me,	kill	me,	but	I	am	not	going	to	kill
one	 hundred	 thousand	 people.	 They	 have	 not	 committed	 any	 sin.	 They	 are
innocent	civilians	-
-	 small	 children,	 old	 people....	 They	 have	 no	 responsibility	 for	 the	war!	 They
have	not	caused	it.	Why	should	I	drop	the	atom	bomb?	It	is	better	to	die	than	to
kill	one	hundred	thousand	people."
If	the	man	had	been	intelligent,	he	would	have	immediately	said	no.	But	he	must
have	 been	 utterly	 stupid:	 he	 dropped	 the	 atom	 bomb,	 and	 had	 a	 good	 night's
sleep.	His	sleep	was	not	disturbed.
In	 the	morning	when	 he	 was	 asked,	 "Could	 you	 sleep	 in	 the	 night?"	 he	 said,
"Certainly,	I	slept	well!	I	did	my	duty,	I	finished	my	job,	and	then	I	had	a	good
night's	sleep.
Whenever	I	do	my	duty	perfectly	well,	I	always	sleep	well."
One	 hundred	 thousand	 people	 burnt	 within	 five	 seconds,	 and	 not	 even	 a
nightmare	came	to	this	man?	Just	think:	we	must	have	destroyed	his	intelligence
totally;	 we	 must	 have	 reduced	 him	 to	 a	 machine.	 Machines	 don't	 have	 any
conscience,	 machines	 don't	 have	 any	 consciousness,	 machines	 don't	 have	 any
heart.	 And	 the	 society	 needs	 machines,	 more	 and	 more	 efficient	 machines.
Hence	the	universities	go	on	reducing	people	to	stupid	people.
If	you	are	a	BA	it	means	you	have	a	certificate	that	you	have	lost	much	of	your
intelligence.	If	you	are	an	MA,	even	more;	if	you	are	a	PhD,	finished!	No	hope
for	you.
It	is	said	that	when	Henry	Thoreau	came	back	from	the	university,	an	old	man	of
his	village	came	 to	see	him	and	was	very	much	surprised.	Seeing	 the	old	man
very	 much	 puzzled	 and	 surprised,	 Thoreau	 asked	 him,	 "Why	 do	 you	 look	 so
puzzled?	Why	are	you	so	much	surprised?"
He	 said,	 "I	 am	 surprised	 because	 you	 have	 really	 done	 a	 great	 job:	 you	 have
saved	your	intelligence,	although	you	have	been	to	the	university.	You	still	look
intelligent!	 This	 very	 rarely	 happens:	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 university	 and	 still
remain	intelligent	--	because	the	whole	machinery	of	education	is	 to	make	you
mechanical."
A	new	education	is	needed	in	the	world,	which	will	make	you	more	conscious,
not	more	knowledgeable,	which	will	make	you	more	 loving,	not	more	 logical.
Logic	 is	 good	 --	 if	 love	 remains	 the	master,	 then	 logic	 is	 a	 good	 servant;	 but
logic	should	not	be	the	master,	and	love	should	not	be	the	servant.
Knowledge	is	good	if	consciousness	remains	in	control.	But	if	knowledge	is	in
control,	if	the	head	is	in	control,	then	the	heart	is	killed,	destroyed.
The	society	does	not	need	intelligent	people,	hence	it	has	created	conditionings	-
-	 social,	 religious,	 political,	 educational	 --	 great	 psychological	 strategies	 have
been	 invented	 down	 the	 ages	 to	 reduce	 you	 to	 a	 thing,	 to	 reduce	 you	 to
something	pseudo,	 to	 reduce	you	 so	 that	 you	 can	become	 a	 commodity	 in	 the
marketplace.
You	 have	 to	 be	 aware,	 because	 you	 exist	 in	 a	 society	 which	 is	 against	 your
intelligence.
My	sannyasins	are	 trying	 to	do...	what	 the	society	has	destroyed	 in	 them,	 they
are	trying	to	revive.	What	the	society	has	done,	they	are	trying	to	undo	it.	That's
the	whole	work	of	sannyas	--	and	that	has	ALWAYS	been	the	work	of	a	real	true
religion.
I	LAUGH,	says	Kabir,	WHEN	I	HEAR	THAT	THE	FISH	IN	THE	WATER	IS
THIRSTY.
YOU	DON'T	GRASP	THE	FACT	THAT	WHAT	IS	MOST
ALIVE	OF	ALL	IS	INSIDE	YOUR	OWN	HOUSE;
AND	SO	YOU	WALK	FROM	ONE	HOLY	CITY	TO	THE	NEXT
WITH	A	CONFUSED	LOOK!
YOU	DON'T	GRASP	THE	FACT	THAT	WHAT	IS	MOST
ALIVE	OF	ALL	IS	INSIDE	YOUR	OWN	HOUSE...
YOU	HAVE	NOT	BEEN	TOLD.	The	secret	has	been	hidden	from	you.	Nobody
has	told	you	to	go	in;	nobody	has	given	you	any	chance	to	be	in.	Parents	are	not
telling	 their	 children,	 "Sometimes	 just	 be.	 Don't	 do	 anything.	 Just	 sit	 silently
under	a	tree,	search	in,	ask	'Who	am	I?"'	No	school,	no	college,	no	university,	is
telling	 you	 to	meditate.	 In	 fact,	 they	 think	meditation	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
education.
The	government	of	India	has	written	a	letter.	They	don't	recognize	this	commune
as	 educational.	 Why?	 "Because	 what	 does	 meditation	 have	 to	 do	 with
education?"	And	I	say	to	them,	"If	meditation	has	nothing	to	do	with	education,
then	what	else	can	become	the	foundation	of	a	true	education?	What	else?"
But	 I	know:	some	stupid	 fool	 in	some	office	must	have	written	 that.	He	 is	not
aware	 of	 what	meditation	 is.	Meditation	 simply	means	 to	 be	with	 yourself	 in
your	absolute	aloneness,	so	that	you	can	have	a	taste	of	your	own	being.	To	be
with	yourself	is	meditation.
In	my	 philosophy	 of	 life,	 only	 two	 things	 are	 valuable:	 one	 is	meditation,	 the
other	 is	 love.	And	both	are	complementary.	Meditation	means	 the	 joy	of	being
alone,	and	 love	means	 the	 joy	of	being	 together	with	somebody.	These	are	 the
two	 wings	 of	 a	 true	 education.	 Meditation	 means	 independence,	 freedom	 --
freedom	 from	 all,	 even	 from	 the	 beloved,	 because	 even	 the	 presence	 of	 the
beloved	 encroaches	 on	your	 space.	 It	 is	 good	 for	 the	 time	being,	 it	 is	 good	 to
overlap	your	space	with	somebody,	it	is	good	to	meet	and	merge,	but	ultimately,
AND	fundamentally,	you	are	alone.	And	you	have	to	learn	how	to	be	alone,	and
not	only	how	to	be	alone,	but	joyously	alone,	ecstatically	alone.
Meditation	means	 sitting	 silently,	doing	nothing...	 just	being!	The	world	 is	 too
full	of	doing.	The	society	teaches	you	to	do	this,	 to	do	that	--	why?	Because	if
you	do	this,	you	will	have	that;	if	you	don't	do	this,	you	will	not	have	that.	Doing
is	 a	way	of	 having	more,	 and	we	 are	 conditioned	 to	 have	more	 and	more	 and
more	 --	 as	 if	 by	 having	 more	 we	 will	 really	 be	 satisfied,	 contented;	 as	 if	 by
having	more	we	will	really	become	rich.
The	truth	is	just	the	opposite:	the	more	you	have,	the	more	you	feel	your	inner
poverty	--
in	 contrast.	 The	 richer	 you	 become	 in	 the	 outside	world,	 the	 emptier	 you	 feel
inside,	and	no	outer	richness	can	fill	the	inner	gap.	Nothing	from	the	outside	can
be	taken	in.	You	can	have	as	much	wealth	as	possible,	but	it	will	go	on	piling	up
outside	you;	and	the	bigger	the	heap,	the	more	you	will	see	your	inner	emptiness,
nothingness,	hollowness	--
the	more	miserable	you	will	become.
Hence,	 the	 richer	 a	 society	 gets,	 the	 more	 and	 more	 it	 becomes	 interested	 in
religion.	 Poor	 societies	 cannot	 be	 religious;	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible.	 I	 am	 not
saying	a	poor	person	cannot	be	religious	--	a	poor	person	CAN	be	--	but	a	poor
society	cannot	be.	A	poor	person	may	be	an	exception:	Kabir	was	a	poor	man	--
and	attained	to	the	highest	peak	possible,	became	a	Buddha.	But	the	poor	society
as	such	cannot	be	religious.
The	poor	society	remains	interested	in	having	more	and	more,	and	if	you	want	to
have	more	you	will	have	 to	do	more.	You	will	have	 to	put	your	whole	energy
into	doing	--	and	meditation	is	just	the	opposite	of	doing.	Meditation	is	a	state	of
non-doing,	it	is	a	state	of	utter	passiveness.	It	is	a	state	of	being:	one	simply	IS...
and	ENJOYING	that	simple	isness.	And	then	something	starts	happening	inside
--	without	any	doing	on	your	part.
SITTING	SILENTLY,
DOING	NOTHING,
THE	SPRING	COMES,
AND	THE	GRASS	GROWS	BY	ITSELF....
Something	starts	growing	in	you.
One	thing,	 the	most	 important	 thing	in	life,	 is	meditation.	No	education	can	be
called	real	education.	Even	the	word	 'education'	simply	means	to	draw	out	that
which	is	within	you.
This	commune	is	educational,	because	our	effort	is	to	draw	out	whatsoever	is	in
you.	And	your	so-called	universities	are	NOT	educational;	they	don't	fulfill	the
requirement	of	being	educational.	They	stuff	people	from	the	outside;	they	don't
draw	out,	they	force	in.
Even	literally	they	are	not	educational.
The	whole	effort	in	the	so-called	educational	institutions	is	to	stuff	people	with
more	and	more	knowledge,	because	knowledge	will	help	 them	to	do	more	and
do	more	 efficiently,	 and	 if	 they	 can	 do	 things	more	 efficiently,	 they	will	 have
more	things.	This	is	what	you	call	education?	This	is	not	real	education.
Real	 education	will	 teach	 a	 person	 the	most	 fundamental	 truth:	 "I	 am	 alone.	 I
come	 alone,	 I	 will	 go	 alone.	 And	 between	 coming	 and	 going,	 I	 can	 deceive
myself	 that	 I	 am	not	 alone,	 but	 that	 is	 only	 a	 deception.	 Intrinsically	 I	 remain
alone.	Aloneness	is	my	intrinsic	nature,	so	I	have	to	fall	in	tune	with	it,	I	have	to
dive	deep	into	it.	I	have	to	know	exactly	what	it	is	--	what	is	this	aloneness?"
And	 it	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful,	 it	 is	 incredibly	 beautiful,	 unbelievably
beautiful.	 When	 you	 enter	 into	 your	 aloneness,	 you	 start	 becoming	 aware	 of
God,	you	start	becoming	aware	of	your	 treasures	hidden	within	you.	You	start
becoming	aware	of	the	kingdom	of	God	that	is	within	you.
Kabir	says:
YOU	DON'T	GRASP	THE	FACT	THAT	WHAT	IS	MOST
ALIVE	OF	ALL	IS	INSIDE	YOUR	OWN	HOUSE...
But	nobody	teaches	you.	The	whole	teaching	is:	"Go	out!	Search	for	money,	for
power,	 for	 prestige"	 --	 and	 they	 are	 not	 found	 within.	 Peace	 is	 found	 within,
silence	is	found	within,	stillness	is	found	within,	godliness	is	found	within.	But
those	are	not	 the	goals	 that	you	have	been	 taught	 to	 fulfill;	 those	are	not	your
targets.
It	is	said	of	a	great	Sufi	mystic,	Bayazid:
One	day,	some	people	came	to	Sheikh	Bayazid's	door	and	knocked.	He	opened
his	upstairs	window	and	looked	out	saying,	"What	do	you	want?"
"Oh,"	they	said,	"we	are	looking	for	Bayazid."
He	said,	"Well,	I	have	been	looking	for	Bayazid	for	ten	years	now,	and	I	have	not
found	him	yet!"	and	closed	the	window.
This	is	what	meditation	is	all	about:	trying	to	find	oneself.
And	 the	other	most	 important	 thing	 is	 love.	Love	means	 trying	 to	 find	oneself
reflected	in	the	other.	Love	is	a	mirror.	Meditation	is	a	search	without	a	mirror;
love	is	nothing	but	seeing	yourself	in	the	eyes	of	the	other	you	love,	reflected	in
his	being,	and	a	way	of	enjoying	the	togetherness.
We	ARE	alone,	 but	we	 are	 not	 alone	 in	 the	 sense	 that	we	 exist	 alone.	We	are
alone,	 but	 there	 are	 other	 people	 around	us	 --	who	 are	ALSO	alone!	We	exist
with	many	people	who	are	alone.	Bridges	have	to	be	made.	Love	is	the	meeting
of	 two	alonenesses.	One	aloneness	 is	 immensely	beautiful	--	what	 to	say	about
when	two	alonenesses	meet	and	merge?	A	great	flowering	happens,	life	becomes
more	mysterious,	more	joyous.
And	then	one	learns	the	rhythm:	sometimes	be	alone,	enjoy	yourself;	sometimes
be	together,	enjoy	love,	friendship.	When	tired	of	togetherness,	escape	into	yom
innermost	 being;	 when	 tired	 of	 your	 aloneness,	 escape	 into	 the	 being	 of	 the
other.
It	is	like	walking	on	a	tightrope:	sometimes	you	lean	towards	the	left,	and	then
you	know	that	 if	you	lean	any	more	you	will	 fall,	so	you	start	 leaning	towards
the	 right.	 Then	 again	 a	 point	 comes	 when	 you	 know	 that	 if	 you	 lean	 more
towards	 the	 right	 you	 will	 fall,	 and	 you	 start	 leaning	 towards	 the	 left.	 That
balance,	the	balance	of	the	tightrope-walker,	is	the	balance	that	gives	richness	to
man.	Walk	between	love	and	meditation,	balancing	each	other.	Become	rich	with
meditation	and	love.
But,	remember,	the	first	thing	is	meditation.	If	you	don't	know	who	you	are,	you
will	not	be	able	to	love	either.	If	you	don't	know	inner	blissfulness	you	will	not
be	able	to	share	it	with	anybody	else	either.
But	people	don't	 go	 in;	 they	 are	 running	hither	 and	 thither	 --	 they	 are	 running
everywhere	 except	 inwards.	 And	 all	 this	 running	 is	 nothing	 but	 dreaming,
desiring.	Just	watch	your	mind!	What	does	your	mind	go	on	doing?	In	the	night
it	 dreams,	 in	 the	 day	 it	 dreams...	 it	 goes	 on	 running	 and	 running.	 It	moves	 in
circles,	but	those	circles	are	all	dreams.
The	 truth	 is	 yom	 consciousness,	 not	 your	 mind.	 Your	 mind	 is	 created	 by	 the
society:	 your	 consciousness	 comes	 from	 God.	 Move	 to	 the	 consciousness;
change	the	gestalt.	Your	emphasis	has	to	be	changed	--	that's	what	it	means	to	be
religious.	That's	what	 conversion	 is:	 changing	your	 attention	 from	 the	mind	 to
consciousness.
Mind	 is	 a	 social	 by-product	 --	 the	 Hindu	 mind,	 the	 Christian	 mind,	 the
communist	mind,	the	Catholic	mind	--	these	are	social	by-products.	The	society
has	 put	 ideas	 in	 yom	 head:	 that	 is	 your	mind.	 Shift	 your	 consciousness,	 your
attention,	 to	that	which	is	God-created;	otherwise	you	will	 live	in	dreams.	And
dreams	cannot	fulfill.	Dreams	are	dreams	--	they	are	not	really	there....
Two	friends	meet	on	the	street	after	several	years	of	not	seeing	each	other.	The
usual	salutation	of	"How	are	you?"	provokes	the	answer	from	Saul	that	he	feels
awful	--	is	suffering	terribly	from	a	strong	dream.	It	seems	that	every	night,	the
moment	he	goes	to	sleep,	he	dreams	he	is	getting	on	the	train	from	Tel	Aviv	to
Haifa.	The	train	reaches	Haifa,	but	he	does	not	get	off.	He	returns	to	Tel	Aviv,
and	upon	arriving,	he	wakes	up	to	find	the	new	day	and	he	is	hot	and	tired	from
the	trip.
Morris	exclaims	that	he	too	is	in	a	similar	shape	for	basically	the	same	reason.	It
seems	that	every	night	he	dreams	that	 the	door	on	the	 left	side	of	his	bedroom
opens	and	in	walks	Sophia	Loren.	She	strips	stark	naked	and	walks	into	the	room
and	climbs	into	his	bed.	At	the	moment	he	turns	on	his	left	side,	the	door	on	the
right	side	of	the	bedroom	opens,	and	in	comes	Raquel	Welch	--	equally	as	naked
--	 she	 climbs	 into	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 bed.	 He	 turns	 to	 be	 with	 Raquel	 and
Sophia	taps	his	shoulder.	He	turns	to	her	and	there	is	Raquel	touching	him.	All
night	long	he	is	turning	from	one	side	to	the	other.	He	is	a	wreck	when	he	wakes
up.
Saul	immediately	says,	"For	Christ's	sake,	why	didn't	you	phone	me?	That's	what
friends	are	for.	I	would	gladly	come	over	and	help	you	any	night."
Morris	answers,	"I	did	phone	you	several	 times	--	but	each	time	I	called	I	was
told	you	had	just	caught	the	train	for	Haifa."
The	mind	goes	on	dreaming....	The	mind	keeps	you	un-aware	of	who	you	are,	so
many	dreams	that	the	truth	is	lost.	In	the	rubbish	of	your	dreams	the	diamond	of
your	being	is	covered.
Kabir	says:
YOU	DON'T	GRASP	THE	FACT	THAT	WHAT	IS	MOST	ALIVE	OF	ALL	IS
INSIDE
YOUR	OWN	HOUSE;	AND	SO	YOU	WALK	FROM	ONE	HOLY	CITY	TO
THE
NEXT	WITH	A	CONFUSED	LOOK!
YOU	CAN	SEE	--	all	 faces	 look	confused.	 It	 is	very	rare	 to	find	a	face	which
does	not	look	confused,	which	has	a	transparency	to	it,	a	clarity.	And	whenever	a
face	has	clarity,	 transparency,	 the	 face	has	beauty	 --	a	beauty	 that	 is	not	of	 the
physical	body	only,	 a	beauty	 that	 is	 something	 from	 the	beyond,	 a	beauty	 that
wells	up	from	within.
But	look	at	people's	faces	--	just	confused,	split,	schizophrenic.	That's	what	their
being	is:	their	faces	are	only	reflecting	their	being.	Faces	are	mirrors.	One	part	of
yom	being	wants	 to	go	to	 the	north,	another	part	wants	 to	go	to	 the	south,	and
another	 part	 to	 the	 east	 and	 another	 still	 to	 the	west...	 and	 you	 are	 torn	 apart.
Your	faces	show	that	--	a	confused	look.
You	don't	know	who	you	are,	where	you	are,	why	you	are.	Everything	seems	to
be	just	accidental.	You	feel	like	a	driftwood	with	no	direction,	with	no	sense	of
direction	even.
Where	are	you	going?	Why	are	you?	For	what?	The	question	mark	 is	 there	on
every	face,	and	the	reason?	Kabir	is	right	--	the	reason	is	you	have	not	looked	at
the	deepest	core	of	your	being,	where	there	is	a	space,	a	center	of	the	cyclone,	a
space	which	 is	 indivisible.	 In	 fact,	 that	 space	known	makes	you	an	 individual.
'Individual'	means	indivisible	--	one	who	is	not	falling	in	parts,	one	who	is	one
piece.
And	that	center	is	there	in	everybody's	being,	but	you	never	go	there.	And	even
if	sometimes	the	desire	to	search	within	arises,	you	again	start	searching	outside.
Somebody	goes	to	Kaaba,	because	a	great	desire	has	arisen	in	him	to	know	who
he	 is.	Why	 are	 you	 going	 to	 Kaaba?	 Somebody	 goes	 to	 Kashi,	 somebody	 to
Mathura,	somebody	to	Tibet...
and	people	go	on.	But	still	the	search	remains	somewhere	outside.
Even	 if	 the	 right	 question	 arises,	 you	move	 in	wrong	 directions.	 If	 you	 really
want	to	know	who	you	are,	you	need	not	ask	anybody	else.	Nobody	can	answer
it.
And	even	if	somebody	answers,	that	answer	will	not	become	your	answer.	That
will	become	at	the	most	information,	but	not	knowing;	and	information	is	futile
because	you	will	interpret	the	information	according	to	your	own	mind.	You	will
read	the	Gita,	you	will	read	the	Koran,	you	will	listen	to	great	teachers,	but	you
will	 understand	 according	 to	 your	 own	 mind.	 You	 will	 translate	 everything
according	to	yourself,	according	to	your	level	of	being.	And	then	all	gets	lost.
Not	only	will	the	information	be	of	no	help	to	you,	it	will	create	more	confusion
in	you.
The	more	learned	a	person	is,	the	more	confused	he	is.	If	you	read	the	Vedas	and
the	Koran	and	the	Bible	and	the	Dhammapada,	you	will	become	more	and	more
confused,	because	each	Buddha	 says,	 in	his	own	way,	 the	 same	 truth,	but	 it	 is
said	 in	 millions	 of	 ways.	 But	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 the	 truth,
because	you	don't	know	what	the	truth	is.
The	real	process	is	first	to	know	within	and	then	go	into	the	Vedas	and	the	Gita
and	the	Koran,	and	they	will	all	become	witnesses	to	your	experience,	they	will
authenticate	your	experience.	They	will	witness	that	you	are	right,	and	you	will
witness	that	they	are	right.
Otherwise,	 all	 reading,	 studying,	 is	 going	 to	 create	more	 and	more	 confusion,
because	who	is	going	to	interpret	it?
"Listen,"	the	man	said	to	his	friend	Albert,	"I	have	got	this	female	gorilla	that	I
bought	a	while	back.	It	cost	me	a	lot	of	money.	The	problem	is	that	I	can't	find
any	male	gorilla	 to	mate	with	 it.	 I	was	wondering	 if	you	would	mate	with	my
gorilla	for	a	hundred	dollars."
"Hmmm,	let	me	think	this	over,"	replied	Albert.
The	next	day	Albert	went	over	to	his	friend's	house	and	said,	"I	will	do	it,	only
under	three	conditions."
"What	are	the	conditions?"	asked	the	friend.
"One	is	that	there	is	no	hugging	and	kissing,	and	no	foreplay.	Two	is	that	all	the
children	are	to	be	raised	Catholic.	Three	is	that	you	give	me	at	least	two	weeks
to	come	up	with	the	hundred	dollars."
Who	is	going	to	interpret?	You	cannot	understand	more	than	you	know;	you	can
understand	only	that	much	which	you	know	on	your	own.	Hence,	the	real	Master
does	 not	 impart	 information:	 he	 imparts	 being.	 He	 does	 not	 make	 you	 more
knowledgeable:	he	makes	you	more	meditative,	he	makes	you	more	 silent.	He
does	 not	 give	 you	 theories,	 hypo-theses,	 philosophies:	 he	 throws	 you	 upon
yourself	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.	And	he	 has	 to	 do	 it	 in	 spite	 of	 you,	 even
against	you,	because	you	want	clearcut	answers,	you	want	some	philosophy	 to
cling	 to,	 some	 idea	 to	believe	 in.	And	 the	 real	Master	will	never	give	you	any
idea,	 any	 theology.	 In	 fact	 he	 will	 take	 all	 ideas	 away	 from	 you,	 and	 all
theologies	--	Catholic	and	Protestant	and	Hindu	and	Mohammedan.	And	slowly
slowly	he	will	leave	you	utterly	naked,	so	that	you	can	see	yourself	as	you	are	--
not	according	to	some	idea,	but	actually	as	you	are.	That	is	revelation.
That	can	happen	within	you.	You	need	not	go	anywhere.
KABIR	WILL	TELL	YOU	THE	TRUTH:	GO	WHEREVER	YOU
LIKE,	TO	CALCUTTA	OR	TIBET;
IF	YOU	CAN'T	FIND	WHERE	YOUR	SOUL	IS	HIDDEN,
FOR	YOU	THE	WORLD	WILL	NEVER	BE	REAL!
If	you	 live	 in	dreams,	your	world	will	 remain	nothing	but	dreams,	your	world
will	remain	unreal.
In	the	East,	the	Buddhas	have	always	called	the	world	MAYA	--	illusion,	a	magic
show;	 nothing	 real,	 nothing	 substantial	 in	 it.	 They	 don't	mean	 that	 these	 trees
around	 the	Buddha	Hall	are	unreal;	 they	don't	mean	 that	you	can	pass	 through
the	wall	because	the	wall	is	unreal;	they	don't	mean	that	whether	you	eat	stones
or	bread,	it	doesn't	matter	because	both	are	unreal.
What	they	mean	is	totally	different.	They	don't	mean	that	this	world	is	unreal	--
they	 simply	mean	 that	unless	you	drop	all	 your	dreams	you	will	 be	 creating	a
world	of	your	own,	you	will	be	projecting	a	world	of	your	own.	The	real	world
will	function	only	as	a	screen	and	you	will	project	your	dreams	on	it.	You	will
never	see	 the	real	world.	The	real	world	 is	God,	but	you	will	go	on	projecting
your	own	dreams,	and	you	will	live	in	maya,	in	illusion.
Mind	 is	 illusion,	not	 the	world.	Let	me	emphasize	 it,	 because	 it	 has	become	a
great	misunderstanding	around	the	world	that	the	East	teaches	that	the	world	is
illusory	 --	 that	 is	 a	 misunderstanding.	 The	 East	 teaches	 that	 the	 MIND	 IS
illusory,	 and	 the	world	 created	 by	 the	mind	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 illusory	 --	 because
only	an	illusion	can	come	out	of	another	illusion.
The	true	world	--	that	which	is	--	is	not	illusory.	But	you	have	not	known	it	yet;
you	have	no	inkling	of	it.	You	can	know	it	only	when	you	drop	all	dreaming.
It	 is	 said	 that	 when	 Rabbi	 Kotzker	 drove	 out	 of	 town	 with	 Rabbi	 Hirsh	 of
Tomashov,	they	came	to	a	bridge	where	several	women	began	to	throw	stones	at
them.
"Have	no	fear,"	said	Kotzker.	"They	are	not	real	women,	nor	are	their	stones	real.
They	are	mere	phantoms."
Rabbi	Hirsh	was	silent	 for	a	moment,	 then	asked,	 "Might	we	not	be	phantoms
too?"
"No,"	came	Kotzker's	answer,	"as	long	as	we	have	at	some	time	had	a	genuine
urge	to	repent."
The	word	 'repent'	 has	 to	 be	 understood;	 it	 has	 been	mis-understood	 down	 the
ages.
'Repent'	is	repeated	again	and	again	by	Jesus;	he	says	again	and	again,	"Repent!
Repent!
because	 the	 end	 of	 the	 world	 is	 close	 by."	 From	 the	 Greek,	 when	 Jesus
statements	were	translated	into	English,	a	great	misfortune	happened	--	to	many
words.	This	word	'repent'
is	one	that	has	suffered	the	most.	It	is	a	translation	of	a	Greek	word	'metanoia';
'metanoia'
means	 turning	 in,	 'metanoia'	 means	 meditation.	 'Repent'	 also	 means	 return	 --
return	 to	 the	 source.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 idea	 of	 repentance	 that	 you
have	 been	 taught	 in	 your	 churches,	 that	 your	 priests	 have	 been	 telling	 you.
'Repent'	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 repentance.	 'Repent'	 means:	 Turn	 in!	 Return
back!	Come	to	the	source	of	your	being!
Come	to	the	very	core	of	your	being!
And	Rabbi	 Kotzker's	 answer	 is	 immensely	 beautiful,	 of	 great	 value.	 He	 says,
"No	--	as	long	as	we	have	at	some	time	had	a	genuine	urge	to	repent."	If	we	have
even	a	genuine	urge	to	meditate,	for	metanoia,	for	turning	back	in,	then	we	are
real.	But	we	are	real	only	IN	meditation;	otherwise	we	are	also	unreal.	Because
in	meditation	dreaming	stops	--
that's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	stopping	of	 the	dreaming	mind.	No	dreams,
no	thoughts	--	a	total	silence.	Nothing	stirs.	Absolute	stillness.	Not	even	a	ripple.
No	content.
Pure	consciousness.	Just	the	mirror...	in	that	mirroring,	you	are	real	and	whatso-
ever	 you	 see	 is	 real.	 In	 fact,	 the	 seer	 and	 the	 seen	 are	 no	 more	 two:	 in	 that
tremendous	 moment,	 the	 observer	 is	 the	 observed,	 the	 seer	 is	 the	 seen,	 the
knower	 is	 the	 known.	 The	 distinction	 between	 the	 subject	 and	 the	 object
disappears.	That's	what	is	called	'God-realization'.
KABIR	WILL	TELL	YOU	THE	TRUTH:	GO	WHEREVER	YOU
LIKE,	TO	CALCUTTA	OR	TIBET;
IF	YOU	CAN'T	FIND	WHERE	YOUR	SOUL	IS	HIDDEN,
FOR	YOU	THE	WORLD	WILL	NEVER	BE	REAL!
Go	 in!	Turn	 in!	Find	out	who	you	 are!	And	you	have	 started	moving	 towards
God.
Moving	towards	one's	own	being	moving	towards	God.
I	 DON'T	 KNOW	 WHAT	 SORT	 OF	 A	 GOD	 WE	 HAVE	 BEEN	 TALKING
ABOUT.
KABIR	SAYS:	"People	go	on	talking	about	God,	but	I	DON'T	KNOW	WHAT
SORT
OF	A	GOD	WE	HAVE	BEEN	TALKING	ABOUT"	--	because	if	you	have	not
known	yourself,	all	talk	about	God	is	just	rot,	meaningless.	It	is	nonsense.
THE	CALLER	CALLS	IN	A	LOUD	VOICE	TO	THE	HOLY	ONE	AT	DUSK.
In	the	Mohammedan	mosque:
THE	CALLER	CALLS	IN	A	LOUD	VOICE	TO	THE	HOLY	ONE	AT	DUSK.
WHY?
SURELY	THE	HOLY	ONE	IS	NOT	DEAD.
We	 have	 created	 our	 own	 gods	 --	 rather	 than	 looking	 at	 the	 reality	 we	 have
imagined	our	own	gods,	we	have	dreamed	our	own	gods.	And	we	have	made	our
own	rituals.	Now,	calling	loudly	to	the	God	simply	means	your	God	is	deaf.	In
fact,	no	word	is	needed	between	you	and	your	God	--	loud	or	not	loud	--	no	word
is	 needed	 between	 you	 and	 your	 God,	 because	 God	 understands	 only	 one
language.	It	is	not	German,	it	is	not	English,	it	is	not	Hindi,	it	is	not	Sanskrit,	it	is
not	Arabic,	it	is	not	Greek.	God	understands	only	one	language:	the	language	of
silence.
WHY?	SURELY	THE	HOLY	ONE	IS	NOT	DEAF.
HE	HEARS	THE	DELICATE	ANKLETS	THAT	RING	ON	THE
FEET	OF	AN	INSECT	AS	IT	WALKS.
There	 is	no	need	 to	shout.	 In	 fact,	 real	prayer	 is	not	saying	something	 to	God,
but,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 listening	 to	 God,	 listening	 silently..."Does	 he	 have
something	 to	 say	 to	me?"	All	 the	 prayers	 that	 you	 go	 on	 doing	 are	 pointless.
Learn	 to	 listen	whether	God	has	something	 to	say	 to	you,	 learn	 to	 listen	 to	 the
still	 small	 voice	 within	 you.	 Stop	 talking.	 Stop	 the	 inner	 talk,	 the	 inner
chattering.	In	that	silence,	prayer	arises	on	its	own.
Prayer	is	a	silent	heart	full	of	gratitude.
GO	OVER	AND	OVER	YOUR	BEADS,	PAINT	WEIRD	DESIGNS
ON	YOUR	FOREHEAD,
WEAR	YOUR	HAIR	MATTED,	LONG,	AND	OSTENTATIOUS,
BUT	WHEN	DEEP	INSIDE	YOU	THERE	IS	A	LOADED	GUN,
HOW	CAN	YOU	HAVE	GOD?
You	can	go	on	doing	rituals,	but	 if	your	heart	 is	full	of	violence.	 if	you	have	a
loaded	gun	in	the	heart...	and	that's	what	the	case	is.	Mohammedans	have	been
fighting	with	Hindus.
Hindus	 have	 been	 fighting	 with	 Mohammedans;	 Christians	 have	 been	 killing
Mohammedans,	 Mohammedans	 have	 been	 killing	 Christians.	 Religions	 have
been	 a	 calamity	 to	 the	world,	 not	 a	 blessing,	 a	 curse,	 not	 a	 benediction.	More
people	 have	 been	 killed,	 butchered,	 murdered,	 raped,	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion
than	in	any	other	name.
This	is	very	strange!	Prayer	is	on	the	lips,	and	a	loaded	gun	in	the	heart.	Unless
your	inner	violence	disappears,	you	cannot	be	prayerful.
And	why	 is	 there	 inner	 violence?	 Because	 there	 is	 competition:	 everybody	 is
trying	to	outdo	others;	everybody	is	trying	to	go	ahead	of	others.	That's	what	you
have	been	taught:	to	be	ambitious.	Ambition	is	the	root	cause	of	all	violence,	and
ALL	your	education	is	that	of	ambition:	"Be	the	first!	Attain	to	the	gold	medal!"
And	 then	 your	whole	 life	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 be	 the	 first,	 to	 become	 the	 prime
minister	or	the	president.
We	teach	people	ambition,	competition.	And	when	you	are	ambitious,	how	can
you	be	prayerful?	And	when	you	are	ambitious,	how	can	you	turn	in?	Ambition
has	to	be	fulfilled	there,	outside	--	in	New	Delhi,	in	Washington,	in	Moscow	--
somewhere	there....
These	are	the	new	holy	places.
The	 ambitious	 person	 cannot	 turn	 in;	 it	 is	 impossible.	 The	 competitive	 person
cannot	turn	in;	he	is	always	looking	at	the	other,	he	is	always	at	war.	How	can	he
be	loving?	How	can	he	be	meditative?
Kabir	is	right.	He	says,	"You	go	on	talking	about	God,	great	theology	is	created,
great	philosophical	 argument	 continues	 --	 and	 in	 the	heart	 a	 loaded	gun?"	The
real	 question	 is	 a	 transformation	 in	 the	 heart.	 But	 up	 to	 now	 that	 has	 not
happened.
A	very	proper	 old	 lady	bought	 a	 parakeet	which	was	guaranteed	 to	 be	 able	 to
speak,	 but	 all	 she	 could	 say	 was,	 "I	 am	 a	 whore,	 I	 am	 a	 whore!"	 very
enthusiastically,	while	flapping	her	wings.	The	very	proper	woman	complained
to	 her	minister,	who	 told	 her	 of	 a	 couple	 in	 his	 congregation	who	 owned	 two
male	 parakeets	 who	 behaved	 very	 properly	 and	 could	 perhaps	 influence	 the
woman's	parakeet.
The	minister	borrowed	the	couple's	male	parakeets	and	lent	them	to	the	woman.
She	put	them	in	the	cage	and	they	settled	together	on	a	perch	opposite	that	of	the
woman's	 parakeet.	 Very	 soon	 they	 lowered	 their	 heads	 and	 engaged	 in	 a
beautiful,	low-voiced	prayer.	The	female	parakeet	flapped	her	wings	and	sang,	"I
am	a	whore,	I	am	a	whore!"
Whereupon	 one	male	 parakeet	 nudged	 the	 other	with	 his	wing	 and	 said,	 "Our
prayers	have	been	heard!"
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Feel,	Love	and	Feel	Alone
12	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904120
ShortTitle:
FISH02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
104
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	SPEAK	A	LITTLE	ON	WITNESSING	AND
THE
HEART.	CAN	THEY	BE	EXPERIENCED	SIMULTANEOUSLY?
Deva	Darshan,
WITNESSING	 AND	 THE	 HEART	 ARE	 ONE	 AND	 THE	 same	 thing.
Witnessing	 is	 not	 of	 the	mind;	 mind	 can	 never	 be	 a	 witness.	When	 you	 start
witnessing,	mind	becomes	 the	witnessed	not	 the	witness,	 it	 is	 the	observed	not
the	observer.	You	see	your	 thoughts	moving,	your	desires,	your	 fantasies,	your
memories,	your	dreams	--	just	as	you	see	things	moving	on	the	screen	of	a	film.
But	you	are	not	identified	with	them.
That	non-identification	is	what	is	meant	by	witnessing.	Then	who	is	the	witness?
Mind	is	being	seen,	then	who	is	the	seer?	It	is	the	heart.
So	 the	 heart	 and	 witnessing	 are	 not	 two	 things.	 If	 you	 witness,	 you	 will	 be
centered	 in	 the	 heart;	 or	 if	 you	 are	 centered	 in	 the	 heart,	 you	 will	 become	 a
witness.	These	are	two	processes	to	reach	the	same	goal.	The	lover,	the	devotee,
never	 thinks	of	witnessing;	he	simply	tries	 to	reach	the	heart,	 the	source	of	his
being.	Once	he	has	reached	the	heart,	witnessing	comes	of	its	own	accord.
The	meditator	 never	 thinks	 of	 love	 and	 the	 heart;	 he	 starts	 by	witnessing.	But
once	witnessing	 is	 there,	 the	heart	opens,	because	 there	 is	no	other	place	 from
where	 to	 witness:	 The	 path	 of	 the	 meditator	 and	 the	 path	 of	 the	 devotee	 are
different,	but	they	culminate	in	one	experience.	At	the	ultimate	point	they	reach
the	same	peak.
You	can	choose	the	path,	but	you	cannot	choose	the	goal	--	because	there	are	not
two	goals,	there	is	only	one	goal.	Of	course,	if	you	have	followed	the	path	of	a
devotee,	you	will	not	talk	of	witnessing	when	you	have	arrived	--	you	will	talk	of
love.	If	you	have	followed	the	path	of	meditation	you	will	not	talk	of	love	when
you	have	arrived	--	you	will	talk	of	witnessing.	The	difference	is	only	of	words,
language,	expression	--	but	that	which	is	expressed	is	one	and	the	same	reality.
The	second	question:
Question	2
OSHO,	HOW	TO	SEE	WHAT	IS?
Akam,
THERE	IS	NO	HOW	TO	SEE	WHAT	IS,	because	if	you	are	carrying	a	how	you
will	distort	it.	That	which	is	needs	no	method,	technique,	to	see	it	--	just	silence,
a	transparent	stillness,	no	thought	in	the	mind,	not	even	the	thought	of	a	certain
method.	No	strategy,	because	all	strategies	are	bound	to	distort.
In	 fact,	 no	mind	 is	 needed	 to	 see	 that	which	 is.	Mind	means	 thoughts.	And	 if
there	is	a	traffic	of	thoughts,	you	will	never	be	able	to	see	what	is,	you	will	see
something	else.
You	will	see	what	your	thoughts	allow	you	to	see.	Your	thoughts	prevent	much
reaching	you.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 what	 modern	 psychological	 researchers	 have
come	to	know:	ninety-eight	percent	of	the	reality	is	not	allowed	to	enter	in	your
being;	 the	mind	 only	 allows	 two	 percent.	 So	whatsoever	 you	 see	 is	 only	 two
percent	 of	 the	 reality.	 And	 because	 the	 mind	 allows	 only	 two	 percent	 of	 the
reality	in	and	then	gives	you	the	feeling	that	this	is	the	whole,	you	live	in	a	false
world.	You	think	the	part	is	the	whole.	And	you	live	accordingly	--	your	whole
life	becomes	a	falsification.
The	mind	is	a	judge;	it	allows	only	that	which	suits	it,	which	fits	with	it,	which
nourishes	 it,	 strengthens	 it.	 It	does	not	allow	anything	 that	goes	against	 it.	For
example,	you	are	listening	to	me:	your	mind	will	allow	only	that	which	helps	to
strengthen	your	opinions,	your	 ideologies.	If	you	are	a	Christian,	you	will	hear
one	thing;	and	if	you	are	a	Buddhist,	you	will	hear	something	totally	different.	If
you	 have	 come	 here	 with	 a	 prejudice,	 for	 or	 against,	 you	 will	 hear	 different
things.	 I	 am	saying	 the	 same	 thing,	but	 a	Christian	will	 interpret	 it	 in	his	own
way	and	the	Buddhist	in	his	own	way	and	the	communist	in	his	own	way.
One	who	 has	 come	with	 a	 determined	 idea	 that	 I	 am	wrong	will	 find	 all	 the
arguments	that	help	his	prejudice.	Each	prejudice	tries	to	get	support	for	itself	So
if	you	think	any	methodology	is	needed	to	see	that	which	is,	then	you	are	starting
from	the	very	beginning	in	a	wrong	way.
That	which	 is	 is	 already	 there	 --	 you	be	 silent,	without	 any	prejudice,	without
any	 ideology,	 atheist,	 theist,	 without	 any	 concept,	 without	 any	 a	 priori.	 You
simply	remain	available,	open,	 like	a	child	who	knows	nothing.	Function	from
the	state	of	not	knowing	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	what	is.
Let	me	 repeat:	 function	 from	 the	 state	 of	 not	 knowing.	 If	 you	 know	 you	will
distort	--
knowledge	 is	 mind.	 The	 state	 of	 not	 knowing	 means	 you	 have	 put	 the	 mind
aside;	now	your	eyes	are	without	dust,	your	mirror	is	clean.	It	will	reflect!	It	will
reflect	that	which	is.
This	is	the	way	one	comes	to	encounter	reality	--	and	the	encounter	is	going	to
be	shattering.	It	 is	not	going	to	help	your	 ideas	about	 it.	 It	will	destroy	all	 that
you	have	been	always	thinking	is	right.	It	is	going	to	surprise	you.	It	is	going	to
show	you	that	you	have	lived	up	to	now	in	a	dream,	 that	you	have	lived	up	to
now	in	your	own	projections,	that	you	have	not	allowed	reality	to	penetrate	you	-
-	on	 the	contrary,	you	have	created	a	world	of	your	own	ideas	around	yourself
You	have	lived	in	a	capsule,	without	any	windows.
That's	how	people	are	living.
A	Christian	cannot	know	reality,	a	Hindu	cannot	know	reality,	a	Mohammedan
cannot	 know	 reality.	 Only	 a	 man	 who	 is	 courageous	 enough	 to	 drop	 all	 this
garbage,	who	 can	 simply	 be,	who	 can	 simply	 be	 innocent....	 Jesus	 says	 to	 his
disciples,	 "Unless	 you	 are	 like	 small	 children	 you	 will	 not	 enter	 into	 my
kingdom	of	God."	He	is	saying:	Function	from	the	state	of	not	knowing.
The	Upanishads	say:	Those	who	claim	 to	know,	beware	 --	 they	know	nothing.
Those	who	say	they	know	not,	surrender	to	them	--	because	there	is	a	possibility
of	some	transformation	happening	around	them,	with	them,	in	communion	with
them.
Socrates	 at	 his	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 wisdom	 said,	 "I	 know	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 I
know	nothing."
Function	from	the	state	of	not	knowing,	and	it	will	bring	you	immense,	ecstatic
experiences,	 because	 the	 person	 who	 is	 without	 knowledge	 is	 capable	 of
wondering.	 The	 person	 who	 is	 without	 knowledge	 is	 capable	 of	 awe.	 He	 can
dance	seeing	a	rose	flower,	he	can	sing	because	the	sky	is	full	of	stars.	He	can	be
in	tune	with	existence.	Seeing	a	sunset,	he	can	go	into	wild	ecstasy	--	because	he
knows	nothing.	Life	is	a	mystery	to	him.
Knowledge	 demystifies	 life.	 Because	 he	 knows	 nothing,	 everything,	 the	 most
ordinary	too,	becomes	absolutely	extraordinary,	luminous,	because	everything	is
mysterious.
Everything	 Is	 mysterious!	 Your	 knowledge	 simply	 hides	 your	 ignorance	 and
destroys	your	capacity	to	be	mystified.	Knowledge	is	destructive	of	mysticism.
Hence	 all	 the	mystics	of	 all	 the	 ages	have	been	 saying	one	 single	 thing:	Drop
knowledge	 --	 all	knowledge	 is	 rubbish.	Be	 in	a	 state	of	not	knowing;	 function
from	that	state.	Look	at	trees	like	a	child,	look	at	the	moon	like	a	poet,	look	at
the	sky	like	a	madman!
Akam,	don't	ask	HOW	to	see	what	is,	because	that	question	'how?'	simply	means
you	want	 some	methodology,	 some	knowledge,	 some	 information,	 so	 that	 you
can	 interpret	 reality.	But	 reality	 is	uninterpretable.	You	want	something	so	 that
you	can	 explain	 to	yourself	what	 it	 is	 all	 about	 --	 but	 reality	 is	 unexplainable.
You	would	like	to	define	reality,	but	it	is	indefinable.
Be	ready	to	be	surprised.	I	have	heard:
Michelangelo	was	painting	the	ceiling	of	the	Sistine	Chapel.	He	was	getting	tired
of	 lying	 on	 his	 back	 and	 in	 rolling	 over	 noticed	 that	 an	 Italian	 woman	 was
praying	down	in	the	chapel.	The	great	artist	decided	to	play	a	little	prank.
He	sat	 at	 the	edge	of	 the	 scaffold	and	shouted,	 "I	 am	Jesus	Christ!	 I	 am	Jesus
Christ!
Listen	to	me	and	I	will	perform	miracles!"
The	 Italian	 lady	 looked	up,	 clasping	 her	 rosary	 and	 answered	 back,	 "Shut	 upa
your	mouth!	I'ma	talka	to	your	mother!"
Just	think	of	Michelangelo....	Life	is	like	that.	It	brings	surprises	each	moment.
You	go	on	missing	--	you	go	on	missing	because	you	can't	see	those	surprises.
You	are	so	full	of	expectations,	you	are	so	full	of	ready-made	answers,	you	go	on
interpreting	 it	 according	 to	 your	 own	 mind.	 You	 pass	 through	 a	 miraculous
world,	dull,	dead,	dragging.	This	world	is	nothing	but	miracles	and	miracles,	and
each	 moment	 they	 are	 happening.	 And	 not	 in	 a	 miserly	 way	 is	 the	 existence
miraculous	--	 it	 is	overflowing	with	miracles!	But	you	have	to	be	again	a	 little
child,	you	have	to	be	again	innocent.
It	 is	not	a	question	of	method,	not	a	question	of	how.	 It	 is	more	a	question	of
understanding	the	very	process	of	how	the	mind	functions.	And	when	you	have
understood	how	the	mind	functions,	you	will	put	it	aside.	Then	there	is	no	barrier
between	 you	 and	 reality.	 And	when	 there	 is	 no	 barrier,	 there	 is	 no	 separation
either	--
because	it	is	the	barrier	that	separates.	When	there	is	no	barrier,	you	are	one	with
reality.
In	that	oneness,	the	reality	reveals	its	secrets	to	you.
The	third	question:
Question	3
OSHO,	DO	I	HAVE	TO	FORGET	MYSELF	TO	LOSE	MY	EGO?
Eva,
IT	IS	NOT	A	QUESTION	OF	FORGETTING	YOURSELF	--	on	the	contrary,	it
is	a	question	of	remembering	yourself.What	is	the	ego?	Ego	exists	because	you
have	forgotten	yourself,	because	you	don't	remember	who	you	are.	And	it	is	very
difficult	to	live	without	SOME	idea	of	who	you	are.	Not	knowing	the	reality	of
your	being,	you	have	to	create	a	false	substitute.
What	is	the	ego?	Ego	is	the	false	substitute	that	you	have	created	for	the	self.	It
is	not	your	self,	but	it	is	very	difficult	to	live	without	a	self	--	it	will	be	almost
impossible	 to	 live	 without	 a	 self	 some	 kind	 of	 self	 is	 needed,	 is	 a	 must;
otherwise,	how	will	you	keep	yourself	together?	You	will	start	falling	apart.
Even	 if	 the	center	 is	 false,	 it	helps	you.	Even	a	 false	center	keeps	you	at	 least
somehow	together.	You	have	forgotten	yourself	--	hence	you	need	the	ego.
If	you	remember	yourself,	there	will	be	no	need	for	the	ego.
You	ask,	Eva:	DO	I	HAVE	TO	FORGET	MYSELF	TO	LOSE	MY	EGO?
Ego	is	not	anything	real	that	you	have	to	lose	or	you	can	lose	--	you	don't	have	it
in	the	first	place.	It	is	just	an	idea,	a	shadow;	it	is	non-existential.	It	is	like	your
name:	when	you	were	born,	you	did	not	come	with	a	name.	Then	somebody	--
your	mother,	your	father,	your	family	--	started	calling	you	'Eva'.	Some	name	is
needed	to	call	you	by;	it	is	utilitarian.
Your	 name	 is	 the	 first	 name	 that	 was	 ever	 given.When	 Haavva	 was	 created
because	man	was	alone,	Adam	was	alone,	and	was	very	much	depressed	because
of	the	loneliness...
the	 whole	 existence	 and	 Adam	 was	 lonely.	 He	 asked	 God	 to	 give	 him	 a
companion,	and	God	created	a	woman.	God	asked	Adam,'	What	are	you	going	to
call	 her?What	 name	would	you	 like	 to	 give	her?"	And	he	was	 so	 ecstatic	 that
now	at	least	there	was	somebody	with	whom	he	could	be	friendly,	with	whom	he
could	be	loving,	with	whom	he	could	talk,	communicate,	with	whom	there	was	a
possibility	of	relating.	He	was	no	more	alone!
--	he	was	so	ecstatic	that	he	said	he	would	call	this	creature	'Eve',	'Eva',	'Haavva'.
"Why?"	God	asked.
And	 Adam	 said,	 "Because	 Eve,	 Eva	 or	 Haavva	 means	 life	 --	 she	 is	 my	 life.
Without	her	I	was	almost	dead."
But	when	Eve	was	created,	there	was	no	name.	A	name	was	given	to	her	because
Adam	would	need	 it.	Sometimes	he	would	have	 to	call	her:	 "Where	are	you?"
Sometimes	the	name	would	be	needed	--	but	a	name	is	a	false	thing,	it	is	just	a
label.	We	give	names	to	people	just	to	make	it	helpful	to	commune,	to	relate,	to
call,	to	address.	But	names	are	not	real!	You	need	not	drop	them,	and	even	if	you
drop	them	nothing	will	be	dropped.
You	can	drop	this	name	 'Eva'	 --	nothing	will	be	dropped.	Simply	an	idea!	And
you	are	no	more	attached	to	it.	In	exactly	the	same	way:	the	name	is	for	others	to
call	you	by,	but	you	need	something	to	call	yourself	by	too	--	that's	what	the	ego
is:	I.
If	you	want	to	say	something	about	yourself,	you	need	some	word	--	that	word	is
'I'.
Names	 are	 for	 others	 to	 call	 you	by;	 the	 ego	 is	 for	 you	 to	 call	 yourself	 by,	 to
address	yourself.	It	is	also	false,	it	does	not	exist.	You	need	not	lose	it.	All	that	is
needed	 is	 to	 understand	 it	 --	why	 this	 'I'	 has	 become	 so	 important,	why	 it	 has
become	 so	 significant,	 so	 central,	 so	 substantial.	 A	 shadow	 has	 become	 so
substantial	--	why?	Because	you	don't	know	yom	real	self
When	Jesus	says	'I',	he	does	not	mean	the	same	'I'.When	he	says,	"I	am	the	gate,
I	am	 the	 truth,	 I	am	 the	way,"	his	 'I'	does	not	connote	any	ego.	When	Krishna
says	to	Arjuna,
"Come	to	my	feet,	surrender	to	me,"	his	'me'	is	not	the	same	as	your	'me'.
Buddha	 used	 to	 say	 to	 his	 disciples,	 "Be	 a	 light	 unto	 yoursel."	A	 great	 King,
Prasenjit,	 had	 come	 to	 see	 him.	 And	 he	 saw	 many	 sannyasins	 coming	 and
bowing	to	Bud&a,	and	saying:	"BUDDHAM	SHARNAM	GACHCHHAMI	--	I
go	to	the	feet	of	the	Buddha.
SANGHAM	SHARNAM	GACHCHHAMI	--	I	go	to	the	feet	of	the	community
of	 the	Buddhas.	DHAMMAM	SHARNAM	GACHCHHAMI	--	I	go	to	the	feet
of	 the	 ultimate	 law,	 the	 ultimate	 law	 that	 supports	 existence,	 that	 runs	 like	 a
thread	and	makes	the	existence	a	garland."
Prasenjit	 was	 a	man	 of	 logic,	well-educated,	 sophisticated.	He	was	 a	 little	 bit
puzzled.	He	asked	Bud&a,	 "Excuse	me,	Sir,	but	you	say	 to	people,	 'Be	a	 light
unto	yourself,'	and	 then	 they	surrender	 to	you,	and	 they	 touch	your	 feet	 --	you
don't	prevent	them.	This	is	illogical,	this	is	contradictory.	If	you	say	'Be	a	light
unto	 yourself,'	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 surrender	 to	 anybody	 else.	 Then	why
should	they	touch	your	feet?"
And	 Buddha	 laughed	 and	 he	 said,	 "They	 are	 not	 my	 feet,	 and	 they	 are	 not
surrendering	 to	ME	 --	 because	 there	 is	 nobody	 inside	me	 as	 the	 ego	who	 can
claim.	I	am	just	an	excuse	--
they	are	surrendering.	It	is	not	a	surrender	to	me;	it	is	simply	a	surrender	--	I	am
just	 an	 excuse.	 Because	 they	 are	 not	 yet	 capable	 of	 surrendering	without	 any
excuse,	I	allow	them	to	use	me	as	an	excuse.	But	there	is	nobody	to	whom	they
are	surrendering."
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	a	Buddha:	one	who	is	not;	in	the	sense	of	an	ego,
one	who	is	not.	But	as	hr	as	 the	supreme	self	 is	concerned,	 the	ultimate	self	 is
concerned,	he	is	and	you	are	not.	The	ego	is	a	false	idea,	and	it	is	needed	because
the	real	self	is	unknown.
Eva,	you	need	not	forget	yourself	to	lose	the	ego	--	in	fact,	that's	how	you	have
gained	it.
You	 need	 to	 remember	 yourself,	 not	 to	 forget	 but	 to	 remember.	 You	 have	 to
become	more	aware	and	alert,	you	have	to	wake	up.	You	have	to	see	who	you
are,	not	what	has	been	told	to	you	--	that	you	are	a	woman,	that	you	are	a	man,
that	you	are	a	Hindu,	a	Christian,	a	white	or	a	black	--	not	what	has	been	told	to
you.
You	will	have	 to	go	 inside	your	being	 to	 the	very	 innermost	core	and	see	who
you	are.	In	that	very	seeing,	in	that	very	remembering,	the	ego	disappears.When
the	light	comes,	the	darkness	disappears;	when	the	real	self	is	remembered,	the
unreal	is	no	more	needed.	And	it	is	not	that	you	have	to	drop	it:	it	is	simply	not
found.
But	we	live	in	the	ego,	and	in	every	possible	way	we	go	on	finding	new	props
for	it.	In	every	act	we	go	on	nourishing	it	--	even	in	those	actions	of	which	you
are	 not	 the	 doer	 you	 go	 on	 claiming	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 it.	 People	 say,	 "I	 am
breathing."	 Just	 look	 at	 the	 absurdity	 of	 it.	 If	 you	 are	 breathing	 then	 you	will
never	 die;	 death	 will	 come	 and	 stand	 in	 front	 of	 you	 and	 you	 will	 go	 on
breathing.	 You	 may	 not	 oblige	 death;	 you	 may	 say,	 "I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 stop
breathing."
You	are	not	breathing;	breathing	is	not	your	activity,	it	is	not	your	doing	--	it	IS
happening.	You	cannot	breathe.	If	it	stops,	it	stops.	If	the	next	breath	is	not	going
to	come	back,	you	will	not	be	able	to	do	anything.	Breathing	is	a	happening,	but
man	has	made	it,	or	at	least	believes	it	to	be,	a	doing.
You	 say,	 "I	 love."	 Even	 the	 expression	 'love-making'	 is	 utter	 nonsense.	 You
cannot	love;	you	cannot	not	love.	Love	is	a	happening,	not	a	doing.What	can	you
do	about	love?
Either	it	happens	or	it	doesn't	happen.	If	you	try,	then	it	will	be	something	false,
then	it	will	not	be	love	at	all	--	then	it	will	only	be	acting.
If	you	are	ordered	to	love	a	woman	or	a	man,	what	are	you	going	to	do?	You	will
go	 through	 empty	 gestures:	 you	 will	 hug	 and	 you	 will	 kiss	 and	 you	 will	 go
through	 all	 the	 movements,	 and	 with	 no	 love	 at	 all.	 The	 whole	 thing	 will	 be
mechanical!	And	 that's	what	 is	going	on,	what	goes	on	around	 the	world.	The
wife	has	to	love	the	husband,	the	husband	has	to	love	the	wife	--	it	is	a	kind	of
duty	to	be	fulfilled.	It	becomes	a	performance,	acting.	It	 is	not	real,	hence	it	 is
not	satisfying,	it	brings	no	contentment,	no	fulfillment.
The	 ego	 is	 very	 cunning	 in	 that	way:	 it	 goes	 on	 finding	 supports,	 props,	 new
pastures	to	feed	itself	on.	If	you	fail,	you	blame	circumstances.	If	you	succeed,	it
is	 you	 who	 have	 succeeded.	 If	 you	 fail	 it	 is	 fate,	 kismet;	 if	 you	 fail	 it	 is	 the
society,	 the	 ugly	 society.	 If	 you	 fail,	 it	 is	 the	 cunning	 people,	 the	 cunning
competitors.	But	if	you	succeed,	you	succeed.
A	great	Sufi	story:
Mulla	Nasruddin	took	his	disciples	to	an	exhibition.	Many	things	were	going	on
at	 the	exhibition.	At	one	place	people	were	staking	much	money	and	 trying	 to
shoot	arrows	to	reach	a	certain	target.	Mulla	gathered	his	disciples	and	he	said,
"Come,	 and	 I	will	 show	you	 something."	That	 is	 the	Sufi	way	of	 teaching	 the
disciples.	 He	 took	 the	 bow	 and	 the	 arrow	 --	 a	 great	 crowd	 gathered:	 "A	 Sufi
Master	with	his	disciples	 --	 something	 is	going	on!"	People	were	very	 silently
watching.	With	 great	 show,	Mulla	 shot	 the	 arrow...	 it	 fell	 very	 short,	 it	 never
reached	the	target.	The	crowd	started	laughing.	Mulla	said,	"Stop!
Don't	 be	 foolish."	 He	 turned	 to	 his	 disciples	 and	 said,	 "Look,	 this	 is	 what
happens	when	you	live	with	an	inferiority	complex.	This	is	how	the	person	who
suffers	from	an	inferiority	complex	will	act	--	he	will	never	reach	the	target;	he
will	fall	short.	His	whole	heart	is	not	in	it."
The	crowd	became	silent:	"Yes,	there	is	a	lesson	in	it."
Next	arrow...	and	it	simply	went	far	ahead,	it	left	the	target	behind.	That	was	also
a	failure;	the	crowd	started	laughing	again.	And	Mulla	said,	"Be	silent!	You	don't
understand	these	secrets."	He	turned	to	his	disciples	and	said,	"Look,	this	is	how
a	man	who	thinks	himself	very	superior	behaves.	He	will	never	reach	the	target.
He	runs	so	fast	that	he	will	bypass	the	goal,	and	he	will	not	stop	at	the	goal.	He
is	too	confident.	He	is	also	unbalanced."
The	crowd	again	became	silent:	"Yes,	there	is	a	lesson."
And	Mulla	tried	the	third	time...	and	the	arrow	went	directly	into	the	target.	Now
the	 crowd	 was	 silent	 and	 waiting	 for	 what	 Mulla	 was	 going	 to	 teach	 to	 his
disciples.
He	went	to	the	owner	and	demanded	the	money.	The	owner	said,	"Why?"
He	 said,	 "This	 is	me!	 The	 first	 was	 the	 arrow	 of	 a	man	who	 suffers	 from	 an
inferiority	 complex;	 the	 second	 the	 arrow	 of	 the	 man	 who	 suffers	 from	 a
superiority	 complex	 --	 and	 this	 is	 Mulla	 Nasruddin's	 arrow.	 Where	 is	 the
money?"
This	is	what	we	go	on	doing.	In	each	situation,	watch.When	you	fail,	it	is	God,	it
is	fate,	 it	 is	society,	circumstances...	a	thousand	and	one	names.	But	the	simple
phenomenon	is	that	you	don't	want	to	take	the	responsibility	because	it	hurts	the
ego.	But	when	you	succeed,	it	is	always	you	--	it	is	never	God,	never	fate,	never
circumstances,	never	your	cunning	strategies,	no.	It	is	simply	you,	your	talents,
your	genius,	your	intelligence.	It	is	always	you	when	you	succeed.
Watch	the	ego,	and	don't	feed	it.	It	dies	if	you	don't	feed	it.	If	you	stop	feeding	it,
it	starves	to	death.
Mrs.	Cochrane	was	 standing	 beside	 the	 coffin	 of	 her	 dead	 husband.	Their	 son
stood	at	her	elbow.	The	mourners,	one	by	one,	passed	in	review.
"He	is	feeling	no	pain	now,"	said	Mrs.	Croy.	"What	did	he	die	of?"
"Poor	fella,"	said	Mrs.	Cochrane.	"He	died	of	the	gonorrhoea."
Another	woman	gazed	at	the	corpse.	"He	is	well	out	of	it	now,"	she	said.	"He	has
got	a	smile	of	serenity	on	his	face.	What	did	he	die	from?"
"He	died	of	the	gonorrhoea!"	said	the	widow.
Suddenly,	 the	 son	 pulled	 his	 mother	 aside.	 "Mom,"	 he	 said,	 "that's	 a	 terrible
thing	to	say	about	Pop.	He	did	not	die	of	gonorrhoea	--	he	died	of	diarrhoea!"
"I	know	 that,"	 said	Mrs.	Cochrane,	 "but	 I	would	 rather	have	 them	 thinking	he
died	like	a	sport	--	instead	of	the	shit	that	he	was!"
The	ego	is	constantly	there,	in	every	situation	--	it	will	not	miss	any	situation	to
feed	itself,	to	strengthen	itself.	Stop	feeding	the	ego	--	that	is	the	first	thing	to	do.
And	 the	 second	 thing	 is:	 become	more	 aware.	Walking,	walk	with	 awareness;
listening,	 listen	 with	 total	 awareness	 --	 not	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 sleep,	 not	 so-so,	 not
lukewarm.	 Talking,	 talk	 with	 awareness.Whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing,	 let	 your
whole	life	be	coloured	by	awareness.
And	slowly	slowly	that	awareness	will	bring	you	a	vision	of	your	real	self.
So	this	is	a	double	attack	on	the	ego.	First,	don't	feed	it;	second,	become	more
aware	--	so	the	ego	disappears	by	starvation	and	the	self	appears	by	being	aware.
And	once	the	clouds	of	ego	are	no	more	there,	the	self	rises	like	a	sun.	And	that
self	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	'I'.	Still	the	word	will	be	used.	I	use	it,	Jesus	uses
it,	Buddha	uses	it	--	it	has	to	be	used,	but	now	it	has	a	totally	different	meaning.
On	 the	 lips	 of	 a	 Buddha	 or	 a	 Krishna	 or	 a	 Christ	 it	 has	 a	 totally	 different
connotation.
When	the	being	is	 transformed,	everything	is	 transformed	--	even	the	language
that	is	uttered	by	a	Buddha	has	a	totally	different	meaning.	His	words	can't	have
the	same	meaning.	It	is	impossible!	because	now	a	new	light	has	happened,	and
in	that	new	light	everything	becomes	new.
You	live	in	darkness,	you	stumble	in	darkness,	you	grope	in	darkness.	The	man
of	awareness	lives	in	light.	He	never	stumbles,	he	never	gropes.	He	moves	with
grace,	he	has	a	totally	different	quality	of	being,	life,	love.
Do	two	things,	Eva:	first,	don't	feed	the	ego	any	more	--	enough	is	enough	--	and
second,	become	more	aware.	This	is	a	double	attack,	from	two	sides.	It	always
succeeds;	it	has	never	failed.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 NEVER	 BEFORE	 HAVE	 I	 FELT	 SO	 MUCH	 LOVE	 AND	 NEVER
BEFORE
SO	ALONE.	THANK	YOU,	OSHO...
Prem	Turiya,
IT	IS	SOMETHING	VERY	DEEP	TO	BE	UNDERSTOOD,	something	of	great
significance.	Love	always	brings	aloneness.	Aloneness	always	brings	love.	They
are	never	separate.
People	think	just	the	opposite.	People	think,	"When	you	are	in	love,	how	can	you
be	alone?"	They	don't	make	any	distinction	between	two	words:	loneliness	and
aloneness.
Hence	the	confusion.
When	you	are	 in	 love,	you	cannot	be	 lonely;	 that	 is	 true.	But	when	you	are	 in
love,	you	are	bound	to	be	alone	--	that	is	even	far	truer.	Loneliness	is	a	negative
state.	Loneliness	means	you	are	hankering	for	 the	other.	Loneliness	means	you
are	dark,	dismal,	in	despair.
Loneliness	 means	 you	 are	 frightened.	 Loneliness	 means	 you	 are	 feeling	 left
behind.
Loneliness	means	nobody	needs	you.	It	hurts.	Loneliness	is	like	a	wound.
Aloneness	is	like	a	flower.	I	know	your	dictionaries	will	say	that	loneliness	and
aloneness	 are	 synonyms	 --	 they	are	not.	They	are	 totally	different	phenomena.
Loneliness	 is	 a	 wound	 and	 can	 turn	 into	 a	 cancer.	Many	 more	 people	 die	 of
loneliness	 than	 of	 any	 other	 disease.	 The	 world	 is	 full	 of	 lonely	 people,	 and
because	 of	 their	 loneliness	 they	 go	 on	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 things	 to
somehow	stuff	that	wound,	that	hollowness,	that	emptiness,	that	negativity.
The	 lonely	 person	 starts	 eating	 too	much,	 just	 to	 feel	 full.	 The	 lonely	 person
starts	gathering	fat.	The	lonely	person	starts	taking	alcohol	or	other	drugs,	from
soma	to	LSD	--
because	 he	 wants	 to	 forget	 himself	 The	 loneliness	 is	 so	 ugly,	 so	 scary,	 so
deathlike	that	one	wants	to	escape	from	it.	The	lonely	person	sits	before	his	TV
glued	to	 the	chair	for	four,	 five,	even	six	hours.	The	average	American	sits	for
six	hours	before	the	TV	--	just	burning	his	eyes.	But	what	else	to	do?	Where	to
go?	With	whom	to	commune?
Communication	has	 stopped.	People	 are	 not	 talking	 to	 each	other;	 at	 the	most
they	talk	at	the	other,	but	not	to	the	other.	People	have	forgotten	how	to	reach	the
other;	 people	 have	 become	 parallel	 lines,	 running	 very	 close	 but	 meeting
nowhere.	 Even	 husbands	 and	 wives,	 even	 friends,	 even	 so-called	 lovers,	 are
parallel	lines	never	meeting	anywhere.
Running	very	close,	hoping	that	 tomorrow	the	meeting	will	happen,	but	 that	 is
just	a	hope,	that	is	just	an	illusion.	That	keeps	people	somehow	going	on.
It	 is	 like	 if	you	go	 to	 the	rail-track	and	you	see	 the	rails	 running	parallel	 --	 far
away	in	the	distance	they	appear	to	be	meeting,	but	they	never	meet.	You	can	go
to	 that	 place	 and	 you	 will	 not	 find	 them	 meeting.	 As	 you	 move	 closer,	 the
meeting-point	 will	 move	 farther	 away.	 The	 distance	 between	 you	 and	 the	 so-
called	meeting-point	will	remain	the	same.
The	world	is	very	lonely;	hence	people	go	into	drugs	or	into	sex,	or	into	any	kind
of	 entertainment	 that	 keeps	 them,	 at	 least	 for	 the	 time	 being,	 forgetful	 of	 the
loneliness.	The	wound	is	oozing	with	pus.	We	hide	it	in	many	ways	--	with	great
possessions,	with	a	big	palace,	with	much	money,	with	new	gadgets	 --	but	 the
wound	continues,	gadgets	won't	hide	 it.	You	can	have	 the	biggest	house	 in	 the
world	and	still	you	will	be	as	lonely	in	it	as	you	were	in	your	small	cottage.	It	is
not	 going	 to	 make	 any	 difference	 --	 possessions	 cannot	 change	 your	 inner
loneliness.
And	 then	 people	 go	 on	 relating	with	 others,	 but	 because	 they	 are	 both	 lonely
relationship	 is	not	possible;	 relationship	cannot	grow	out	of	need.	Relationship
grows	 only	 out	 of	 overflowing	 energies,	 never	 out	 of	 needs.	 If	 one	 person	 is
needy	 and	 the	 other	 is	 also	 needy,	 then	 both	will	 try	 to	 exploit	 the	 other.	 The
relationship	will	be	 that	of	exploitation,	not	of	 love,	not	of	compassion.	 It	will
not	be	of	friendship.	It	will	be	a	kind	of	enmity	--
very	 bitter,	 but	 sugar-coated.	And	 sooner	 or	 later,	 the	 sugar	wears	 out;	 by	 the
time	the	honeymoon	is	over	the	sugar	is	gone	and	all	is	bitter.	And	now	they	are
caught.	First	 they	used	 to	be	 lonely	separately,	now	they	are	 lonely	 together	 --
which	hurts	even	more.	Just	see	a	husband	and	a	wife	sitting	in	the	room,	both
lonely.	On	the	surface	together,	deep	down	lonely.	The	husband	lost	in	his	own
loneliness,	the	wife	lost	in	her	own	loneliness.
The	saddest	thing	in	the	world	is	to	see	two	lovers,	a	couple,	and	both	lonely	--
the	saddest	thing	in	the	world!
Aloneness	 is	 totally	 different.	Aloneness	 is	 a	 flower,	 a	 lotus	 blooming	 in	 your
heart.
Aloneness	is	positive,	aloneness	is	health.	It	is	the	joy	of	being	yourself.	It	is	the
joy	of	having	your	own	space.
Yes,	when	you	 are	 in	 love,	Turiya,	 you	 feel	 aloneness.	Aloneness	 is	 beautiful,
aloneness	is	a	blessing.	But	only	lovers	can	feel	it,	because	only	love	gives	you
the	 courage	 to	 be	 alone,	 only	 love	 creates	 the	 context	 to	 be	 alone.	 Only	 love
fulfills	you	 so	deeply	 that	you	are	no	more	 in	need	of	 the	other	 --	you	can	be
alone.	Love	makes	you	 so	 integrated	 that	 you	 can	be	 alone	 and	 ecstatic.	Love
becomes	the	contrast:	love	and	aloneness	are	two	polarities	of	one	energy.
And	it	 is	good	to	understand	it,	because	sometimes	it	happens	that	 lovers	don't
allow	each	other	space	enough	to	be	alone.	If	lovers	don't	allow	each	other	space
to	be	alone,	then	love	will	be	destroyed,	because	it	is	out	of	aloneness	that	love
gets	fresh	energy,	fresh	juices.	When	you	are	alone,	you	accumulate	energy	to	a
point	from	where	it	starts	overflowing.
That	overflowing	becomes	love	--	 then	you	can	go	and	share	with	your	friend,
with	your	woman,	with	 anybody	you	 love.	You	have	 enough	 to	 share	now;	 in
fact,	too	much	--	you	have	to	share.	And	it	is	not	that	you	are	obliging	the	other;
in	 fact,	 you	 are	 being	obliged	by	 the	other.	When	 the	 cloud	 is	 heavy	 it	 has	 to
rain,	and	it	is	grateful	to	the	earth	that	it	allowed	it	to	rain,	that	it	absorbed	it,	that
it	received	it	like	a	guest,	that	it	welcomed	it.
When	the	flower	opens,	it	has	to	release	its	fragrance.	It	is	thankful	to	the	winds
that	they	have	taken	its	fragrance	in	all	directions.
When	alone,	one	gathers	energy.	Energy	is	life	and	energy	is	delight,	and	energy
is	 love	 and	 energy	 is	 dance	 and	 energy	 is	 celebration.	 Then	 everything	 is
possible	 if	 energy	 is	 there.	Then	 it	will	 become	 a	 song,	 then	 it	will	 become	 a
dance,	then	it	will	become	love.
And	when	energy	is	too	much	there,	only	then	can	it	become	orgasmic.
Many	people	make	 love	but	have	no	 idea	of	what	orgasm	 is,	because	 they	are
already	dissipated.	When	they	are	making	 love,	 they	are	empty;	when	they	are
making	love	there	 is	no	energy	to	be	shared.	When	they	are	making	love,	 they
cannot	 overflow.	 Their	 orgasm	 is	 at	 the	 most	 genital.	 Their	 orgasm	 is	 a	 very
small,	mediocre	 thing;	 nothing	 of	 any	 spiritual	 value.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 sneeze.	Yes,
after	a	sneeze	you	feel	a	little	better.	Or	like	scratching	your	back	--	it	feels	good.
You	are	relieved.
Orgasm	is	not	a	relief:	orgasm	is	a	celebration.	And	orgasm	is	a	meeting	of	you,
through	the	other,	with	the	whole.	Orgasm	is	always	divine	--	the	other	becomes
the	 door	 and	 you	 enter	 into	 the	 divine.	Orgasm	 is	 always	 spiritual,	 it	 is	 never
sexual.	Those	who	think	that	orgasm	is	sexual	have	not	understood	anything	at
all;	 they	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 sex	 and	 they	 don't	 know	 anything	 about
orgasmic	 experiences.	 Orgasm	 is	 always	 samadhi,	 ecstasy.	 But	 people	 don't
know	because	they	meet	out	of	need,	not	out	of	overflowing	energies.
So	 when	 you	 are	 in	 love,	 a	 great	 need	 arises	 to	 be	 alone	 --	 ONLY	 IN	 love,
remember,	a	great	need	arises	 to	be	alone.	And	 real	 lovers	are	 those	who	give
freedom	to	the	other	to	be	alone.	They	will	be	full	of	energy	soon	and	they	will
come	 together	 and	 shower	 their	 energy	 on	 each	 other.	When	 alone,	 the	 great
desire	 to	 share	will	 arise.	See	 the	 rhythm:	when	 in	 love,	 you	would	 like	 to	be
alone;	when	alone,	soon	you	would	like	to	be	in	love.
Lovers	come	close	and	go	away,	come	close	and	go	away	--	 there	is	a	rhythm.
Going	away	is	not	anti-love;	going	away	is	just	getting	your	aloneness	again,	and
the	beauty	of	it	and	the	joy	of	it.	But	whenever	you	are	full	of	joy,	an	intrinsic,
inevitable	necessity	arises	to	share	it.	Nobody	can	contain	joy	--	and	the	joy	that
can	 be	 contained	 by	 you	 is	 not	 of	much	worth.	The	 joy	 is	 bigger	 than	 you,	 it
cannot	be	contained	by	you.	It	is	a	flood!	You	cannot	contain	it;	you	have	to	seek
and	search	for	people	to	share	it	with.
What	happens	in	your	love	affairs	happens	on	a	higher	plane	to	all	the	Buddhas.
When	Buddha	became	enlightened,	he	became	so	full	of	energy,	so	full	of	 joy,
that	he	had	to	share	it.	For	forty-two	years	he	went	from	one	village	to	another,
constantly	sharing	his	joy.
That's	what	I	am	doing	with	you.	I	am	not	a	teacher.	I	have	nothing	to	teach,	no
teaching	to	impart,	no	information	...	but	I	am	here	to	share	my	being.	I	am	too
full,	the	cloud	is	too	heavy.	And	if	you	can	receive	me,	I	will	be	grateful	to	you.
It	 is	 out	 of	 too	 much	 that	 sharing	 arises.	 And	 enlightenment,	 Buddhahood,
Christ-consciousness,	 bridge	 you	 with	 the	 God.	 Infinite	 sources	 of	 energy
become	 available	 to	 you.	 Inexhaustible	 sources	 are	 yours.	 You	 can	 go	 on
sharing,	and	the	more	you	share,	the	more	goes	on	coming	to	you.
Aloneness	has	reached	its	ultimate	peak.	The	Master	is	the	most	alone	person	in
the	world,	and	hence	 the	Master	 is	 the	greatest	 lover	 in	 the	world.	You	cannot
find	 a	 greater	 lover	 than	 a	 Buddha	 or	 a	 Christ.	 But	 now	 the	 love	 is	 so
qualitatively	different	that	it	has	the	quality	of	friendship,	compassion,	empathy.
The	passion	has	disappeared.
Passion	is	 tiny,	small;	compassion	is	 immense,	huge,	enormous,	 infinite.	When
passion	becomes	infinite	it	is	compassion.
Turiya,	your	experience	is	beautiful,	and	you	have	understood	its	beauty;	hence,
you	have	felt	like	thanking	me.
You	 say:	NEVER	BEFORE	HAVE	 I	 FELT	 SO	MUCH	LOVE	AND	NEVER
BEFORE
SO	ALONE.
Those	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
And	you	say:	THANK	YOU,	OSHO.
YOU	HAVE	UNDERSTOOD	IT.	I	am	happy	that	you	have	been	able	to	see	the
connection	between	love	and	aloneness.	Enjoy	both.	Never	choose	one	out	of	the
two,	 because	 if	 you	 choose	 one	 both	 will	 die.	 Allow	 both	 to	 happen.	 When
aloneness	 happens,	move	 into	 it;	when	 love	 happens,	move	 into	 it.	Aloneness
means	moving	in,	love	means	moving	out.
Aloneness	 is	 the	breath	going	 in,	 love	 is	 the	breath	going	out.	And	if	you	stop
one,	you	will	die.	You	cannot	hold	the	breath	in;	you	cannot	hold	the	breath	out.
Breathing	 is	a	 total	process,	and	 in	 the	 total	process	 the	 in-coming	breath	 is	as
much	essential	as	the	out-going	breath.	Love	is	the	out-going	breath,	aloneness	is
the	 in-coming	 breath.	 And	 that's	 how	 your	 soul	 lives;	 that's	 how	 you	 become
soulful.	.
Allow	both.	Never	choose!	Choicelessly	allow	both.	And	go	with	wherever	the
breath	is	going.	Aloneness	is	interiority,	love	is	exteriority.
Carl	 Gustav	 Jung	 has	 made	 these	 words	 very	 famous.	 He	 divided	 people
basically	 into	 two	 types:	 the	 introverts	 and	 the	 extroverts.	 That	 is	 a	 wrong
division.	People	cannot	be	categorized	that	way.	People	cannot	be	pigeon-holed
this	way.	 I	 have	never	 come	across	 anyone	who	 is	 just	 introvert	 --	 he	will	 die
immediately,	because	he	will	have	only	the	in-breath.	I	have	never	come	across	a
person	who	is	just	extrovert	--	he	will	die	too.	People	are	both.
It	 is	possible	that	one	is	more	of	an	extrovert	 than	an	introvert,	and	vice	versa.
And	 that's	 what	 brings	 imbalance	 to	 your	 personality.	 One	 should	 be	 both
simultaneously.	One	should	be	balanced.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 extrovert	 introverts,	 introvert	 extroverts	 --	 both
together.	This	 is	one	of	 the	most	 important	 things	to	be	understood,	because	in
the	past	 the	monks	have	tried	to	be	just	 introverts.	They	were	called	the	other-
worldly	 people,	 the	 people	 who	 renounce	 the	 world	 and	 move	 into	 the
monasteries	and	the	mountains	and	the	deserts.
They	decided	that	only	to	be	an	introvert	is	the	right	way	to	connect	with	God	--
as	if	God	is	not	without,	but	only	within.
And	 the	 other,	 the	 worldly	 person,	 has	 remained	 extrovert.	 He	 thinks	 he	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 introversion,	 meditation,	 prayer.	 His	 interest	 is	 in	 money,
power,	prestige,	people,	crowds	--	 the	world.	He	never	 looks	 in.	This	 is	a	very
schizophrenic	arrangement.
I	would	like	my	sannyasins	not	to	be	schizophrenic	but	whole.	Be	in	the	world
and	 yet	 be	 not	 of	 it.	 Move	 between	 the	 outside	 and	 the	 inside,	 and	 let	 the
movement	 become	 as	 smooth	 as	 possible,	 as	 simple	 as	 possible.	 Just	 as	 you
come	out	of	your	house	into	the	garden:	it	is	too	cold	inside,	you	come	out.	It	is
too	sunny	outside;	soon	you	start	feeling	hot,	soon	you	start	perspiring,	and	you
move	in	--	into	the	house,	into	the	coolness	and	the	shade	of	the	house.	Just	as
you	move	 inside	 the	house	and	outside	 the	house,	go	on	moving	 in	and	out	 --
both	are	yours.
The	old	sannyasins,	the	old	monks,	claimed	only	the	inner,	they	denied	the	outer.
My	message	is:	Nothing	has	to	be	denied	--	the	whole	belongs	to	you.	I	give	you
the	whole	universe,	 the	 inner	 and	 the	outer	both.	And	 I	would	not	 like	you	 to
become	introverts,	because	those	who	are	introverts	against	extroversion	become
ill,	 pathological,	 dormant,	 stagnant,	 closed,	 disconnected,	 uprooted.	 They	 start
living	 a	 windowless	 existence.	 They	 start	 living	 in	 unnecessary	 misery.	 They
never	 come	 to	 know	 what	 aloneness	 is,	 because	 aloneness	 cannot	 be	 known
without	 love	 --	 they	 only	 know	 loneliness.	 And	 loneliness	 is	 not	 health;
loneliness	is	illness.
And	the	people	who	live	only	in	the	outside	world	and	never	think	of	the	inner,
they	are	on	 the	other	extreme.	They	know	something	of	 love,	but	 their	 love	 is
never	more	than	lust
--	because	love	cannot	happen	unless	aloneness	has	also	happened	in	you.	Their
love	is	a	beautiful	name	for	lust.	They	need	the	other,	they	exploit	the	other,	they
possess	 the	 other.	 And	 when	 you	 possess	 the	 other,	 the	 other	 possesses	 you.
People	 become	 slaves,	 and	 people	 are	 reduced	 to	 things.	 People	 are	 no	more
people.
The	person	who	lives	only	on	the	outside,	without	knowing	his	 inside,	 is	poor,
very	poor
--	unaware	of	his	inner	treasures.	And	the	person	who	lives	only	in	the	inside	is
also	 poor,	 because	 he	 never	 becomes	 aware	 of	 the	 beauty	 of	 existence,	 of	 the
stars,	of	the	sands	and	the	sun,	of	the	trees	and	the	birds.
The	inner	and	the	outer	are	not	two.	The	inner	is	the	inner	of	the	outer,	and	the
outer	is	the	outer	of	the	inner.	My	sannyasin	has	to	be	both	together.	I	would	like
to	create	a	new	man	whom	Carl	Gustav	Jung	cannot	categorize,	whom	he	cannot
call	extrovert	or	introvert,	for	whom	he	will	have	to	find	a	new	word	--	because
he	will	be	whole,	he	will	be	both.	He	will	be	as	much	in	his	body	as	in	his	soul;
he	will	be	a	materialist	as	much	as	a	spiritualist.	He	will	be	of	this	world	as	much
as	of	that,	and	he	will	have	no	division	in	his	mind,	and	no	choice.
Turiya,	 something	 beautiful	 has	 happened	 to	 you	 go	 on	 moving	 in	 the	 same
direction.
Don't	 go	 astray,	 because	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 go	 astray.	 Our	 old	 habits,	 our	 old
concepts,	go	on	dragging	us	back	to	the	old	patterns.	Your	mind	will	say,	"This	is
not	aloneness,	 this	 is	 loneliness."	Your	mind	will	 try	 to	destroy	 it	by	calling	 it
loneliness.	 Beware!	 Beware	 of	 your	 own	 mind!	 because	 there	 is	 no	 greater
enemy	than	your	own	mind.
And	by	'mind'	I	mean	your	past.	Go	on	dying	to	the	past	and	go	on	learning	new
things.
You	 have	 stumbled	 upon	 something	 tremendously	 valuable,	 utterly	 new	 and
fresh.	Love	brings	aloneness:	aloneness	brings	love.	That	too	will	happen.
Now	you	have	said:	NEVER	BEFORE	HAVE	I	FELT	SO	MUCH	LOVE	AND
NEVER
BEFORE	SO	ALONE.
I	would	like	each	of	my	sannyasins	to	feel	like	Turiya	--	feel	alone	and	feel	love.
And	never	 create	 any	conflict	 between	 the	 two.	Create	 a	 symphony	out	of	 the
two,	and	you	will	have	a	richness	which	is	very	rare.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,	IF	I	EVER	GET	ENLIGHTENED,	AM	I	GOING	TO	BE	AS	CRAZY
AS	YOU
ARE?
Govind,
CRAZY	YOU	WILL	BE,	but	you	will	be	crazy	in	your	own	way.	You	cannot	be
crazy	as	I	am.	Your	craziness	will	have	an	individuality	of	its	own.
Krishna	 is	 crazy	 in	 his	 own	 way,	 but	 it	 happened	 only	 once;	 it	 was	 never
repeated.	Just	think	of	Krishna	playing	on	his	flute	--	you	cannot	conceive	Christ
playing	on	the	flute.
He	is	crazy	in	his	own	way:	he	carries	his	cross.	Now	what	connection	can	you
find	between	the	flute	and	the	cross?	Just	put	a	flute	by	the	side	of	the	cross	and
it	will	 look	like	a	very	absurd	arrangement	--	a	surrealist	arrangement.	Absurd,
utterly	absurd.
Meera	became	enlightened,	and	danced	and	danced.	Her	whole	life	she	danced
from	one	village	to	another,	singing	songs	of	God,	of	love.	And	Buddha	became
enlightened	and	became	utterly	 silent,	quiet,	 still.	 It	 is	not	 an	accident	 that	 the
first	marble	statues	made	were	of	Buddha	--	he	looked	like	a	marble	statue,	he
sat	 like	a	marble	statue.	Now,	you	cannot	make	a	marble	statue	of	Meera;	 it	 is
impossible.	She	is	so	volatile.	She	is	more	like	a	river	 than	like	a	marble	rock.
You	cannot	make	a	statue	of	Meera	--	it	will	be	a	falsification	because	the	statue
will	not	be	able	to	dance.	And	without	dance,	there	is	no	Meera.	Meera's	statues
can	 only	 be	 made	 by	 fountains,	 not	 by	 marble	 rocks.	 Yes,	 in	 a	 fountain	 it	 is
possible	to	make	a	statue	of	Meera,	but	it	has	to	be	dynamic,	it	has	to	be	a	dance.
Meera	 is	 crazy	 in	 her	 own	 way.	 And	 these	 people	 are	 never	 repeated.	 Alt
enlightened	people	are	simply	unique.	Just	the	other	day	I	was	telling	you	about
the	laughing	Buddha	of	Japan	--	he	laughed	his	whole	life.	Laughter	became	his
message.
Govind,	God	never	 repeats.	He	 always	 comes	 in	new	 forms,	 new	expressions,
new	 revelations.	 And	 never	 use	 the	 word	 'if'	 --	 you	 ARE	 going	 to	 become
enlightened!	Don't	be	so	afraid.	Why	'if'?	This	is	not	a	question	of	ifs	and	buts:
you	are	going	to	become	enlightened	--	because	enlightenment	is	not	something
like	 an	 achievement,	 it	 is	 your	 very	 nature.	 Any	 day,	 turn	 in,	 and	 you	 are
enlightened	--	any	day.	Monday	will	do,	Tuesday	will	do,	any	day!	And	there	are
only	seven	days....
Any	moment	you	turn	in!
Enlightenment	 is	 not	 something	 like	 a	 faraway	 goal;	 it	 is	 very	 close	 by,	 the
closest.	 Even	 to	 say	 that	 it	 is	 close	 is	 not	 right	 --	 it	 is	 YOU!	 There	 is	 no
distinction,	no	distance	between	you	and	enlightenment.	Know	yourself	and	you
are	 enlightened	 --	 and	you	are	 already	 there!	Nothing	has	 to	be	 added	 to	your
being.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn...	and	you	will
be	crazy.
Yes,	it	is	better	to	call	enlightened	people	crazy,	because	the	so-called	sane	in	the
world	 are	 really	 insane.	 If	 the	 so-called	 sane	 are	 sane,	 then	 Buddha	 is	 crazy,
Christ	 is	 crazy,	 I	 am	 crazy,	 and	 sooner	 or	 later,	 Govind,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be
crazy!	And	I	hope	it	will	be	sooner.
But	one	thing	is	certain:	you	will	not	be	like	me	--	and	you	need	not	be.	And	it	is
good	 that	you	cannot	be	 like	me,	otherwise	 there	will	be	 imitations,	otherwise
there	will	be	actors,	otherwise	there	will	be	pseudo	people.	And	many	have	tried;
that's	how	religions	are	born.	Millions	have	tried	to	be	like	Christ;	not	a	single
one	has	become	a	Christ.
Millions	 have	 tried	 and	 instead	 of	 becoming	 Christs	 they	 have	 become
Christians	--	and	to	be	a	Christian	is	ugly,	is	stupid,	unintelligent.
To	be	a	Christ	is	really	something,	but	when	you	want	to	be	a	Christ	you	cannot
imitate	 Christ.	 Learn	 from	 him,	 imbibe	 his	 being,	 but	 remember:	 God	 will
manifest	in	you	in	a	totally	different	way.	And	it	 is	unpredictable;	no	prophecy
can	 be	 made.	 I	 cannot	 say	 how	 he	 will	 manifest	 in	 you,	 because	 God	 is	 the
craziest	person	 in	 the	world	 --	unpredictable,	absolutely	unpredictable.	He	will
find	 a	 way,	 he	 will	 find	 something	 new.	 And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 he	 always	 finds
something	 new,	 because	 through	 that	 new	 the	world	 becomes	more	 and	more
enriched.	Just	think:	Buddha	is	like	Christ,	Krishna	is	also	like	Christ;	Mahavira,
Zarathustra,	 Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu,	 all	 are	 like	Christ...	 the	world	would	 look
very	 sad,	 boring.	Wherever	 you	 go,	 you	meet	 Christ.	 You	will	 get	 tired.	 It	 is
good	 that	 once	 in	 a	while	 the	 cross	 disappears	 and	 the	 flute	 appears,	 and	 it	 is
good	that	once	in	a	while	God	comes	dancing,	and	it	is	good	that	once	in	a	while
he	is	silent,	AND	it	is	also	good	that	once	in	a	while	he	comes	with	a	cross.	All
shades,	all	nuances,	all	dimensions....
And,	Govind,	you	are	a	unique	person,	as	everybody	else	is.	No	two	persons	are
alike.
How	can	two	Buddhas	be	alike?	Not	even	two	persons	are	alike,	not	even	two
pebbles	on	the	seashore	are	alike.	Your	fingerprints	are	your	fingerprints	--	what
to	 say	 about	 the	 prints	 of	 your	 inner	 being?	 They	 are	 going	 to	 be	 separate,
unique,	incomparable.
The	last	question
Question	6
OSHO,	 MY	 CHRISTIAN	 PARENTS	 USED	 TO	 TALK	 ABOUT	 GOD'S
PROMISE	TO
MAN	AND	THAT	WHEN	JESUS	LEFT	THIS	EARTH	HE	PROMISED	HIS
DISCIPLES	HE	WOULD	RETURN	TO	TAKE	THEM	TO	THE	KINGDOM
OF	GOD.
ARE	YOU	THIS	PROMISE	COME	TRUE?	ARE	YOU	JESUS	CHRIST?
Svarga,
WHY	SHOULD	I	BE	JESUS	CHRIST?	One	is	enough!	I	am	myself.	I	am	just
my	being.
I	am	neither	Jesus	Christ,	nor	Gautam	Buddha,	nor	Vardhaman	Mahavira.	Why
should	I	be?	How	can	I	be?	I	am	not	a	carbon	copy	of	anybody	else;	have	my
original	face.
But	such	questions	arise.	You	love	Jesus	Christ	and	now	you	have	fallen	in	love
with	me
--	 it	 is	 YOUR	 PROBLEM!	 Now	 you	 would	 like	 to	 bridge	 your	 two	 loves
somehow;	there	must	be	a	conflict	inside:	what	to	do	now?	Now	you	are	in	love
with	me	and	you	have	loved	Jesus	Christ;	deep	down	the	mind	will	say,	"Are	you
betraying	Jesus?	Falling	 in	 love	with	 this	man?"	And	you	don't	want	 to	betray
Jesus	--	and	now	you	cannot	betray	me	either!	So	the	conflict.	You	would	like	an
assurance	that	I	am	Jesus	Christ	so	your	problem	is	solved.
I	am	the	same	truth,	but	not	the	same	expression.	I	am	the	same	experience,	but
not	the	same	expression.	What	Jesus	knew,	I	know;	what	he	experienced,	I	have
experienced.
But	Jesus	is	Jesus,	I	am	me,	and	that's	how	it	should	be.
A	 section	 of	Manhattan	 called	 the	 Bowery,	 home	 to	 winos	 and	 derelicts,	 has
become	the	most	famous	Skid	Row	in	the	world.	Here's	one	of	the	reasons	why:
At	 four	 o'clock	 in	 the	 morning	 a	 drunk	 staggered	 into	 a	 Bowery	 flophouse
shouting,	"I	am	Jesus	Christ!	I	am	Jesus	Christ!"
The	 sleeping	men	were	 all	 awakened.	 "l	 am	 Jesus	Christ!	 I	 am	 Jesus	Christ!"
blurted	the	wino.
"Ah,	 shut	 up!"	 howled	 the	 hotel	 inhabitants.	 "Be	 quiet!"	 "I	 am	 Jesus	 Christ!"
slobbered	the	inebriate.	"I	am	Jesus	Christ!"
"Will	you	let	us	get	some	sleep!"
"If	you	don't	believe	me,	come	on	downstairs	and	I	will	prove	it	to	you!"
A	 few	 of	 the	men	 got	 up	 and	 followed	 him	 outside	where	 he	walked	 up	 to	 a
darkened	saloon	and	began	bellowing	and	banging	on	the	door.
The	proprietor	who	lived	upstairs	heard	 the	noise,	came	down,	and	opened	the
front	door.
He	looked	at	the	drunk	and	shouted,	"Jesus	Christ,	are	you	here	again?"
"You	see,	I	told	you!"	said	the	drunk	turning	to	his	followers.
Jesus	is	beautiful,	but	there	is	no	need	for	him	to	come	again	--	and	I	don't	think
he	will	dare.	Just	think	of	what	you	did	with	him!	He	may	have	promised,	"I	will
come	again,"
but	I	promise	you	he	will	never	come	--	because	what	you	did	with	him	you	will
do	again.	It	is	only	new	persons	who	become	enlightened,	not	knowing	what	is
going	to	happen	to	them...!
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	The	Prints	of	Your	Inner	Being
13	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904130
ShortTitle:
FISH03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
97
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 THAT	 ENLIGHTENMENT,	 OR	 THE	 NATURAL
STATE	OF
MAN,	IS	SOMETHING	ACAUSAL	--	IT	JUST	HAPPENS.	AND	ALL	OUR
ENDEAVOURS	TO	BRING	ABOUT	AWARENESS,	TO	BE	AWARE,	ARE
ACTUALLY	 TAKING	 US	 AWAY	 FROM	 THIS	 STATE	 SINCE	 THEY	 ARE
ALL
MIND	GAMES,	AND	THESE	ACTIVITIES	 FOR	SELF-AWARENESS	ARE
JUST	A
"HOLY	BUSINESS".	I	CANNOT	IMAGINE	WHAT	MY	LIFE	WOULD	BE	IF
I	 GAVE	 UP	 THE	 SEARCH	 SINCE	 IT	 HAS	 PERMEATED	 MY	 LIFE	 AS
LONG	AS	 I	 CAN	REMEMBER.	 IF	 THERE	 IS	NO	WAY	TO	 INTEGRATE,
NOTHING	ONE	CAN
DO,	WHY	ALL	 THIS	 ACTIVITY?	WHY	 BOTHER?	 YET	WHAT	 ELSE	 IS
THERE
TO	DO?	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Deva	Samadhi,
IT	 IS	ONE	OF	THE	MOST	 SIGNIFICANT	QUESTIONS	TO	BE	 asked.	We
will	 have	 to	 go	 deep	 into	 it.	 It	 is	 true,	 absolutely	 true,	 that	 enlightenment	 is
acausal:	it	cannot	be	caused	by	our	efforts.	But	that	does	not	mean	that	you	have
to	cease	making	efforts,	because	then	too	it	will	not	happen.
This	mystery,	 this	 paradox,	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 deeply.	 The	 tendency	 of	 the
logical	mind	is	either	to	decide	that	enlightenment	is	causal	so	that	one	can	make
efforts	to	achieve	it,	or	it	is	acausal,	it	happens	only	when	it	happens	of	its	own
accord,	then	there	is	no	need	to	make	any	efforts.
In	both	ways	you	will	miss.	If	you	think	it	is	causal,	and	make	efforts,	you	will
miss,	because	it	is	not	causal.	If	you	think	it	is	not	causal,	that	hence	there	is	no
need	to	make	any	efforts	--	why	bother?	--	you	will	miss	again.
The	reality	is:	you	have	to	make	all	possible	efforts,	yet	it	is	not	going	to	happen
through	your	efforts,	but	you	will	be	prepared	through	your	efforts	to	receive	it
when	it	happens.
It	IS	acausal.	It	will	happen.	It	is	not	a	doing	on	your	part.	But	when	it	happens,
will	you	be	ready	to	see	it?	That	is	the	point,	the	very	crux	of	the	matter.	When	it
happens,	will	you	be	ready	to	recognize	it?	When	it	happens,	will	you	be	ready
to	welcome	it,	to	open	your	heart	to	it,	to	receive	it	into	your	being?	Will	you	be
ready	to	become	a	host	to	the	guest	when	it	knocks	on	your	doors?
Your	 efforts	 are	 NOT	 going	 to	 create	 enlightenment:	 your	 efforts	 are	 simply
going	 to	make	 you	more	 and	more	 available	 to	 it,	 open	 to	 it,	 vulnerable	 to	 it.
Your	efforts	are	going	to	make	a	womb	out	of	your	being	so	you	can	be	pregnant
with	 it.	 It	 is	going	 to	happen	from	the	beyond.	And	 it	 is	not	 that	 it	 is	going	 to
happen	somewhere	in	the	future	-
-	it	is	ALREADY	happening.	You	are	just	not	ready.
When	it	happened	to	Buddha,	it	could	have	happened	to	the	whole	earth,	to	the
whole	 of	 humanity.	 But	 Buddha	 was	 ready	 to	 receive	 it	 and	 others	 were	 not
ready	to	receive	it.	The	sun	rises:	it	will	rise	only	for	those	who	have	eyes,	it	will
not	rise	for	those	who	are	blind.
If	 you	 go	 to	 the	 physician,	 he	 can	 help	 --	 he	 can	 help	 you	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 your
blindness.	His	medicines	are	not	going	to	create	the	sunrise;	his	medicines	are	of
no	use	as	far	as	 the	sunrise	 is	concerned.	 It	happens	on	 its	own	--	 it	 is	already
happening,	happening	every	day	--	but	it	never	happens	to	the	blind	person	or	to
the	person	who	is	not	blind	yet	keeps	his	eyes	closed.
Samadhi,	your	efforts	will	only	open	your	eyes.	And	this	is	part	of	the	opening
of	your	eyes	 --	 to	understand	 that	 enlightenment	 is	 acausal.	But	 this	 is	not	yet
your	understanding,	remember.
You	 say:	 I	 HAVE	HEARD	 THAT	 ENLIGHTENMENT	OR	 THE	NATURAL
STATE
OF	MAN	IS	SOMETHING	ACAUSAL...
You	have	heard	it.	It	is	not	going	to	help	you	--	unless	you	start	feeling	that	it	is
acausal.
And	how	are	you	going	to	feel	that	it	is	acausal?	By	making	all	possible	efforts
and	failing	again	and	again	and	again,	one	day	suddenly	the	realization	happens
that	 efforts	 can't	 make	 it.	 In	 that	 realization	 you	 don't	 start	 thinking,	 "Why
bother?"	You	don't	start	thinking	of	stopping	efforts.	Efforts	simply	STOP	in	that
understanding.	In	that	understanding	efforts	evaporate.
That's	 how	 it	 happened	 to	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha.	 For	 six	 years	 he	 made	 all
possible	 human	 efforts	 to	 achieve	 it,	 but	 because	 it	 is	 not	 an	 achievement	 he
could	 not	 achieve	 it.	 And	 the	 more	 efforts	 he	 made,	 the	 more	 frustrated	 he
became	 --	 obviously.	 If	 you	 don't	 make	 any	 efforts	 for	 it	 you	 will	 not	 be
frustrated,	and	when	you	make	efforts	with	your	total	heart,	it	hurts	to	fail	each
time.	He	staked	his	whole	life	for	it,	and	yet	it	was	not	happening.	He	was	not
holding	 anything	 back.	 If	 he	 had	 been	 holding	 anything	 back,	 then	 this
understanding	 that	 happened	 to	 him	 would	 not	 have	 been	 possible	 --	 that	 all
efforts	are	futile.
It	happens	only	to	those	who	are	not	holding	anything	back,	when	you	have	put
all	 that	 you	 have	 at	 stake,	 when	 nothing	 is	 left	 behind,	 when	 you	 are	 utterly
empty,	 you	 have	 emptied	 yourself	 totally,	 and	 it	 is	 not	 happening,	 then	 the
understanding	arises,	"My	efforts	are	futile.	My	efforts	are	ego	efforts	--	the	ego
is	futile.	My	efforts	are	my	own	mind	games.	The	mind	itself	is	the	barrier."
But	this	has	to	become	your	own	experience,	Samadhi.	It	is	not	going	to	help	if
you	have	heard	it.	You	can	hear	great	 truths,	but	unless	 they	arise	in	your	own
being	they	are	not	true.	A	heard	truth	is	a	lie:	only	an	experienced	truth	is	a	truth.
And	 only	 the	 experienced	 truth	 liberates.	 How	 will	 you	 experience	 it?	 You
would	like	to	have	it	without	any	efforts.
You	would	like	it	 to	happen	as	it	happened	to	Buddha	--	minus	those	six	years
that	preceded	it.
Those	 six	 years	 of	 tremendous	 effort	 are	 a	must.	 Then	 one	 day	 suddenly,	 one
evening	when	the	sun	was	setting,	the	revelation	happened	to	him:	"My	efforts
cannot	take	me	beyond	myself."	This	is	so	natural!	It	is	like	pulling	yourself	up
by	your	own	shoestrings
--	it	is	utterly	futile.	But	how	is	one	going	to	know	it?
Those	 six	 long	 years...	 and	 they	 must	 have	 looked	 like	 sixty	 years	 to	 him,
because	 they	 were	 really	 painful.	 All	 kinds	 of	 ascetic	 practices,	 long	 fasts,
torturing	 the	 body,	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 yoga	 exercises,	many	 of	 which	 are	 just
stupid:	standing	on	your	head,	distorting	your	body,	utterly	ridiculous	postures	--
he	did	all!	Whatsoever	was	said	to	him,	he	followed	it	literally,	word	for	word.
He	went	 to	 all	 kinds	 of	 teachers;	 they	must	 have	 all	 been	 pseudo.	Not	 even	 a
single	 one	 of	 them	was	 a	Buddha,	was	 yet	 enlightened.	 They	 gave	 him	many
strategies	to	work	out.
If	he	had	not	been	doing	them	perfectly	well,	they	would	have	been	safe.	They
would	 have	 told	 him,	 "Because	 you	 are	 not	 doing	 totally,	 hence	 you	 are
missing."	 But	 this	 was	 impossible:	 the	 man	 was	 so	 authentic,	 so	 sincere,	 so
innocently	 total,	 that	 even	 those	 pseudo	 teachers	 had	 to	 tell	 him,	 "Excuse	 us,
forgive	us	--	this	is	all	we	know.	And	you	have	done	it	all,	and	we	cannot	expect
more	from	you.	Now	you	have	to	go	somewhere	else.	This	is	all	we	know,	and
now	you	know	that	this	is	not	going	to	give	you	enlightenment	--	it	has	not	given
enlightenment	 to	us	either.	But	 it	 is	very	rare	 to	find	a	person	like	you.	People
come	and	they	do	it	very	partially.	With	them	we	can	always	say,
'Because	you	are	not	total,	hence	you	are	missing,'	but	we	cannot	say	this	to	you!
Your	innocence	forbids	it.	Your	totality...	we	are	ashamed.	In	fact,	we	ourselves
have	 not	 done	 these	 practices	 so	 totally.	 Forgive	 us,	 and	 find	 another	 teacher.
And	if	you	ever	find	enlightenment,	don't	forget	us.	If	you	ever	find	truth,	please
remember	 us	 --	 we	 are	 also	 seeking	 and	 searching.	We	 are	 also	 blind,"	 those
teachers	confessed	to	Buddha.
After	six	years	of	wandering,	one	evening,	sitting	silently	underneath	a	tree,	by
the	side	of	the	River	Niranjana,	this	revelation	welled	up	within	his	being:	that
human	 effort	 cannot	 help	 you	 to	 transcend	 humanity.	 It	 can	 only	 happen:	 it
cannot	be	caused.	But	now	these	six	years	of	austerity	had	purified	him;	this	fire
had	made	him	gold.	These	six	years	had	helped	him	to	see	the	utter	uselessness
of	the	mind.	Now	he	was	ready	to	be	silent,	effortless,	passive.
That	 night	 he	 slept	with	 no	 search,	 not	 even	 for	 truth,	 because	 search	 creates
desires,	 desires	 can	 be	 fulfilled	 only	 through	 effort	 --	 the	 search	 disappeared!
The	 desires	 disappeared.	 The	 efforts	 disappeared.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 he	 slept
totally	relaxed	--	neither	worldly	desires	tortured	him	nor	other-worldly	desires.
He	had	no	dreams	 that	 night,	 that	was	 the	 first	 night	without	 dreams,	 because
dreams	are	a	by-product	of	your	desires.	The	worldly	people	dream	of	worldly
things,	the	other-worldly	people	dream	of	other-worldly	things.	And	the	worldly
people	are	not	 so	much	deceived,	because	 if	 in	 the	night	you	see	a	dream	 that
you	have	come	upon	a	great	 treasure	of	diamonds	--	 in	 the	morning	you	know
that	it	was	only	a	dream.	But	the	other-worldly	people	are	very	much	deceived
by	their	dreams.
Somebody	 sees	 Krishna	 playing	 on	 his	 flute;	 somebody	 sees	 Jesus	 Christ,
somebody	sees	Rama,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	And	they	cannot	say	that	these	are
dreams,	 they	 are	 so	 valuable	 to	 them.	 They	 start	 thinking	 that	 these	 are
experiences.	These	are	dreams!	as	much	as	other	dreams.
And	the	other-worldly	person	starts	hallucinating	in	the	day	too,	even	with	open
eyes	--
because	the	worldly	man	is	in	the	world,	and	in	the	world	you	cannot	hallucinate
because	others	will	 think	you	are	mad.	 In	 the	world	you	 live	with	objects,	and
you	have	to	prove	to	others	that	what	you	are	seeing	is	a	reality.	The	treasures	of
your	 dreams,	 nobody	 is	 going	 to	 believe	 in	 them.	 There	 are	 so	 many	 non-
believers	around	you;	they	will	ask	for	proofs	and	proofs	you	cannot	supply.	So
you	can	dream	only	in	the	night.	But	the	other-worldly,	those	who	have	escaped
from	the	world,	a	person	who	lives	in	isolation	in	a	Himalayan	cave,	has	no	need
to	prove;	there	is	nobody	to	prove	to	and	nobody	asks	him.
He	has	dropped	 the	objective	world;	now	he	 lives	 in	his	 subjectivity	 --	he	can
dream	in	the	day,	he	can	dream	with	open	eyes.
It	is	now	a	well-known,	well-established	psychological	fact	that	if	people	go	on	a
long	fast	 in	 isolation,	after	 the	 first	week	 they	start	hallucinating,	and	after	 the
third	week	 they	 lose	ALL	distinction	between	what	 is	 real	 and	what	 is	 unreal.
After	the	third	week	of	fasting,	the	reality	and	the	dream	start	getting	mixed	up.
It	 is	 like	 small	 children:	 small	 children	 don't	 know	 what	 is	 real	 and	 what	 is
unreal.	So	sometimes	a	child	who	was	dreaming	about	a	beautiful	toy	wakes	up
and	starts	crying	 for	 it.	And	 the	mother	goes	on	 trying	 to	convince	him	 that	 it
was	only	a	dream,	but	he	says,
"It	was	here	--	how	can	it	be	a	dream?	I	had	it!	Where	has	my	toy	gone?	Bring	it
back	to	me!"
The	 same	 thing	 happens	 in	 deep	 isolation.	 If	 it	 is	 a	 prolonged	 thing,	 a	 three
weeks'	 fast	 in	 an	 isolated	 cave	 in	 the	Himalayas,	 slowly	 slowly	 you	will	 start
hallucinating.	 Then	 you	 see	 Krishna	 playing	 on	 the	 flute	 --	 not	 only	 that:	 he
starts	talking	to	you.	Not	only	that	--
he	starts	playing	with	you	And	because	it	is	thought	to	be	spiritual....	It	is	simple
madness!	But	because	 it	 is	 thought	 to	be	spiritual	you	 feel	very	very	gratified,
your	ego	feels	very	fulfilled.	You	brag	about	it,	that	Krishna	has	appeared,	that
you	 have	 talked	 with	 Krishna,	 that	 you	 have	 played	 with	 him,	 that	 he	 was
playing	on	the	flute	and	you	danced	around	him.
And	 there	 are	 other	 fools	 also	who	will	 believe	 it.	The	whole	world	 is	 full	 of
superstitious	people.
Buddha	lived	those	six	long	years	through	all	kinds	of	things	like	this.	It	is	only
by	 experiencing	 these	 things	 that	 one	 day	 one	 can	 conclude	 that	 this	 is	 all
nonsense.	And	when	it	is	your	own	realization	that	it	 is	all	nonsense,	you	need
not	drop	it:	it	simply	disappears.
That	night	he	slept	without	dreams.	And	in	 the	early	morning	when	he	opened
his	eyes	and	the	last	star	was	disappearing,	something	in	him	disappeared	--	the
ego.	He	became	enlightened	.
THIS	enlightenment	is	not	something	that	has	come	from	the	outside	--	it	is	your
intrinsic	 nature.	 It	 has	 come	 from	 within.	 But	 the	 within	 and	 the	 beyond	 are
synonymous:	 the	within	is	 the	beyond.	It	 is	 through	the	within	that	 the	beyond
penetrates.
Then	 Buddha	 said,	 "Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an	 achievement	 --	 it	 is	 a	 gift	 from
existence."
But	those	six	years	had	prepared	him	to	receive	it.
Samadhi,	prepare	yourself	to	receive	it.	It	is	acausal,	but	that	does	not	mean	that
you	have	to	stop	all	efforts.	If	you	stop,	you	will	miss.	If	they	stop	on	their	own,
because	 your	 understanding	 has	 penetrated	 so	 deeply	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
make	 any	 effort	 any	 more,	 even	 if	 you	 want	 to	 you	 cannot,	 in	 that	 state	 of
effortless	passivity	you	become	the	host	and	God	becomes	the	guest.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	I	FEEL	NEGATIVE	ABOUT	MYSELF:	HOW	DO	YOU	SEE	ME?
Swami	Prem	Asutosh,
IT	IS	NOT	ONLY	YOUR	PROBLEM	--	it	is	the	problem	of	almost	everybody.
All	the	cultures	and	all	the	religions	have	been	conditioning	you	to	feel	negative
about	yourself.
Nobody	is	loved,	appreciated,	for	just	being	himself	or	herself.	You	are	asked	to
prove	whether	 you	 are	 of	 any	worth:	 "Bring	 gold	medals	 from	 the	 university!
Achieve	success,	money,	power,	prestige,	 respectability!	Prove!"	Your	worth	 is
not	intrinsic;	that's	what	has	been	taught	to	you.	Your	worth	has	to	be	proved.
Hence	 a	 deep	 antagonism	 towards	 oneself	 arises,	 a	 deep	 feeling	 that	 I	 am
worthless	as	I	am	--	unless	proved	otherwise."	And	very	few	people	can	succeed
in	this	competitive	world.	Millions	and	millions	of	people	are	competing.	How
many	people	can	succeed?
How	many	people	can	become	presidents	and	prime	ministers?	In	a	country	of
millions,	only	one	person	will	become	the	president;	and	deep	down	everybody
is	hankering	for	it.
Millions	will	feel	that	they	are	unworthy.
How	many	people	can	become	great	poets?	A	Shakespeare.	a	Milton,	a	Shelley,
a	Rabindranath	--	how	many	people	can	become	great	poets?	And	everybody	has
something	of	the	poetic	in	his	being;	everybody	has	some	poetry	to	give	to	the
world.	But	when	it	becomes	an	ambition...	ambition	in	itself	is	anti-poetic.	How
many	people	can	become	great	painters	like	Picasso	or	Dali?	And	everybody	has
something	to	create.
The	idea	of	success	is	torturing	you.	It	is	the	greatest	calamity	that	has	happened
to	humanity,	 the	idea	of	success,	 that	you	have	to	succeed.	And	success	means
you	have	to	compete,	you	have	to	fight,	by	fair	or	foul	means	--	it	doesn't	matter.
Once	you	succeed	everything	is	okay.	The	question	is	of	success.	even	if	by	foul
means	you	succeed,	once	you	are	successful	whatsoever	you	have	done	is	okay.
Success	 changes	 the	 quality	 of	 all	 your	 acts.	 Success	 changes	 evil	means	 into
good	means.	So	the	only	question	is:	How	to	succeed?	How	to	reach	to	the	top?
And	naturally,	 very	 few	people	 can	 reach	 to	 the	 top.	 If	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to
reach	Everest.	how	many	people	can	stand	there?	There	is	not	much	space	there;
only	one	person	can	stand	there	at	ease.	Then	the	millions	who	were	also	striving
will	feel	failure,	a	great	despair	will	settle	in	their	souls.	They	will	start	feeling
negative.
This	 is	 a	 wrong	 kind	 of	 education.	 It	 is	 utterly	 poisonous,	 this	 so-called
education	that	has	been	given	to	you.	Your	schools,	colleges,	your	universities,
are	poisoning	you.	They	are	creating	misery	for	you;	they	are	the	factories	where
hells	 are	manufactured	 --	 but	 in	 such	 a	 beautiful	 way	 that	 you	 never	 become
aware	 of	what	 is	 going	 on.	 The	whole	world	 has	 become	 a	 hell	 because	 of	 a
wrong	education.	Any	education	that	is	based	on	the	idea	of	ambition	is	going	to
create	hell	on	the	earth	--	it	has	succeeded.
Everybody	 is	 suffering	 and	 feeling	 inferior.	 This	 is	 really	 a	 strange	 situation.
NOBODY
IS	 inferior,	 and	 nobody	 is	 superior,	 because	 each	 individual	 is	 unique	 --	 no
comparison	is	possible.	You	are	you,	and	you	are	SIMPLY	YOU,	and	you	cannot
be	anybody	else,	and	there	is	no	need	either.	And	you	need	not	become	famous,
you	need	not	be	a	success	in	the	eyes	of	the	world.	Those	are	all	foolish	ideas.
All	that	you	need	is	to	be	creative,	loving,	aware,	meditative...	if	you	feel	poetry
arising	in	you,	write	it	for	yourself,	for	your	woman,	for	your	children,	for	your
friends	--	and	forget	all	about	it!	Sing	it,	and	if	nobody	listens,	sing	it	alone	and
enjoy	it!	Go	to	the	trees	and	they	will	applaud	and	appreciate	 it.	Or	talk	to	the
birds	and	the	animals,	and	they	will	understand	far	more	than	the	stupid	human
beings	who	have	been	poisoned	for	centuries	and	centuries	with	wrong	concepts
of	life.
The	ambitious	person	is	pathological.
You	say:	I	FEEL	NEGATIVE	ABOUT	MYSELF.
Everybody	 is	 feeling	 negative	 about	 himself,	 because	 that's	 how	 he	 has	 been
made	 to	 feel.	 Your	 parents	 have	 done	 it	 to	 you	 --	 this	 is	 a	 heritage,	 a	 great
heritage.	Your	 teachers	 have	 done	 it	 to	 you,	 your	 priests	 have	 done	 it	 to	 you,
your	political	leaders	have	done	it	to	you	--	and	so	many	people	are	doing	it	that,
naturally,	you	have	become	 impressed	by	 the	very	 idea	 that	you	are	worthless,
that	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 intrinsic	 meaning	 or	 value,	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 any
significance	of	your	own.
Each	 parent	 is	 saying	 to	 the	 child,	 to	 each	 child,	 "Prove	 that	 you	 have	 some
worth!"
Being,	just	being,	is	not	enough	--	some	doing	is	needed.
My	whole	 approach	 is	 that	 being	 is	 intrinsically	 valuable.	 Just	 that	 you	 are	 is
such	a	gift	from	God,	what	more	can	you	ask	for?	Just	to	breathe	in	this	beautiful
existence	 is	 certificate	 enough	 that	 God	 loves	 you,	 that	 existence	 needs	 you;
otherwise	you	would	not	be	here.	YOU	ARE!	Existence	has	given	birth	to	you.
There	must	have	been	an	 immense	need	--	you	have	 filled	a	gap.	Without	you
existence	would	be	less.	And	when	I	say	this,	I	am	saying	it	not	only	to	you:	I
am	saying	it	to	the	trees,	to	the	birds,	to	the	animals,	to	the	pebbles	on	the	shore.
A	single	pebble	less	on	the	immense	seashore	and	the	seashore	would	not	be	the
same.	A	single	flower	less	and	the	universe	would	miss	it.
You	have	to	learn	that	you	are	valuable	as	you	are.	And	I	am	not	teaching	you
any	ego	--
just	the	contrary.	In	the	feeling	that	you	are	valuable	as	you	are	you	will	also	feel
others	are	valuable	as	they	are.	Accept	people	as	they	are;	drop	shoulds,	oughts	-
-	those	are	the	enemies.
And	 you	 are	 carrying	 so	many	 shoulds:	 "Do	 this	 and	 don't	 do	 that!"	 You	 are
carrying	so	many	dos	and	don'ts	that	you	cannot	dance;	the	burden	is	too	heavy.
And	you	have	been	given	so	many	ideals	and	goals	--	ideals	of	perfection	--	that
you	always	feel	you	are	falling	short.	And	the	ideals	are	utterly	impossible.	You
cannot	 fulfill	 them;	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 fulfilling	 them.	 So	 you	 will
ALWAYS	fall	short.
To	 be	 a	 perfectionist	 is	 to	 be	 ready	 for	 the	 psychiatrist's	 couch;	 to	 be	 a
perfectionist	is	to	be	a	neurotic.	And	you	have	all	been	told	to	be	perfect.
Life	is	beautiful	in	all	 its	 imperfections.	Nothing	is	perfect.	Let	me	say	to	you:
even	God	is	not	perfect	--	because	if	God	is	perfect	then	Friedrich	Nietzsche	is
right	that	God	is	dead.	Perfection	means	death!	Perfection	means	now	there	is	no
possibility	of	growth.
Perfection	 means	 now	 everything	 is	 finished.	 Imperfection	 means	 there	 is	 a
possibility	to	grow.	Imperfection	means	the	excitement	of	new	pastures,	ecstasy,
adventure.
Imperfection	means	that	you	are	alive,	that	life	is	going	to	be	there.
And	life	 is	eternal,	hence	I	say	life	 is	eternally	 imperfect.	And	there	 is	nothing
wrong	in	being	imperfect.	Accept	your	imperfection.	And	then	the	idea	of	being
negative	 towards	 yourself	 will	 disappear.	 Accept	 your	 present	 state	 and	 don't
compare	it	with	some	future	perfection,	future	ideal.	Don't	think	in	terms	of	how
you	should	be!	That	is	the	root	of	all	pathology	--	drop	that.	You	are	as	you	are
today,	and	tomorrow	you	may	be	different,	but	you	cannot	predict	it	today,	and
there	is	no	need	to	plan	for	it	either.
Live	this	day	in	all	its	beauty,	in	all	its	joy,	in	all	its	pain,	agony,	ecstasy.	Live	it
in	its	totality	--	in	its	darkness,	in	its	light.	Live	the	hate	and	live	the	love.	Live
the	anger	and	live	the	compassion.	Live	whatsoever	is	available	in	this	moment.
My	approach	is	not	that	of	perfection	but	that	of	totality.	Live	the	moment	that	is
available	 to	 you	 totally,	 and	 the	 next	 moment	 will	 be	 born	 out	 of	 it.	 If	 this
moment	 has	 been	 lived	 totally,	 the	 next	 is	 going	 to	 reach	 a	 higher	 pitch	 of
totality.	a	higher	peak	of	totality	--	because	from	where	is	the	next	moment	going
to	come?	It	is	going	to	be	born	out	of	this	moment.	Forget	all	about	the	future	--
the	present	is	enough.
Jesus	 says:	 "Think	 not	 of	 the	morrow,	 and	 look	 at	 the	 lilies	 in	 the	 field!	 how
beautiful	 they	 are.	 Even	 Solomon	 was	 not	 so	 beautiful	 attired	 in	 all	 his
grandeur."
And	what	is	the	secret	of	the	beautiful	lilies,	the	poor	lilies?	The	secret	is	simple:
they	think	not	of	the	morrow,	they	don't	know	anything	of	the	future.	Tomorrow
exists	not.
This	day	is	enough	unto	itself,	this	moment	is	enough	unto	itself.
And,	 Asutosh,	 your	 feeling	 of	 negativity	 about	 yourself	 will	 disappear.
Remember,	 if	 you	 feel	 negative	 about	 yourself,	 you	 will	 automatically	 feel
negative	about	others.	That	is	a	necessary	corollary.	It	has	to	be	understood.
THE	 PERSON	WHO	 IS	 NEGATIVE	 ABOUT	 HIMSELF	 cannot	 be	 positive
about	anybody	else	either,	because	the	faults	that	he	finds	in	himself	he	will	find
in	others	 --	 in	 fact	he	will	magnify	 them	in	others.	He	will	 take	revenge.	Your
parents	have	made	you	negative	about	yourself,	you	will	 take	revenge	on	your
children	you	will	make	them	even	more	negative.
Hence,	 negativity	 goes	 on	 growing	 with	 each	 generation.	 Each	 generation
becomes	 more	 and	 more	 pathological.	 If	 the	 modern	 man	 is	 suffering
psychologically	 so	much	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the	modern	man	himself:	 it
simply	shows	that	 the	whole	past	has	been	wrong.	It	 is	all	accumulation	of	 the
whole	past.	The	modern	man	is	suffering	from	the	past;	the	modern	man	is	not
suffering	from	his	own	sins	as	the	so-called	religious	preachers	go	on	saying	to
you.	You	are	suffering	from	the	sins	of	centuries...	but	now	things	have	come	to
a	 peak.	Man	 is	 falling	 apart.	 Up	 to	 now	 somehow	we	 have	managed	 to	 keep
ourselves	together,	but	now	things	have	come	to	such	a	point	that	either	man	has
to	 change	 totally	 and	 has	 to	 change	 his	 vision	 of	 life,	 or	 man	 has	 to	 commit
suicide.
If	you	follow	the	past,	then	you	are	on	the	verge	of	committing	a	global	suicide.
And	 that's	what	your	political	 leaders	 are	 trying	 to	do:	preparing	atom	bombs,
hydrogen	bombs,	super	hydrogen	bombs	--	piling	up	bombs	upon	bombs.	They
already	have	too	many!	In	fact,	just	ten	years	ago	they	were	already	capable	of
killing	each	person	seven	 times.	Ten	years	ago	 they	were	 ready	 to	destroy	 this
earth	 seven	 times,	 although	 a	 person	 dies	 only	 once	 --	 you	 need	 not	 kill	 him
twice,	that	will	be	unnecessary.	But	in	case	somebody	survives,	politicians	have
to	take	care	--	they	plan	perfectly.	But	that	is	how	things	were	ten	years	ago.
Now,	you	will	be	surprised:	 they	can	destroy	 this	earth	seven	hundred	 times	--
each	single	person	can	be	killed	seven	hundred	times!	Now	this	is	too	much,	and
absolutely	 unnecessary.	 Seven	 is	 okay	 --	 there	 are	 a	 few	 cunning	 people	who
may	not	die.	But	seven	hundred	times!?	And	still	the	race	continues.	Even	poor
countries	are	joining	the	race	hankering	to	join	it	--	starving,	but	they	want	atom
bombs.	Starving!	but	they	want	more	power	to	kill	and	destroy.
Just	a	bird's	eye	view	and	you	can	see	the	earth	is	preparing	for	a	global	suicide,
a	total	destruction,	a	total	war.	And	remember	again,	this	has	nothing	to	do	with
the	modern	man	as	 such.	The	modern	man	 is	only	a	victim	of	 the	whole	past.
And	the	priests	go	on	saying	that	something	is	wrong	with	the	modern	man,	and
they	go	on	praising	the	past.
The	modern	man	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 the	whole	 past!	Christian,	Mohammedan,
Hindu,	Buddhist	--	all	kinds	of	cultures	have	contributed	to	this	situation.	They
are	responsible.
Unless	they	all	disappear,	unless	we	drop	this	whole	pathological	past	and	start
anew,	 living	 in	 the	present,	with	no	 idea	of	perfection,	with	no	 ideals,	with	no
shoulds,	with	no	commandments,	man	is	doomed.
Everybody	 is	 feeling	negative.	One	may	say	 it,	one	may	not	 say	 it.	And	when
one	feels	negative	about	oneself,	one	feels	negative	about	everything	else.	One's
attitude	becomes	negative,	that	of	a	NO.	And	if	the	negative	person	is	taken	to
the	 rosebush	he	will	count	 the	 thorns,	he	will	not	 look	at	 the	 rose	 flower	 --	he
cannot.	He	is	not	capable	of	that.	He	will	simply	ignore	the	roseflower,	he	will
count	the	thorns.
A	woman	was	very	unhappy.	Her	husband	was	seriously	ill	in	hospital,	and	her
son	had	just	been	arrested	on	a	drug	charge.	So	she	went	to	the	park	to	sit	in	the
sun	and	 refresh	herself.	She	 sat	on	a	bench.	As	 she	watched,	 a	 little	bird	 flew
from	a	 tree	on	one	side	of	 the	bench	 towards	a	 tree	on	 the	other	side.	When	it
passed	over	the	woman,	it	let	loose	a	little	birdshit	which	hit	her	on	the	forehead.
The	woman's	eyes	lifted	towards	heaven,	her	hands	came	up,	and	she	said,	"You
see	how	it	is,	God	--	for	other	people	they	sing!"
If	you	are	feeling	negative,	then	the	whole	life	becomes	a	dark	night.	Then	there
are	no	more	dawns,	 then	 the	mornings	are	never	 there.	Then	 the	 sun	only	 sets
and	never	rises.
Then	your	dark	nights	are	not	even	full	of	stars.	What	 to	say	about	stars?	You
don't	even	have	a	small	candle.
The	 negative	 person	 lives	 in	 darkness,	 lives	 a	 kind	 of	 death.	 He	 slowly	 dies.
That's	what	he	thinks	life	is.	He	goes	on	poisoning	himself	in	many	ways;	he	is
self-destructive.	 And,	 naturally,	 whosoever	 comes	 in	 contact	 with	 him,	 he
destroys	 him	 too.	 A	 negative	 mother	 will	 destroy	 the	 child.	 The	 negative
husband	will	destroy	 the	wife;	 the	negative	wife	will	destroy	 the	husband.	The
negative	parents	will	destroy	their	children;	the	negative	teacher	will	destroy	his
students.	The	negative	priest...	and	all	priests	are	negative.	It	is	very	rarely	that
you	 come	 across	 a	 man	 like	 Buddha	 or	 Christ	 or	 Mohammed,	 who	 is	 not
negative	--	but	they	are	not	priests:	they	are	prophets.	They	bring	new	visions	to
life.
Priests	exploit	the	prophets'	vision;	they	distort	it.	They	interpret	it	in	such	ways
that	 it	 becomes	 a	 strategy	 to	 dominate	 people.	 Christ	 is	 not	 a	 Christian,
remember;	Christ	was	 never	 a	Christian.	Christianity	 is	 created	 by	 the	 priests;
Christianity	is	the	creation	of	Saint	Paul.	He	is	the	real	founder	of	Christianity	--
not	Jesus	Christ.
It	is	not	Buddha	who	is	the	founder	of	Buddhism,	but	the	priests	who	followed....
And	it	 is	so	with	every	religion.	Whenever	a	truth	has	entered	into	somebody's
being,	 whenever	 somebody	 has	 received	 God,	 priests	 gather	 together	 around
him.	They	never	miss	the	opportunity	--	they	are	the	most	cunning	people.	They
start	exploiting	the	situation.	And	once	the	enlightened	person	is	gone,	then	the
priests	become	the	masters,	the	owners.
The	past	has	been	created	by	the	priests.	It	is	a	negative	past	--	life-denying,	anti-
life,	anti-love,	anti-joy,	anti-celebration.	It	has	created	only	two	kinds	of	people
in	 the	world	 those	who	 are	 sincere	 --	 just	 like	 you,	Asutosh	 --	 those	who	 are
sincere,	 they	are	suffering	from	negativity,	anguish,	despair;	and	those	who	are
not	sincere,	they	have	become	hypocrites.	They	go	on	talking	about	the	anti-life
religious	 teachings,	and	from	the	backdoor	 they	 live	a	 totally	different	 life.	On
the	surface	they	are	spiritualists,	deep	down	they	are	materialists.
And,	 remember,	 I	am	not	against	materialism:	 I	am	against	hypocrisy.	 I	would
like	everybody	to	be	a	materialist	and	a	spiritualist,	because	you	are	both	body
and	 soul,	 because	 God	 is	 both	 God	 and	 the	 universe.	 The	 universe	 is	 his
manifestation.	Your	body	is	the	manifestation	of	your	soul.
In	the	past,	because	the	religions	talked	in	terms	of	anti-materialism	they	created
two	 kinds	 of	 people:	 sincere	 people	 who	 had	 to	 declare	 that	 they	 were
materialists	 --	 and	 that	 is	 not	 good;	 because	 of	 that	 declaration	 they	 became
closed	to	the	spiritual	dimension	--
and	then	there	were	insincere,	cunning	people	who	talked	about	spiritualism	and
remained	materialists.
You	 can	 see	 it	 in	 this	 country.	My	own	experience	 is	 --	 and	 I	 have	known	all
kinds	of	people;	here	with	me	 there	are	all	kinds	of	people	 from	almost	 every
country	of	the	world
--	my	own	experience	is	that	Indians	are	the	most	materialistic.	They	talk	about
spiritualism,	 they	 brag	 about	 spiritualism,	 but	 all	 that	 bragging	 and	 all	 that
talking	is	just	to	hide,	to	cover	their	reality.	They	are	hypocrites.
The	more	religious	a	country	pretends	to	be,	the	more	hypocritical	it	is.	And	then
man	 is	 split.	 Either	 the	 spiritual	 dimension	 becomes	 closed,	 or	 you	 become	 a
split	person.	And	both	alternatives	are	wrong.
A	new	man	is	needed	who	will	affirm	life,	who	will	love	life,	who	will	love	love,
who	will	love	this	existence	AS	it	is,	who	will	not	make	demands	that	first	it	has
to	be	perfect,	who	will	celebrate	life	with	all	its	limitations.	And	that	new	man	is
my	sannyasin.
My	sannyasin	heralds	the	new	man,	a	new	beginning,	a	disconnection	from	the
past,	a	discontinuity	from	the	past.	I	don't	want	you	to	be	hypocrites:	I	want	you
to	be	real,	authentic	human	beings.	Love	your	body,	live	your	body	to	its	totality.
Love	your	instincts,	your	desires,	and	live	them	in	their	totality.
And	you	will	be	surprised:	if	you	love	your	life,	life	starts	opening	its	doors	to
you.	If	you	love,	mysteries	are	revealed	to	you,	secrets	are	handed	over	to	you.	If
you	 love	 your	 body,	 sooner	 or	 later	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 soul	 that
resides	 in	 it.	 If	 you	 love	 the	 trees	 and	 the	mountains	 and	 the	 rivers,	 sooner	or
later	you	will	see	the	invisible	hands	of	God	behind	everything.	His	signature	is
on	 every	 leaf.	 You	 just	 need	 eyes	 to	 see	 --	 and	 only	 positive	 eyes	 can	 see;
negative	 eyes	 cannot	 see.	Negative	 eyes	 are	blind!	Negative	 eyes	only	 see	 the
wrong.
You	ask	me,	Asutosh:	I	FEEL	NEGATIVE	ABOUT	MYSELF:	HOW	DO	YOU
SEE
ME?
I	 SEE	 YOU	 AS	 A	 BEING	 A	 BEAUTIFUL	 PERSON.	 I	 see	 you	 as	 of	 great
worth,	 significance.	 If	God	has	given	birth	 to	you,	 that	 is	 proof	 enough!	 --	 no
other	 proof	 is	 needed	 --	 that	 you	 are	 fulfilling	 some	 immense	 need	 of	 the
universe.	Start	loving	yourself,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	love	others,	that	is
the	only	way	to	love	God.	If	you	cannot	 love	yourself,	how	can	you	love	your
creator?	If	you	hate	yourself,	you	will	hate	your	creator	too	--	because	finally	HE
is	 responsible.	He	has	created	an	unworthy	person	 like	you.	He	has	made	you
ugly.	He	has	given	you	wrong,	evil	desires.	He	is	the	culprit!	Condemning	your
own	instincts,	your	own	desires,	yom	own	life,	you	are	condemning,	vicariously,
God	himself
Accept	yourself,	otherwise	you	will	become	a	hypocrite.	Don't	repress	--	nothing
is	 negative	 in	 you.	 Existence	 is	 utterly	 positive.	 Express...	 manifest	 your
hiddenmost	core.
Sing	your	song,	and	don't	be	worried	what	it	is.	Don't	expect	anybody	to	applaud
it	--
there	is	no	need.	Singing	in	itself	should	be	the	reward.
I	would	not	like	you	to	become	a	hypocrite.	And	who	is	a	hypocrite?	The	person
who	says	something,	believes	something,	and	lives	just	the	contrary.
Father	 Flanagan	 is	 walking	 through	 the	 village	 when	 he	 is	 hailed	 by	 Mrs.
O'Rourke.
"Would	 ye	 be	 joining	 us,	 father?"	 she	 calls	 out.	 "It	 is	 a	 bit	 of	 a	 party	we	 are
having."
"I	wish	I	could,"	replies	the	good	father,	"but	I	have	to	go	and	say	mass."
"What	 a	 pity,"	 says	 the	 woman,	 "a	 fine	 party	 it	 is,	 and	 we	 are	 playing	 some
lovely	games.
We	blindfolded	the	women,	the	men	took	off	their	trousers,	and	the	women	have
been	guessing	who	is	who.	And	would	you	believe	it,	father,	your	name	has	been
called	out	five	times	already!"
Beware!	One	cannot	live	in	the	negative.	One	can	think	negatively	but	one	has	to
live	positively.	You	cannot	live	in	the	no,	because	the	no	has	no	nourishment	in
it,	 and	 the	 no	has	 no	 space	 in	 it.	No	 is	 a	 death!	One	 can	die	 in	 a	 no,	 but	 one
cannot	live	in	a	no.
If	you	want	to	really	live,	you	will	need	a	deep	yes	in	your	heart.	It	is	only	yes
that	 allows	you	 to	 live.	 It	 gives	 you	nourishment,	 it	 gives	 you	 space	 to	move.
Just	watch	the	word!
Even	repeating	the	word	'yes'...	and	something	starts	opening	up	in	you.	Say	no
and	something	shrinks.	Say	no,	repeat	no,	and	you	are	killing	yourself	Say	yes
and	you	will	feel	overflowing.	Say	yes	and	you	are	ready	to	love,	to	live,	to	be.
Asutosh,	 to	 me,	 each	 individual	 is	 superb,	 is	 unique.	 I	 don't	 compare	 any
individual;	comparison	 is	not	my	way,	because	comparison	 is	always	ugly	and
violent.	I	will	not	say	you	are	superior	to	others,	I	will	not	say	you	are	inferior	to
anybody	 --	you	are	 just	yourself	And	you	are	needed	as	you	are.	And	you	are
incomparable	--	as	everybody	else	is.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	YOU	SAY,	"DO	NOT	IMITATE	CHRIST,	BUDDHA	OR	YOU,"	BUT
CANNOT	ONE	LEARN	BY	IMITATION?	CANNOT	ONE	LEARN	BY
FOLLOWING?	 CANNOT	 ONE	 BECOME	 ONE'S	 TRUE	 SELF	 BY	 THE
LIGHT	OF
CHRIST,	BUDDHA	OR	YOU?
Anand,
TO	IMITATE	IS	TO	GO	AGAINST	YOURSELF.	To	imitate	simply	means	you
are	 denying	 yourself	 and	 you	 are	 imposing	 somebody	 else	 upon	 you.	 Love
Christ	 if	you	can	find	him,	but	don't	 imitate	him.	Understand	the	Buddha	if	by
chance	you	meet	him,	but	don't	follow	him.	You	are	here	with	me:	BE	with	me
in	deep	love,	in	deep	trust;	allow	me	to	have	a	communion	with	your	heart	--	let
our	 hearts	 meet,	 merge,	 mingle	 with	 each	 other.	 But	 please	 don't	 imitate	 me,
don't	follow	me.
You	have	to	go	on	your	own.	You	have	to	be	a	light	unto	yourself.	You	have	to
BE
YOURSELF!	If	you	imitate	Christ	you	will	be	a	Christian	but	never	a	Christ	--
and	 to	 be	 a	 Christian	 is	 ugly,	 and	 to	 be	 a	 Christ	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful
happenings.	The	most	precious	happening	in	the	world	is	to	be	a	Christ.
To	 be	 a	 Buddha	means	 to	 be	 awakened	 to	 your	 inner	 light.	 How	 can	 you	 be
awakened	by	 following	 somebody?	My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	my	 followers,	 they
are	my	friends,	they	are	my	lovers.	They	are	not	my	followers!	I	am	not	giving
you	any	instructions	about	how	to	live;	I	am	not	giving	you	any	commandments
about	how	to	behave.	I	am	not	giving	you	any	character	to	cultivate.	I	am	simply
sharing	my	insight	--	I	am	simply	sharing	with	you	what	has	happened	to	me.	I
am	simply	telling	my	story	to	you.	And	I	am	grateful	that	you	are	listening	to	it.
Just	listen	to	it	as	totally	as	possible,	and	then	something	will	start	happening	in
you.	It	will	not	be	a	following,	it	will	not	be	an	imitation.	It	will	not	be	caused	by
me:	it	will	be	a	synchronicity.	It	will	be	acausal.
The	 law	 of	 synchronicity	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
contributions	of	Carl	Gustav	Jung	to	modern	humanity:	the	law	of	synchronicity.
Science	is	based	on	the	law	of	causality.	The	law	of	causality	is	mechanical.	You
heat	water	to	a	hundred	degrees	--	it	evaporates.	Where	you	heat	it	is	irrelevant	--
in	the	temple,	in	the	church,	in	the	mosque,	it	doesn't	matter;	in	India,	in	Tibet,	it
doesn't	matter.
If	you	heat	water	to	a	hundred	degrees,	it	evaporates;	the	water	has	no	say	in	it.
The	water	cannot	say,	"Today	I	am	not	feeling	like	it."	Or,	"Today	is	Sunday	and
I	am	on	a	holiday,	and	I	am	not	interested	in	becoming	vapour."	Or,	"Today	I	am
not	 in	 the	 mood,	 and	 you	 can	 go	 on	 heating	 and	 heating	 and	 I	 will	 not
evaporate."	Or,	 "Today	 I	 am	 suddenly	 feeling	 very	 generous	 towards	 you	 so	 I
will	evaporate	at	fifty	degrees.	I	will	favour	you."
No,	the	water	has	no	choice.	The	law	is	mechanical,	it	is	causal.	If	you	create	the
cause,	the	effect	HAS	to	follow.	And	it	is	without	any	exception.
Because	of	this	law	of	causality,	science	cannot	believe	in	the	existence	of	soul,
in	 the	 existence	 of	 consciousness,	 in	 the	 existence	 of	God	 --	 because	 they	 are
non-mechanical	phenomena.	The	very	methodology	of	science	prevents	it	from
accepting	 them;	 they	 cannot	 be	 absorbed	 in	 the	 scientific	 world.	 They	 will
disturb	it,	 they	will	destroy	its	whole	edifice.	They	have	to	be	kept	out	--	God,
soul,	 consciousness,	 love	 --	 they	 have	 all	 to	 be	 kept	 outside	 the	 temple	 of
science.	They	cannot	be	allowed	in.	They	are	dangerous:	 they	will	sabotage	its
whole	structure.	They	are	acausal.	But	they	must	be	following	some	other	law.
The	credit	goes	 to	Carl	Gustav	Jung.	The	 law	has	been	known	down	 the	ages,
but	 nobody	 had	 named	 it	 exactly.	 He	 called	 it	 'the	 law	 of	 synchronicity'.	 It
suddenly	happened	to	a	scientist.	A	scientist	a	hundred	years	ago	was	staying	in
an	old	house.	In	that	old	house	there	were	two	old	clocks	on	the	same	wall.	He
was	 surprised	 to	 see	 that	 they	 always	 kept	 exactly	 the	 same	 time,	 second	 to
second:	"Old	clocks,	and	so	perfect?	Not	even	a	single	second's	difference?"
Being	 a	 scientist	 he	became	curious.	He	put	 one	 clock	 five	minutes	back,	 and
after	 twenty-four	hours	 in	 the	morning	when	he	 looked	again,	 they	were	again
keeping	 the	 same	 time.	Now	 it	was	 a	great	puzzle.	He	enquired...	 nobody	had
changed,	nobody	had	touched	anything.	He	tried	again	and	again,	and	again	and
again	they	would	come	to	the	same	rhythm.	Then	he	tried	to	find	out:	"What	is
happening?	--	something	strange.	They	are	disconnected!"
Then	he	observed	more	minutely	and	he	came	to	conclude:	"The	vibration	of	the
one	 clock,	which	 is	more	powerful,	 the	bigger	 clock,	 goes	 through	 the	wall	 --
just	 the	 vibration	 --	 and	 keeps	 the	 other	 clock	 in	 tune.	 It	 is	 a	 subtle	 rhythm.
Nothing	is	visible."
That	was	 the	beginning	of	a	new	phenomenon...	 then	many	many	more	 things
happened.
And	 by	 the	 time	 Carl	 Gustav	 Jung	 started	 working	 on	 how	 things	 happen	 in
consciousness,	he	came	to	conclude	that	the	vibe	of	one	heart,	 if	 it	 is	powerful
enough,	can	change	the	rhythm	of	another	heart	--	just	like	the	bigger	clock	was
changing	the	smaller	clock.
The	vibe	is	invisible.	There	is	not	yet	any	way	to	measure	it,	but	it	is	there.	It	is
not	tangible,	but	it	functions.	It	is	not	causal.
That's	what	happens	 in	SATSANG	--	 in	 communion	with	 a	Master.	 If	 you	are
with	a	Christ,	he	is	a	 tremendous	power	--	he	is	God!	He	is	a	window	to	God.
God	 is	 flowing	 through	 him.	 If	 you	 come	 close	 to	 him	 --	 and	 that's	 what
disciplehood	is	all	about:	to	come	close	to	a	Master,	to	come	close	to	a	window
from	whom	God	 is	 flowing	 --	his	power,	his	vibe,	will	 set	 the	 rhythm	of	your
heart.	 It	 is	 acausal,	 one	 of	 those	 mysterious	 intangibles,	 but	 it	 has	 been
happening	down	the	ages.
Have	you	watched	it?	Two	lovers,	if	they	are	really	lovers,	and	deep	in	intimacy,
slowly	 slowly	 start	 looking	 alike	 --	 that	 is	 synchronicity.	 You	 can	 see	 it:	 real
lovers,	 slowly	 slowly	 start	 looking	 like	 brother	 and	 sister.	 Something	 in	 them
starts	becoming	synchronized,	they	start	having	the	same	rhythm.
The	mother	and	the	child	have	the	same	rhythm;	hence,	now	it	is	a	known	fact,
and	even	scientifically	proved,	that	if	a	child	is	killed	thousands	of	miles	away
from	the	mother,	something	 in	 the	heart	of	 the	mother	 feels	 the	pain.	She	may
not	be	able	to	understand	it,	what	is	happening;	she	may	not	be	able	to	explain	it.
She	 may	 not	 know	 anything	 about	 what	 is	 happening	 to	 her	 child,	 but	 if
something	is	happening	to	the	child	and	the	child	is	thousands	of	miles	away	--
that	doesn't	make	any	difference	--	the	mother's	heart	immediately	starts	feeling
it.	Something	is	broken	in	her	heart	too.
Just	the	other	day	a	sannyasin	wrote	to	me	that	his	mother	died	a	few	days	ago	--
just	now	he	has	received	 the	 telegram.	And	he	 is	puzzled,	because	 the	day	she
died	 he	 was	 in	 such	 agony,	 with	 no	 physical	 problem,	 with	 no	 psychological
problem,	with	no	visible	came,	but	in	such	agony,	such	terrible	agony,	as	he	has
never	been	before.
This	 is	 synchronicity.	 The	 mother	 and	 the	 child	 have	 lived	 together	 for	 nine
months,	the	child	lives	in	the	mother's	womb;	his	heart	beats	in	rhythm	with	the
mother's	heart,	his	blood	pulsates	in	rhythm	with	the	mother's	blood	--	he	is	not
separate	at	all!	He	is	one	with	the	mother.	And	that	oneness	persists.
When	two	lovers	become	really	intimate,	when	they	don't	have	any	secrets	from
each	other,	when	they	are	really	open	to	each	other,	when	they	are	not	afraid	of
each	other	and	not	hiding	anything	from	each	other...	that	is	intimacy.	When	they
can	say	each	and	everything	without	any	fear	that	the	other	will	be	offended	or
hurt....	If	the	lover	thinks	the	other	will	be	offended,	then	the	intimacy	is	not	yet
enough.	Then	it	is	a	kind	of	arrangement	which	can	be	broken	by	anything.	But
when	two	lovers	start	feeling	that	there	is	nothing	to	hide	and	everything	can	be
said,	and	the	trust	has	come	to	such	a	depth,	where	even	if	you	don't	say	it	the
other	is	going	to	know,	then	they	start	becoming	one.	Then	they	start	becoming
more	like	brother	and	sister.
Many	people	become	puzzled...	just	a	few	nights	ago,	a	couple	came	to	me	and
the	husband	was	very	much	puzzled.	He	said,	"What	is	happening	to	us?	We	are
no	more	 husband	 and	wife	 --	 all	 sex	 has	 disappeared,	 but	 still	we	 feel	 a	 deep
intimacy."	And	I	told	them,	"Something	immensely	valuable	is	happening.	You
are	 becoming	 brother	 and	 sister.	 Your	 love	 is	 taking	 on	 a	 new	 dimension,	 a
higher	one	--	that	of	non-sexuality.	It	is	becoming	purer."
Hearing	 it,	 immediately	 everything	 became	 clear	 to	 them.	 They	 hugged	 each
other,	tears	started	flowing	from	their	eyes.	It	was	a	beautiful	scene	to	see	--	they
understood	it.	Yes,	it	clicked.	Yes,	that's	what	is	happening.	They	were	worried
because	 they	came	from	the	West	 --	 the	East	has	always	known	it:	 that	 if	 love
deepens	it	transforms	the	relationship;	husbands	and	wives	become	brothers	and
sisters.	And	ultimately	a	moment	comes	when	not	even	brothers	and	sisters...	a
kind	of	oneness	arises,	they	become	one.
THIS	IS	SYNCHRONICITY!	And	this	is	what	happens	between	the	Master	and
the	disciple	 --	on	a	 far	deeper	 level	 than	any	other	 love,	on	a	 far	higher	plane
than	any	other	intimacy.	You	need	not	imitate	Buddha,	you	need	not	imitate	me,
you	 need	 not	 follow	 Christ	 or	 Krishna	 or	 Mohammed.	 If	 you	 are	 fortunate
enough	to	be	with	an	alive	Master,	just	become	vulnerable	to	him.	Let	intimacy
happen,	 come	 closer	 and	 closer.	 Drop	 your	 defences	 and	 armours.	 And	 the
powerful	 dynamo	 of	 the	 Master,	 his	 magnetic	 field,	 his	 Buddhafield,	 will
transform	 you.	 And	 he	 will	 not	 even	 give	 you	 any	 commandment.	 And	 his
transformation	 will	 not	 be	 something	 imposed	 on	 you	 but	 something	 stirred
within	you	that	will	bring	your	own	being	alive.
Real	life	is	not	acting.	Imitation	is	acting.	Imitation	is	superficial.	Real	life	is	not
a	game,	and	 if	you	are	playing	games	you	will	never	be	 real	 and	you	will	not
know	what	real	life	is.
An	actor	who	had	not	worked	for	some	time	was	offered	a	one	line	replacement
in	 a	 show.	 He	 practised	 the	 line	 all	 the	 way	 to	 the	 theater:	 "Hark,	 I	 hear	 the
cannon's	roar.
Hark,	I	hear	the	cannon's	roar."
Having	gone	through	all	 the	possibilities,	he	decided	on	the	best	one.	When	he
arrived	at	the	theater	they	told	him	his	line	was	just	about	to	come	up	and	asked
him	if	he	was	ready.	He	said	he	was.	They	pushed	him	out	on	to	the	stage	to	an
enormous	 sound	 of	 cannons	 roaring.	 The	 actor	 jumped	 with	 fright	 and	 said,
"Christ,	what	the	hell	was	that?"
Life	is	a	constant	surprise.	If	you	are	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan
you	 are	 going	 to	 miss	 it.	 You	 cannot	 depend	 on	 rehearsals,	 and	 you	 cannot
depend	on	playing	superficial	games.	And	that's	what	is	happening:	people	in	the
churches	 are	 just	 playing	 the	 game	 of	 being	 Christians.	 In	 their	 real	 life	 they
have	nothing	to	do	with	Christ.	Has	any	Christian	anything	to	do	with	Christ?
Just	 watch.	 Christ	 says:	 "Blessed	 are	 the	 meek,	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	 kingdom	 of
God."	But	look	at	Christians:	they	have	become	the	most	powerful	religion	in	the
world.	The	Pope	is	not	meek;	he	has	the	greatest	empire	in	the	world	--	all	 the
Rockefellers	and	all	the	Morgans	and	all	the	Fords	have	nothing....	In	fact,	I	am
always	 puzzled	 how	 the	 Jews	 missed	 such	 a	 big	 opportunity,	 and	 the	 poor
Italians	befooled	them!	Such	a	business!
And	you	will	become	ugly	if	you	imitate,	you	will	become	distorted	--	because
trying	to	become	like	Christ	you	will	have	to	cut	many	things	here	and	there.
Do	you	know	that	in	the	ancient	scriptures	Christ	is	described	as	a	hunchback?
And	do	you	know	his	height?	--	four	feet	five	inches.	And	the	ancient	scriptures
say	he	was	one	of	the	most	ugly	of	men.	Now,	try	to	be	Jesus	Christ	--	become	a
hunchback,	 cut	 your	 legs	 or	 your	 head,	 and	 distort	 your	 face	 and	 become	 the
ugliest	of	men.
A	man	went	into	a	tailor's	shop.	He	tried	on	a	sports	jacket;	the	tailor	took	a	tuck.
The	man's	shoulder	went	up	three	inches.	The	tailor	said,	"That's	fine	--	I	will	fix
it."	 He	 made	 another	 adjustment;	 the	 man's	 arm	 twisted	 into	 an	 awkward
position.	And	an	hour	later	he	walked	out	in	his	newly	fitted	jacket.
Two	 elderly	women	 noticed	 him.	 The	 first	 one	watching	 him	 from	 across	 the
street	said,
"Isn't	that	a	shame	--	such	a	handsome	young	man	and	so	hopelessly	crippled!"
Her	friend	nodded,	"Yes,	but	doesn't	that	jacket	fit	him	beautifully?"
Avoid	such	jackets	and	avoid	all	rehearsals.
Giant	 Polish	 dockworker,	 Kraczewski,	 was	 considered	 by	 most	 of	 the
longshoremen	 to	be	a	great	 lover.	They	claimed	he	could	make	 love	 to	 twenty
girls	 in	 an	 hour.	When	 some	disbelieving	 seamen	 showed	up,	 bets	were	made
and	the	next	night	twenty	girls	were	lined	up	in	one	of	the	warehouses.
The	 big	 Polack	 went	 to	 work.	 He	 had	 made	 love	 to	 the	 first	 dozen	 when
suddenly	he	fell	to	the	floor	in	a	state	of	exhaustion.	His	pals	rushed	up	to	him
screaming,	"What	happened?"
"I	dunno,"	answered	Kraczewaski.	"I	did	okay	this	afternoon	at	the	rehearsal!"
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Wake	Up!	Wake	Up!
14	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904140
ShortTitle:
FISH04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
104
mins
FRIEND,	WAKE	UP!	WHY	DO	YOU	GO	ON	SLEEPING?	THE	NIGHT	 IS
OVER	--
DO	YOU	WANT	TO	LOSE	THE	DAY	THE	SAME	WAY?	OTHER	WOMEN
WHO
MANAGED	TO	GET	UP	EARLY	HAVE	ALREADY	FOUND	AN	ELEPHANT
OR	A	JEWEL....	SO	MUCH	WAS	LOST	ALREADY	WHILE	YOU	SLEPT...
AND	THAT
WAS	SO	UNNECESSARY!
THE	ONE	WHO	LOVES	YOU	UNDERSTOOD	BUT	YOU	DID	NOT.	YOU
FORGOT
TO	 MAKE	 A	 PLACE	 IN	 YOUR	 BED	 NEXT	 TO	 YOU.	 INSTEAD	 YOU
SPENT
YOUR	 LIFE	 PLAYING.	 IN	 YOUR	 TWENTIES	 YOU	 DID	 NOT	 GROW
BECAUSE
YOU	DID	NOT	KNOW	WHO	YOUR	LORD	WAS.	WAKE	UP!	WAKE	UP!
THERE'S
NO	ONE	IN	YOUR	BED	--	HE	LEFT	YOU	DURING	THE	LONG	NIGHT.
Kabir	 says:	 THE	 ONLY	 WOMAN	 AWAKE	 IS	 THE	 WOMAN	 WHO	 HAS
HEARD
THE	FLUTE!
I	PLAYED	FOR	TEN	YEARS	WITH	THE	GIRLS	MY	OWN	AGE	BUT	NOW
I	AM
SUDDENLY	 IN	 FEAR.	 I	 AM	 ON	 THE	WAY	 UP	 SOME	 STAIRS	 --	 THEY
ARE
HIGH.	YET	I	HAVE	TO	GIVE	UP	MY	FEARS	IF	I	WANT	TO	TAKE	PART	IN
THIS
LOVE.
I	HAVE	TO	LET	GO	THE	PROTECTIVE	CLOTHES	AND	MEET	HIM	WITH
THE
WHOLE	 LENGTH	 OF	 MY	 BODY.	 MY	 EYES	 WILL	 HAVE	 TO	 BE	 THE
LOVE-CANDLES	THIS	TIME.
Kabir	 says:	 MEN	 AND	 WOMEN	 IN	 LOVE	 WILL	 UNDERSTAND	 THIS
POEM.	IF
WHAT	YOU	FEEL	FOR	THE	HOLY	ONE	IS	NOT	DESIRE	THEN	WHAT'S
THE
USE	OF	DRESSING	WITH	SUCH	CARE	AND	SPENDING	SO	MUCH	TIME
MAKING	YOUR	EYELIDS	DARK?
FRIEND	WAKE	UP!	WAKE	UP!
THIS	HAS	BEEN	THE	CALL	OF	ALL	THE	BUDDHAS	down	 the	centuries.
They	 have	 been	 shouting	 from	 the	 housetops.	Everybody	 hears	 it,	 but	 nobody
listens.	Everybody	knows	it,	but	nobody	understands.	And	knowledge	is	futile	--
it	 is	 only	 understanding	 that	 liberates.	And	 hearing	 is	 of	 no	 use	 --	 unless	 you
listen.
Anybody	who	is	not	deaf	is	capable	of	hearing,	but	listening	is	a	totally	different
matter,	 qualitatively	 different.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your	 ears:	 it	 has
something	 to	 do	 with	 your	 heart.	 When	 your	 ears	 and	 your	 heart	 are	 joined
together,	listening	happens.	If	the	heart	is	not	in	the	ears,	you	hear,	but	hearing	is
not	going	 to	help.	 It	will	make	you	more	knowledgeable.	But	 to	become	more
knowledgeable	is	to	create	more	hindrances	between	you	and	the	Beloved.
Knowledge	can	never	become	a	bridge,	it	is	always	a	wall.	It	divides	you	from
the	ultimate,	from	the	immediate,	from	the	whole.	It	cannot	connect	you	--	only
love	 connects.	 But	 love	 is	 of	 the	 heart;	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 head.
Knowledge	gathers	in	the	head;	memory	accumulates	it.	The	ego	enjoys	it.
Love	wells	 up	 in	 the	 heart.	And	 love	 is	 another	 name	 for	 understanding.	 It	 is
only	the	eyes	of	love	which	can	see,	and	the	ears	of	love	which	can	hear.
Existence	is	not	a	problem	that	can	be	solved	by	the	head.	It	is	not	a	riddle	to	be
figured	out:	it	is	a	poem	to	be	sung,	it	is	a	dance	to	be	danced.	It	is	a	love	affair!
Existence	is	a	mystery	--	with	no	solution,	because	it	is	not	a	problem	in	the	first
place.	It	cannot	be	solved:	it	has	to	be	lived.
And	when	 the	Buddhas	 call	 "Wake	 up!	Wake	 up!"	what	 do	 they	mean?	They
mean	that	your	heart	 is	asleep.	Your	head	is	very	awake,	but	 the	awakening	of
the	head	 is	 in	 reality	a	metaphysical	 sleep.	Unless	 the	heart	wakes	up,	you	are
only	dreaming	--	dreams	and	dreams,	even	dreams	that	you	are	awake,	dreams	of
wakefulness,	 dreams	 of	 becoming	 religious,	 dreams	 of	 becoming	 saints,	 holy,
but	they	are	all	dreams.
People	even	think	about	God!	It	 is	such	an	absurdity.	People	even	try	 to	prove
God	 through	 arguments.	God	 cannot	 be	 proved,	 because	 anything	 that	 can	 be
proved	can	also	be	disproved.	If	God	depends	on	logic,	then	logic	is	God,	then
logic	is	higher	than	God.
No,	God	does	not	depend	on	logic.	In	fact,	if	you	are	too	logical,	you	will	not	be
able	at	all	to	sense	the	presence	of	God	in	existence.	And	the	loss	is	going	to	be
yours,	because	not	to	feel	the	presence	of	God	in	existence	is	to	miss	the	whole
point	of	life.
And	man	lives	in	thoughts,	arguments,	theories,	philosophies.	And	the	danger	is
that	if	you	talk	too	much	about	God	and	you	read	too	much	about	God	and	you
discuss	too	much	about	God,	you	may	be	able	to	deceive	yourself	Millions	have
deceived	themselves	in	this	way.
A	 seminarian,	 ordained	 during	 his	 last	 semester,	 dressed	 in	 his	 black	 suit,	 his
gleaming	 white	 collar,	 his	 well-polished	 shoes,	 contemplated	 himself	 in	 the
mirror.	Pleased	with	what	he	saw,	he	decided	to	deprive	the	world	of	his	services
no	 longer	 and	went	 forth	 to	 do	God's	 bidding	 on	Ninth	Avenue	 in	New	York
City.
As	 he	 stood	 on	 the	 kerb,	 hands	 in	 pockets,	 wondering	 what	 TO	 do,	 he	 was
observed	 by	 a	 drunk	who	 seemed	 unimpressed.	 Their	 eyes	met	 and	 the	 drunk
said,	"Sonny,	what	the	hell	do	you	know	about	God?"
The	young	man	made	no	reply,	went	to	his	room,	removed	his	clerical	garb,	and
wondered	what	the	hell	he	did	know	about	God.
You	can	study,	you	can	go	 to	 the	universities,	 to	 theological	colleges;	you	can
have	degrees	in	religious	philosophy	--	and	yet	you	will	never	know	God.	That	is
not	the	way	-
-	that	is	the	barrier.
God	is	known	through	the	heart!	Let	 it	sink	deep	 into	your	being:	God	is	only
known	 through	 the	heart.	So	when	 the	Buddhas	say	"Wake	up!"	 they	mean	 let
your	heart	be	awake.	And	what	is	the	meaning	of	the	heart	being	awake?	When
the	head	is	awake,	it	thinks,	it	spins,	weaves,	beautiful	systems	of	thought.	And
when	the	heart	is	awake,	it	sings	songs	of	love.	It	celebrates	--	just	the	sheer	joy
of	being	is	enough	to	celebrate.	It	loves	--	the	love	is	unaddressed;	the	love	is	not
flowing	towards	a	particular	object.	When	the	heart	is	awake,	it	starts	flowing	in
all	directions.	It	loves	the	whole,	it	simply	loves	--
it	is	love.
That's	 what	 Kabir	 is	 going	 to	 say	 to	 you	 today.	 HIS	 sutras	 are	 of	 immense
beauty.	Each	single	word	has	to	be	meditated	upon.	Remember	I	am	not	saying
'think	upon',	 I	am	saying	 'meditate'.	 I	am	saying:	Be	silent	and	still	and	 let	his
song	sink	in	your	heart.	Let	it	stir	your	heart,	let	it	awaken	your	sleeping	energies
of	love,	joy,	bliss.
Religion	 is	 a	 celebration.	 You	 cannot	 be	 indoctrinated	 in	 religion,	 because
religion	is	not	a	doctrine	at	all.	It	is	a	very	mad	love	affair.
FRIEND	WAKE	UP!	WHY	DO	YOU	GO	ON	SLEEPING?
Man	is	deep	asleep.	What	does	his	sleep	consist	of?	He	is	asleep	because	he	has
forgotten	the	route	to	his	heart.	He	is	alert	as	far	as	mathematics	is	concerned;	he
is	fully	alert	as	far	as	calculation	is	concerned,	he	is	awake	as	far	as	the	world	is
concerned	 and	 worldly	 concerns	 are	 concerned	 --	 for	 money,	 for	 power,	 for
prestige,	respectability,	he	is	fully	awake!	He	is	awake	only	for	the	mundane.	He
is	awake	only	for	the	meaningless.	He	collects	garbage	with	great	alertness.	But
he	is	asleep	for	the	precious,	for	the	sacred.	He	sees	the	trees,	but	he	cannot	see
the	 green	 life	 flowing	 in	 them.	He	 sees	 the	mountains,	 but	 he	 cannot	 feel	 the
beauty	and	the	virgin	silence.	He	sees	people,	but	people	look	like	machines.	He
cannot	 feel	 their	 souls	 --	 he	 has	 not	 even	 felt	 his	 own	 soul,	 how	 can	 he	 feel
anybody	else's	soul?	He	has	not	even	become	aware	of	who	he	is.
FRIEND	WAKE	UP!	WHY	DO	YOU	GO	ON	SLEEPING?
And	in	this	sleep,	when	the	heart	is	in	darkness	and	the	whole	light	has	become
focussed	 on	 the	 head,	 even	 if	 you	 are	 told	 the	 ultimate	 truths	 you	 will
misunderstand	them.	Even	if	a	Buddha	tries	to	wake	you	up,	you	will	be	angry	at
him.	 Naturally,	 obviously!	 because	 you	will	 think	 he	 is	 disturbing	 you.	 He	 is
disturbing	 your	 dreams,	 not	 you,	 but	 you	 have	 invested	 too	 much	 in	 your
dreams.	He	will	say	one	thing,	you	will	understand	another.
Either	 you	 will	 go	 on	 listening	 according	 to	 your	 prejudices,	 choosing	 --
choosing	only	 those	 things	which	can	 support	you	 --	or	you	will	become	very
angry,	 you	will	 crucify,	 you	will	 poison,	 you	will	 destroy	 such	 a	 person	who
comes	and	unnecessarily	disturbs	your	sleep.
Your	sleep	is	deep.	It	has	been	long,	long	there.	You	have	become	accustomed	to
it	 --	so	much	so	 that	 the	heart	goes	on	sleeping	and	still	you	can	manage	your
life.	YOU	 are	 a	 sleep-walker,	 a	 somnambulist.	 There	 are	 people	who	walk	 in
their	 sleep;	 they	 can	 go	 to	 the	 fridge,	 they	 can	 eat	 something,	 they	 can	 come
back	to	their	beds	--	and	they	will	not	stumble	anywhere.	And	if	you	wake	them
up	 in	 the	 middle,	 they	 will	 be	 very	 much	 surprised;	 they	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
figure	it	out,	where	they	are	and	what	they	are	doing.
They	will	be	shocked.
They	move	 with	 open	 eyes,	 remember;	 somnambulists	 move	 with	 open	 eyes.
But	those	open	eyes	are	not	really	open;	 they	simply	manage	a	few	steps.	And
because	 they	 have	 become	 accustomed	 to	 those	 few	 steps,	 they	 can	 be	 done
mechanically;	no	consciousness	is	needed.	Just	watch	your	life:	you	are	doing	a
thousand	and	one	 things,	but	all	 those	 things	are	mechanical.	You	go	on	doing
them	like	a	robot.
And	 when	 you	 talk	 to	 robots,	 it	 is	 really	 very	 difficult	 to	 reach	 them.	 They
misunderstand.
It	seems	there	were	two	brothers	by	the	name	of	Jones.	John	Jones	was	married
and	Jim	was	 the	owner	of	an	old	dilapidated	 rowboat.	 It	 just	 so	happened	 that
John's	wife	died	on	 the	same	day	 that	Jim's	boat	 filled	with	water	and	sank.	A
few	days	 later,	 a	kindly	old	 lady	saw	Jim	on	 the	 street,	 and	mistaking	him	for
John	said,	"Oh,	Mr.	Jones.	I	heard	about	your	terrible	catastrophe.	You	must	feel
heartbroken."
Replied	Jim,	"Why,	I	am	not	a	bit	sorry.	She	was	a	rotten	old	thing	from	the	start.
Her	bottom	was	all	chewed	up	and	she	smelled	like	old	dead	fish.	She	had	a	bad
crack	 in	back	and	a	pretty	bad	hole	 in	 the	 front	and	every	 time	 I	used	her	 she
started	 leaking	 all	 over	 the	 place.	 Oh,	 I	 could	 handle	 her	 all	 right,	 but	 when
anybody	else	used	her,	she	would	go	to	pieces.	Well,	here	is	what	finished	her.
Four	guys	came	across	town	looking	for	a	good	time	and	asked	me	to	rent	out.	I
warned	 them	 she	 was	 not	 so	 hot,	 but	 they	 said	 they	 wanted	 to	 take	 a	 crack
anyway.	Well,	the	damn	fools,	all	four	of	them	tried	to	get	inside	at	once	and	she
split	right	up	the	middle."
The	old	woman	fainted	before	he	could	finish.
That's	 how	 it	 goes	 on:	 one	 thing	 is	 said,	 something	 else	 is	 understood.
Communication	is	very	very	difficult.	Even	ordinary	communication	is	difficult,
and	when	a	man	like	Kabir	talks	it	becomes	almost	impossible	--	because	he	is
talking	 from	 the	 sunlit	 Himalayan	 tops	 and	 you	 are	 listening	 from	 your	 dark
holes	in	the	valley.	By	the	time	it	reaches	you	its	colour	has	changed,	its	flavour
has	changed,	its	meaning	is	no	more	the	same.
And,	obviously,	you	interpret	it	according	to	your	own	conditionings,	your	own
past.
Hence,	 you	 hear	 but	 you	 don't	 listen.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 listen.
Listening	means	being	utterly	silent,	not	interpreting,	not	judging,	not	evaluating
--	neither	for	nor	against	--	just	being	present.
Listen	to	these	words	of	Kabir,	 just	as	a	silent	presence.	Don't	be	in	a	hurry	to
decide	whether	he	is	right	or	wrong.	The	beauty	of	listening	is	that	if	he	is	right,
you	will	simply	know	that	he	is	right.	If	he	is	true,	truth	is	self-evident;	you	will
know	 it	 as	 sure	 as	 you	 know	when	 you	 have	 a	 headache	 --	 nobody	 needs	 to
prove	it	to	you.
All	the	elephants	in	Greece	were	ordered	to	evacuate	the	country.	Behind	the	last
one	was	a	small	mouse.	The	elephant	turned,	"Why	are	you	running,	my	friend?"
"Haven't	you	heard	the	decree?"	replied	the	mouse.	"Yes,	but	you	are	a	mouse,"
the	elephant	said.
"Ah	yes,"	the	mouse	sighed,	"but	if	 they	say	I	am	an	elephant,	 then	how	will	I
prove	that	I	am	not?"
It	is	difficult	to	prove,	but	there	are	things	which	need	not	be	proved	--	a	mouse
knows	that	he	is	a	mouse.	Proof	may	be	difficult.	When	you	listen	to	the	truth,	it
may	be	difficult	for	you	to	prove	that	it	is	true,	but	YOU	WILL	KNOW.	It	will
be	an	inner	feeling	that	it	is	true,	and	that	feeling	is	enough,	because	that	feeling
simply	 transports	you	 into	another	world.	 It	 is	not	a	question	of	your	deciding
whether	it	is	true	or	untrue.	If	you	decide,	you	will	miss	the	whole	point,	because
how	are	you	going	to	decide?	You	will	decide	by	your	past.	And	you	don't	know
what	truth	is!	If	you	had	known	there	would	have	been	no	need	to	listen	to	the
Buddhas	--	you	would	be	a	Buddha	yourself	You	don't	know,	so	your	past	has	no
idea	of	what	truth	is.	How	can	your	past	decide	what	is	what?	Put	the	past	aside.
Just	listen.
And	I	am	not	saying	believe	--	just	listening	is	not	synonymous	with	believing.	It
has	nothing	to	do	with	belief	or	disbelief	--	just	listening	is	just	listening.	You	are
neither	in	favour	nor	disfavour;	you	are	simply	open.	You	allow	it	inside	you.
And	 let	me	 repeat:	 the	 beauty	 of	 truth	 is	 that	when	 it	 reaches	 you,	 your	 heart
simply	 jumps	 in	 joy.	 It	 knows!	 Truth	 synchronizes	with	 your	 heart.	 It	 has	 the
same	rhythm.
Suddenly	 the	heart	 starts	 dancing,	 and	 that	 dance	 is	 the	proof.	And	 if	 it	 is	 not
true,	the	heart	will	not	dance,	and	then	you	will	know	that	it	is	not	true.	But	it	is
not	a	question	of	logical	decision,	of	logical	evaluation.
Listen	to	these	words	very	meditatively:
FRIEND,	WAKE	UP!
Kabir	 calls	 you	 'friend'	 --	 that's	 how	 all	 the	 Buddhas	 have	 always	 felt.	 The
disciple	thinks,
"Buddha,	Krishna,	Christ	or	Kabir,	they	are	Masters	and	we	are	disciples."	From
the	disciples'	side	this	is	so,	but	how	is	it	from	the	Master's	side?
The	Master	knows	there	is	no	Master	and	no	disciple.	The	Master	knows	that	it
is	a	company	of	friends.	The	Master	 is	not	holier-than-thou;	 the	Master	has	no
superiority	complex.	The	Master	is	a	nobody;	the	Master	is	just	ordinary,	but	his
ordinariness	is	luminous.	The	whole	existence	is	either	ordinary	or	extraordinary
--	 but	 the	whole.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 a	 few	 things	 are	 ordinary	 and	 a	 few	 things	 are
extraordinary.	 For	 the	 Master,	 everything	 is	 unique.	 His	 reverence	 for	 life	 is
infinite.
When	a	disciple	comes	and	bows	down	to	the	Master,	deep	down	the	Master	is
also	bowing	down	to	the	disciple.	His	bowing	down	may	not	be	visible,	because
he	is	not	visible;	his	gestures	are	invisible.	The	disciple	slowly	slowly	becomes
capable	of	deciphering,	slowly	slowly	capable	of	decoding	--	slowly	slowly	he
understands	that	the	Master	loves	him,	that	the	Master	thinks	of	him	as	a	friend,
as	a	beloved.
FRIEND	WAKE	UP!	WHY	DO	YOU	GO	ON	 SLEEPING?	 THE	NIGHT	 IS
OVER	--
DO	YOU	WANT	TO	LOSE	THE	DAY	THE	SAME	WAY?
THIS	IS	A	VERY	STRANGE	STATEMENT.	To	 those	who	know,	 life	 is	night
and	death	is	the	day.	In	life	people	remain	asleep;	it	is	death	that	wakes	them	up.
In	ordinary	thinking,	life	is	life	and	death	is	the	end	of	life.	To	the	Buddhas,	to
the	awakened	ones,	death	 is	 far	more	valuable	 than	 life,	 far	 superior,	 far	more
precious,	 far	 more	 significant.Why?	 Because	 it	 is	 the	 crescendo	 of	 life,	 the
ultimate	flowering.	If	life	is	the	night,	then	death	is	the	morn.
Kabir	 says:	THE	NIGHT	 IS	OVER...	 you	 are	 getting	 old,	 time	 is	 slipping	 by.
Death	is	coming	closer	and	closer	every	moment.
THE	NIGHT	IS	OVER	--	DO	YOU	WANT	TO	LOSE
THE	DAY	THE	SAME	WAY?
You	 have	 lost	 the	 night;	 you	 could	 not	 wake	 up	 in	 the	 night.	 But	 it	 can	 be
forgiven:	it	was	night	and	you	slept.	But	you	cannot	be	forgiven	when	death	is
coming	closer	--	now	it	is	time	to	wake	up!	And	if	even	death	cannot	wake	you
up,	then	what	is	going	to	wake	you	up?	And	if	a	person	wakes	up	in	death,	then
for	him	there	is	no	more	any	birth,	no	more	any	death.
But	a	person	can	wake	up	in	death	only	if	he	has	tried	hard	to	wake	up	in	life,	if
his	 whole	 life	 has	 been	 a	 consistent	 effort	 to	 find	 a	 center	 in	 his	 being,	 a
persistent	effort	to	know
"Who	am	I?	Only	then	is	it	possible	that	when	death	comes...	and	death	is	a	great
shock!
It	shatters	all	that	you	have	made.	It	takes	away	all	that	you	have	been	clinging
to;	it	dispossesses	you	of	all	your	possessions.	It	simply	leaves	you	utterly	naked
and	alone.	If	death	cannot	wake	you	up,	 then	you	are	not	simply	asleep	--	you
are	in	a	coma.	And	that's	how	people	are.
Every	day	millions	of	people	die.	They	lived	in	darkness.	 they	die	in	darkness.
They	lived	dreaming,	they	die	dreaming.	They	lived	in	a	stupid	way,	they	die	in
a	stupid	way.	They	miss	all	opportunities.
And	 three	 are	 the	great	 opportunities	 in	 life.	The	 first	 is	 birth.	Only	once	 in	 a
while	 is	 a	man	 so	 intelligent	 that	 he	 uses	 that	 opportunity	 --	 only	 very	 rarely.
Maybe	a	Lao	Tzu	--
hence	the	story.
It	is	said	Lao	Tzu	lived	in	his	mother's	womb	for	eighty-two	years.	Now	this	is
nonsense,	but	it	has	some	truth	in	it.	It	is	not	factual,	but	it	has	some	truth	in	it.
And	that	is	the	difference	between	the	Western	way	of	thinking	and	the	Eastern.
If	you	 tell	 such	a	 story	 to	 the	Western	mind,	he	 simply	 says,	 "This	 cannot	be.
How	can	 a	 person	 live	 for	 eighty-two	years	 in	 the	mother's	womb?	And	what
will	happen	to	the	mother?	Eighty-two	years?
This	is	not	believable;	this	cannot	be	historical."
The	Western	mind	immediately	asks	about	the	facticity	of	the	phenomenon	--	but
it	 is	a	parable!	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	facts;	 it	certainly	has	something	to	do
with	truth.	And	truth	can	only	be	expressed	through	parables;	 there	 is	no	other
way	 to	 express	 truth.	Truth	 can	only	be	 expressed	 through	metaphors,	 through
poetry,	not	through	history.	It	is	poetry,	pure	poetry,	and	of	tremendous	power.
It	means	that	when	Lao	Tm	was	born	he	was	already	so	mature,	so	ripe,	that	he
used	his	first	opportunity	to	wake	up.	Ordinarily	it	takes	eighty-two	years	for	a
person	to	wake	up,	and	even	then,	how	many	people	wake	up?	People	wake	up
at	the	time	of	death,	but	how	many?	--	that	too	is	very	rare.
Lao	 Tzu	 must	 have	 been	 of	 immense	 intelligence,	 must	 have	 carried	 the
intelligence	from	his	past	lives	--	maybe	just	a	little	bit	was	missing,	just	the	last
straw	on	the	camel.	He	used	the	opportunity.	The	first	opportunity	is	birth.	It	is
as	 important	as	death.	 It	 is	a	death	 in	a	way,	because	 the	child	 in	 the	mother's
womb	lives	in	one	way,	one	kind	of	life,	and	then	is	simply	thrown	out,	expelled.
He	 wants	 to	 cling	 to	 his	 home	 where	 he	 has	 lived	 for	 nine	 months,	 and	 so
peacefully,	 so	 silently,	 without	 any	 worry,	 without	 any	 responsibility,	 in	 such
warmth....	He	clings	 to	 the	womb,	he	does	not	want	 to	go	out.	He	feels	 it	as	a
death,	 and	 it	 is	 natural	 --	 because	what	 does	 he	 know	 about	what	 is	 going	 to
happen?	One	thing	is	certain:	his	home	is	being	shattered;	he	is	being	thrown	out
of	all	his	comfort	and	security.	He	knows	he	is	dying!	Hence	the	birth	trauma	--
because	 the	birth	enters	 into	 the	child's	consciousness	as	death.	He	dies	and	 is
reborn.
Lao	Tzu	used	his	 first	opportunity.	And	 the	 same	 is	 the	case	with	Zarathustra,
another	beautiful	story.
It	 is	 said	 that	 Zarathustra	 is	 the	 only	 child	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 man	 who
laughed	 when	 he	 was	 born.	 Children	 cry,	 they	 don't	 laugh	 --	 and	 Zarathustra
laughed	 --	must	 have	 shocked	his	mother	 and...	 a	 real	 belly-laughter.	He	must
have	used	the	first	opportunity.
These	two	names	are	known	TO	have	used	the	first	opportunity.	The	first	shock,
and	they	became	awakened.
The	 second	 opportunity	 in	 life	 is	 love.	 A	 few	 people	 have	 become	 awakened
through	 love.	And	 the	second	opportunity	 is	available	 to	more	people	 than	 the
first	or	the	third	--
because	birth	 is	almost	unconscious	and	so	 is	death,	but	 love	can	bring	a	 little
consciousness	to	your	heart.
Hence	my	 insistence	on	 love	 --	 and	Kabir's	 insistence	 is	 also	on	 love,	because
this	 is	 the	 opportunity	many	many	 people	 can	 use	 and	 become	 awake.	 If	 you
love,	you	will	have	to	drop	your	ego	--	and	that	will	be	the	death,	the	death	of	the
ego.	If	you	love	you	will	have	to	learn	how	to	melt,	merge,	disappear.	If	you	love
you	will	have	 to	know	that	 there	 is	much	more	 to	 life	 than	 logic,	calculation...
there	is	much	more	to	life	than	having	money,	more	possessions,	power.
If	you	love,	you	will	have	a	glimpse	of	the	divine.	And	if	you	go	deep	in	love,
you	will	start	entering	into	the	temple	of	God	--	that	is	 the	second	opportunity.
The	society	has	destroyed	it.
The	 first	 opportunity	 is	 very	 rare,	 but	 the	 second	opportunity	 could	have	been
available	 to	 almost	 everybody	 --	 that	 has	 been	 destroyed	 by	 the	 society.	Your
love	has	been	contaminated.	You	have	been	brought	up	in	fear,	not	in	love.	You
have	been	brought	up	to	fight,	not	 to	 love.	You	have	been	brought	up	as	 if	 the
whole	existence	is	your	enemy,	not	your	friend	--	how	can	you	love?	Love	has
been	made	impossible	by	the	society.
The	 only	 possibility	 of	 people	 turning	 to	 religion,	 the	 only	 possibility	 of
revolution	 in	 people's	 lives,	 has	 been	 destroyed	 by	 the	 society.	 Society	 is	 so
much	afraid	of	love	that	it	is	not	afraid	of	anything	else	like	it	is	of	love.	Love	is
the	most	potential	and	dangerous	thing	for	your	so-called	society,	because	love
will	 wake	 up	 people,	 love	 will	 stir	 people's	 hearts.	 And	 they	 will	 start	 living
through	the	heart,	and	they	won't	listen	to	the	head.	And	if	they	don't	listen	to	the
head	then	the	society	will	be	at	a	loss;	it	will	be	impossible	to	dominate	people
who	live	through	the	heart.	Only	the	head	can	be	dominated	only	heads	can	be
reduced	to	slaves.	The	heart	is	always	the	king,	the	master.
And	 the	 third	opportunity	 is	 death	 --	 the	 last.	 If	 you	have	missed	birth,	 if	 you
have	missed	love,	don't	miss	death.	At	least	the	last	chance	should	not	be	missed.
Kabir	says:	THE	NIGHT	IS	OVER	--	DO	YOU	WANT	TO	LOSE	THE	DAY
THE	SAME	WAY?
OTHER	WOMEN	WHO	MANAGED	TO	GET	UP	EARLY	HAVE	ALREADY
FIND
AN	ELEPHANT	OR	A	JEWEL....	SO	MUCH	WAS	LOST	ALREADY	WHILE
YOU
SLEPT...	AND	THAT	WAS	SO	UNNECESSARY!
ONE	 THING	 OF	 TREMENDOUS	 IMPORTANCE	 TO	 BE	 remembered,
because	Kabir	will	repeat	it	again	and	again:	he	calls	the	seeker	 'the	woman'	--
and	 that	has	been	my	effort	 too.	 I	go	on	 telling	my	sannyasins	"Be	 feminine!"
because	 to	be	 feminine	means	 to	be	 receptive,	 to	be	open,	 to	be	 loving.	To	be
feminine	 means	 to	 be	 non-aggressive	 --	 and	 you	 cannot	 conquer	 God!
Aggression	won't	help.	You	cannot	attack	the	citadel	of	God.
All	that	can	be	done	is	that	you	can	be	a	feminine	welcome.	You	can	invite,	you
cannot	attack.	You	can	absorb:	you	cannot	possess.	You	can	allow	God	to	enter
in	you.	YOU
can	be	pregnant	with	God	--	that's	the	only	way.
Kabir	says:	OTHER	WOMEN...	You	will	be	surprised	--	why	is	he	talking	about
women?
OTHER	WOMEN	WHO	MANAGED	TO	GET	UP	EARLY	HAVE	ALREADY
FOUND	 AN	 ELEPHANT	 OR	 A	 JEWEL....	 He	 says:	 The	 impossible	 has
happened	--
they	have	found	something	which	makes	life	meaningful,	something	which	gives
life	the	colour	of	a	rainbow	and	the	dance	of	a	peacock	and	the	song	of	a	cuckoo.
OTHER
WOMEN	WHO	HAVE	MANAGED	TO	GET	UP	EARLY...	 Gautam	Buddha,
Jesus	 Christ,	 Mohammed.	 Mahavira	 --	 these	 are	 the	 other	 women.	 Don't	 be
offended	by	it!
Friedrich	Nietzsche	condemned	Buddha	and	Christ	as	feminine.	His	insight	was
right,	but	he	was	using	it	as	a	condemnation,	as	a	criticism,	because	his	idea	of
beauty	was	that	of	masculine	power,	muscular	power.	His	idea	of	beauty	was	not
that	of	feminine	roundness,	softness.	His	 idea	of	 the	right	person	was	 that	of	a
brave	soldier,	ready	to	attack.
He	 said,	 "The	most	 beautiful	 experience	 of	my	 life	was	when	 I	 saw	 an	 army
moving	and	the	sun	shining	and	the	sound	of	their	boots,	the	music,	the	melody
of	 their	 boots,	 and	 their	 guns	 shining	 in	 the	 sun.	 That	was	 the	most	 beautiful
experienCe	of	my	life.
He	did	not	talk	about	a	sunrise	or	a	sunset,	or	the	starry	night,	or	a	roseflower,	or
a	beautiful	woman	--	no.	Soldiers	walking	in	step,	and	the	sound	of	their	boots
and	 their	 guns	 shining	 in	 the	 sun.	 Of	 course,	 he	 created	 the	 philosophic
background	 for	Adolf	Hitler	 to	 follow.	 Just	as	Karl	Marx	created	communism,
Friedrich	 Nietzsche,	 knowingly	 or	 unknowingly,	 created	 fascism;	 he	 was	 the
father	 of	 the	 fascist	 mind.	 Of	 course	 he	 was	 against	 Buddha,	 against	 Christ,
because	Christ	 says:	Love	 is	God.	And	Christ	 says:	 If	 somebody	 slaps	you	on
one	 cheek,	 give	 him	 the	 other	 too.	 And	 Christ	 says:	 Love	 your	 enemies	 as
yourself	And	Buddha	says	continuously:	Be	rooted	in	the	heart,	forget	the	head.
Move	to	the	center	of	your	being;	the	head	is	just	the	periphery.	And	if	you	see	a
statue	of	Buddha,	it	looks	feminine,	it	has	a	feminine	beauty.
I	tell	each	of	my	sannyasins	--	man	or	woman,	it	doesn't	matter	--	one	has	to	be
spiritually	feminine,	only	then	can	God	be	received.	You	have	to	be	a	host,	only
then	can	the	guest	come	to	you.
But	 the	problem	 is	 that	down	 the	ages	 the	crowd	has	been	 telling	you	 just	 the
opposite.	It	makes	you	aggressive,	violent,	competitive.	It	takes	away	all	that	is
soft	in	you.	And	now	the	women's	liberation	movement	is	there,	which	is	even
destroying	the	softness	of	women	too.	The	women's	liberation	movement	is	not
really	a	liberation	movement.	It	is	in	fact	just	the	opposite:	it	is	trying	to	imitate
man,	to	become	as	hard	as	men	are,	to	do	whatsoever	men	are	doing.
And	 remember	 one	 thing:	 if	 women	 try	 to	 imitate	 men	 they	 will	 always	 be
carbon	copies;	they	will	not	attain	to	their	fulfillment,	they	will	not	attain	the	full
potential.	And	 they	will	 always	 remain	 lagging	behind.	And	 they	will	 become
ugly	 too!	The	 real	 liberation	movement	has	not	 started	yet.	The	 real	 liberation
movement	will	insist	that	the	woman	has	to	be	more	and	more	feminine,	that	she
has	 to	be	rooted	 in	HER	nature,	 that	she	 is	not	 to	 follow	men	 in	 retaliation,	 in
reaction,	in	rebellion	--	that	is	stupid.	No	reaction	ever	helps.
The	woman	has	to	be	herself.	And	not	only	that:	the	woman	has	to	be	herself	and
she	has	to	help	man	to	become	a	little	more	feminine.	Not	only	does	the	woman
have	to	be	liberated	from	men,	the	man	has	also	to	be	liberated	from	men.	There
is	a	great	need	 for	a	men's	 liberation	movement	 --	not	 liberation	 from	women,
but	liberation	from	all	the	nonsense	that	has	been	taught	to	him	down	the	ages:
Be	hard!	Be	steel!	Don't	bend!
Break	 but	 don't	 bend!	Man	has	 been	 taught	 to	 be	 hard	 like	 a	 rock	 --	man	 has
missed	much.
And	now	women	are	following	in	the	same	tracks.	It	is	a	dangerous	situation.	If
the	woman	also	follows	the	man,	she	will	be	a	second-rate	citizen,	she	will	never
be	equal	to	man.
And	 not	 only	 that:	 if	 she	 follows	man	 and	 becomes	 hard,	 as	 lib	women	ARE
becoming	--
their	 faces	 are	 becoming	 hard,	 their	 bodies	 are	 losing	 roundness,	 softness,
vulnerability,	they	are	becoming	more	and	more	angry	and	less	and	less	loving	--
the	danger	is	that	that	will	be	the	end	of	the	whole	of	humanity,	if	it	happens.
The	only	hope	for	humanity	 is	 in	 the	quality	of	 feminineness	--	 the	only	hope.
The	 hope	 is	 not	with	 Friedrich	Nietzsche,	Adolf	Hitler,	 Benito	Mussolini:	 the
hope	is	with	Buddha,	Chaitanya,	Meera	--	with	a	totally	different	kind	of	people.
And	we	have	to	turn	men	and	women	BOTH	into	a	kind	of	feminine	lovingness.
That's	what	Kabir	means,	 but	 you	 have	 been	 taught	 something	 else	 --	 and	we
have	learnt	the	lesson.	And	when	it	is	told	by	everybody,	the	whole	crowd	goes
on	 teaching	 you	 the	 same	 thing	 again	 and	 again,	 the	 whole	 crowd	 goes	 on
singing	a	chorus...	and	down	the	ages.	And	you	want	to	satisfy	everybody	--	your
father,	 your	 friends,	 your	 priests,	 your	 politicians	 --	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 satisfy
everybody,	and	in	satisfying	everybody	you	are	destroying	your	own	soul.
I	have	heard:
Even	 in	 biblical	 times	 they	 knew	 that	 too	much	good	 advice	 can	 produce	 bad
results.
Remember	 the	 ancient	 story	 of	 the	 old,	 old	 man	 in	 the	 Holy	 Land	 trudging
barefoot	down	a	dusty,	rocky	path?	The	rocks	were	sharp	and	they	made	his	feet
bleed,	and	by	his	side	trudged	a	small	boy	with	torn	sandals,	and	the	sharp	rocks
cut	 into	his	 feet	 too	and	made	 them	bleed.	And	behind	 them	ambled	a	 strong,
healthy	donkey.
They	came	to	a	group	of	travellers	resting	beside	the	road.	"Look	at	that,"	said
the	travellers,	"that	poor	old	man	with	his	bleeding	feet	while	that	fat,	 indolent
donkey	carries	no	one	on	his	back."
So	the	old	man	shrugged	and	climbed	up	on	the	donkey	to	continue	his	journey.
In	a	mile	or	so,	another	group	of	travellers	resting	by	the	roadside	looked	up	and
said,	"For	shame,	that	grown	man	riding	on	the	donkey	while	the	poor	little	boy
has	his	feet	cut	and	bleeding	by	the	sharp	stones	of	the	road."
Once	again,	the	old	man	shrugged,	got	off	the	donkey	and	put	the	young	boy	up
in	his	place.
A	third	group	of	travellers	had	still	more	advice	to	give.	"Look	at	that	fat	healthy
donkey	with	 that	small	boy	his	only	burden.	He	should	carry	both	the	boy	and
the	man."
Again	the	old	man	followed	advice	and	climbed	on	the	donkey	behind	the	boy.
Within	a	few	miles	they	came	to	a	rickety	bridge	over	a	fast-flowing	river,	and
with	both	man	and	boy	on	the	donkey's	tired	back,	they	started	over	the	bridge.
In	the	very	middle,	the	bridge	gave	way	to	the	combined	weight	--	and	man	and
boy	and	donkey	plunged	into	the	raging	current.
Thanks	to	their	ride,	the	man	and	the	boy	were	rested	and	managed	to	swim	to
shore.	 But	 the	 tired,	 weary,	 overburdened	 donkey	 was	 drowned.	 And	 it	 only
proves	one	thing:	if	you	take	advice	from	everyone...	you	will	only	end	up	losing
your	ass.
If	you	object	 to	any	of	 the	 language	 in	 that	 story,	don't	blame	me...	 that	 is	 the
way	they	talked	in	biblical	times.
You	have	been	listening	to	good	advice	from	every	nook	and	corner.	Everybody
is	 giving	 you	 ROTTEN	 traditional	 ideas.	 Everybody	 is	 conditioning	 you,
hypnotizing	you.	And	because	 the	 crowd	 is	big	 and	you	are	 alone,	unless	you
bring	your	energies	together	you	will	not	be	able	to	get	rid	of	this	prison	--	the
prison	of	 the	crowd.	Unless	you	sharpen	your	 intelligence	a	 little	more,	unless
you	start	meditating	a	 little	more,	you	will	not	be	able	 to	break	 the	chains	 that
the	society	goes	on	putting	on	you.
And	they	go	on	telling	you	it	is	just	for	your	welfare.	They	are	destroying	you,
but	they	go	on	saying,	"We	are	serving	you."	And	the	strangest	thing	is	that	you
also	 think	 that	 they	 are	 well-wishers	 --	 they	 think	 they	 are	 well-wishers,	 you
think	 they	 are	 well-wishers,	 and	 just	 look	 at	 humanity!	 So	 dull,	 so	 dead,	 so
ugly...	 something	 has	 to	 be	 done	 urgently,	 something	 has	 to	 be	 done	 very
urgently.
And	 the	most	 important	 thing	will	be	 to	bring	a	 little	more	 femininity,	 a	more
soft	heart	to	human	beings	--	men	and	women	both.	A	little	more	liquidity.	You
need	not	be	like	rocks:	please	be	like	water.	Lao	Tzu	says	that	his	path	is	that	of
the	watercourse	way	--
liquid,	 fragile,	 feminine,	 non-resisting,	 flowing,	 dynamic	 OTHER	 WOMEN
WHO	MANAGED	TO	GET	UP	EARLY	HAVE	ALREADY
FOUND	AN	ELEPHANT	OR	A	JEWEL....	SO	MUCH	WAS	LOST	ALREADY
WHILE	YOU	SLEPT...	AND	THAT	WAS	SO	UNNECESSARY!
THE	ONE	WHO	LOVES	YOU	UNDERSTOOD,	BUT	YOU	DID	NOT.
EXISTENCE	IS	ALWAYS	COMPASSIONATE	towards	you	--	it	is	bound	to	be
so.	It	has	created	you.	The	painter	loves	his	painting,	the	poet	loves	his	poetry	--
existence	 loves	 you.	 Existence	 goes	 on	 creating	 people.	 Unless	 there	 is	 great
love	 in	 the	very	center	of	existence,	 life	will	disappear.	Who	will	 sustain	you?
Who	goes	on	breathing	in	you?	It	is	a	mystery!	Who	goes	on	circulating	in	your
blood?	--	it	is	a	mystery.	Who	beats	in	your	heart?	--	it	is	a	mystery.	Who	is	alert
and	aware	in	you?	--	it	is	a	mystery.
But	one	thing	is	certain,	absolutely	certain,	call	it	God	or	call	it	existence	--	the
whole	 loves	 you.	And	 the	whole	 goes	 on	 showering	with	 grace	 and	 gifts,	 and
each	 moment	 it	 is	 pouring	 on	 you.	 If	 you	 remain	 a	 beggar,	 only	 you	 are
responsible,	nobody	else.	Existence	would	like	you	to	be	an	emperor.
THE	ONE	WHO	LOVES	YOU	UNDERSTOOD,	BUT	YOU	DID	NOT.
Existence	understands	you,	but	you	don't	understand	existence.	And	sometimes
when	 you	 come	 to	 a	 man	 who	 has	 understood	 existence	 --	 that's	 what
enlightenment	is	all	about	--
he	 also	 loves	 you,	 but	 you	 will	 not	 understand	 him	 either.	 You	 have	 lost	 the
capacity	 to	 trust,	 because	 trust	 comes	 only	 as	 a	 shadow	 of	 love.	 If	 love	 is
missing,	trust	will	be	missed.
You	live	in	thoughts,	and	thoughts	create	doubt.	Thoughts	are	based	in	doubt	--
the	greater	the	thinker,	the	more	and	more	he	has	to	enter	into	doubt.
Here,	being	with	mc,	you	are	not	to	be	great	thinkers,	because	the	thinkers	miss
all.	They	only	live	in	their	thoughts,	and	thoughts	are	castles	in	the	air.	Nothing
about	 those	 thoughts	 is	existential;	 they	can	spin	and	weave	beautiful	 systems,
but	they	are	all	useless
--	you	cannot	live	in	them.	And	they	dissipate	your	energy.
Be	lovers,	not	thinkers!	If	you	truly	want	to	be	religious,	be	lovers	not	thinkers.
And	the	heart	has	its	own	reasons	that	reason	knows	not.	Once	you	have	started
moving	 into	 the	world	 of	 love,	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 a	 new	 phenomenon
starts	arising	 in	you:	 the	phenomenon	of	 trust	 --	SHRADDHA.	And	that	 is	 the
greatest	experience	in	life:	to	trust	-
-	because	 the	man	who	 trusts	 transforms	not	himself,	but	 transforms	his	whole
world.	He	starts	living	in	a	totally	different	world.
Doubt,	 and	 you	 are	 expelled	 from	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden.	 Trust,	 and	 you	 are
received	back,	welcomed	back	--	you	are	home	again.
The	man	fell	over	a	cliff	and	in	the	last	moment	was	able	to	get	hold	of	a	branch
that	was	sticking	out	of	 the	wall.	He	heard	voices	above	and	shouted	 for	help,
"God,	help	me!	Is	there	anyone	up	there?"
The	answer	came,	in	a	deep	voice,	"My	son,	relax,	let	go	of	the	branch."
The	man	could	hardly	believe	what	he	had	heard	and	yelled,	Is	there	anyone	else
up	there?"
Even	if	God	responds	to	you,	you	will	not	understand.	You	cannot	relax	because
you	cannot	trust.	The	modern	man	suffers	from	great	anxiety;	it	has	never	been
so	 --	 man	 has	 never	 suffered	 so	 much	 from	 anxiety.	 Why	 is	 there	 so	 much
anxiety?	 Amidst	 so	 much	 scientific,	 technological	 growth,	 amidst	 so	 much
affluence,	why	does	man	suffer,	why	is	man	in	so	much	anxiety?	One	thing	has
disappeared	from	his	heart:	trust	is	no	more	there,	only	doubt...	doubt	and	doubt.
You	are	surrounded	by	doubts,	a	thousand	and	one	doubts.
They	are	like	ghosts	torturing	you.	Your	life	has	become	a	nightmare.
But	remember	again:	nobody	is	responsible	except	you.	You	can	be	surrounded
by	 trust,	by	 the	milieu	of	 trust,	by	a	climate	of	 trust.	And	when	 the	climate	of
trust	is	there,	the	spring	has	come	--	you	start	blossoming,	for	the	first	time	you
start	releasing	your	fragrance.	Flowers	burst	forth,	life	becomes	a	celebration.
THE	ONE	WHO	LOVES	YOU	UNDERSTOOD,	BUT	YOU	DID	NOT.	YOU
FORGOT
TO	MAKE	A	PLACE	IN	YOUR	BED	NEXT	TO	YOU.	Listen	to	the	words	of
Kabir:	he	 is	 talking	in	 the	 language	of	 love.	God	has	not	 to	be	worshipped	but
loved	--	prepare	a	place	for	him	in	your	bed.
YOU	 FORGOT	 TO	 MAKE	 A	 PLACE	 IN	 YOUR	 BED	 NEXT	 TO	 YOU.
INSTEAD
YOU	SPENT	YOUR	LIFE	PLAYING.
Playing	with	toys	--	money,	power,	prestige	--	ALL	toys.	And	all	is	vain,	because
death	 will	 take	 everything	 away.	 And	 you	 KNOW	 it!	 And	 still	 you	 go	 on
clinging,	because	the	idea	in	your	head	is:	anything	is	better	than	nothing.	You
will	have	to	change	it	--	you	will	have	to	change	it	diametrically.	You	will	have
to	 learn:	 nothing	 is	 better	 than	 anything	 --	 because	 it	 is	 in	 nothing,	 in
nothingness,	in	emptiness,	in	silence,	that	you	become	a	womb	so	that	God	can
descend	in	you.
IN	YOUR	TWENTIES	YOU	DID	NOT	GROW	BECAUSE	YOU	DID	NOT
KNOW
WHO	YOUR	LORD	WAS.
YOU	HAVE	LOST	YOUR	YOUTH,	which	was	the	MOST	precious	time.	Birth
is	missed,	 but	 it	 can	be	 forgiven;	 love	missed	 cannot	 be	 forgiven.	You	wasted
your	 youth	 on	 playthings	 --	 you	 did	 not	 really	 love.	 Your	 love	 never	 became
prayer;	 your	 love	 never	 attained	 the	 glories	 that	 it	 contains	 in	 it	 --	 your	 love
remained	lust,	your	love	remained	a	very	mundane	passion.	Your	love	remained
sexual:	it	never	became	spiritual.
And	love	has	two	aspects:	one	is	sexual,	 the	other	is	spiritual.	And	unless	love
becomes	spiritual,	it	keeps	you	in	the	mud;	you	cannot	fly	in	the	sky,	you	cannot
have	wings.
And	 remember:	 sexual	 love	 does	 not	 contain	 spiritual	 love,	 but	 spiritual	 love
CAN
contain	sexual	love	--	but	then	it	changes	the	quality	of	the	sexual	love	too.	This
is	one	of	the	fundamental	laws:	the	higher	contains	the	lower,	but	the	lower	does
not	contain	the	higher.	So	don't	be	worried	and	afraid	that	 if	you	rise	higher	in
your	love	the	joys	of	your	sex	will	disappear	--	no	--	they	will	become	intenser,
more	orgasmic.	They	will	become	more	deep,	more	satisfying,	more	penetrating,
and	they	will	have	a	quality	which	is	not	of	this	world.	Your	orgasms	will	not	be
simply	sexual	--	they	will	have	the	quality	of	meditativeness	in	them.	Time	will
disappear	 and	 ego	will	 disappear,	 and	 for	 a	 few	moments	you	will	 be	 in	God.
Your	beloved	will	disappear,	you	will	disappear...	the	twoness	will	disappear	and
there	will	be	oneness,	and	you	will	feel	an	orgasmic	oneness	with	the	whole.
Kabir	says:
IN	YOUR	TWENTIES	YOU	DID	NOT	GROW...
Very	few	people	grow	up.	People	simply	grow	old,	but	they	never	grow	up.	And
growing	old	is	not	growing	up.
...	BECAUSE	YOU	DID	NOT	KNOW	WHO	YOUR	LORD	WAS.
When	you	fall	in	love	with	a	woman	do	you	think	you	are	falling	in	love	with	a
woman?
If	you	ask	Kabir	or	if	you	ask	me	I	will	tell	you	you	are	not	falling	in	love	with	a
woman
--	nobody	has	ever	fallen	in	love	with	a	woman	or	with	a	man:	you	have	had	a
glimpse	of	the	God	in	the	woman...	you	have	fallen	in	love	with	that	glimpse.
One	ALWAYS	falls	in	love	with	God.	When	the	rose	flower	opens	up	its	petals
in	the	morning,	fresh	with	the	morning	dew,	dancing	in	the	morning	wind,	just
joyous	with	 the	 sun,	and	you	 fall	 in	 love,	do	you	 think	you	are	 falling	 in	 love
with	the	chemistry	of	the	rose?	--	no	--	but	with	the	soul.	You	don't	fall	in	love
with	the	chemistry	of	a	man	or	a	woman,	you	don't	fall	in	love	with	the	biology	-
-	you	fall	in	love	with	something	invisible,	intangible.	You	may	not	know	it!	--
and	that	is	your	misery.	If	you	knew	it	then	each	love	would	be	prayer,	then	each
love	 would	 bring	 you	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 God,	 then	 your	 gestalt	 would	 be
different,	then	your	love	would	not	be	so	much	rooted	in	the	earth	-
-	it	would	have	wings,	it	would	have	the	capacity	to	fly.
Kabir	says,	You	missed,	you	could	not	grow:
...	BECAUSE	YOU	DID	NOT	KNOW	WHO	YOUR	LORD	WAS.
WAKE	UP!	WAKE	UP!	THERE	IS	NO	ONE	IN	YOUR	BED	--
HE	LEFT	YOU	DURING	THE	LONG	NIGHT.
And	this	happens	again	and	again:	you	fall	in	love	with	a	man	or	a	woman	and
soon	 everything	 disappears,	 the	 Lord	 is	 gone	 --	 because	 you	 never	 paid	 any
attention	to	the	Lord.	You	became	too	much	focussed	on	the	physical,	hence	the
spiritual	disappears.
Almost	 always	 by	 the	 time	 the	 honeymoon	 is	 over,	 love	 is	 finished	 --	 by	 that
time	the	Lord	is	gone.	Then	only	two	physical	bodies...
Two	physical	bodies	can	have	a	few	sexual	contacts,	but	no	sexual	contact	can
ever	 be	 satisfying,	 fulfilling.	 It	 brings	 more	 and	 more	 frustration.	 All	 sexual
experiences	 end	 in	 frustration;	 in	 the	 wake	 comes	 great	 frustration,	 a	 kind	 of
hopelessness.	And	 the	 reason	 is	 that	you	paid	attention	 to	 the	wrong	side,	you
became	too	much	interested	in	the	physical	and	you	did	not	pay	enough	respect
to	the	spiritual.
If	 you	 focus	 on	 the	 spiritual,	 by	 and	 by	 the	 physical	 becomes	 secondary.	And
then	the	honeymoon	is	the	beginning	of	a	great	love	affair.	It	doesn't	end	with	the
honeymoon;	in	fact,	it	only	starts	after	the	honeymoon	is	over.	Then	it	is	a	totally
different	phenomenon.
Intimacy	 goes	 on	 growing	 and	 growing.	 Sexuality	 becomes	 less	 and	 less;
intimacy	becomes	more	and	more,	deeper	and	deeper.
And	soon	you	find	the	beloved	is	not	just	the	woman:	the	beloved	is	the	ultimate
Beloved.	And	 then	 there	 is	 great	 reverence	 for	 the	 other.	And	 then	 love	 gives
freedom,	and	then	love	does	not	possess;	 then	love	has	no	violence	in	 it.	Then
love	is	sacred,	holy.
WAKE	 UP!	WAKE	 UP!	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 ONE	 IN	 YOUR	 BED	 --	 HE	 LEFT
YOU
DURING	THE	LONG	NIGHT.
But	 you	 go	 on	making	 love,	 and	 the	 lover	 is	 gone!	You	 are	making	 love	 to	 a
corpse	when	 the	 love	 is	 gone.	When	 the	 Lord	 has	 disappeared,	 when	 you	 no
longer	 see	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 your	 woman	 or	 man	 the	 presence	 of	 God,	 you	 are
making	love	to	a	corpse.	How	can	it	give	you	contentment?	And	how	can	it	help
you	to	soar	high.
Yes,	in	some	moments	you	imagine,	in	some	moments	the	nostalgia	of	the	past...
those	 beautiful	 days	which	 are	 just	 like	 dreams	now;	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 unbelievable
that	 they	ever	happened.	But	people	are	 living	 in	 imagination,	not	 in	 reality.	 If
you	live	in	reality,	God	is	everywhere.	If	you	live	in	imagination,	 then	you	are
living	in	a	loneliness,	there	is	no	God	--	the	world	is	empty,	then	the	world	has
no	meaning,	then	the	world	is	just	a	nightmare.
The	 priest,	 the	 parson	 and	 the	 rabbi	were	walking	 down	 the	 street	 together	 in
New	York	when	 they	 came	 upon	 a	 grubby	 urchin	 sitting	 on	 the	 kerb,	 playing
with	himself.
The	priest	was	outraged	and	went	over	to	the	kid	and	asked,	"How	can	a	child	of
decent	Catholic	parents	behave	in	such	an	unspeakable	fashion?"
Without	missing	a	stroke,	 the	youngster	retorted,	"Push	off!	 I	am	not	Catholic,
and	anyway	I	am	not	doing	what	YOU	think	I	am	doing."
Speechless,	 the	 priest	 retreated	 to	 his	 companions.	 The	 parson	 took	 it	 upon
himself	 to	 remonstrate	 with	 the	 boy.	 How	 can	 you	 behave	 so	 sinfully	 after
everything	you	have	been	taught	in	chapel?"
"Push	off!"	said	the	kid.	"I	am	not	Protestant,	and	anyway	I	am	not	doing	what
you	 think	 I	 am	doing."	With	 his	 tail	 between	his	 legs,	 the	 parson	 rejoined	 the
other	two	clergymen.
"This	 is	 outrageous,"	 said	 the	 rabbi.	Striding	over	 to	 the	urchin,	 he	 thundered,
"Little	boy,	little	boy,	you	have	been	raised	in	accordance	with	the	law	of	your
forefathers	and	of	their	forefathers	before	them.	How	dare	you	behave	in	such	an
unspeakably	vile	manner?"
"Aw,	 push	 off	 and	 leave	me	 alone,"	 the	 boy	 responded.	 "I	 am	not	 Jewish	 and
anyway	I	am	not	doing	what	you	think	I	am	doing."
"In	that	case,"	demanded	the	rabbi,	WHO	do	you	think	you	are	and	what	do	you
think	you	are	doing?"
"Well,	 if	you	must	know,"	 said	 the	child,	 "I	 am	a	Christian	Scientist	 and	 I	 am
making	love	with	my	girlfriend	in	Poona."
From	New	York...	Christian	Scientists	can	do	such	things,	because	they	think	the
whole	world	is	nothing	but	thought.	The	world	is	not	thought,	and	if	you	live	in
thoughts	 you	will	miss	 the	 reality	 of	 the	world.	Come	out	 of	 your	 thoughts	 --
that's	what	Kabir	means	when	he	says:	Wake	up!	Wake	up!
Move	 from	 the	head	 to	 the	heart.	A	heart	wakefulness	 is	needed.	Don't	 live	 in
imagination.	Don't	live	in	thoughts!	Live	in	silence	--	and	only	the	heart	knows
how	 to	 be	 still,	 because	 in	 the	 heart	 there	 are	 no	 thoughts.	 Thoughts	 cannot
penetrate	into	that	innermost	shrine.	No	noise	ever	penetrates	there;	it	is	absolute
silence,	it	is	virgin	silence.
Move	into	the	heart,	and	suddenly	you	will	see	yourself	waking	up	in	a	totally
different	kind	of	waking	that	you	have	not	known	ever	before.	Your	whole	life
will	become	full	of	light	and	full	of	life	and	full	of	love,	and	full	of	energy.	And
wherever	energy	is	there	is	delight.	Overflowing	energy	is	delight.
Kabir	 says:	 THE	 ONLY	 WOMAN	 AWAKE	 IS	 THE	 WOMAN	 WHO	 HAS
HEARD
THE	FLUTE!
AND	ONLY	 IN	THE	HEART,	 in	 the	 deepest	 recesses	 of	 your	 heart,	will	 you
hear	 the	flute	of	Krishna.	This	 is	 just	a	metaphor:	you	will	hear	 the	music,	 the
celestial	 music	 of	 existence,	 what	 Zen	 people	 call	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand
clapping,	what	other	mystics	have	called	the	soundless	sound,	what	in	India	the
Upanishadic	 seers	 have	 called	Omkar	 --	 the	 sound	 of	Aum.	Kabir	 calls	 it	 'the
flute'	--	the	flute	of	Krishna.
THE	ONLY	WOMAN...	Remember,	again	he	uses	the	word	'woman'.
THE	ONLY	WOMAN	AWAKE	 IS	THE	WOMAN	WHO	HAS	HEARD	THE
FLUTE!
And	 unless	 you	 have	 heard	 the	 flute,	 don't	 rest.	Go	 on	 searching	 and	 seeking
inwards.	A	moment	 comes	when	you	hear	 the	 flute,	when	 suddenly	a	 celestial
music	bursts	forth	in	you.	You	will	be	bathed	in	a	totally	new	experience	--	the
experience	of	deathlessness,	 the	experience	of	 timelessness;	not	 the	experience
that	God	is	present,	but	the	experience	that	"I	am	part	of	God,	God	is	part	of	me	-
-	I	am	God	--	AHAM	BRAHMASMI!	ANA'L
HAQ!	--	I	am	truth!"
Jesus	says:	"I	am	truth!	I	am	the	door,	I	am	the	way."	About	whom	is	he	talking?
Is	he	talking	about	the	son	of	Joseph	the	carpenter?	No.	He	is	talking	about	the
innermost	core	of	your	being	which	is	 immortal	--	he	is	 talking	about	 the	flute
that	he	has	heard,	he	is	talking	about	the	one	hand	clapping,	creating	sound.	He
is	talking	about	the	cosmic	sound,	the	cosmic	melody.
THE	ONLY	WOMAN	AWAKE	 IS	THE	WOMAN	WHO	HAS	HEARD	THE
FLUTE!
Remember,	 till	 you	 have	 heard	 the	 flute	 you	 are	 asleep,	 till	 you	 have	 started
feeling	God	everywhere	you	are	asleep.	The	only	criterion	to	judge	whether	you
are	 awake	 or	 asleep	 is	 this:	 Do	 you	 see	 the	world	 as	matter?	 --	 then	 you	 are
asleep.	Do	you	see	the	world	as	divine?	I	am	not	saying:	Do	you	believe?	I	am
saying:	Do	you	see,	experience	the	world	as	divine?	--	then	you	are	awake.
I	PLAYED	TOR	TEN	YEARS	WITH	THE	GIRLS	MY	OWN	AGE	BUT	NOW
I	AM
SUDDENLY	IN	FEAR.
Kabir	says:	I	have	been	playing	with	the	same	kind	of	seekers.
I	PLAYED	TOR	TEN	YEARS	WITH	THE	GIRLS	MY	OWN	AGE...
Remember,	again	he	use	the	word	'girls'.	He	was	moving	with	seekers,	searchers,
he	was	sitting	in	satsang,	singing	songs	of	God,	dancing,	meditating.
I	PLAYED	FOR	TEN	YEARS	WITH	THE	GIRLS	MY	OWN	AGE	BUT	NOW
I	AM
SUDDENLY	IN	FEAR.
But	when	you	really	start	approaching	closer	to	the	heart,	a	great	fear	grips	you.
Hence,	whenever	a	sannyasin	comes	to	me	and	says,	"I	am	very	much	afraid	of
you,"	I	always	say	this	is	a	good	sign.	It	simply	means	the	head	is	losing	its	grip
on	 you	 and	 the	 heart	 is	 coming	 closer.	 The	 fear	 arises	 because	 the	 head	 says,
"Now,	you	are	falling	in	danger.
Who	 will	 protect	 you?	 I	 was	 protecting	 you.	 Who	 will	 guard	 you?	 I	 was
guarding	you.
Who	will	keep	you	on	the	right	track?	Now	you	are	moving	into	the	madness	of
the	heart,	you	are	going	beyond	me	--	I	will	not	be	of	any	help.	And	you	have
depended	on	me	up	to	now.	I	have	been	your	security,	your	safety."
Hence,	the	fear	arises.
I	AM	ON	THE	WAY	UP	SOME	STAIRS...
Kabir	says:	Now,	some	doors	are	opening	--	some	stairs	I	can	see	going	upwards.
...	THEY	ARE	HIGH.
And	 they	 are	high	 --	 higher	 than	me.	 I	will	 have	 to	 surpass	myself,	 hence	 the
fear.	I	will	have	to	transcend	myself,	I	will	have	to	drop	the	ego	and	go	without
the	 ego,	 and	 I	 will	 have	 to	 drop	 the	 whole	 baggage	 of	 the	 mind	 and	 go
unburdened	--	hence	the	fear.
YET	I	HAVE	TO	GIVE	UP	MY	FEARS	IF	I	WANT	TO	TAKE	PART	IN	THIS
LOVE.
One	 has	 to	 give	 up	 one's	 fears	 if	 one	 wants	 to	 live	 in	 love,	 because	 it	 is	 the
SAME	energy	that	becomes	fear	and	that	becomes	love.	If	you	live	in	fear,	your
energy	will	remain	involved,	occupied,	vested	in	fear.	Drop	the	fears.	Risk...	and
suddenly	the	same	energy	that	was	contained	in	the	fear	is	released	and	becomes
a	flower	of	love.
YET	I	HAVE	TO	GIVE	UP	MY	F	EARS	IF	I	WANT	TO	TAKE	PART	IN	THIS
LOVE.
I	HAVE	TO	LET	GO	THE	PROTECTIVE	CLOTHES...
...	 all	 the	 defence	 measures,	 all	 the	 armours	 that	 you	 are	 carrying	 around
yourself.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 in	 utter	 trust.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 ready	 to	 die	 --	 even	 if
existence	kills,	it	is	okay.
Only	 then	will	 you	be	 able	 to	drop	your	 armour.	And	everybody	 is	 carrying	 a
great	armour	around	himself.	We	are	carrying	our	prisons	around	ourselves;	they
are	transparent	prisons,	but	you	know	they	are	there.
If	you	want	 to	 reach	 somebody,	 suddenly	 there	 is	 a	glass	wall	 and	you	cannot
reach.
People	 come	 close,	 but	 not	 really	 close,	 because	 those	 two	walls	won't	 allow.
Only	walls	clash.	Hence,	all	lovers	are	in	conflict	--	it	should	not	be	so.	Lovers
should	 be	 in	 deep	 harmony,	 but	 they	 are	 in	 conflict	 because	 those	walls	 don't
allow	you	to	be	in	harmony.
Each	is	living	in	his	fear	and	pretending	to	be	loving	--	that	love	is	false,	it	is	a
mask.
I	HAVE	TO	LET	GO	THE	PROTECTIVE	CLOTHES	AND	MEET	HIM	WITH
THE
WHOLE	LENGTH	OF	MY	BODY.
You	have	to	face	love	utterly	naked,	absolutely	vulnerable.
MY	EYES	WILL	HAVE	TO	BE	THE	LOVE-CANDLES	THIS	TIME.
Enough	time	is	wasted,	so	many	lives	wasted.	Let	your	eyes	be	love-candles	this
time.
Kabir	 says:	 MEN	 AND	 WOMEN	 IN	 LOVE	 WILL	 UNDERSTAND	 THIS
POEM.
This	 poem	will	 not	 be	 understood	 by	 the	 scholars,	 by	 the	 pundits,	 by	 the	 so-
called	learned	people.	This	poem	can	be	understood	only	by	a	loving	heart.	This
poem	will	be	understood	by	you,	my	people,	because	my	basic	message	is	love.
Love	and	love	and	nothing	else...	because	love	is	enough	unto	itself.
Kabir	 says:	 MEN	 AND	 WOMEN	 IN	 LOVE	 WILL	 UNDERSTAND	 THIS
POEM.
Nobody	else	will	understand	it.
IF	WHAT	YOU	FEEL	FOR	THE	HOLY	ONE	IS	NOT	DESIRE	THEN	WHAT
IS	THE
USE	OF	DRESSING	WITH	SUCH	CARE	AND	SPENDING	SO	MUCH	TIME
MAKING	YOUR	EYELIDS	DARK?
PEOPLE	GO	TO	THE	TEMPLES,	and	the	mosques,	and	the	Churches	and	the
gurudwaras	--	for	what?	And	you	are	not	in	love	with	God!	It	is	so	stupid.	You
need	not	waste	your	time	in	the	temples	and	the	churches	if	you	are	not	in	love.
Then	why	go	on...
...	 DRESSING	 WITH	 SUCH	 CARE	 AND	 SPENDING	 SO	 MUCH	 TIME
MAKING
YOUR	EYELIDS	DARK?
If	 you	 are	 NOT	 in	 love,	 then	 why	 go	 on	 doing	 these	 empty	 rituals?	 Do
something	else!
Do	something	else	that	you	love.	Don't	waste	your	time	in	the	name	of	religion,
because	religion	is	possible	only	if	you	are	in	love.	In	a	deep,	intense	love,	only
then	is	your	prayer	true.	And	then	whatsoever	you	say	has	a	sacred	quality	to	it.
You	need	not	go	to	the	temples	then	--	wherever	you	sit	will	be	the	temple.	You
need	not	do	rituals:	worshipping	God	with	flowers	and	candles	and	this	and	that
--	whatsoever	you	do	will	be	your	prayer.
Kabir	 says	 in	another	poem:	 I	don't	go	 to	 the	 temple,	because	wherever	 I	 sit	 I
find	him	present	all	around	me.	He	cannot	be	 in	 the	 temples	more	 --	he	 is	not
more	and	less	and	where:	he	is	exactly	the	same	everywhere.
Kabir	says:	I	don't	go	with	special	food	to	offer	to	God	--	when	I	eat,	that	is	my
offering	to	God.	See	the	beauty	of	his	statement.	He	says:	When	I	eat,	that	is	my
offering	to	him	--
because	HE	is	inside	me.	Why	should	I	go	to	a	stone	statue	which	cannot	eat	at
all.	 If	 I	 have	 more	 food,	 I	 invite	 friends	 And	 when	 they	 eat,	 I	 know	 he	 has
accepted	my	offerings.
Religion	 is	 not	 ritual,	 religion	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 formalities	 --	 with
Christianity,	Hinduism,	 Islam.	Religion	 is	 an	 individual	 love	 affair.	Be	 in	 love
with	 people,	 be	 in	 love	 with	 the	 world,	 be	 in	 love	 with	 trees	 and	 birds	 and
animals	and	stars	--	BE	IN	LOVE!
And	slowly	slowly,	your	love	will	bun	candles	in	your	eyes	and	you	will	be	able
to	see	him.
He	is	present,	but	you	are	blind.	He	is	playing	on	his	flute,	but	you	are	deaf.
FRIEND,	WAKE	UP!
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	An	Alive	Buddhafield
15	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904150
ShortTitle:
FISH05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
99
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	I	AM	HERE	ONLY	FOR	A	VERY	SHORT	VISIT.	I	HAVE	COME	TO
TRY
TO	UNDERSTAND	WHAT	YOU	HAVE	HERE	THAT	THE	REST	OF	 THE
WORLD
DOES	NOT.	CAN	YOU	HELP	ME?
Mrs.	Ward,
I	 HAVE	 NOTHING	 TO	 OFFER	 TO	 YOU	 --	 only	 nothing.	 But	 that	 is	 the
greatest	thing	that	can	be	given	as	a	gift.	My	only	advice	to	my	people	is	to	be
nothing,	to	be	nobodies,	to	be	utterly	nude	of	all	the	clothes	that	the	society	has
given	to	you	--	of	thought,	of	religion,	of	philosophy	--	utterly	empty	of	all	the
conditionings	 that	have	been	 forced	on	you	by	others,	utterly	devoid	of	all	 the
inhibitions	and	taboos	that	time	has	gathered	around	you	like	dust.
If	you	can	be	an	empty	mirror,	then	God	is.	In	that	empty	mirror,	God	reflects	--
and	there	is	no	other	way.
I	 have	 nothing	 substantial	 to	 give	 to	 you,	 because	 all	 that	 is	 substantial	 is
mundane.	 I	 have	 something	 intangible	 to	 give	 you,	 non-substantial,	 something
that	 you	 cannot	 grasp	with	 your	 hand,	 something	 that	 cannot	 be	measured	 or
weighed.	 It	 is	 called	 nothing,	 it	 is	 called	 meditation,	 it	 is	 called	 a	 state	 of
consciousness	without	content.
But	I	can	only	point	the	way.	I	cannot	give	it	to	you.	because	it	is	untransferable.
It	is	not	a	thing	--	how	can	it	be	transferred?	You	cannot	purchase	it,	you	cannot
steal	 it	 --	 you	can	only	 allow	 it	 to	happen.	 I	 am	 just	 a	 certain	 space,	 a	 certain
context,	in	which	this	immensely	potential	nothing	can	happen.	But	all	depends
on	you,	not	on	me.	All	depends	on	you:	 if	you	allow	it	 to	happen,	 it	will	open
doors	into	the	divine,	it	will	reveal	to	you	the	mysteries	of	life.	It	is	not	going	to
answer	 your	 questions,	 because	 life	 is	 not	 a	 question/answer	 thing,	 it	 is	 not	 a
problem.	 It	 will	 dissolve	 your	 questions,	 certainly,	 although	 it	 will	 not	 solve
them	--	but	you	will	be	transformed.	It	is	not	knowledge	that	you	will	gain	but
knowing,	eyes,	insight.
But,	Mrs.	Ward,	you	say:
I	AM	ONLY	HERE	ON	A	VERY	SHORT	VISIT...
In	such	a	hurry	it	is	not	possible.	In	such	a	hurry,	you	will	not	be	able	to	relax,	to
imbibe.
An	ancient	Zen	story	says:
A	young	man	came	to	a	Zen	Master	to	learn	about	meditation.	The	Zen	Master
said,	"Are	you	capable	of	waiting?"
The	young	man,	of	course,	asked,	"How	long?"
The	Zen	Master	said,	"That	is	enough	for	me	to	reject	you.	To	ask	 'how	long?'
means	 you	 are	 not	 ready	 to	wait.	 If	 you	 can	 simply	wait	without	 asking	 'how
long?'	then	you	are	capable	of	waiting."
The	 young	 man	 understood	 the	 point.	 He	 bowed	 down,	 remained	 with	 the
Master.
One	year	passed,	and	not	a	single	word	was	said	to	the	disciple.	And	two	years
passed...
and	three	years	passed..."Now	it	is	too	much!	Nothing	has	even	been	started,	not
a	 single	 lesson.	 How	 long	 can	 one	 wait?"	 Again	 the	 question	 became	 very
prominent	in	his	consciousness:	"How	long?"
He	went	to	the	Master	and	asked,	"I	have	waited	three	years."	The	Master	said,
"So	you	have	been	counting?	That	simply	shows	you	don't	know	how	to	wait.
Counting?
Counting	days	with	the	Master?
"In	 one	 sense,	 each	moment	 is	 an	 eternity;	 in	 another	 sense,	 eternity	 is	 just	 a
moment.
You	are	unworthy!	You	will	have	to	wait.	You	will	have	to	learn	how	to	wait.	Be
alert	--
from	tomorrow	the	lessons	will	start."
And	 the	 lesson	was	 very	 strange:	 the	 young	man	was	 sweeping	 the	 floor;	 the
Master	came	from	the	back	and	hit	him	hard	with	his	staff	on	his	back.	Shocked,
the	 young	man	 said,	 "Is	 this	 the	 beginning	 of	meditation?	 after	 three	 years	 of
waiting?"	The	Master	said,
"Yes	--	now	be	alert.	I	will	hit	you	any	moment,	any	time	--	be	watchful,	be	alert,
be	on	your	guard."	And	it	continued	for	months.	His	whole	body	would	ache	in
the	 night,	 because	 in	 the	 day	many	 times	 it	 would	 happen:	 the	Master	would
suddenly	jump	from	somewhere...	he	was	very	old	but	he	was	really	a	cat.
But,	 slowly	 slowly,	 a	 strange	awareness	 started	arising	 in	 the	young	man.	 Just
when	the	Master	would	be	on	the	verge	of	hitting	him,	he	would	dodge	--	even
from	 the	 back;	 although	 he	 was	 occupied	 in	 his	 work	 a	 subtle	 awareness
remained	there.	It	was	bound	to	be	so;	he	was	suffering	so	much.	Pain	is	a	must
for	growth,	suffering	is	absolutely	necessary	for	growth.	Unless	you	suffer	you
cannot	 be	 aware.	 Suffering	 brings	 awareness,	 and	 voluntary	 suffering	 brings
tremendous	 awareness.	 Willingly	 he	 was	 suffering!	 He	 could	 have	 escaped;
nobody	was	preventing	him	--	it	was	his	own	choice.
HE	had	chosen	the	Master.
And	now	he	started	to	understand	why:	"This	is	his	teaching.	This	is	how	he	is
teaching	meditation!"	Now	it	dawned	 in	his	consciousness.	He	was	 immensely
grateful.
The	day	the	Master	came	from	the	back	and,	just	before	he	was	going	to	hit	him,
the	young	man	jumped,	dodged,	and	the	stick	of	the	Master	fell	on	the	ground,
the	 young	 man	 was	 immensely	 happy.	 Something	 new	 had	 happened	 in	 his
being.	And	the	Master	blessed	him.
But	from	that	day,	things	became	even	more	difficult...	the	Master	started	hitting
him	while	he	was	asleep.	Now,	this	was	too	much.	In	the	night,	any	time...!	And
the	Master	was	very	old;	naturally,	he	could	not	sleep	much,	so	whenever	he	felt
awake	he	would	go	and	hit	 the	young	man.	But	now	 the	young	man	knew:	 "I
may	not	understand	the	process	of	it,	but	the	Master's	hitting	in	the	day	has	been
of	such	immense	benediction,	has	been	such	a	transformation,	that	I	accept	this
too	--	without	any	question."	He	didn't	ask,	"This	is	absurd,	this	is	ridiculous.	It
is	 okay	 that	 you	 hit	me	 in	 the	 day	 --	 I	 can	 at	 least	 protect	myself,	 run	 away,
escape,	dodge	--	but	what	can	I	do	when	I	am	asleep?"	He	didn't	say	it.
And	 the	Master	 said,	 "This	 is	 a	 good	 sign.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 are	 learning
trust	--	you	have	not	asked	the	question."
And	after	 two,	 three	months	of	being	hit	 in	 the	night,	 the	whole	day	 the	body
would	ache.
In	 the	 day	 he	 was	 able	 now	 to	 protect	 himself...	 but	 one	 day	 in	 the	 night	 it
happened!
The	 Master	 entered	 the	 room	 and	 he	 opened	 his	 eyes.	 He	 said,	 "Wait!	 I	 am
awake."
And	it	happened	more	and	more.	It	became	impossible	to	hit	him.	Immediately
the	Master	 entered	 into	 the	 room	 he	would	 open	 his	 eyes	 --	 as	 if	 he	was	 not
asleep	 at	 all.	That	was	 not	 so:	 he	was	 fast	 asleep,	 but	 a	 part	 of	 his	 being	was
released	from	the	metaphysical	sleep,	the	tip	of	the	iceberg,	just	a	small	part,	but
it	went	on	like	a	lit	candle	inside	--
watching,	waiting.
The	Master	was	very	happy.	The	next	day	in	the	morning,	the	Master	was	sitting
underneath	a	 tree	 reading	 some	old	 sutras,	 some	old	 scripture.	Suddenly	 --	 the
young	man	was	sweeping	the	garden	--	an	idea	arose	in	him:	"This	old	man	has
been	hitting	me	for	almost	one	year,	day	in,	day	out	--	how	will	it	be	if	I	try	once
to	hit	him?	It	will	be	worth	seeing	how	HE	reacts."
And	the	Master	closed	his	sutras	and	said,	"You	stupid!	I	am	an	old	man!	Don't
have	such	ideas."
Yes,	the	ultimate	state	of	awareness	where	even	the	footprints,	the	step	sounds	of
the	thoughts	are	heard.
Mrs.	Ward,	you	are	in	such	a	hurry	you	cannot	relax.	Meditation	is	not	a	hit	or
miss	 affair.	 It	 needs	 tremendous	 waiting;	 it	 needs	 love,	 trust.	 It	 needs	 a	 very
unhurried	approach.	In	fact,	it	needs	a	mind	which	is	not	goal-oriented	at	all.	But
if	you	are	in	a	hurry,	it	will	be	impossible.
You	ask	me:	I	HAVE	COME	TO	TRY	TO	UNDERSTAND...
UNDERSTANDING	IS	NOT	SOMETHING	THAT	YOU	CAN	TRY,	it	is	not	an
effort.
It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 can	 concentrate	 upon,	 contemplate	 upon.
Understanding	is	not	of	the	mind:	understanding	is	of	the	heart.	You	will	have	to
fall	in	love.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.	Falling	in	love	with	a	Master,	for	NO	reason	at
all	 just	 for	 the	sheer	 joy	of	 falling	 in	 love	with	someone	who	has	disappeared,
who	is	no	more,	who	has	become	a	great	nothing.	Who	has	become	a	silence...
of	course,	that	silence	is	full	of	songs,	and	that	silence	is	music,	celestial	music.
That	silence	is	not	negatively	empty.	It	is	empty	of	noise	but	full	of	melodies.	It
is	empty	of	thoughts	but	full	of	awareness.	It	is	empty	of	darkness	and	death	but
full	of	light	and	life.
Unless	one	falls	 in	love,	 the	process	of	understanding	cannot	be	triggered.	You
CAN	be	here,	you	can	listen	to	me	--	only	words	will	 reach	you.	Those	words
will	become	part	of	your	memory;	they	will	make	you	more	knowledgeable.	But
to	be	knowledgeable	is	utterly	futile;	it	doesn't	help.	To	know	about	God	is	not	to
know	God,	because	the	word
'God'	 is	 not	God.	 To	 know	 about	 love	 is	 not	 to	 know	 love,	 because	 the	word
'love'	is	not	love.
You	will	have	to	move	into	an	experiential	space.	For	that,	waiting	is	needed,	a
relaxed,	 non-goal-oriented	 attitude	 is	 needed	 --	 otherwise	 you	 will	 not
understand	a	thing.	You	will	only	MISunderstand.	The	head	only	knows	how	to
misunderstand.	It	is	only	the	heart	which	knows	how	to	understand.	Love	is	the
only	way	to	know.	Logic	is	a	pretend:	it	only	pretends	that	it	knows;	it	befools
you,	it	deceives	you.	It	is	only	love	that	opens	the	eyes	of	knowing.
But	 see:	 the	 head	 goes	 on	 condemning	 love.	 The	 head	 says,	 "Love	 is	 blind."
Only	 love	has	eyes!	Without	 love,	everything	 is	blind.	But	 the	head	condemns
the	heart,	and	the	head	is	really	very	skillful	in	creating	counterfeit	phenomena.
Instead	 of	 understanding,	 it	 spins	 and	 weaves	 knowledgeability.	 And
knowledgeability	is	a	false	coin	--	it	is	not	understanding.	Understanding	means
you	have	tasted,	lived,	loved,	been,	in	a	totally	different	space;	you	have	visited
the	innermost	core	of	your	being.
Knowledge	 simply	means	you	have	heard	 somebody	 talk	 about	 it.	Knowledge
only	goes	on	adding	to	your	memory	but	not	to	your	being.	Understanding	helps
your	being	to	grow,	to	mature.
If	 you	 are	 here	 to	 understand,	 then	 forget	 about	 going	 so	 quickly.	 Just	 see:	 so
many	people	here	had	come	only	for	a	few	days...	then	a	few	years	have	passed!
And	I	am	happy	about	my	people	--	they	don't	even	count,	and	they	don't	go	on
asking	 me	 "How	 long	 is	 it	 going	 to	 take?"	 Now	 they	 know	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a
question	of	'how	long?'	It	can	happen	any	moment...	it	is	only	a	question	of	your
own	 openness,	 your	 own	 intensity,	 your	 own	 passionate	 desire	 to	 know,	 your
own	love.
It	 is	 unpredictable.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 commodity.	 Had	 it	 been	 a	 thing,	Mrs.	Ward,	 I
would	have	given	it	to	you	very	joyously.	I	am	helpless	--	I	cannot	give	it	to	you.
I	 am	 creating	 the	 space	 in	 which	 it	 can	 happen,	 but	 it	 happens	 indirectly.
Understanding	 is	 not	 direct;	 it	 is	 very	 indirect.	 If	 you	 approach	 understanding
directly,	it	is	very	shy,	it	escapes,	it	is	very	elusive.
You	 have	 to	 be	 very	 very	 alert,	 watchful,	 when	 you	 start	 moving	 towards
understanding	-
-	in	indirect	ways.	ALL	that	is	great	in	life	happens	only	indirectly	--	it	may	be
understanding,	 or	 happiness,	 poetry,	 painting,	 sculpture;	 it	 may	 be	 art,	 it	 may
even	be	a	discovery	of	science	--	all	that	is	great	happens	indirectly.
Now	 it	 is	 a	 well-known	 fact	 that	 scientists	 go	 on	 struggling	 to	 understand
something,	and	they	fail	again	and	again	and	again,	and	one	day	suddenly,	when
they	are	not	 struggling	at	 all	 --	maybe	 smoking	a	cigar,	or	 just	 resting	 in	 their
bathtub.	or	digging	in	the	garden	--
suddenly	 it	 pops	 up!	 And	 they	 have	 been	 struggling	 so	 long	 and	 it	 was	 not
coming.
There	is	a	certain	secret	in	it.
When	 you	 are	 too	 intent,	 too	 direct,	 you	 are	 aggressive,	 and	 life	 reveals	 its
secrets	 only	 to	 people	 who	 are	 non-aggressive.	When	 you	 are	 too	 intent,	 too
aggressive,	 too	violent,	 and	you	are	 trying	 to	 conquer	 some	 secret	of	 life,	 you
become	very	narrow.	Your	consciousness	closes;	you	are	no	longer	wide,	open.
And	truth	is	so	big	that	it	cannot	enter	into	a	narrow	consciousness.
When	you	are	relaxed,	the	narrowness	disappears,	you	are	open	from	all	sides	--
maybe	 just	 playing	 with	 soap-bubbles	 in	 your	 bathtub....	 That's	 exactly	 what
Albert	 Einstein	 used	 to	 do:	 all	 his	 great	 discoveries	 happened	 while	 he	 was
playing	with	soap-bubbles	in	his	bathtub.	You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	for
hours	 together	 he	would	 remain	 in	 his	 bathtub	playing	with	 soap-bubbles.	His
wife	was	very	embarrassed	to	tell	it	to	other	people.
One	of	my	friends	went	to	see	him	and	he	had	to	wait	for	six	hours	--	because	he
wouldn't	 come	 out	 of	 the	 bathroom.	 And	 finally	 the	 wife	 had	 to	 tell	 him	 the
truth:	"He	cannot	be	disturbed	--	never	when	he	 is	 in	 the	bathroom.	He	can	be
disturbed	when	he	is	in	his	lab,	but	not	when	he	is	in	his	bathroom	--	because	he
becomes	 so	 utterly	 relaxed	 that	 all	 the	 great	 insights	 happen	 to	 him	 there.	 So
nothing	 can	 be	 done.	He	may	 be	 playing	with	 soap-bubbles,	 but	 playing	with
soap-bubbles	he	has	come	to	know	about	stars,	faraway,	faraway	stars."	Playing
with	 soap-bubbles,	 even	 stars,	 which	 are	 so	 far	 away	 that	 their	 light	 has	 not
reached	yet	since	the	earth	came	into	existence...!	For	millions	of	years	the	earth
has	been	in	existence;	their	light	has	not	reached	the	earth	yet.	And	light	travels
with	terrific	speed;	greater	speed	is	inconceivable.
Light	travels	one	hundred	and	eighty-six	thousand	miles	per	second....	When	the
earth	came	into	existence,	since	that	day	the	light	has	been	travelling	from	those
stars;	 it	 has	 not	 reached	 yet.	 Einstein	 became	 aware	 of	 THOSE	 stars.	 Playing
with	soap-bubbles?!
Became	aware	of	the	greatest	discovery	of	this	age,	the	theory	of	relativity,	in	his
bathtub.
This	 is	 simply	 to	 say	 that	 life	 is	 ready	 to	 reveal	 itself	 when	 you	 are	 non-
aggressive,	 when	 you	 are	 like	 a	 child	 playing	 with	 reality.	 All	 that	 is	 great
happens	in	fun,	in	playfulness.
Mrs.	Ward,	you	are	too	much	intent.	You	say:
I	AM	ONLY	HERE	ON	A	VERY	SHORT	VISIT.	I	HAVE	COME	TO	TRY	TO
UNDERSTAND	 WHAT	 YOU	 HAVE	 HERE	 THAT	 THE	 REST	 OF	 THE
WORLD
DOES	NOT.
WHAT	 I	 HAVE	 HERE	 IS	 EVERYWHERE,	 but	 maybe	 you	 cannot	 see	 it
somewhere	else.	You	need	a	certain	space	in	which	you	can	relax	--	that	space	is
nowhere	else.
Religion	is	very	serious	all	over	the	world;	religion	here	with	me	is	a	non-serious
phenomenon.	Elsewhere	life	is	taken	as	a	great	problem,	a	theological	problem.
HERE	it	is	thought	to	be	a	beautiful	joke!	Prayer	is	thought	to	be	very	sacred	in
other	places.	Here,	 just	 to	be	celebrating,	ANYTHING...	 the	whole	question	 is
just	to	be	celebrating.	If	you	are	eating	your	food	with	celebration,	it	is	prayer;	if
you	 are	 taking	 your	 bath	with	 celebration,	 it	 is	 prayer.	 If	 you	 have	 joy	 in	 the
heart,	it	is	prayer.	Prayer	is	not	a	ritual	here;	you	need	not	repeat	certain	words,
you	need	not	move	through	certain	gestures.
Prayer	is	a	quality	here,	not	an	activity	--	a	flavour,	a	subtle	dance	of	your	inner
energy.
Listening	to	the	birds...	and	it	is	prayer!	Seeing	the	trees,	all	their	green	and	all
their	 red	 and	 all	 their	 gold,	 is	 prayer.	 A	 bird	 on	 the	 wing,	 and	 you	 simply
watching	with	great	joy,	with	a	certain	relatedness	to	the	bird,	a	certain	affinity,
empathy	--	as	if	you	are	on	the	wing	--	it	is	prayer.
Prayer	 is	 not	 something	 special	 here:	 it	 is	 the	 day-to-day	 ordinary	 life,	with	 a
new	quality
--	the	quality	of	joy	added	to	it,	the	quality	of	surrender	and	offering	added	to	it.
Any	 act	 offered	 to	God	 is	 sacred.	And	 if	 you	 can	 offer	 all	 your	 acts	 to	God,
everything	is	sacred.
There	are	thousands	of	churches	and	temples	in	the	world;	there	are	thousands	of
teachers,	great	teachers,	very	learned	teachers....	I	am	not	a	learned	man	and	I	am
not	a	teacher,	because	I	have	no	teaching	to	impart.	I	am	just	a	silent	stillness;	I
am	just	love	in	my	heart,	a	playfulness.	If	you	can	be	here,	without	any	idea	of
when	you	are	leaving,	if	you	can	just	be	here,	and	you	can	imbibe	the	spirit	of
this	 Buddhafield,	 this	 energy-field,	 something	 is	 possible	 --	 something
impossible	is	possible,	which	may	not	be	possible	anywhere	else.	Because	as	far
as	I	know,	there	exists	no	Buddhafield	in	the	world	right	now	except	this.
Christians	 are	 there	 and	 Hindus	 are	 there	 and	 Mohammedans	 are	 there	 and
Jainas	and	Buddhists	--	there	are	three	hundred	religious	on	the	earth,	but	all	are
hangovers	 of	 the	 past.	 Their	 Masters	 are	 long	 dead;	 they	 are	 traditions	 not
religions,	conventions	not	religions,	conformities	not	revolutions.
Here	it	is	not	a	tradition	that	I	am	making	available	to	you.	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	the	past.	It	is	a	new	beginning,	and	it	is	very	fortunate	to	be	at	the	beginning
of	something,	to	be	at	the	very	source	of	something.
The	people	who	walked	with	Jesus	were	immensely	fortunate	--	they	were	at	the
very	source,	at	the	purest	source.	The	people	who	walked	with	Buddha	and	lived
with	 Buddha	 were	 immensely	 blessed,	 but	 now	 to	 be	 Buddhist	 is	 just
meaningless.	 Twenty-five	 centuries	 have	 passed,	 and	 in	 these	 twenty-five
centuries	Buddhism	has	been	corrupted	so	much	that	now	it	is	almost	impossible
to	sort	out	what	Buddha	said	and	what	has	been	added	to	it	and	what	has	been
deleted	from	it.	It	is	almost	impossible	to	say	what	has	come	from	Buddha	and
what	these	twenty-five	centuries	have	gathered	around	it.
It	is	like	a	snow-ball	rolling:	more	and	more	snow	goes	on	collecting	around	it;
the	original	face	is	lost.	You	will	even	be	surprised	that	the	Buddhist	statues	have
nothing	to	do	with	the	real	face	of	Buddha.	The	Buddhist	statues	have	something
more	to	do	with	the	face	of	Alexander	the	Great	--	because	with	Alexander	the
Great	 Indians	 became	 aware	 for	 the	 first	 time	 of	 the	 Greek	 beauty,	 and
particularly	of	the	Greek	male	beauty.
Greeks	were	not	 interested	 in	 female	beauty	at	all,	 remember,	 their	whole	 idea
was	of	male	beauty.	If	you	look	at	ancient	statues	that	the	Greek	culture	left,	you
will	not	 find	statues	of	women	--	you	will	 find	statues	of	men,	statues	of	nude
men.	 They	 were	 tremendously	 in	 love	 with	 male	 beauty,	 the	 male	 body.	 The
female	body	was	not	thought	to	be	beautiful	in	Greece.
They	 created	 beautiful	 statues	 of	 nude	 male	 bodies.	 Those	 statues	 and	 those
Greeks	who	came	to	India	with	Alexander	the	Great,	they	gave	the	idea	of	how
the	 Buddha's	 face	 should	 be	 made.	 Buddha's	 statues	 are	 not	 in	 ANY
correspondence	with	his	real	face	--
they	are	Greek	in	origin.	And	everything	like	that	has	been	changed.
The	 day	 Buddha	 died,	 the	 monks	 started	 quarrelling	 --	 about	 each	 and
everything.	Thirty-six	schools	immediately	arose,	thirty-six	sects.	One	man	they
all	have	loved,	one	man	they	all	have	heard	--	but	they	have	heard	according	to
their	minds.	And	when	a	man	like	Buddha	is	there,	he	releases	great	power;	and
there	 are	 power-hungry	 people	who	 immediately	 jump	 on	 it,	 exploit	 it.	 These
power-hungry	people	are	really	politicians.
St.	Paul	who	created	Christianity	 is	a	politician.	Christianity	has	nothing	 to	do
with	 Christ,	 and	 Buddhism	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Buddha.	 Buddhism	 was
created	by	King	Ashoka,	the	great	Emperor.	He	spread	Buddhism	all	over	Asia.
It	was	he...	 and	 I	don't	 think	 that	he	was	 a	man	of	 any	great	understanding	or
enlightenment;	politicians	never	are.	It	became	a	new	power	trip.	Somebody	can
spread	 his	worldly	 riches	more	 and	more	 and	more,	 somebody	 can	 spread	 his
empire	of	political	domination,	somebody	else	can	spread	his	religious	empire	--
but	 it	 is	 all	 the	 same!	 The	 desire	 is	 to	 dominate	 more	 and	 more	 people.
Politicians	are	not	very	intelligent	people.
Those	thirty-six	people	who	started	quarrelling	must	have	been	politicians.
And	 this	 is	 something	 that	 is	 always	 going	 to	 happen;	 it	 is	 something	 in	 the
nature	 of	 things	 --	 it	 cannot	 be	 avoided.	 Those	 who	were	 really	 in	 tune	 with
Buddha	remained	silent.	The	shock	was	such	--	Buddha's	leaving	the	body	--	that
they	 were	 shattered,	 they	 were	 crying	 and	 weeping.	 They	 were	 missing	 their
Master;	their	hearts	were	no	more	in	their	right	places.	They	were	not	interested
at	 all	 in	 creating	 schisms,	 sects,	 divisions,	 politics.	 But	 there	were	 idiots,	 and
they	are	always	around	--	seek	one	and	you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one;	they
are	 always	 around.	 And	 when	 one	 idiot	 goes,	 another	 idiot	 takes	 his	 place,
immediately.
Just	 now...	 the	 other	 day	 I	was	 reading:	 in	Uganda,	 Idi	Amin	 is	 gone;	 he	was
known	as
'Idiot	Amin'.	Now	do	you	know	who	has	succeeded	him?	--	a	man	called	Lulu.
One	idiot	goes,	another	lulu	comes!	It	is	a	very	strange	world.	You	cannot	get	rid
of	idiots	and	lulus.
Once	the	Master	is	gone,	the	politicians	are	there	immediately	ready	to	grab	the
power.
And	politics	remains	as	long	as	ego	remains;	politics	is	the	shadow	of	the	ego.
So	you	can	go	to	a	Christian	church	or	a	Hindu	temple,	and	you	will	go	empty-
handed	 and	 you	will	 come	 back	 empty-handed.	 Unless	 you	 can	 find	 an	 alive
Buddhafield,	pulsating,	streaming	with	life...	and	this	is	what	is	happening	here.
Something	is	possible.	I	cannot	promise	you	that	I	can	give	it	to	you;	I	can	only
say	that	the	space	is	here,	and	the	space	is	becoming	richer	and	richer	every	day,
more	 and	more	 dimensional	 every	 day.	 If	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 dive	 deep	 into	 the
world	that	we	are	creating	here	--	 it	 is	an	invisible	world	--	something	of	great
value	is	possible.
You	ask	me:	CAN	YOU	HELP	ME?
That's	what	I	am	here	for.	That	is	not	the	real	question....	Can	you	take	my	help?
--	that	is	the	real	question.	Are	you	ready	to	take	my	help?	Will	you	ALLOW	me
to	help	you?
Won't	you	resist?	Will	you	open	your	heart	for	me	to	come	in?	And	my	coming
in	your	heart	 is	 a	great	 surgery.	 It	 is	pain	 in	 the	beginning,	 agony	on	 the	way,
ecstasy	only	in	the	end.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHY	DO	ALL	THE	BUDDHAS	SAY	THE	SAME	THING?
Vinod,
TRUTH	IS	ONE.	Even	 if	 it	 is	 said	differently,	 it	 is	 the	 same	 truth.	Languages
may	differ,	metaphors	may	differ	 parables	may	differ,	 but	 if	 you	 really	 look	 a
little	deep,	then	al	parables,	all	languages,	all	metaphors,	culminate	in	one	truth.
TRUTH	 is	one	 --	what	 can	Buddhas	do?	Although	each	Buddha	 speaks	 in	his
own	way,	and	his	expression	has	HIS
signature	on	it.	His	expression	is	just	his	and	nobody	else's.	But	still	those	who
can	 see	will	 always	 find	 that	 it	 is	 the	 same	 diamond	 --	maybe	we	 have	 been
shown	only	one	aspect	of	it	by	Krishna,	another	aspect	by	Christ,	still	another	by
Mohammed,	but	those	are	aspects	of	the	same	diamond.
The	diamond	is	one,	this	universe	is	one	--	and	all	the	Buddhas	have	been	saying
the	same	thing,	in	different	languages,	in	different	ways.	Those	differences	come
from	their	individualities,	not	from	their	experience.	The	moment	of	experience
is	 wordless,	 the	 moment	 of	 experience	 is	 thoughtless.	 So	 when	 Buddha
experienced	 it,	 it	 was	 the	 same	 purity	 of	 consciousness	 as	 when	 Jesus
experienced	it.
Two	 purities	 cannot	 be	 different;	 two	 impurities	 can	 be	 different.	 Two	 healths
cannot	 be	 different;	 two	 diseases	 can	 be	 different.	 Two	 silences	 cannot	 be
different;	 two	 noises	 can	 be	 different.	 The	 truth	 is	 known	 in	 silence,	 but	 you
cannot	 utter	 It	 in	 silence	 --	 you	 have	 to	 use	 words,	 language,	 noise.	 And
immediately...	when	Buddha	speaks,	he	speaks	in	Pali;	that	is	the	language	that
he	knows,	that	is	his	mother	tongue.
And	Jesus	speaks	in	Aramaic;	that	is	his	mother	tongue.	If	Jesus	and	Buddha	had
met,	they	would	not	have	understood	each	other's	language	at	all,	but	they	would
have	 looked	 into	 each	 other's	 eyes	 and	 would	 have	 understood	 each	 other
TOTALLY!
A	Sufi	story:
Mulla	Nasruddin	is	sitting	in	the	village	square	one	evening	plucking	the	strings
of	a	sitar.	Little	by	little,	an	expectant	circle	of	villagers	gathers	around	him.	He
keeps	on	playing	just	one	note.	Finally,	one	villager	enquires,	"That's	a	very	nice
note	 you	 are	 playing,	Mulla,	 but	most	musicians	 use	 all	 the	 notes.	Why	 don't
you?"
"Those	donkeys,"	retorts	the	Mulla,	"they	are	searching	for	the	note,	but	I	have
found	it!"
Truth	is	one	--	when	you	have	found	it	you	can	go	on	repeating	it,	you	can	find
different	ways	to	repeat	it,	unique	ways	to	express	it,	you	can	devise	your	own
methods.	And	there	are	many	methods	devised	--	because	of	the	compassion	of
the	enlightened	ones.	Strange	methods,	very	contradictory	to	each	other.
If	you	go	to	a	Sufi	saint,	he	will	be	very	polite	to	you,	he	may	even	touch	your
feet	--
because	 the	 Sufis	 respect	God	 in	 all	 forms.	 That	 is	 their	 device.	When	 a	 Sufi
Master	 touches	 your	 feet...	 just	 think	 of	 that	 moment,	 contemplate	 over	 the
moment	--	a	Bahauddin,	or	a	Jalaluddin,	or	a	Farid	--	great	Masters!	diamonds	of
the	purest	water.	A	Bahauddin	touching	your	feet,	it	is	a	device.	In	that	moment
when	Bahauddin	 touches	 your	 feet,	 you	 are	BOUND	 to	 fall	 silent,	 howsoever
noisy	your	mind.	Bahauddin	touching	your	feet!?	A	great	silence	will	descend	on
you.	Bahauddin	 is	 giving	 you	 a	 taste	 of	 his	meditation	 in	 this	way;	 this	 is	 his
device.
And	a	Zen	Master	 is	 just	 the	opposite:	you	go	 to	him,	you	have	 to	bow	down
seven	times.
And	 you	 ask	 some	 innocent	 question...	 and	 he	 jumps	 on	 you,	 hits	 you	 on	 the
head	--	so	unexpectedly.	A	very	different	device,	but	just	think:	a	Bodhidharma,
a	 Rinzai,	 a	 Bokoju,	 jumping	 on	 you,	 hitting	 on	 your	 head!	 For	 a	moment	 all
thinking	stops...	so	unexpected.
And	you	had	asked	a	simple	question:	"Is	there	a	God?"	and	he	became	furious.
And	you	cannot	figure	it	out	--	why?	And	he	gives	you	no	time	to	figure	it	out;
he	gives	you	no	time	to	escape	either.
It	happened	once	that	when	Bokoju	met	his	Master	and	asked	something	about
Buddha,	 the	Master	 took	 him	 physically	 and	 threw	 him	 out	 of	 the	 window...
from	a	three-storey	building.	The	poor	fellow	fell	down	on	a	rock,	smashed,	and
the	Master	 was	 looking	 from	 the	 window	 and	 he	 asked,	 "Do	 you	 understand
now?"	And	the	whole	ridiculousness	of	it!
And	the	silence	of	the	garden.	And	the	silence	of	the	accident.	The	shock.	And
the	Master's	smiling	face,	and	those	compassionate	eyes,	and	his	asking,	"Now
do	you	understand?"
And	 in	 that	moment,	 Bokoju	 became	 enlightened.	He	 said,	 "Yes,	 yes,	Master.
Can	I	come	in	and	touch	your	feet	in	gratitude?"
"You	are	welcome,"	the	Master	said,	"to	have	a	cup	of	tea	with	me."
And	they	are	sipping	tea	together.
Something	immensely	valuable	has	happened.	In	that	moment,	in	that	dangerous
moment,	when	you	are	falling,	it	is	almost	as	if	you	are	going	to	die	--	you	are
finished.
How	 can	 you	 think?	 In	 dangerous	 moments	 thinking	 stops.	 When	 you	 come
across	a	snake,	suddenly	thinking	stops.	You	don't	decide	to	jump	out	of	the	way,
remember	--
you	jump	FIRST	and	then	you	decide,	then	you	think	it	over,	then	you	can	afford
to	think	it	over.	But	you	jump	first!
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	mind	is	very	slow	in	action,	and	he	is	right.	The	body
is	far	quicker.	Mind	is	very	lethargic;	it	goes	on	round	and	round	in	circles.	So
whenever	there	is	some	urgency,	then	your	existence	does	not	allow	your	mind
to	 go	 round	 and	 round	 through	 logical	 processes	 to	 come	 to	 a	 conclusion,
because	then	it	will	be	too	late.	By	the	time	you	have	decided....	For	example,	if
a	snake	is	passing	by	and	you	give	it	to	the	mind,	then	there	is	trouble.	First	the
mind	will	say,	"Ninety-seven	percent	of	snakes	are	non-poisonous,	so	there	are
only	 three	 chances	 out	 of	 a	 hundred	 that	 this	 snake	 is	 poisonous.	 A	 hundred
persons	who	are	bitten	by	snakes,	they	don't	all	die;	only	five	percent	die,	ninety-
five	percent	are	saved.	And	those	five	persons	who	die,	maybe	they	were	going
to	die	anyway.	So	what	is	the	hurry?	Why	bother?	And	one	has	to	die	one	day."
And	great	philosophical	ideas	about	death	and	the	immortality	of	the	soul....	And
snakes	don't	care	about	these	things!	They	are	absolutely	non-philosophical;	they
won't	give	you	that	much	time.	The	snake	may	strike	you	before	you	have	come
to	any	conclusion.
Gurdjieff	is	right:	he	says	whenever	there	is	any	urgency,	the	body	immediately
takes	over	from	the	mind;	it	does	not	give	mind	any	chance	to	do	--	it	does	it	on
its	own.	The	body	has	its	own	wisdom:	it	jumps	out	of	the	way.	It	is	almost	an
in-built	response,	so	no	thinking	is	needed.
That's	what	Zen	people	have	been	doing	with	their	disciples.
One	Zen	Master	had	this	habit	that	whenever	he	would	talk	of	God,	of	Buddha,
of	 the	higher	dimensions	of	 life,	he	would	 raise	one	of	his	 fingers	 towards	 the
sky.	It	became	so	characteristic	of	him	that	one	of	his	small	sannyasins,	a	young
boy	--	must	have	been	of	the	age	of	Siddhartha	--	became	very	much	interested
in	this	one	finger	pointing	upwards.
And	he	was	 always	 in	 attendance	 just	 to	 do	 something	 for	 the	Master	 --	 if	 he
needs	some	tea,	to	run	and	bring	the	tea,	or	just	to	be	by	his	side	and	to	help	him
to	get	rid	of	the	mosquitoes.
He	learnt	the	trick,	and	playfully,	whenever	the	Master	was	not	looking	at	him,
he	would	 show	one	 finger	 to	 the	 audience.	The	Master	 knew	 --	 people	would
laugh,	or	smile	and	he	would	know	who	was	doing	the	whole	trick.
One	day	--	and	this	can	be	done	only	by	a	Zen	Master	--	he	simply	caught	hold
of	 the	child	when	he	was	making	the	gesture	of	one	finger	pointing	to	heaven,
and	cut	 the	 finger	with	a	sharp	knife.	Now,	 just	 think	of	doing	such	a	 thing	 to
poor	Siddhartha....
The	child	cried,	screamed,	and	the	Master	said,	"Stop!	And	put	 the	finger	up!"
And	his	shout	was	such,	it	was	such	a	thunderlike	shout,	that	the	child	forgot	all
about	his	finger,	that	it	had	been	cut	and	blood	was	oozing,	and	he	showed	the
finger	which	was	NO	more	there,	because	the	Master	had	ordered.
And	in	that	moment	when	he	was	showing	a	finger	which	was	no	more	there,	he
became	aware	of	the	invisible;	the	Master	was	not	pointing	to	something	visible,
but	something	invisible.	And	the	child	started	laughing,	and	the	Master	took	him
into	his	embrace	and	said,	"You	have	understood."
And	 it	 is	 said	 that	 small	 child	 had	 his	 first	 satori.	 Later	 on	 became	 a	 famous
enlightened	Master.
Different	approaches...	but	the	truth	is	one.	The	truth	is	silence	--	the	single	note
of	 silence.	 Be	 silent	 and	 know,	 and	 you	 will	 also	 know	 the	 same	 thing	 that
Buddhas	 have	 always	 known	 and	 will	 always	 know:	 truth	 is	 eternal.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	time,	it	never	changes.
Third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	IS	IT	NOT	GOOD	TO	TEACH	THE	CHILDREN	SOMETHING	OF
RELIGION?	 WILL	 IT	 NOT	 BENEFIT	 THEM	 FO	 HELP	 THEM	 KNOW
SOMETHING
ABOUT	JESUS	CHRIST?
Maria,
RELIGION	CANNOT	BE	TAUGHT	to	children	or	to	grown-ups.	It	cannot	even
be	 taught	 to	grown-ups,	 so	how	can	 it	 be	 taught	 to	 children?	Religion	as	 such
cannot	be	taught:	religion	can	only	be	caught.	Maria,	if	you	live	a	religious	life...
and	by	'religious	life'	I	don't	mean	the	life	of	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu;	by	'religious
life'	I	mean	a	life	full	of	love,	prayer,	celebration,	joy,	cheerfulness,	gratitude.	If
you	 live	a	 religious	 life,	 the	children	are	bound	 to	catch	 it.	Teaching	 is	needed
because	you	don't	live	a	religious	life,	so	you	tell	them	theories.	Those	theories
are	not	going	to	help	at	all.	When	a	child	is	thirsty,	don't	talk	about	H2O	--	give
him	water.	He	needs	water!	Don't	tell	him,	"H20	is	the	formula	which	contains
water,	which	contains	all	the	oceans	--	don	t	be	worried.	Just	remember	H20	is
equivalent	to	water."
But	the	child	will	say,	"How	can	I	drink	H20?"
And	 then	 the	 ridiculous	 thing	happens:	 the	 child	will	 think	 if	 you	 repeat	H20,
H20,	 H20,	 H20,	 then	 maybe	 someday,	 by	 repeating	 it	 constantly,	 intensely,
chanting	it	again	and	again,	using	it	as	a	mantra,	the	miracle	will	happen....
People	 are	 chanting	 "Rama,	Rama,	Rama,"	 "Ave	Maria,"	 "Jesus,"	 "Allah"	 --	 a
thousand	 and	 one	 formulas.	You	 can	 go	 on	 chanting...	 they	 are	 all	H20,	H20,
H20.	You	are	simply	wasting	your	 time	--	not	only	wasting	your	 time,	you	are
destroying	your	intelligence	too.
The	man	who	gets	 into	 such	 a	 repetitive	 routine	becomes	 stupid.	He	 loses	 the
sharpness	of	his	intelligence.	What	are	you	going	to	teach	to	the	children?	What
is	religion	after	all?
Is	 there	 some	 way	 to	 teach	 it?	 Yes,	 you	 can	 teach	 Christianity,	 because
Christianity	 is	a	doctrine;	and	you	can	 teach	Buddhism	because	Buddhism	is	a
doctrine.	A	doctrine	can	be	taught,	but	religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	doctrine	--
religion	is	not	a	doctrine:	it	is	an	experience.
Maria,	you	cannot	teach	it,	but	you	can	create	the	context,	you	can	live	in	such	a
way	 that	 the	 child	 slowly	 slowly	 imbibes	 the	 spirit.	 And	 children	 are	 very
vulnerable,	very	flexible,	and	very	attentive	 too!	And	 they	are	always	ready	 to
learn.	If	something	of	immense	beauty	is	felt	by	them,	they	Learn	it,	they	drink
it,	they	digest	it.
But	 you	 teach	 them	 stupid	 doctrines.	 For	 example,	 that	 Christ	 was	 born	 of	 a
virgin	mother	 --	 now	 the	 child	will	 laugh	 at	 you,	 because	 now	 children	 know
much	more	than	you	think.
A	small	boy	gave	the	following	summary	of	his	Sunday	school	lesson:
"There	were	these	Jews	who	had	broken	out	of	a	prison	camp	in	Egypt.	They	ran
and	ran	until	they	came	to	a	wide	lake.	The	prison	guards	were	closing	in	so	the
Jews	 jumped	 into	 the	water	and	swam	out	 to	some	boats	 that	were	waiting	for
them.	The	guards	got	in	submarines	and	tried	to	torpedo	the	boats,	but	the	Jews
set	off	depth	charges	and	blew	up	all	the	submarines	and	made	it	safe	to	the	other
side.	Everybody	called	the	Admiral	by	his	first	name,	Moses."
The	boy's	father	asked,	"Son	are	you	certain	that	is	what	your	teacher	told	you?"
"Dad,"	 responded	 the	 boy,	 "if	 you	 can't	 believe	 my	 story,	 you	 would	 never
believe	the	one	the	teacher	told."
Now,	telling	children	stupid	stories	you	are	not	helping	the	to	become	religious;
on	the	contrary,	you	are	helping	them	to	become	anti-religious.	When	they	grow
up	they	will	know	that	all	those	religious	doctrines	were	fairy-tales.
Your	God.	your	Jesus	Christ,	all	will	turn	into	Santa	Claus	later	on	in	the	child's
mind	--
deceptions,	fables,	 to	keep	children	occupied.	And	once	the	children	know	that
what	you	have	been	 telling	 them	as	absolute	 truth	 is	 just	 lies	and	nothing	else,
you	 have	 destroyed	 something	 very	 valuable	 in	 their	 being.	 They	 will	 never
become	interested	in	religion	at	all.
My	 own	 observation	 is	 that	 the	world	 is	 becoming	more	 and	more	 irreligious
because	of	religious	teaching.	No	child	should	be	taught	any	religious	doctrine.
Yes,	when	you	are	praying,	let	the	child	be	present	there.	When	you	are	dancing,
let	 the	child	be	present	 there.	And	 the	child	will	 soon	 join	you	 --	how	can	 the
child	resist	 joining	a	dance?	Let	the	child	know	that	 life	has	grace	in	it;	 let	 the
child	 know	 that	 life	 is	 not	 only	 suffering	 but	much	 ecstasy	 too.	 Let	 the	 child
know	that	laughter	is	good,	divine,	that	love	is	good,	godly.
And	these	things	are	not	to	be	taught:	they	have	to	be	imbibed	by	the	child.	You
have	 to	create	 the	vibe.	And	 then	 sooner	or	 later	 the	child	will	 start	becoming
aware	 of	 many	 more	 things	 which	 cannot	 be	 seen	 just	 by	 the	 physical	 eyes.
Because	 you	 will	 have	 given	 him	more	 sensitivity.	 Otherwise	 you	 can	 go	 on
teaching	him,	 and	nobody	even	 remembers.	How	much	do	you	 remember	 that
was	 taught	 to	 you?	 Nobody	 even	 remembers;	 everything	 is	 thrown	 in	 the
garbage.
Three	Italians	were	driving	fast	on	the	expressway	when	their	car	collided	with	a
truck	and	 they	were	 instantly	killed.	Finding	 themselves	at	heaven's	door,	 they
knocked	and	God	answered.	"What	do	you	want?"	God	asked.
"We	want	to	come	in,"	they	replied.
God	said,	"Before	you	can	enter	you	must	answer	a	question."	He	pointed	to	one
Italian	and	said,	"You,	Vito,	tell	me,	what	is	Easter	about?"
Vito	paused,	then	with	an	Italian	accent	answered,	"Thatsa	when	there	are	lotsa
parades	 alla	 over	America!	Fireworks	 are	 shot	 at	 night	 and	 the	 people	 go	 ona
picnics.	Itsa	celebrated	in	July."
"Sorry,	Vito,"	God	said,	"but	you	must	go	to	hell."
Pointing	at	Pietro,	God	said,	"You,	Pietro,	tell	me	what	Easter	is	about?"
Pietro	smiled	and	replied,	"I	know,	God,	thatsa	when	some	time	ina	November
the	family	gathers	together	and	eatsa	turkey,	pumpkin	pie,	potatoes...."
"Sorry,	Pietro,"	God	said,	"you	must	go	to	hell."
Looking	at	Giuseppe,	God	said,	"You,	Giuseppe,	you	have	been	an	altar	boy	for
ten	years.	You	go	to	church	every	Sunday.	You	tell	me	what	Easter	is	about."
Giuseppe	replied,	"Thatsa	when	the	people	who	did	not	like	your	poor	son	and
what	he	said	hung	him	upa	on	a	cross.	For	 three	hours	your	son	he	hang	there
before	he	died.
Thena	his	mother	and	friends,	they	take	him	down	from	the	cross,	wrap	his	body
up	and	put	the	body	in	a	cave	and	they	roll	a	huge	stone	in	front	of	the	cave.	For
three	days	your	son	was	in	the	cave	and	on	the	third	day	he	wakes	up	from	the
dead,	rolls	back	the	stone,	goes	out	of	the	cave.	Hea	no	seea	his	shadow,	so	he
goes	back	in	for	sixa	more	months."
You	can	go	on	teaching...	nobody	is	listening.	Children	are	helpless;	they	have	to
go	 to	 the	Sunday	 school,	 so	 they	go.	They	have	 to	 listen,	 so	 they	 listen	 --	but
they	are	not	there.
And	later	on	they	say	and	they	know	that	all	that	was	just	nonsense.	They	may
not	say,	but	they	know	certainly	that	that	was	all	nonsense.
Maria,	this	is	not	the	way	to	help	the	world	become	more	religious.	This	is	the
way	 we	 have	 tried	 for	 centuries	 --	 and	 we	 have	 failed.	 Instead	 of	 the	 earth
becoming	more	religious,	it	has	become	more	and	more	irreligious	every	day.	As
the	 teaching	 has	 spread,	 as	 there	 have	 been	 more	 and	 more	 missionaries	 and
more	 and	more	 teachers	 and	more	 and	more	 people	 indoctrinating	 others,	 the
world	has	turned	more	and	more	irreligious	--
not	only	irreligious	but	anti-religious	too.
It	is	time	to	understand	that	something	IS	basically	wrong.	This	is	not	the	way	to
teach	religion;	religion	can	only	be	caught	and	not	taught.	Yes,	it	happens	with	a
Jesus,	because	Jesus	creates	the	space	where	it	can	happen.
A	disciple	once	asked	Jesus,	"What	is	prayer?"
Do	you	know	what	he	did?	He	simply	fell	on	his	knees	and	started	praying;	tears
started	 rolling	 down	 his	 cheeks.	 This	 is	 creating	 a	 space.	 Now	 he	 is	 creating
PRAYER	itself!
What	is	the	need	to	say	anything?
Seeing	it,	the	disciple	fell	on	his	knees	--	for	the	first	time	he	felt	the	tremendous
beauty	 of	 surrender,	 and	 a	 great	 joy	 in	 feeling	 grateful	 to	 God.	 Tears	 started
flowing	down	his	cheeks	too.	They	were	both	crying	--	in	joy,	in	gratitude.
Finally,	Jesus	asked	him,	"Now	do	you	know	what	prayer	is."
And	he	nodded;	he	said,	"Yes,	Master.	Now	I	know	what	prayer	is."
This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 teach.	 Not	 giving	 theoretical	 answers,	 not	 giving	 absurd,
outdated,	metaphysical	doctrines,	which	may	have	looked	relevant	one	day,	but
now	they	look	simply	stupid.	Now	say	to	a	child	that	God	created	the	world	just
four	thousand	and	four	years	before	Jesus	Christ,	and	the	child	will	smile	at	you.
And	the	child	knows	that
"Either	you	are	befooling	me,	or	you	are	in	utter	ignorance."
THE	WORLD	HAS	 EXISTED	 for	millions	 of	 years.	 In	 fact.	 there	 has	 never
been	a	beginning.	God	is	not	the	creator	in	reality	but	the	creativity.	To	say	to	a
child	that	God	finished	the	world	in	six	days	and	then	rested	on	the	seventh	day
because	he	was	tired	--
now,	that	means	that	since	then	he	has	not	bothered	about	us	at	all.
A	man	went	to	his	tailor	and	asked	him,	"How	long	is	it	going	to	take	for	my	suit
to	 be	 ready?	 You	 have	 been	 promising	 it	 already	 for	 six	 weeks,	 and	 you	 say
again	and	again,
'Come	again,	come	again...'	And	do	you	know?	--	God	created	the	world	in	only
six	days?
And	in	six	weeks	you	have	not	been	able	to	even	create	my	suit."
And	do	you	know	what	the	tailor	said?	The	tailor	said,	"Yes,	I	know	--	and	look
at	the	world,	then	look	at	my	suit,	and	you	will	see	the	difference.	The	world	is
in	a	mess.	This	is	what	happens	when	you	create	something	in	six	days."
God	is	still	creating.	In	fact,	to	think	of	God	as	a	separate	person	from	existence
is	 not	 experiential.	 Those	 who	 have	 experienced,	 they	 say	 God	 is	 the	 very
creativity	of	existence	--	he	is	not	a	creator.	Existence	creates	itself;	it	is	a	self-
creating	process.	And	it	is	unending	and	eternal.
And	how	 are	 you	 going	 to	 describe	God?	 --	 a	 very	 very	 old	man	with	 a	 long
white	beard,	sitting	on	a	throne	up	in	the	heaven.	And	do	you	know	what	ideas
come	to	children's	minds?	You	will	be	surprised.
Carl	Gustav	Jung	in	his	memoirs	writes...	he	was	the	son	of	a	clergyman,	so	he
used	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 sermons	 about	 God	 sitting	 on	 the	 throne	 and	 watching
everybody	from	there.
And	 Jung	 says,	 "The	 idea	 that	 always	 came	 to	 my	 mind	 was:	 if	 he	 starts
urinating,	 then	what	will	happen?	Sitting	on	 top...	and	sometimes	he	must	 feel
like	pissing,	then	what?"
Children	are	children!	When	you	talk	to	children,	be	very	alert.	They	have	their
own	 ideas...	 and	 he	would	 start	 giggling	 at	 the	whole	 idea,	 because	 the	 father
knew	nothing	about	it.
One	day,	the	father	asked,	"Why	do	you	giggle	whenever	talk	about	God	sitting
on	the	throne?"	So	he	told	the	father.	The	father	said,	"Shut	up!	Never	think	such
things!"
And	Jung	said,	"This	is	nothing	--	I	think	even	worse	things."	And	Jung	relates
that	that	idea	persisted,	persisted....	Even	when	he	became	older,	once	in	a	while
whenever	he	would	see	in	a	church	a	picture	of	God	up	there,	 immediately	the
idea	would	come.
Your	teachings	cannot	be	of	any	help	--	only	your	life.	Live!	If	you	really	love
your	 children,	 live	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 they	 start	 feeling	 that	 there	ARE	 things
which	are	not	visible	but	still	they	are.	You	need	not	convince	them.	They	don't
ask	for	proofs,	they	don't	understand	proofs.	They	are	not	asking	for	arguments	-
-	they	are	asking	for	existential	experiences.
And	they	are	always	ready	to	go	on	any	adventure	--	more	ready	than	you.	You
may	be	afraid	for	safety,	security,	and	a	thousand	and	one	things	--	children	are
never	afraid.
Children	are	more	 fearless	 than	you.	They	can	have	a	more	 immediate	contact
with	God	than	you	can	ever	have.
But	we	give	them	so	many	rotten	theories,	and	in	the	name	of	religion,	too,	we
go	on	 teaching	 them	a	kind	of	ambitiousness,	competitiveness:	"Be	better	 than
others!	 Be	 more	 religious	 than	 others!	 Be	 holier	 than	 others!	 Be	 purer	 than
others,	more	virtuous,	more	 righteous!	Then	God	will	 reward	you.	And	 if	you
are	not,	you	will	be	punished	in	hell."
This	is	psychological	conditioning,	making	them	afraid	and	making	them	greedy
--	 and	you	call	 this	 religion?	To	make	a	person	 fearful	 is	 religion?	Religion	 is
when	 a	 person	 becomes	 fearless.	 To	make	 a	 person	 greedy	 for	 rewards	 in	 the
other	life	is	religion?
Religion	is	when	there	is	no	greed.
And	you	make	them	competitive:	"Compete	with	others!	Be	more	virtuous,	more
saintly.
Look	at	other	boys,	how	well-behaved	they	are	and	how	religious	they	are!"	You
are	creating	in	their	mind	a	subtle	ego,	a	pious	ego,	so	when	the	boy	goes	to	the
church	he	feels	holier	than	everybody	else.	He	looks	all	around	--	he	knows	he	is
higher.	He	has	risen	on	the	ladder;	soon	the	paradise	will	be	his.
This	 is	 poisoning	 your	 children	with	 competitiveness.	 This	 competitiveness	 is
there	in	the	marketplace,	it	is	in	the	monastery	too.	In	the	marketplace	it	can	be
forgiven,	but	not	in	the	monastery.	When	people	are	rushing	for	money,	it's	okay,
understandable,	that	they	will	be	competitive.	But	for	virtue	too,	the	same	rush?
And	once	the	goal	becomes	too	important,	then	means	lose	all	importance.	When
the	end	becomes	all-important,	then	any	means	will	do,	fair	or	foul,	but	one	has
to	attain	to	the	end.
This	 is	 not	 creating	 religiousness.	A	 religious	mind	 is	 non-competitive,	 utterly
unambitious.	He	has	nowhere	to	go	--	no	hell	to	fear,	no	heaven	to	attain.	He	is
RIGHT
now	in	God,	in	THIS	very	moment.	His	this	moment	is	all	and	all.	And	he	never
compares	 himself	 with	 anybody	 else.	 Your	 saints	 go	 on	 comparing:	 Who	 is
higher?	 Who	 is	 a	 bigger	 saint?	 And	 all	 these	 so-called	 saints	 are	 just	 stupid
children,	still	thinking	in	terms	of	what	they	have	learnt	in	their	schools,	still	not
out	of	their	teens.	I	have	heard:	There	was	a	deaf	and	dumb	couple	who	had	just
got	married	and	were	on	 their	honeymoon.	They	 took	off	 their	clothes	 to	have
some	fun	when	the	wife	signalled	in	sign	language,	"Did	you	bring	the	safes?"
"Oh	no,"	replied	the	man	in	sign	language,	"I	forgot."
And	 she	 said,	 using	 her	 fingers,	 "You	 will	 have	 to	 get	 dressed	 and	 get	 some
because	I	am	not	going	to	do	it	without	safes."
"But	I	am	deaf	and	dumb,"	cried	the	man.	"How	am	I	gonna	get	the	man	at	the
drugstore	to	understand	what	I	want?"
"Oh,	 that's	easy,"	 replied	 the	wife.	 "You	 just	go	 to	 the	counter,	 lay	down	a	 ten
dollar	bill,	take	your	prick	out	and	lay	it	on	the	counter	and	the	man	will	know
what	you	want."	The	man	went	out	and	came	back	a	half	an	hour	later	looking
very	sheepish.
"Well,	did	you	get	them,	did	you	get	the	safes?"	asked	the	expectant	wife.
The	man	just	hung	his	head	and	said	no.
"Well,	did	you	do	what	I	said?"	asked	the	now	frustrated	wife.
"Yes,"	he	replied.
"So,	what	happened?"
"Well,	I	went	to	the	counter	and	put	down	the	ten	dollars.	Then	I	pulled	out	my
prick	and	put	it	on	the	counter.	Then	the	man	behind	the	counter	put	ten	dollars
on	the	counter	and	pulled	out	his	prick	and	put	it	on	the	counter."
"So,	what	happened?"	asked	the	curious	wife.
"Well,"	replied	the	husband,	"his	was	bigger	so	he	took	all	the	money!"
Competition,	competition,	competition...	everywhere	competition.	And	this	story
is	not	just	a	story:	if	you	ask	Sigmund	Freud	he	will	say	exactly	this	that	that	is
from	where	Competition	 arises.	 Small	 boys	 become	 very	much	worried	 about
their	genital	organs:
"Who	has	the	bigger	one?"
All	 competition	 is	 rooted	 there,	 originates	 there!	 And	 then	 it	 spreads	 all	 over
your	 life.	 It	 is	 sexual	 basically.	 Then	 it	 takes	 many	 forms,	 many	 masks	 and
facades:	Who	has	the	biggest	car?	It	is	nothing	but	the	same	story:	Whose	prick
is	 bigger?	Who	 has	 the	 biggest	 house?	 It	 is	 the	 same	 story	 again.	 These	 are
different	symbols	for	the	same	sexual	competition.
And	who	is	the	greatest	saint?	--	the	story	is	not	different...
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Untimely	Sannyasination
16	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904160
ShortTitle:
FISH06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
107
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 HOW	 CAN	 REBELLION	 BE	 RECEPTIVE,	 FEMININE,	 YES-
SAYING?	IT
FEELS	SO	MUCH	LIKE	A	NO	TO	ALL	THESE	OLD	THINGS.	IS	IT	JUST
AWARENESS	AND	LOVE	THAT	IS	IT?
Prem	Mariam,
REVOLUTION	IS	NO,	REBELLION	IS	YES.	Revolution	is	negative,	rebellion
is	positive.	Revolution	says	no	to	all	that	is	wrong	and	should	not	be.	Rebellion
says	 yes	 to	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful,	 good.	Revolution	 is	 past-oriented,	 rebellion	 is
present-oriented.	They	are	not	synonymous.
Revolution	 is	 destructive,	 rebellion	 is	 creative.	 Revolution	 can	 never	 be
feminine,	 receptive,	 yes-saying.	 That	 is	 impossible.	 But	 rebellion	 is	 always
feminine,	always	receptive,	always	yes-saying.
I	 am	 talking	 about	 rebellion,	 I	 am	 not	 talking	 about	 revolution.	 Revolution	 is
political,	rebellion	is	spiritual.	Revolution	is	of	the	crowd,	rebellion	is	individual.
You	can	be	a	rebel	and	you	don't	need	anybody	else	to	be	with	you	--	you	alone
can	be	a	 rebel.	But	you	alone	cannot	be	a	 revolutionary;	you	will	need	a	great
organization,	you	will	need	a	great	army	behind	you.
And	the	problem	is	--	one	of	the	most	significant	things	to	be	understood	--	that
when	you	fight	with	somebody,	slowly	slowly,	you	become	like	your	enemy.	It's
bound	 to	 be	 so;	 it	 follows	 a	 certain	 natural	 course.	 If	 you	 have	 to	 fight	 with
somebody,	you	have	to	be	like	him;	otherwise	you	will	not	be	able	to	fight	with
him.	Choose	your	enemy	very	carefully.
Friends	can	be	chosen	without	much	care	--	they	don't	affect	you	so	much	--	but
enemies	are	very	decisive.
All	revolutions	fail	because	of	 the	enemy.	The	enemy	decides	the	whole	 thing.
The	 czars	 of	 Russia	 decided	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 communist	 party;	 the	 czars
decided	how	Joseph	Stalin	was	going	 to	be.	And	he	proved	a	bigger	czar	 than
any	other	czar,	and	he	proved	even	more	terrible	than	Ivan	the	Terrible.
Fighting	with	 the	 czar,	 fighting	with	 the	 imperialist	 structure	 of	 the	 czar,	 they
learnt	 the	whole	strategy,	all	 the	 tactics.	By	 the	 time	 they	came	 in	power,	 they
were	 perfectly	 groomed	 by	 the	 czar,	 by	 the	 enemy.	By	 the	 time	 they	 came	 in
power,	they	started	behaving	in	the	same	way	against	their	enemies	as	the	czar
had	been	behaving	with	them.
This	you	can	see	all	over	the	world	again	and	again.	Right	now	this	is	happening
in	Iran.
The	Emperor	is	gone,	and	a	far	worse	regime	has	taken	his	place.	Khomeini	is
proving	at	least	ten	times	more	violent	than	the	Emperor	himself.	Khomeini	has
learnt	 the	 whole	 strategy	 from	 the	 Emperor;	 his	 whole	 life	 he	 has	 suffered,
struggled.	 That	 has	 been	 his	 school.	 Now,	 with	 a	 vengeance,	 he	 is	 proving
himself	 to	 be	 a	 bigger	 emperor	 than	 the	 Emperor	 himself	 Now,	 every	 day,
hundreds	of	people	are	being	executed,	killed.
This	has	happened	always:	revolutions	fail	because	they	are	reactions.	Never	be
a	revolutionary:	be	a	rebel.	A	rebel	is	not	AGAINST	the	past;	the	past	is	not	even
worth	that.	To	be	against	it	m.ans	to	be	focussed	on	it;	to	be	against	it	means	you
are	paying	too	much	attention	to	it.	To	be	against	it	means	you	are	hypnotized	by
it.
A	 few	 are	 for	 it	 --	 they	 are	 hypnotized.	 And	 a	 few	 are	 against	 it	 --	 they	 are
hypnotized.
The	 rebel	 is	one	who	simply	sees	 the	whole	 futility	of	 it,	 and	without	 fighting
drops	it.	If	you	fight,	it	will	cling	to	you;	if	you	fight,	you	have	to	cling	to	it.	It
will	become	your	definition.	Don't	let	the	past	define	you;	simply	slip	out	of	it,
just	like	a	snake	slips	out	of	the	old	skin	--	and	never	even	looks	back.	That	is
the	way	of	the	rebel.
I	teach	the	way	of	the	rebel.	That	is	the	way	of	religion	--	religion	is	rebellion,
not	revolution.	And	it	gives	immense	respect	to	the	individual.	Each	one	can	be	a
rebel	 in	 his	 own	 way:	 just	 simply	 slip	 out	 of	 the	 past.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to
struggle	with	 it	 --	 it	 is	no	MORE	there.	And	 if	you	go	on	 fighting...	you	don't
have	that	long	a	life.	The	past	has	been	very	long	--	millions	of	years	--	how	are
you	going	to	fight	with	it	in	a	life	that	consists	at	the	most	of	seventy	or	eighty
years?	In	this	small	life	span,	how	are	you	going	to	fight	with	the	past	which	is
so	huge,	immense?
The	only	wise	way	is	to	slip	out	of	it;	there	is	no	need	to	fight	with	it.	And	this
has	to	be	understood	on	many	levels.
Politically,	 people	 fight	with	 the	past	 --	 the	Hindu	past,	 the	Christian	past,	 the
Mohammedan	past	--	and	they	become	like	the	past	they	are	fighting	with.
Psychologically,	 since	 Sigmund	 Freud,	 people	 are	 fighting	 with	 their	 own
individual	pasts	--	the	childhood	traumas.	That	too	is	big,	and	if	you	have	to	sort
it	out	and	fight	with	everything	and	put	everything	right,	your	whole	present	and
future	will	be	wasted	in	it.	The	past	is	already	wasted,	the	present	will	be	wasted
in	psychoanalysis,	and	the	whole	future	you	will	be	fighting,	and	fighting	with
the	past.	And	 to	 fight	with	 the	past	 is	 to	 fight	with	a	shadow	--	you	can	never
win.	How	can	you	win	against	a	shadow?	It	does	not	exist	in	the	first	place.	You
have	only	to	see	that	it	is	a	shadow!	and	that	is	that.
That	is	the	basic	difference	between	the	psychological	approach	towards	life	and
the	 religious	 approach.	 Religion	 simply	 says:	 "Be	 more	 meditative,	 be	 more
aware.	 Be	 right	 now	 here!"	 In	 that	 very	 awareness,	 in	 that	 crystal-clear
consciousness,	 you	 see	 that	 the	past	 is	 an	unnecessary	burden	 --	 you	need	not
carry	it.	Nobody	can	force	you	to	carry	it;	you	are	carrying	it	on	your	own,	it	is
your	decision.
Your	 parents	 are	 not	 there	 to	 enforce	 it...	 it	 is	 already	 gone!	 Just	 shadows	 are
lingering.
See	 that	 they	are	shadows,	and	you	are	free.	 In	 that	very	seeing	 is	 freedom.	In
that	very	understanding	is	liberation.	And	then	all	your	energies	are	available	to
be	 herenow.	Then	 you	 can	 bloom!	Then	 you	 can	 blossom.	Then	 your	 life	 can
have	some	fulfillment,	some	joy,	some	celebration.
Revolution	is	against	the	past	and	for	the	future	--	both	are	non-existential.	The
past	is	no	more	and	the	future	is	not	yet.	And	revolution	consists	only	of	past	and
future:	 against	 the	 past	 and	 for	 some	 future	 utopia.	 The	 word	 'utopia'	 is	 very
beautiful;	literally	it	means	'that	which	never	comes'.
Rebellion	consists	of	the	present	and	only	the	present.	It	has	no	concern	with	the
past,	it	has	no	concern	with	the	future.	It	loves,	lives,	dances,	sings,	but	its	space
is	here,	and	its	time	is	now.	And	then	you	can	be	feminine,	and	then	you	can	be
receptive,	and	then	you	can	be	yea-saying.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 I	 ONCE	 READ	 SOMEWHERE	 THAT	 WHEN	 BUDDHA	 WAS
ASKED	 BY	 A	 DISCIPLE	 TO	 DESCRIBE	 LIFE	 BRIEFLY,	 THE	 BUDDHA
REPLIED	'MISERY'.	IS
THIS	TRUE?
Zareen,
IT	 IS	 TRUE.	 But	 if	 a	 Buddha	 had	 asked	 Buddha,	 "What	 is	 life?	 --	 describe
briefly,"	 he	 would	 have	 said,	 "Bliss."	 The	 answer	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the
question;	 the	 answer	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with	 the	 questioner.	 The	 answer
depends	 on	 the	 questioner.	 A	 man	 like	 Gautam	 Buddha	 does	 not	 answer
questions,	 he	 answers	 questioners.	He	 is	 not	 saying	 anything	 about	 life,	mind
you	--	he	is	not	saying	anything	about	life.	He	is	saying	something	about	the	life
of	the	man	who	had	asked	the	question.
Buddha	 is	 not	 saying	 about	his	 own	 life	 that	 it	 is	 a	misery;	 certainly	 it	 is	 not.
Nobody	 has	 seen	 such	 grandeur,	 such	 bliss;	 nobody	 has	 walked	 on	 this	 earth
with	such	grace,	such	utter	celebration.	Nobody	does	humanity	remember	who
has	been	more	beautiful.	How	can	Buddha	say	 that	 life	 is	misery?	You	should
remember:	he	is	not	talking	about	life	as	such;	he	is	talking	about	the	life	of	the
man	who	had	asked	the	question.
And	then	it	becomes	a	problem,	because	for	forty-two	years	Buddha	continued
answering	 people,	 and	 different	 people	 required	 different	 answers,	 and
sometimes	 contradictory	 answers.	 A	 Buddha	 has	 to	 contradict	 himself	 almost
every	day.
Once	it	happened:
In	the	morning	a	man	asked	Buddha,	Is	 there	a	God?"	and	Buddha	said,	"No."
And	in	the	afternoon	another	person	asked,	"Is	there	a	God?"	and	Buddha	said,
"Yes."	And	by	the	evening	a	third	person	asked,	"Is	there	a	God?"	and	Buddha
kept	quiet,	didn't	answer,	remained	silent.
Ananda,	who	was	Buddha's	chief	disciple,	was	present	on	all	three	occasions.	He
was	continuously	behind	Buddha	like	a	shadow	--	serving	him,	taking	care	of	his
body,	 looking	 after	 his	 needs.	 He	 was	 very	 much	 puzzled:	 "In	 a	 single	 day
Buddha	has	said	there	is	no	God,	Buddha	has	said	there	is	a	God,	and	Buddha
has	kept	silent	too,	he	has	not	answered	this	way	or	that.	These	are	the	only	three
possibilities	 --	 all	 the	 possibilities	 exhausted,	 in	 a	 single	 day?	All	 the	 answers
given."
He	could	not	sleep;	he	tossed	and	turned,	and	Buddha	asked,	"What	is	the	matter
with	you	tonight?	Are	you	not	tired	or	something?"
He	said,	"I	don't	want	to	disturb	you,	but	unless	you	answer	me	this	question	I
don't	think	I	will	be	able	to	sleep.	In	the	morning	you	said	no,	in	the	afternoon
you	said	yes,	and	by	the	evening	you	remained	silent,	you	didn't	answer	--	and
the	question	was	exactly	the	same!"
Buddha	 laughed	and	he	said,	"The	person	who	had	come	early	 in	 the	morning
and	had	asked	'Is	there	a	God?'	was	a	theist,	was	a	believer.	He	wanted	me	to	say
yes	so	that	his	belief	could	become	more	strengthened	--	and	I	don't	strengthen
people's	beliefs,	because	a	believing	mind	is	never	a	seeing	mind.	To	believe	is
to	remain	in	darkness.	I	wanted	to	shatter	his	belief.	My	answer	had	nothing	to
do	with	God;	my	answer	had	something	to	do	with	that	man.	He	was	there	just	to
accumulate	a	 little	more	evidence	for	his	belief,	so	he	could	say	 to	people	 that
'Not	only	do	I	believe	that	there	is	a	God,	but	even	Buddha	says	there	is	a	God!'
"He	had	not	come	to	understand.	He	simply	wanted	me	to	be	a	witness	to	HIS
belief	 And	 his	 belief	 is	 just	 out	 of	 fear,	 a	 conditioning	 taught	 by	 others.	 His
belief	is	nothing	but	a	cover-up	for	his	ignorance.	I	cannot	be	in	any	way	a	help
to	it.	I	had	to	shatter	it.	I	had	to	shout	no,	emphatically.	And	it	helped.	'Buddha
says	no?'	Enquiry	started	in	his	being.
Now	he	cannot	be	at	rest	with	his	belief	He	will	have	to	come	--	you	will	see."
And	one	day	he	came	again,	and	he	said	to	Buddha,	"You	did	it:	since	that	time
my	worship	has	become	empty.	Since	that	time	I	go	to	the	temple,	but	the	temple
no	longer	has	any	deity	in	it.	Since	that	time	I	know	it	is	only	a	belief.	If	you	say
God	is	not,	then	who	am	I	to	say	God	is?	You	are	so	godly,	you	must	be	true.	I
have	come	to	enquire.
Now	I	come	to	you	without	any	belief.	Now	I	come	to	you	open	--	 to	seek,	 to
search.
Now	my	question	is	not	rooted	in	my	knowledge."	And	Buddha	said	to	Ananda,
"The	second	person	was	an	atheist	 --	he	believed	 that	 there	 is	no	God.	He	had
come	in	 the	same	way	as	 the	first	one:	 to	have	my	support."	His	belief	was	as
stupid	 as	 the	 first	 one's,	 because	 to	 believe	 without	 knowing	 is	 to	 be	 stupid.
Believe	only	when	you	have	known,	but	then	it	is	not	a	belief	at	all;	it	is	a	totally
different	experience.	It	is	trust.	It	is	not	based	on	somebody	else's	experience;	it
is	 your	 OWN	 experience.	 You	 are	 reborn	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 Hindu,	 Christian,
Mohammedan	--	it	is	simply	your	experience.	And	even	if	the	whole	world	says
it	is	not	so,	you	cannot	deny	it,	your	trust	cannot	be	shaken.
"The	other	person,"	Buddha	said,	"was	an	atheist,	hence	I	had	to	say	YES,	and
emphatically	I	had	to	say	yes."
Ananda	said,	"And	what	about	the	third?"
Buddha	said,	"He	was	neither	a	theist,	nor	an	atheist,	so	neither	was	yes	needed
nor	 was	 no	 needed.	 He	 was	 really	 an	 innocent	 soul,	 a	 very	 pure	 heart.	 His
question	was	not	out	of	his	a	priori	knowledge;	his	question	was	really	innocent.
His	question	was	a	quest,	an	enquiry.	I	had	to	remain	silent	--	because	that	was
my	answer	to	him.	And	he	understood	it.
"Did	you	not	watch:	when	I	remained	silent	and	closed	my	eyes,	he	also	closed
his	 eyes,	 and	 a	 great	 silence	 descended	 on	 him.	And	 did	 you	 not	 observe?	 --
when	he	went	his	eyes	were	shining,	his	eyes	were	like	lit	candles.	And	did	you
not	 observe?	 --	 when	 he	 left,	 he	 touched	my	 feet,	 bowed	 down,	 thanked	me,
saying	'You	answered	rightly,'	although	I	had	not	answered	him	at	all.	That	man
tasted	something	of	my	silence,	imbibed	something	of	my	being.	That	man	was
the	true	seeker."
A	 true	 seeker	 does	 not	 need	 a	 verbal	 answer:	 a	 true	 seeker	 needs	 something
existential	--
a	penetration	of	 the	heart	 into	the	heart,	a	penetration	of	 the	soul	 into	the	soul.
The	 real	 seeker	 wants	 the	 Master	 to	 overlap	 him.	 The	 real	 seeker	 wants	 the
Master	to	go	into	his	innermost	core	and	stir	the	sleeping	soul.
Zareen,	your	question	is	significant.	You	say:
I	ONCE	READ	SOMEWHERE	THAT	WHEN	BUDDHA	WAS	ASKED	BY	A
DISCIPLE	 TO	 DESCRIBE	 LIFE	 BRIEFLY,	 THE	 BUDDHA	 REPLIED
'MISERY.'
It	is	true.	Many	times	he	said	to	many	people	that	life	is	misery;	and	many	times
he	said	to	many	people	that	life	is	bliss	--	SATCHITANANDA	--	it	is	truth,	it	is
consciousness,	it	is	bliss.
But	people	have	gathered	more	the	answer	that	life	is	misery,	because	it	fits	with
their	 own	 experience.	When	 the	Buddha	 says,	 "Life	 is	 joy,"	 it	 doesn't	 fit	with
your	experience.
It	falls	on	flat	ears.	You	hear	it,	but	you	cannot	understand	it.	It	does	not	ring	any
bells	in	your	heart.
So	the	answers	that	he	gave	to	those	who	had	come	to	know	something	of	bliss,
something	of	joy,	something	of	song,	have	not	become	so	important.	And	it	was
only	 rarely	 that	 he	 would	 say	 that,	 because	 it	 is	 only	 a	 rare	 person	 who	 will
require	that	answer.	Millions	and	millions	need	to	be	told,	"Your	life	is	misery."
It	IS	so.
But	why	does	Buddha	say	your	life	is	misery,	why?	He	says	it	so	that	you	can
come	out	of	it.	You	can	have	another	kind	of	life	--	this	is	not	the	only	kind!	This
is	only	one	of	the	ways,	and	the	worst	way	possible.	You	have	created	a	hell	out
of	your	life;	and	if	it	can	be	a	hell,	it	can	also	be	a	heaven;	if	it	can	be	misery,	it
can	be	bliss.	It	is	the	same	energy	used	wrongly	that	becomes	misery,	AND	used
rightly	becomes	bliss.
What	is	misery?	Misery	is	feeling	separate	from	existence,	feeling	isolated	from
existence,	feeling	alienated	from	existence	--	 that	 is	misery.	And	what	 is	bliss?
Feeling	 one	 with	 existence,	 orgasmically	 one	 with	 existence,	 organically	 one
with	existence.
Having	an	ego	is	misery,	and	becoming	egolessness	is	bliss.	Both	alternatives	are
open.
The	choice	is	yours.
Zareen,	 listening	 to	Buddha's	 answer	 that	 life	 is	misery,	 don't	 settle	 there.	His
answer	is	to	unsettle	you.	His	answer	is	to	shock	you.	His	answer	is	to	wake	you
up	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 your	 life	 is	 misery.	 But	 people	 are	 really	 cunning,	 very
cunning;	 they	 listen	 only	 to	 that	 which	 they	 want	 to	 listen	 to.	 People	 are	 so
cunning	that	listening	to	the	statement	that	life	is	misery,	they	say,	''Then	nothing
can	be	done.	If	life	is	misery,	then	I	have	to	live	a	miserable	life,	then	this	is	all
there	is	--	so	live	it!	Live	it	anyhow."
Rather	 than	 creating	 a	 desire	 to	 transform	 themselves,	 they	 completely	 drown
themselves	in	their	misery	--	as	if	Buddha	has	given	them	a	certificate	that	this	is
what	 life	 is	 all	 about.	 People	 are	 so	 cunning,	 they	 simply	 listen	 only	 to	 that
which	they	want	to	listen	to.
"This	is	all	a	mistake,	Your	Honour,"	said	the	first	harlot.	"I	was	walking	along
and	this	guy....	"
"Just	a	minute,	young	lady,"	said	the	judge.	"Now,	you	have	been	here	a	dozen
times	--
one	hundred	dollars	fine.	Next!"
"I	am	just	a	poor	private	secretary,"	said	 the	second	girl,	 "and	I	was	not	doing
anything..."
"I	 recognize	 you	 too,	miss,"	 said	 the	magistrate.	 "Two	 hundred	 dollars	 or	 ten
days	in	jail.
Next	case!"
"Judge,"	said	the	third	girl,	"I	am	a	prostitute.	I	am	not	proud	of	it,	but	it	is	the
only	way	I	can	support	my	three	kids.	I	am	guilty."
"Young	woman,"	 said	 the	 judge,	 "I	 like	 your	 honesty,	 and	 because	 of	 it	 I	 am
going	 to	give	you	a	break.	Your	 case	 is	 dismissed	 and,	 sergeant,	 give	 this	 girl
fifty	dollars	out	of	the	policemen's	fund."
Now	comes	poor	old	Liebowitz,	arrested	for	selling	ties	without	a	license.	"Your
Honour,"	he	pleaded.	"I'm	not	gonna	lie	to	you	--	I	am	a	prostitute	too....	"
Beware	of	your	mind	--	it	is	always	trying	ways	and	means,	strategies,	tactics,	to
remain	 as	 it	 is.	 It	 can	 wear	 masks,	 it	 can	 become	 religious,	 it	 can	 go	 to	 the
church,	it	can	read	the	Bibles	and	the	Vedas...	and	still	it	will	find	only	ways	and
means	to	remain	itself.
Zareen,	 Buddha's	 statement	 has	 been	 taken	 by	 people	 as	 if	 he	 has	 said,	 "Life
cannot	be	bliss."	It	is	impossible.	"Life	is	misery	and	it	is	going	to	remain	misery
--	to	be	miserable	is	life's	intrinsic	quality,"	people	have	taken	it	that	way.	That	is
not	true.	I	know	it	is	not	true.
I	say	to	you:	your	life	is	misery,	but	it	need	not	be	so.	It	is	misery	because	you
have	not	 tried	 to	 transform	 it;	you	have	not	worked	on	 it.	 It	 is	misery	because
you	are	still	unborn.
It	 is	 misery	 because	 the	 opportunity	 is	 being	 wasted,	 and	 you	 are	 not	 being
creative.	It	is	misery	because	you	are	not	behaving	intelligently.
Be	 intelligent.	And	 I	don't	mean	by	 'intelligence'	be	 intellectual	 --	 intellectuals
are	not	necessarily	 intelligent	people,	and	intelligent	people	are	not	necessarily
intellectuals.
Almost	always	the	case	is	that	the	intellectual	is	only	a	pretend,	he	is	pseudo;	by
being	 intellectual	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 convince	 himself	 and	 others	 that	 he	 is
intelligent.
What	 is	 the	criterion	of	being	an	 intelligent	person?	Only	one	criterion:	 if	you
can	create	bliss	in	your	life	you	are	intelligent	--	otherwise	there	is	no	other	way
to	prove	it.	If	you	can	create	a	paradise	around	yourself,	if	you	can	remain	in	a
constant	cheerfulness,	cheerfulness	becomes	just	your	very	milieu,	then	you	are
intelligent.
Be	intelligent	and	life	is	bliss;	be	stupid	and	life	is	misery.	It	all	depends	on	you.
The	third	question
Osho,
Question	3
AND	THE	MIND	GOES	BANANAS...
"SURRENDER,	DO	YOUR	OWN	THING."
"TRUST,	LIVE	YOUR	LIFE..."
SLOWLY	IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	THAT	I	DON'T	KNOW	ANYTHING	AND
SOMETIMES	IT	FEELS	VERY	GOOD.	BUT	STILL	I	WANT	TO	KNOW.
Varidhi,
THE	 MIND	 NEVER	 GOES	 BANANAS	 --	 it	 is	 bananas.	 You	 say:
SURRENDER,	DO
YOUR	OWN	THING.	I	will	suggest	you	put	just	two	words	between	these	two:
SURRENDER	 and	 then	 DO	 YOUR	 OWN	 THING.	 Because	 once	 you	 have
surrendered,	 you	 are	 not	 there,	 God	 is.	 Then	 doing	 your	 own	 thing	 is	 doing
God's	thing:	Thy	kingdom	come,	thy	will	be	done.
First	dissolve	yourself,	then	God	is	your	you,	then	God	is	your	self	You	have	just
missed	those	two	simple	words	'and	then'.
Surrender	AND	THEN	do	your	own	thing.
Trust	AND	THEN	live	your	own	life.
Surrender	 and	 trust	 are	 not	 two	 things;	 it	 is	 the	 same	 phenomenon.	 You	 can
surrender	only	if	you	trust,	and	you	can	trust	only	if	you	surrender.	They	go	hand
in	band.	They	are	inseparable.	If	one	happens,	the	other	is	bound	to	have	already
happened.	Just	those	two	words	that	are	missing	are	creating	trouble	for	you:	and
then.
A	man	came	to	St.	Augustine	and	asked	him,	"I	am	illiterate,	very	old,	not	much
life	is	left.	I	cannot	go	into	great	austerities;	the	energy	is	ebbing.	I	am	just	on	the
verge	of	death.	I	have	walked	many	miles	just	to	see	you	and	ask	you	something
very	simple.	I	have	not	come	to	listen	to	great	philosophy	--	just	something	very
simple,	a	single	word	will	do.	You	just	simply	tell	me	a	single	word	that	I	can
keep	in	my	heart	and	I	can	follow	it	for	whatsoever	of	my	life	is	left."
It	is	said	St.	Augustine	closed	his	eyes...	his	disciples	were	very	much	puzzled.	It
had	never	happened	before.	Great	theologians	had	come,	great	philosophers	had
visited;	they	had	asked	very	complicated,	very	difficult	questions,	and	Augustine
was	never	known	to	meditate	over	those	questions.	His	answers	were	immediate.
"What	is	he	doing?	This	old	villager's	question	--	and	he	is	meditating?"
For	half	an	hour	he	meditated,	and	then	he	opened	his	eyes	and	he	said,	"Then	I
can	say	only	one	thing:	love	and	then	whatsoever	you	do	is	right."
Remember	 love.	 Love	 is	 the	 quintessence	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 religion,	 the	 very
perfume	of	all	the	flowers	that	have	bloomed	in	the	name	of	religion	--	Buddha,
Krishna,	Christ,	Mohammed,	Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu,	Kabir,	Farid,	Nanak,	Meera	-
-	 all	 the	 flowers	 in	 all	 the	 ages	 that	 have	 ever	 bloomed,	 they	 have	 the	 same
fragrance	and	that	fragrance	is	love.
If	you	can	 love,	 then	everything	 is	allowed	--	because	a	 loving	man	cannot	do
anything	wrong.	Love	is	the	only	commandment.	If	love	is	not	there,	then	even
those	ten	commandments	are	not	going	to	help	at	all.	Ten	commandments	are	not
needed;	they	are	needed	only	because	you	are	not	ready	to	fulfill	the	first	and	the
only	commandment.
Those	ten	commandments	are	just	poor	substitutes	for	the	single	commandment:
love.
And	remember,	love	AND	THEN	whatsoever	you	do	is	good,	is	virtuous.
That's	what	 I	go	on	 saying	 in	different	ways:	 surrender	 and	 then	do	your	own
thing.
Listening	 to	 me	 you	 can	 misunderstand,	 because	 doing	 your	 own	 thing	 has
become	the	very	flavour	of	the	new	generation.	I	am	not	saying	the	same	thing.
When	I	say	do	your	own	thing,	I	am	not	repeating	a	hippie	slogan.	When	I	am
saying	 do	 your	 own	 thing,	 there	 is	 a	 condition	 preceding	 it:	 surrender,	 trust,
AND	 THEN....	 Otherwise,	 what	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do?	 Without	 surrender
whatsoever	 you	 do	 will	 come	 out	 of	 your	 ego,	 will	 come	 out	 of	 your
unconsciousness,	will	come	out	of	your	past.	 It	CAN'T	come	from	God,	and	it
can't	come	from	a	conscious,	alert	being.
And	whatsoever	comes	from	the	unconscious	is	going	to	create	more	and	more
misery	for	you	and	for	others.	There	is	enough	misery;	there	is	no	need	for	you
to	contribute	more	 to	 it.	There	 is	more	 than	enough.	 If	you	want	 to	contribute
something	to	it,	please,	first	fulfill	the	basic	requirement	of	surrender	and	trust.
Just	meditate	 for	 a	moment...	 if	 the	 ego	 is	not	 there,	 then	who	 is	doing?	Then
God	is	doing	through	you,	then	you	are	just	a	hollow	bamboo.	On	his	lips	you
become	a	flute	--
the	song	is	his.	And	then	you	will	not	feel	so	puzzled,	Varidhi.
You	 say:	SLOWLY	 IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	THAT	 I	DON'T	KNOW	ANYTHING
AND
SOMETIMES	IT	FEELS	VERY	GOOD.
You	are	going	really	mighty	slow.	You	say:	SLOWLY	IT	SEEMS	TO	ME...	How
can	it	seem	slowly?	Either	you	see	it	instantly,	or	you	don't	see	it	--	what	do	you
mean	by
'slowly'?	These	things	are	not	gradual.	These	things	are	breakthroughs,	sudden,
like	lightning	in	the	dark	night.
When	 I	 say	 something,	 if	you	are	available	 in	 that	moment,	 if	you	are	 in	 tune
with	me	in	that	moment,	there	will	be	a	lightning	experience.	A	tremendous	yes
will	 arise	 in	 your	 heart...	 a	 flood	 of	 a	 new	 vision,	 of	 a	 new	 clarity,	 of	 a	 new
transparency.	You	will	 see	what	 is	what,	and	 in	 that	very	seeing,	 that	which	 is
wrong	drops	out	of	your	hands	--	and	only	the	wrong	has	to	be	dropped;	the	right
is	 always	 there.	 It	 cannot	 be	 dropped;	 it	 is	 only	 covered	 by	 the	 wrong.	 The
wrong	is	a	foreign	element,	the	right	is	your	natural	being.
You	say:	SLOWLY	IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	THAT	I	DON'T	KNOW	ANYTHING...
No,	it	cannot	happen	slowly.	It	never	happens	slowly.	If	you	listen	to	me	you	are
bound	to	experience	it,	that	you	don't	know	anything	at	all.	What	do	you	know?	I
am	not	talking	about	engineering	and	medicine	and	geography	and	history;	I	am
not	talking	about	all	that	nonsense	--	utilitarian	nonsense.	But	what	do	you	know
of	reality,	of	truth,	of	God,	of	love,	of	meditation?	What	do	you	know	about	this
mysterious	existence	that	surrounds	you?	What	do	you	know	about	yourself?	--
with	whom	you	have	lived	from	eternity	and	you	are	going	to	live	for	eternity.
What	do	you	know	about	the	person	who	you	are?
When	 a	 great	 mathematician,	 P.	 D.	 Ouspensky,	 went	 to	 see	 a	 very	 strange
mystic,	George	Gurdjieff,	Ouspensky	was	already	world-famous,	and	Gurdjieff
was	 not	 known	 at	 all;	 nobody	 had	 heard	 about	 him.	 Ouspensky	 had	 already
written	one	of	the	greatest	books	in	the	world,	TERTIUM	ORGANUM.	It	is	said
that	 there	 are	 only	 three	 great	 books	 in	 the	 world:	 the	 first	 was	 written	 by
Aristotle,	 Organum,	 and	 the	 second	 was	 written	 by	 Bacon,	 NOVUM
ORGANUM,	and	the	third	was	written	by	P.	D.	Ouspensky,	TERTIUM
ORGANUM.	First	principle,	 second	principle,	 third	principle	 --	 third	canon	of
thought,	that	is	the	meaning	of	Tertium	Organum
Ouspensky	 declared	 in	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 book	 that	 the	 third	 existed	 even
before	 the	first	ever	existed.	And	 it	 is	NOT	just	pride,	 it	 is	not	 just	ego	--	 it	 is
true.	He	had	discovered	something	of	immense	value;	he	had	contributed	to	the
world	 of	 mathematics,	 logic,	 metaphysics,	 something	 really	 valuable.	 He	 was
known	 all	 over	 the	 world;	 the	 book	 was	 being	 translated	 into	 many	 many
languages.
And	Gurdjieff	was	not	known	at	all	--	just	a	small	group	of	people	knew	about
him.	And	it	was	not	easy	to	approach	him	either;	he	was	not	available	publicly.
Ouspensky	had	great	difficulties	and	had	 to	wait	 three	months	 to	 see	him,	and
had	to	try	many	people	because	only	those	who	belonged	to	the	inner	circle	of
Gurdjieff	were	allowed	to	bring	some	new	guest.
And	the	day	he	was	ushered	into	the	presence	of	Gurdjieff,	twelve	people	were
sitting	 there.	 Gurdjieff	 in	 the	middle	 and	 all	 the	 twelve	 surrounding	 him,	 and
there	was	absolute	silence.	And	the	man	who	had	brought	Ouspensky,	he	also	sat
there	and	closed	his	eyes.
Now,	Ouspensky	 started	 feeling	very	 restless;	 he	was	not	 even	 introduced.	He
started	 feeling	a	 little	embarrassed	 too:	 "What	 is	he	doing	here?	And	what	are
these	people	doing	here,	just	sitting	silently?"
Half	 an	 hour	 passed...	 and	 now	 it	 was	 almost	 one	 hour	 passing.	 Ouspensky
started	 thinking,	 "What	 am	 I	 sitting	 here	 for?"	 But	 he	 could	 not	 even	 leave,
because	it	looked	so	impolite	to	disturb	the	silence.	The	silence	was	so	tangible,
like	a	cloud	the	silence	was	sitting	there.
And	 then	 Gurdjieff	 looked	 at	 Ouspensky,	 and	 he	 said,	 "You	 are	 feeling	 very
restless.	It	is	natural	--	you	come	from	a	restless	world,	you	don't	know	the	ways
of	silence.	Why	did	you	want	 to	see	me?	Why	have	you	been	haunting	me	for
three	months?"
And	Ouspensky	said,	"I	wanted	to	ask	you	a	few	questions."	Gurdjieff	gave	him
a	blank	sheet	of	paper	and	told	him,	"Go	into	the	other	room	and	on	the	one	side
write	whatsoever	you	know,	and	on	 the	other	side	whatsoever	you	don't	know.
And	then	come	back	--	because	I	will	answer	only	that	which	you	don't	know.	If
you	already	know	it,	why	bother	about	it?"
It	was	a	cold	Moscow	night,	 the	snow	was	falling,	and	Ouspensky	remembers,
"Going	 into	 the	 other	 room,	 I	 started	 perspiring.	 For	 the	 first	 time,	with	 such
emphasis,	I	was	made	aware	that	I	know	nothing.	I	wanted	to	write	something,
just	to	save	my	prestige,	that	I	know	this,	that.	I	thought	it	over,	round	and	round,
but	basically	I	knew	nothing.	I	thought:	Do	I	know	anything	about	love?	I	have
heard	much,	 I	 have	 read	much	 --	but	 any	experience?	because	 that	man	 is	not
going	to	let	it	pass	easily.	He	will	ask,	'Any	experience?'	"	And	he	had	seen	those
eyes	which	can	go	to	the	very	core	of	your	being:
"You	cannot	deceive	that	man.
"Do	I	know	anything	about	meditation?	Do	I	know	anything	about	God?	Do	 I
know	anything	of	any	real	significance?'
He	waited	and	waited	and	he	could	not	find	anything.	And	finally	he	came	out
and	gave	 the	paper	back	 --	as	blank	as	before	 --	and	said,	 "Excuse	me,	 I	don't
know	 anything.	 I	 know	 nothing.	 I	 have	 been	 a	 fool	 up	 to	 now.	 I	 had	 always
believed	 that	 I	 knew	 this	 and	 I	 knew	 that.	 You	 have	 shattered	me	 in	 a	 single
blow."
Gurdjieff	looked	at	Ouspensky,	and	his	eyes	were	those	of	benediction.	He	said,
"Then	you	are	accepted	--	because	only	those	who	know	that	they	know	not	can
be	accepted	in	my	circle,	because	only	they	are	capable	of	learning."
Varidhi,	know	that	you	know	nothing	--	and	don't	go	slowly.	It	is	not	a	question
of	gradual	discovery:	 it	 is	a	sudden	lightning	experience.	EACH	morning	I	am
trying	 to	 show	 it	 to	 you,	 shouting	 at	 you	 that	 you	 don't	 know	 anything	 --
anything	that	is	of	any	relevance,	anything	that	is	of	any	value,	anything	that	is
really	 going	 to	 transform	 you,	 anything	 that	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 carry	 beyond
death	to	the	other	shore.
But	 Varidhi	 says:	 SLOWLY	 IT	 SEEMS	 TO	 ME	 THAT	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW
ANYTHING
AND	SOMETIMES	IT	FEELS	VERY	GOOD.
Even	that	--	a	little	glimpse,	a	gradual	thing,	just	a	little...	as	if	a	window	opens
and	closes,	but	a	 little	breeze	comes	 in,	or	a	 ray	of	 the	sun	--	 still	THAT	feels
good!	If	it	feels	good,	go	deeper	into	it,	go	deeper	into	ignorance,	go	deeper	into
not	knowing,	go	deeper	and	deeper	 into	a	 state	where	knowledgeability	 is	 just
garbage.	And	great	will	be	your	experience	--	of	great	joy	and	freedom,	because
knowledge	 is	 a	 bondage,	 borrowed	 knowledge	 is	 a	 bondage.	 One's	 own
experience	is	not	knowledge:	it	is	wisdom,	it	is	freedom.
And	finally	you	say:	BUT	STILL	I	WANT	TO	KNOW.
That's	good!	Start	from	the	state	of	not	knowing	and	you	will	become	capable	of
knowing.	Start	from	the	clean	slate	and	let	God	write	something	on	it.	Efface	all
that	you	know.	Before	God,	be	just	nude,	innocent,	ignorant,	a	child.	And	YOU
WILL	 know.	We	 are	 here	 to	 know,	 but	 that	 knowing	 does	 not	 come	 through
scriptures,	 that	 knowing	 comes	 through	 silence.	And	 the	 knowledgeable	mind
cannot	be	silent.	It	is	so	full	of	knowledge,	so	full	of	thoughts,	it	cannot	empty
itself.
Empty	yourself,	Varidhi.	Empty	yourself	of	all	knowledge,	dreams	and	desires.
Throw	all	 this	 rotten	furniture	out	of	yourself.	Create	a	pure	space,	and	 in	 that
pure	 space	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 attracting	 the	 ultimate	 towards	 you;	 you
become	a	magnetic	force.
You	become	the	host,	and	God	comes	as	a	guest.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 FEELING	 A	 RAPIDLY	 GROWING	 UNEASINESS	 ABOUT	 MY
STATE	AS	A	NON-SANNYASIN.	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	ASK	YOU:	WHAT	IS
YOUR	ART?	HOW
COULD	YOU	FIND	THE	LOOPHOLES	IN	MY	MIND	SO	EASILY	AND	IN
WHAT
WAY	 DID	 YOU	 BYPASS	 MY	 WELL-DEVELOPED	 EGO?	 WHEN	 I
ARRIVED	TEN
DAYS	AGO	I	FELT	RATHER	BALANCED,	GRATEFUL,	YES,	FOR	WHAT
YOU
HAD	SHOWN	ME	ALREADY,	BUT	NEVERTHELESS	FULL	OF	COURAGE
TO
FACE	 AND	 RESIST	 ANY	 UNTIMELY	 ATTEMPT	 THAT	 WOULD
SANNYASIN
ME.	BUT	LOOK	AT	ME	NOW:	WANDERING	AROUND	IN	THE	ASHRAM
OFF-BALANCE,	 EYES	 FULL	 OF	 AWE,	 CRYING	 TIME	 AND	AGAIN	 AT
COMPLETELY
UNPREDICTABLE	MOMENTS	AND	SHOWING	ALL	THE	SIGNS	OF	ONE
WHO	IS
IN	 LOVE.	 OSHO,	 I	 LOVE	YOU,	 SO	WHAT	CAN	 I	 DO?	AND	HOW	DID
YOU
MANAGE?
Hein	Kray,
I	WILL	TELL	YOU	ONE	STORY	--	that's	how	I	manage,	that's	my	art.
Haggarty	 ran	 a	 red	 light	 and	 ploughed	 headlong	 into	 a	 car	 driven	 by	 Father
Cogan.	The	auto	turned	over	three	times	and	the	priest	thrown	from	the	vehicle
lay	stunned	beside	the	road.
Haggarty	rushed	over	and	said,	"I	am	terribly	sorry,	Father!"
"Saints	above!"	said	the	shaken	priest.	"You	almost	killed	me!"
"Here,"	said	Haggarty,	"I	have	got	a	little	sacramental	Jack	Daniels.	Take	some
and	you	will	feel	a	lot	better!"
Father	Cogan	took	a	couple	of	large	swigs	and	continued	his	tirade.	"What	were
you	thinking	about,	man?	You	nearly	launched	me	into	eternity!"
"I	 am	 sorry,	 Father,"	 said	 Haggarty.	 "Take	 a	 few	more	 sips,	 it	 will	 ease	 your
nerves."
After	 the	 priest	 had	 almost	 finished	 the	 entire	 bottle,	 he	 said,	 "Why	don't	 you
have	a	drink?"
"No	thanks,	your	reverence,"	said	Haggarty,	"I	will	just	sit	here	and	wait	for	the
police!"
So	 I	 am	 just	waiting	 till	 the	 day,	which	 is	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer...	 it	 is	 the
nineteenth	of	April	that	you	are	going	to	be	assassinated.
Something	really	beautiful	is	happening	to	you.	All	that	ego	that	seems	so	strong
is	 not	 so	 strong;	 it	 is	 just	 your	 belief	 that	 keeps	 it	 alive.	 Once	 you	 start
understanding,	 it	 starts	dying.	 It	 is	 all	kinds	of	 inhibitions	 that	keep	your	 tears
repressed.	You	have	been	told	again	and	again	that	you	are	not	a	woman,	you	are
a	man	--	be	a	boy,	don't	be	a	girl.
Crying	and	weeping	is	for	girls,	not	for	you.
Nature	has	not	made	any	distinction:	there	are	as	many	tear	glands	in	male	eyes
as	there	are	in	female	eyes.	Tears	are	needed;	tears	do	miracles.	But	repressing
the	tears	is	a	subtle	strategy	to	repress	emotions.	Tears	are	deep	down	connected
with	the	heart.	Heads	don't	cry,	only	hearts.	Repressing	the	tears	is	a	subtle	trick
to	repress	the	heart.
You	have	lived	in	the	head,	high	and	proud,	thinking	your	ego	very	strong.	Now
you	have	fallen	in	a	wrong	company...	these	are	mad	people	here.	Anybody	can
start	 crying	 any	 moment!	 Crying	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 sacred	 here,	 because	 tears
come	directly	 from	the	heart.	There	 is	no	other	prayer	which	 is	more	beautiful
than	tears.
And	it	is	not	that	tears	come	only	when	you	are	in	suffering,	pain	and	sadness.
That	too	is	a	wrong	idea	that	has	been	given	to	you	--	that	tears	come	only	when
you	are	in	pain.	No.
Tears	 come	 whenever	 anything	 is	 overflowing	 --	 it	 may	 be	 pain,	 it	 may	 be
pleasure,	it	may	be	agony,	it	may	be	ecstasy	--	anything	overflowing.	Tears	are
symbols	of	something	overflowing.
And,	Kray,	 something	wants	 to	 overflow,	 something	wants	 to	 burst	 forth.	You
have	 repressed	 a	 long	 long	 time	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful.	 Now,	 being	 in	 my
Buddhafield,	it	 is	impossible	to	remain	in	your	senses;	it	 is	impossible	NOT	to
fall	 in	love.	You	don't	have	a	heart	of	stone;	you	have	a	heart	which	is	beating
with	God,	full	of	love	--	repressed,	but	ready	to	burst	forth	any	moment,	waiting
for	its	opportunity.	And	that	opportunity	has	come.
Sannyas	 is	a	new	way	of	 life,	a	new	style,	a	new	philosophy	 --	 to	 live	 totally:
with	 tears,	 with	 smiles,	 with	 love,	 with	 laughter,	 with	 anger,	 with	 hate,	 with
compassion	--	to	live	in	all	the	dimensions	of	the	mind,	being,	and	to	live	totally.
And	the	miracle	is	that	if	you	live	totally,	slowly	slowly,	all	that	is	negative	starts
disappearing	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	 And	 finally,	 ultimately,	 only	 that	 which	 has
always	been	called	virtue	remains;	the	evil	evaporates.
No	 repression	 is	 recommended,	no	suppression	 is	 supported.	 I	 teach	you	 to	be
natural,	and	 that's	why	you	have	fallen	 in	 love	with	me.	 It	 is	 really	an	 indirect
way	of	falling	 in	 love	with	your	own	nature	--	 I	am	just	an	excuse.	Just	go	on
sipping	a	little	more,	only	three	days	are	left.	Empty	the	bottle,	so	the	day	you
take	sannyas,	or	as	you	say...
I	 WAS	 FULL	 OF	 COURAGE	 TO	 FACE	 AND	 RESIST	 ANY	 UNTIMELY
ATTEMPT
THAT	WOULD	SANNYASIN	ME.	You	can	call	it	 'sannyasinate',	and	that	will
be	 far	 better,	 because	 it	 is	 an	 assassination.	Drink	 as	much	 as	 you	 can	 so	 the
death	is	not	painful.
Drink	 of	 me	 as	 much	 as	 you	 can	 before	 your	 sannyas	 happens,	 so	 that	 it
REALLY
happens.	And	 it	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 really,	 because	 you	 had	 not	 come	 to	 be	 a
sannyasin.
You	had	come	with	all	kinds	of	resistances;	you	were	afraid	that	it	might	happen
untimely.	You	wanted	to	take	it	by	your	own	decision,	in	your	own	time.
Whenever	 one	 becomes	 a	 sannyasin	 by	 his	 own	decision,	 in	 his	 own	 time,	 he
misses	 the	 whole	 point.	 Let	 it	 be	 a	 happening,	 not	 a	 doing	 on	 your	 part.
Surrender	cannot	be	done:	it	can	only	be	gratefully	accepted.	And	that's	what	is
happening.	You	are	fortunate,	you	are	blessed.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
WHY	AM	I	SO	MUCH	AFRAID	OF	HELL?
Dhara,
THERE	IS	NO	NEED	TO	BE	AFRAID	OF	HELL,	because	there	are	many	hells
--	and	 there	 is	an	 Indian	hell	 too.	And	everybody	 is	asked	at	 the	gate,	 "Which
hell	 do	 you	want	 to	 choose?"	Choose	 the	 Indian,	 and	 you	will	 be	 happy	 ever
afterwards.
Fellow	dies	and	 is	met	by	Saint	Peter	at	 the	Gate.	 "Before	you	can	get	 in	you
must	spend	six	months	in	hell.	You	have	a	choice:	either	the	regular	hell	or	the
Indian	hell."
"What	is	the	difference?"	asked	the	fellow.
"In	the	regular	hell,"	explained	Saint	Peter,	"they	tie	you	to	a	stake,	pour	gasoline
over	you,	strike	the	match,	and	you	burn	for	twelve	hours	and	then	you	rest	for
twelve	hours."
"And	the	Indian	hell?"
"They	tie	you	to	a	stake,	pour	gasoline	over	you,	set	you	on	fire	and	you	burn	for
twelve	hours	and	then	rest	for	twelve	hours."
"But	I	don't	see	the	difference,"	said	the	man.
"If	I	were	you,"	advised	Saint	Peter,	"I	would	take	the	Indian	hell	--	somebody
usually	forgets	the	matches	or	the	gasoline..."
So	you	need	not	be	so	much	afraid	--	wise	people	always	choose	the	Indian	hell.
But,	Dhara,	 I	 can	 understand	why	 you	 are	 afraid.	 Fear	 is	 a	 natural	 instinct	 in
man,	and	it	has	been	exploited	by	the	priests	down	the	ages.	Fear	and	greed	are
two	sides	of	the	same	coin,	and	they	have	exploited	both.
It	 is	out	of	 fear	 that	 they	have	created	hell,	 just	 to	exploit	your	fear	 instinct.	 If
you	can	be	made	really	afraid	then	you	will	be	in	the	hands	of	the	priests.	Or	if
you	can	be	made	really	very	greedy	for	heaven,	then	too	you	will	be	in	the	hands
of	the	priests.	The	priests	have	been	telling	you	that	"We	will	protect	you	from
hell	and	we	will	help	you	to	enter	into	heaven.	All	that	you	need	is	just	to	remain
obedient	to	us.
And	because	of	fear	and	greed,	man	has	remained	obedient	to	the	priests.	Parents
have	used...	that's	how	everybody	is	brought	up,	in	fear	and	greed.	If	you	do	one
thing,	 you	 are	 punished;	 if	 you	do	 something	 else,	 you	 are	 rewarded.	 It	 is	 the
SAME	story	--	in	the	school,	college,	university,	the	same	story	repeated,	again
and	again:	punished	for	something,	rewarded	for	something	else.	It	is	greed	and
fear	which	are	being	enforced	again	and	again.
By	 the	 time	you	 come	 from	 the	university,	 you	have	been	 conditioned,	 totally
conditioned.	Your	whole	 life	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 the	 same	 if	 you	don't	 become
alert,	 if	 you	 don't	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 whole	 situation,	 if	 you	 don't	 gather
courage	to	get	out	of	the	prison	that	has	been	made	by	the	society	for	you.	That
prison	consists	of	greed	and	fear.
There	 is	 no	 hell!	 regular	 or	 Indian.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 heaven	 either.	 Hell	 and
heaven	are	psychological	states,	not	geographical	situations.	Forget	all	about	that
childish	nonsense.
You	can	be	in	hell	right	now,	or	in	heaven	right	now.	And	the	only	way	to	be	in
heaven	 is	 to	be	without	mind,	and	 the	only	way	 to	be	 in	hell	 is	 to	be	only	 the
mind	and	nothing	else.
The	constant	traffic	of	thoughts	is	your	misery.	If	this	traffic	disappears	and	you
are	left	silent,	alone,	with	no	thought	surrounding	you,	in	that	moment	of	peace
and	 silence	 and	 stillness	YOU	ARE	 in	 heaven	 --	 you	 are	 heaven!	That's	what
meditation	is	all	about.
Dhara,	you	need	not	be	worried,	need	not	be	afraid	of	any	heaven	or	hell.	You
just	meditate,	 become	more	 and	more	 silent,	 become	more	and	more	detached
from	the	mind,	become	more	and	more	disidentified	from	your	thought	process.
Just	be	a	witness!	Go	on	witnessing	whatsoever	passes	in	the	mind,	and	the	very
process	of	witnessing	has	the	whole	secret	in	it.	Slowly	slowly,	you	will	see	less
and	less	thoughts	are	coming	to	you,	because	you	are	no	more	welcoming	them,
and	because	you	don't	care,	and	because	you	don't	cling,	and	because	you	don't
choose	 this	 against	 that,	 and	 because	 you	 are	 no	 more	 judgemental.	 Good
thoughts,	bad	thoughts,	all	are	alike.	Great	thoughts,	small	thoughts,	all	are	alike.
You	remain	aloof,	distant,	a	watcher	on	the	hill.
Slowly	 slowly,	 less	 and	 less	 traffic...	 and	 one	 day	 suddenly	 intervals	 start
happening.	 An	 interval	 for	 a	 few	 seconds,	 and	 you	 will	 have	 a	 taste	 of	 the
unknown.	And	once	you	have	tasted	something	of	no-mind,	your	real	life	begins.
Then	all	is	joy,	then	all	is	benediction.
But	to	be	meditative,	great	intelligence	is	needed.	You	can't	go	on	being	the	way
you	are,	you	can't	go	on	being	stupid.	You	have	to	be	very	alert!
Towards	the	end	of	World	War	II,	when	the	Italians	were	fighting	the	Germans,
the	Nazi	soldiers	came	up	with	a	scheme	to	kill	many	of	Mussolini's	men.	They
simply	yelled,
"Hey,	 Luigi!"	 When	 an	 Italian	 infantryman	 stuck	 his	 head	 up	 and	 answered,
"Si?"	boom!
He	was	dead.
That's	all	the	Krauts	did:	"Luigi?"	"Si?"	Boom!
After	 thousands	of	Italians	had	been	wiped	out,	 they	decided	 to	retaliate.	They
figured	that	every	German's	name	was	Hans.	So	an	Italian	captain	shouted,	"Hey,
Hans!"
Silence.
"Hey,	Hans!"	he	repeated.	"Is	that	you,	Luigi?"
"Si!"
Boom!
The	sixth	question
Question	6
WHY	IS	THE	MODERN	MAN	FEELING	SO	LONELY?
Dhammo,
MAN	HAS	ALWAYS	FELT	LONELY,	because	man	basically	IS	alone.	We	are
born	alone,	and	we	will	die	alone.	And	in	the	middle	we	can	only	pretend	to	be
together.
Aloneness	remains	unaffected.	It	becomes	an	undercurrent,	it	goes	underground.
Man	 has	 always	 been	 alone,	 but	 modern	man	 is	 feeling	 it	 more	 for	 a	 certain
reason	--
because	modern	man	for	 the	first	 time	has	time	enough	to	think	about	his	own
self.	In	the	past,	the	struggle	for	bread	and	butter	was	so	much	that	it	kept	people
occupied	 from	 the	 early	morning	 to	 the	 late	night,	 and	 then	 too	 they	were	not
able	to	feed	themselves	and	their	children	enough.
And	 that's	 exactly	 the	 case	 in	 the	 East	 even	 today.	Modern	man	 in	 an	 Indian
village	 is	 not	 feeling	 lonely.	 He	 has	 no	 time	 to	 feel	 anything	 at	 all!	 He	 feels
hungry,	 not	 lonely;	 he	 needs	 a	 shelter,	 a	 house.	 These	 things	 --	 feelings	 of
loneliness	--	he	cannot	afford.	These	feelings	start	surfacing	only	when	a	society
becomes	a	little	affluent.
When	people	are	well-fed,	well-clothed,	well-sheltered,	well-employed	--	when
the	ordinary	necessities	of	life	are	fulfilled,	then	the	real	problems	of	life	arise.
Then	 one	 suddenly	 becomes	 aware	 that	 "I	 am	 lonely,	 even	 in	 the	 crowd	 I	 am
lonely."	This	is	a	higher	need.	There	is	a	hierarchy	of	needs.
First	physical	needs	come.	If	physical	needs	are	not	fulfilled,	you	will	not	have
psychological	needs.	Once	physical	needs	are	fulfilled,	then	psychological	needs
arise	--
those	 are	 higher.	 One	 thinks	 of	 music,	 poetry,	 painting;	 one	 thinks	 of	 art,
aesthetics	--
those	 are	 higher	 needs.	 One	 thinks	 of	 Shakespeare,	 Milton,	 Kali	 Das,
Rabindranath,	Kahlil	Gibran;	one	 thinks	of	Wagner,	Beethoven,	Leonardo,	Van
Gogh,	Picasso....	These	are	higher	needs.
A	hungry	man	cannot	understand	Beethoven.	Howsoever	great	 the	music	 is,	 it
cannot	 fill	 his	 stomach.	 And	 he	 is	 so	 hungry	 that	 he	 would	 like	 to	 kill	 the
musician	rather	than	listen	to	the	music.	He	will	not	bother	about	great	works	of
art;	 rather,	 he	 will	 be	 interested	 in	 Karl	Marx	 and	 his	 Communist	Manifesto.
Once	physical	needs	are	fulfilled,	psychological	needs	arise.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know:	I	receive	many	letters	from	Soviet	Russia.	They
cannot	 even	 write	 to	 me	 directly,	 because	 then	 those	 letters	 will	 never	 come.
First	 the	Russian	 government	 and	 then	 the	 Indian	government....	 If	 there	were
only	 the	 Indian	 government	 there	 would	 be	 a	 chance.	 But	 the	 Russian
government...	and	they	are	very	methodical.	So	those	letters	are	given	to	visitors,
tourists,	to	Switzerland,	and	then	those	letters	are	dropped	in	London	or	in	Berlin
or	in	Paris,	then	they	come	to	me.
Many	people	write	 that	 they	would	 like	 to	come	here,	but	 it	 is	 impossible.	My
books	are	being	read,	but	in	an	underground	way.	They	are	circulating	from	one
person	to	another...
but	officially	you	cannot	carry	my	books	in	a	communist	country.
Russia	 is	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 that	 point	 where	 physical	 needs	 are
fulfilled,	and	psychological	needs	will	arise,	and	spiritual	needs	are	the	highest
in	the	hierarchy.	Once	psychological	needs	are	fulfilled	--	you	have	heard	great
music,	you	have	seen	great	paintings,	you	have	read	great	poetry	--	then	what?
Sooner	or	later,	those	things	also	prove	to	be	games,	beautiful	games,	but	games
all	the	same.
Then	the	ultimate	starts	knocking	on	your	doors,	and	when	the	ultimate	knocks
on	your	doors	you	feel	REALLY	LONELY,	lonely	in	 this	whole	universe.	And
that	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 meditation.	 If	 you	 feel	 lonely	 and	 if	 your	 feeling	 of
loneliness	 has	 some	 penetration,	 intensity,	 passion	 in	 it,	 then	 you	 start
meditating.
Meditation	is	a	way	to	come	to	terms	with	one's	loneliness,	to	have	an	encounter
with	one's	own	 loneliness	 rather	 than	escaping	 from	 it,	diving	deep	 into	 it	 and
seeing	what	exactly	it	is.	And	then	you	are	in	for	a	surprise.	If	you	go	into	your
loneliness	you	will	be	surprised:	at	the	very	center	of	it	it	is	not	lonely	at	all	--
there	resides	aloneness	which	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
The	 circumference	 consists	 of	 loneliness	 and	 the	 center	 consists	 of	 aloneness.
The	circumference	consists	of	solitariness	and	the	center	of	solitude.	And	once
you	have	known	your	beautiful	aloneness,	you	will	be	a	totally	different	person	-
-	you	will	never	feel	lonely.	Even	in	the	mountains	or	in	the	deserts	where	you
will	 be	 absolutely	 alone,	you	will	 not	 feel	 lonely	 --	 because	 in	your	 aloneness
you	will	know	God	is	with	you,	 in	your	aloneness	you	are	so	deeply	rooted	 in
God	that	who	cares	whether	there	is	somebody	else	outside	or	not?	You	are	so
full	inside,	so	rich	inside....
Right	now,	even	in	the	crowd	you	are	lonely.	And	I	am	saying:	if	you	know	your
aloneness,	even	in	your	loneliness	you	will	not	be	lonely.
But	modern	man	IS	suffering...
Ira	quit	college,	got	himself	a	backpack	and	began	hitchhiking	around	the	United
States.
After	he	had	been	gone	more	than	a	year,	he	telephoned	home.	"Hello,	Ma.	How
are	you?"
"Just	fine,	son.	When	are	you	coming	home?	I	will	fix	you	some	chopped	liver
and	chicken	soup	and	a	beautiful	pot	roast.
"I	am	still	pretty	far	away."
"Oh,	 son,"	 cried	 the	 desperate	 woman,	 "just	 come	 home	 and	 I	 will	 fix	 your
favourite	oatmeal	cookies."
"I	don't	like	oatmeal	cookies!"	said	the	boy.
"You	don't?"	asked	the	woman.
"Say,"	said	Ira,	"is	this	Century	57682?"
"No!"
"Then	I	must	have	the	wrong	number."
"Does	that	mean	you	are	not	coming?"	asked	the	woman.
People	 are	 really	 lonely.	 The	 woman	 asked,	 "Does	 that	 mean	 you	 are	 not
coming?"	Man	 has	 never	 been	 so	 lonely	 because	man	 has	 never	 been	 able	 to
fulfill	 the	 lower	 desires,	 needs	 before.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	West,	man	 has
been	 able	 to	 fulfill	 all	 lower	 desires;	 now	 the	 higher	 desires	 are	 asserting
themselves.	This	is	a	good	sign.	It	looks	like	a	curse	-
-	it	is	not	--	it	is	a	blessing	in	disguise.
The	 days	 of	 the	West	 turning	 East	 have	 come.	 The	misery	 is	 that	 the	 East	 is
turning	West.
Man	seems	to	be	so	foolish.	By	the	time	the	West	turns	East,	you	will	find	the
East	has	become	West.	And	this	way	the	sorry-go-round	continues....
You	can	see	it	here.	Why	don't	you	see	so	many	Indians	here?	This	is	not	their
need.
What	I	am	sharing	here	has	nothing	to	do	with	them.	The	desire	for	it	has	not	yet
arisen.
Even	when	sometimes	they	come,	they	don't	ask	about	meditation,	they	don't	ask
about	sannyas,	they	don't	ask	about	love	--	no,	not	at	all.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 received	 a	 letter	 saying,	 "Why	 don't	 you	 open	 a	 few
hospitals,	 a	 few	 schools...?	Why	 don't	 you	 teach	 your	 sannyasins	 to	 serve	 the
poor?"	The	poor	have	been	served	down	the	ages	and	they	are	still	poor.	Poverty
cannot	 be	 destroyed	 by	 serving	 the	 poor	 --	 that	 much	 is	 absolutely	 certain.
Poverty	can	be	destroyed	only	if	a	new	vision	of	life	is	given	to	them.	They	are
poor	because	their	philosophy	makes	them	poor;	they	are	poor	because	their	very
attitude	towards	life	keeps	them	poor.	They	are	poor	BECAUSE
of	 themselves!	 They	 don't	 need	 compassion:	 they	 need	 education.	 They	 don't
need	 service:	 they	 need	 to	 be	 shaken	 into	 awareness.	But	 nobody	wants	 to	 be
shaken	out	of	their	own	dreams	and	sleep.	Hence	they	are	angry	at	me.
Hospitals	are	there;	a	few	more	can	be	added.	Schools	are	there;	a	few	more	can
be	 added.	 But	 that	 is	 NOT	 going	 to	 help.	 That	 is	 like	 throwing	 colour	 with
teaspoons	into	the	ocean:	it	is	not	going	to	colour	the	ocean.
We	have	to	change	the	whole	fundamental.	Why	has	India	remained	so	poor	for
so	many	centuries?	The	reason	must	be	very	deep.	The	reason	is	that	the	Indian
mind	is	life-negative.	The	reason	is	that	the	Indian	mind	lives	in	a	division:	this
world	and	that.	The	reason	is	that	the	Indian	mind	is	against	materialism.	If	you
are	against	materialism	you	will	remain	poor,	and	that	is	your	own	decision;	then
it	is	your	own	fate	decided	by	you	yourself.
A	 real	 spirituality	 has	 to	 be	 based	 on	 scientific	 materialism.	 Matter	 and
consciousness	 are	 not	 two	 things,	 just	 as	 body	 and	 consciousness	 are	 not	 two
things	 --	 aspects	 of	 one	 phenomenon.	 This	 world	 has	 to	 be	 loved,	 Then	 this
world	yields,	gives	its	secrets	to	you.
The	 West	 has	 committed	 one	 mistake,	 that	 there	 is	 no	 spiritualism,	 only
materialism	is	enough.	So	their	basic	needs	are	fulfilled,	but	the	higher	needs	are
torturing	 them,	 making	 them	 commit	 suicide	 or	 go	 mad.	 And	 the	 East	 has
committed	the	other	mistake:	that	spiritualism	can	exist	without	materialism,	so
the	 East	 has	 become	 like	 a	 ghost,	 a	 soul	without	 a	 body.	 The	West	 is	 a	 body
without	a	soul,	a	corpse:	and	the	East	is	a	ghost,	a	soul	without	a	body.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 somehow	 bring	 East	 and	 West	 closer	 and	 closer,	 so
everybody	 can	 have	 a	 body	 and	 everybody	 can	 have	 a	 soul.	Materialism	 and
spiritualism	 should	 be	 two	 aspects	 of	 one	 life	 vision.	 Then	 the	 poverty	 will
disappear.	 The	 earth	 is	 rich	 enough,	 and	man's	 intelligence	 is	 there	 --	we	 can
make	it	even	richer.
But	you	don't	see	Indians	here,	not	many,	very	few.	Those	few	are	those	who	are
intelligent	enough	to	see	that	even	if	lower	desires	are	fulfilled,	nothing	will	be
fulfilled.
Those	 few	 are	 born	 in	 the	 East,	 but	 they	 are	 really	 contemporary,	 they	 are
modern.	 They	 have	 seen	 what	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 West.	 And	 even	 if	 India
becomes	 rich,	 this	 is	 going	 to	 happen:	 the	 West	 is	 not	 happy;	 even	 if	 India
becomes	rich	it	is	not	going	to	be	happy	either.	So	happiness	has	to	be	searched
for	in	some	other	dimension.
That	dimension	 is:	entering	your	 loneliness	 till	you	come	upon	aloneness.	The
first	glimpse	of	aloneness	 is	satori.	The	second	glimpse,	 the	second	satori:	you
become	established	in	your	aloneness,	rooted.	And	the	third,	the	ultimate	satori,
what	we	call	samadhi	in	India,	is	the	state	when	you	are	no	more	separate	from
your	aloneness	--	you	ARE	your	aloneness.
And	then	one	starts	overflowing	like	a	fountain.	Out	of	that	aloneness	arises	the
fragrance	of	 love,	 and	out	of	 that	 aloneness	arises	 creativity	 --	because	oUt	of
that	 aloneness	 God	 starts	 flowing.	 You	 become	 a	 hollow	 bamboo...	 he	 starts
singing.	But	the	song	is	always	his.
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	It	is	Morning	Swan,	Wake	Up!
17	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904170
ShortTitle:
FISH07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
99
mins
SWAN,	I'D	LIKE	YOU	TO	TELL	ME	YOUR	WHOLE	STORY!
WHERE	YOU	FIRST	APPEARED,	AND	WHAT	DARK	SAND
YOU	ARE	GOING	TOWARD,
AND	WHERE	YOU	SLEEP	AT	NIGHT,	AND	WHAT	YOU	ARE
LOOKING	FOR....
IT'S	MORNING,	SWAN,	WAKE	UP,	CLIMB	IN	THE	AIR,
FOLLOW	ME!
I	KNOW	OF	A	COUNTRY	THAT	SPIRITUAL	FLATNESS
DOES	NOT	CONTROL,	NOR	CONSTANT	DEPRESSION,
AND	THOSE	ALIVE	ARE	NOT	AFRAID	TO	DIE.
THERE	WILD	FLOWERS	COME	UP	THROUGH	THE	LEAFY	FLOOR,
AMD	THE	FRAGRANCE	OF	'I	AM	HE'	FLOATS	ON	THE	WIND.
THERE	THE	BEE	OF	THE	HEART	STAYS	DEEP	 INSIDE	THE	FLOWER,
AND	CARES	FOR	NO	OTHER	THING.
DON'T	GO	OUTSIDE	YOUR	HOUSE	TO	SEE	FLOWERS.
MY	FRIEND,	DON'T	BOTHER	WITH	THAT	EXCURSION.
INSIDE	YOUR	BODY	THERE	ARE	FLOWERS.
ONE	FLOWER	HAS	A	THOUSAND	PETALS.
THAT	WILL	DO	FOR	A	PLACE	TO	SIT.
SITTING	THERE	YOU	WILL	HAVE	A	GLIMPSE	OF	BEAUTY
INSIDE	THE	BODY	AND	OUT	OF	IT,
BEFORE	GARDENS	AND	AFTER	GARDENS.
MAN	IS	AWAKE	AND	YET	NOT	AWAKE.	His	wakefulness	 is	very	thin,	his
wakefulness	is	almost	of	no	use.	He	is	not	asleep,	that	is	true,	but	he	is	not	awake
either	--
he	is	in	limbo,	in	the	middle.	He	has	awakened	from	the	world	of	animals,	but	he
is	fast	asleep	to	the	world	of	gods.
Man	is	a	transitory	period.	Man	is	not	a	being	but	a	becoming	--	on	the	way.	The
past	 is	 left	 behind	 and	 the	 future	 is	 not	 attained	 yet.	 Hence	 the	 agony,	 the
anguish:	man	is	torn	apart.	The	past	pulls	him	back.	To	be	an	animal	again	seems
to	be	pleasant,	and	it	is,	because	it	has	not	the	agony	of	man	and	the	anguish	and
the	anxiety	of	man.
If	 you	 watch	 the	 animals	 you	 will	 feel	 jealous.	Walt	Whitman	 has	 written	 it
exactly	 in	 his	 diaries	 that:	 "Whenever	 I	 see	 animals,	 I	 feel	 jealous.	We	 have
missed	something."
We	 have	 not	 missed	 really,	 but	 the	 peace,	 the	 calm,	 the	 collectedness	 of	 the
animal	is	lost.
The	animal	is	happy	because	he	is	unaware	--	unaware	of	death,	unaware	of	the
problems	 of	 life.	 The	 animal	 is	 happy	 because	 there	 is	 no	 consciousness.
Consciousness	 first	 brings	 pain,	 because	 suddenly	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 a
thousand	and	one	problems	facing	you.
You	have	to	encounter	them,	you	have	to	solve	them	or	dissolve	them.	All	peace
disappears.
But	 human	 consciousness	 is	 still	 worthwhile.	 And	 I	 don't	 agree	 with	 Walt
Whitman,	 I	 agree	 with	 Socrates	 who	 say.:	 "I	 would	 like	 to	 be	 a	 discontented
Socrates	rather	than	a	contented	pig."	The	statement	of	Socrates	is	of	immense
value.	It	has	to	be	understood	by	every	seeker,	because	the	goal	is	ahead;	there	is
no	going	back.	The	pig	may	look	contented	--	because	he	is	not	aware,	not	really
because	he	is	contented.	But	to	know	discontent	one	needs	consciousness.
There	 is	 something	 ahead;	 something	 more	 has	 to	 happen.	 Something	 HAS
happened,	 but	 only	 partially.	 Look	 back	 and	 you	 find	 the	 pig	 contented;	 look
ahead,	and	you	see	Buddhas	contented.	You	can	become	a	Buddha!	A	Buddha
means	one	who	is	conscious	and	contented.	The	pig	is	one	who	is	unconscious
and	contented.	And	the	man	is	just	between	the	two:	a	little	bit	conscious,	just	a
little	bit.	Conscious	enough	to	be	aware	of	the	pain	of	life	and	the	misery	and	the
suffering,	but	not	conscious	enough	to	be	aware	of	the	ecstasies	that	life	makes
available.
Just	 a	 little	 consciousness	 is	 enough	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 pain.	 But	 much	 more
awareness	 is	 needed,	much	more	 consciousness	 is	 needed,	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 the
deeper	realms	of	your	inner	kingdom.
Man	is	in	a	kind	of	drunkenness:	awake	and	yet	not	awake.	Man	sees	a	little	bit,
and	yet	everything	seems	to	be	dark,	 just	shadows	moving	 in	 the	dark	are	felt.
But	nothing	is	absolutely	clear;	there	is	no	clarity,	no	transparency,	no	light.
This	is	the	state	of	man.	And	we	cannot	go	back	because	there	is	no	possibility
of	going	back.	Man	tries	hard	to	go	back	--	through	sex,	through	food,	through
alcohol,	 through	 drugs	 --	 man	 tries	 somehow	 to	 drown	 this	 little	 bit	 of
consciousness	that	has	arisen	in	him.	But	it	comes	back	again	and	again,	because
whatsoever	has	been	Learnt	has	been	learnt	for	ever	--	it	cannot	be	unlearnt.
It	has	happened	 in	your	being.	Now	there	 is	no	way	 to	discard	 it.	You	have	 to
live	with	it.
The	 only	 possibility	 is	 to	move	 ahead,	 to	 grow	more	 into	 awareness:	 if	 it	 has
brought	 pain,	 then	 go	 deep	 into	 pain,	 but	 become	more	 and	more	 aware.	Use
pain	as	an	object	of	awareness,	as	an	object	of	meditation.
You	are	sad	--	be	aware.	Let	sadness	become	your	meditation.	You	are	angry	--
be	aware.
You	are	in	love	--	be	aware.	Use	all	possibilities,	all	opportunities	to	be	more	and
more	 aware.	 Slowly	 slowly,	 the	 momentum	 gathers,	 and	 one	 day	 something
explodes	in	you.
That	 explosion	 is	 known	 in	 the	 East	 as	 the	 flowering	 of	 the	 one-thousand-
petalled	lotus	--
Kabir	will	 talk	about	this	lotus	in	these	sutras.	And	Kabir	is	 talking	about	you;
first	a	few	metaphors	have	to	be	understood.
The	swan	is	one	of	the	metaphors	most	used	by	the	Eastern	mystics.	The	swan
lives	 beyond	 the	 Himalayas,	 his	 home	 is	 beyond	 the	 Himalayas,	 in	 the	 Lake
Mansarovar.	The	Lake	Mansarovar	is	the	purest	lake	in	the	world	--	very	rarely
does	 a	 human	being	 reach	 there	 --	 uncontaminated,	 unpolluted,	 surrounded	by
the	Himalayan	beauty,	virgin	peaks.
The	swan	is	born	there,	lives	there,	but	when	it	becomes	TOO	cold	the	swan	has
to	come	to	this	side	of	the	Himalayas,	to	the	plains.	And	sometimes	it	happens:	a
swan	 forgets	 the	 way	 to	 go	 back.	 And	 sometimes	 it	 happens:	 a	 swan	 simply
forgets	 that	he	has	a	home	somewhere,	 starts	 living	by	 the	side	of	dirty	 rivers,
dirty	ponds,	muddy	places.
Hence,	the	swan	became	a	tremendously	potent	metaphor	for	man.	Man	comes
from	God	but	has	forgotten	from	where	he	comes,	who	he	is.	Man	comes	from
God,	from	the	holiest	of	the	holies,	and	goes	on	living	by	the	side	of	dirty	rivers,
muddy	pools	of	water.
Of	course,	he	cannot	be	contented	here,	but	he	knows	no	other	place	to	go.	He	is
lost.
This	world	seems	to	be	the	only	world.
The	Eastern	mystics	use	the	metaphor	of	the	swan	for	man.	Kabir	says:	HANSA
KARO	PURATAN	BAT.
Swan,	it	would	be	good	if	we	remember
the	primordial	days,
the	days	when	you	had	not	left	the	home	yet.
It	would	be	good	if	we	remember	the	home.
SWAN,	I	WOULD	LIKE	YOU	TO	TELL	ME	YOUR	WHOLE	STORY!
Tell	me	your	whole	story!	But	if	somebody	asks	you	what	story	you	have	to	tell,
birth	seems	to	be	the	beginning	--	which	it	is	not	--	and	death	seems	to	be	the	end
--	which	it	is	not.	Birth	and	death,	both	are	episodes	in	your	long	life,	and	they
have	happened	millions	of	times.
The	true	story	can	begin	only	when	you	remember	your	real	home,	from	where
you	come.	And	the	real	story	can	never	end,	because	 the	real	story	 is	not	only
your	 story	 --	 it	 is	 the	 story	 of	 consciousness,	 of	 evolving	 consciousness,	 of
evolution.	It	is	not	only	your	story	--	it	is	God's	story.	There	is	no	beginning	and
there	is	no	end.
Once	you	become	full	of	this	nostalgia	for	the	origins,	then	you	will	be	surprised
that	you	have	become	aware	of	the	goal	too	--	because	the	origin	is	the	goal,	the
source	is	the	goal.
We	have	to	go	to	the	same	space	from	where	we	come,	then	the	circle	is	perfect.
And	in	that	perfection	is	beauty,	in	that	perfection	is	blessing,	that	perfection	is
benediction.
SWAN,	I'D	LIKE	YOU	TO	TELL	ME	YOUR	WHOLE	STORY!
ONLY	 A	 BUDDHA	 CAN	 TELL	 HIS	 WHOLE	 STORY,	 only	 one	 who	 has
become	totally	awakened.	You	can	talk	about	your	dreams,	but	that	is	not	your
story.	You	are	dreaming,	desiring,	thinking,	but	you	know	nothing.	And	the	less
you	 know,	 the	 more	 you	 believe	 in	 your	 dreams	 --	 because	 one	 has	 to	 keep
oneself	occupied.	The	less	you	know,	the	more	you	desire	--	just	to	avoid	your
inner	 ignorance	 and	 emptiness.	You	 rush	 in	 all	 directions;	 you	 go	 on	 rushing,
you	 don't	 give	 yourself	 a	 little	 rest,	 because	 the	 lest	 seems	 to	 be	 explosive,
dangerous.
And	rest	 is	meditation.	Finding	at	 least	one	or	 two	hours	out	of	 the	hustle	and
bustle	of	life,	sitting	silently	doing	nothing,	you	may	start	moving	inwards,	you
may	start	remembering	something,	the	origins	--	because	deep	down	the	memory
of	where	you	come	from	is	still	there.	You	may	have	forgotten	it	but	it	is	there,
maybe	 covered	 with	 rubbish,	 all	 kinds	 of	 rubbish,	 but	 that	 rubbish	 can	 be
removed.
That's	 what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about:	 removing	 the	 rubbish	 --	 of	 thoughts,
memories,	dreams,	desires,	imaginations.	And	if	you	can	remove	all	this	rubbish
that	 your	 head	 has	 gathered,	 your	 heart	will	 start	 remembering.	And	 once	 the
source	is	remembered,	the	goal	is	known	--	because,	let	me	repeat,	the	source	is
the	goal.	We	have	to	reach	the	same	place	from	where	we	come.
SWAN,	I	WOULD	LIKE	YOU	TO	TELL	ME	YOUR	WHOLE	STORY!
The	original	has	some	beauty	in	it:
HANSA	KARO	PURATAN	BAT	--
Let	us	talk	of	the	old	days,	swan.
Let	us	remember	the	old	days,	the	ancient	days.
Let	us	remember	the	beginnings.
Let	us	talk	again	about	the	source.
And	Kabir	is	talking	to	his	disciples,	remember.	He	is	calling	his	disciples	swans
--
HANSA.
WHERE	YOU	FIRST	APPEARED,	AND	WHAT	DARK	SAND
YOU	ARE	GOING	TOWARD...
"From	 where	 do	 you	 come,	 and	 to	 where	 are	 you	 going?	 Let	 us	 be	 very
particular	 about	 it."	That	 is	 the	work	of	 a	Master:	 to	 remind	 the	disciple	 from
where	he	comes	and	to	where	he	is	going.	Otherwise,	people	go	on	moving	with
the	crowd...	wherever	others	are	going.	People	remain	imitators;	people	remain
just	followers,	followers	of	the	blind	--	the	blind	following	the	blind.
Your	parents	were	following	their	parents,	you	are	follow-ing	your	parents,	your
children	will	follow	you	--	and	nobody	knows	from	where	you	come	and	where
you	are	going.
And	everybody	is	trying...	not	at	all	aware	of	what	really	your	need	is,	what	is
going	to	fulfill	you.	More	money?	More	houses?	More	power?	Are	these	things
going	to	help?
Have	they	helped	others?
Just	be	a	little	more	observant.	There	is	an	ancient	story:	The	last	initiation	was
going	 to	be	given	 to	 the	disciple.	The	Master	said,	"Your	 last	 initiation	will	be
given	 in	 a	 very	 indirect	way."	The	 disciple	 had	 passed	 all	 the	 hurdles	 that	 the
Master	had	put	 in	his	way;	he	had	proved	his	mettle.	Now	 the	 last	 initiation...
and	once	he	has	passed	 the	 last	 initiation,	he	will	be	declared	enlightened	The
disciple	touched	the	feet	of	the	Master	and	said,	"I	am	ready.	Just	order	me	and	I
will	do	whatsoever	needs	to	be	done."
The	Master	said,	"You	will	have	to	go	to	the	King,	and	go	early	in	the	morning;
be	the	first	visitor	to	the	King.	Because	the	King	has	a	habit:	whosoever	comes
to	him	first,	whatsoever	he	asks,	the	King	gives.	But	the	country	is	so	rich	that	it
is	very	rare	that	anybody	goes.	Years	pass	and	nobody	goes	to	ask	for	anything.
But	don't	take	any	chances	--	be	there	very	early.	The	King	comes	in	the	morning
into	his	garden,	as	 the	sun	rises	 the	King	enters	 the	garden	--	be	there.	And	he
will	ask	you,	'What	do	you	want?'
And	whatsoever	you	want,	ask	him."
The	disciple	could	not	understand	what	kind	of	initiation	this	last	one	was.	But
the	order	had	to	be	followed.	He	went.	He	didn't	take	any	chance:	three	o'clock
early	in	the	morning	he	was	waiting	for	the	King.
As	 the	 sun	was	 rising,	 the	King	 entered.	 The	 young	man	 bowed	 down	 to	 the
King;	 the	King	 said,	 "Have	 you	 come	 to	 ask	 for	 something?	You	 can	 ask	 for
anything!	Whatsoever	you	ask,	I	will	give	it	to	you."
A	great	desire	possessed	the	young	man.	He	was	a	poor	man,	had	come	from	a
very	 poor	 family,	 "And	 the	King	 says	whatsoever...?"	 To	 be	 certain,	 he	 asked
again,	"What	do	you	mean	by	'whatsoever'?"
The	 King	 said,	 "Exactly	 that	 I	 mean	 --	 whatsoever.	 Even	 if	 you	 demand	 my
kingdom	I	will	give	it	to	you.	You	can	ask	for	as	much	money	as	you	want..."
The	poor	young	man	could	not	 think	much.	He	 thought,	 "Maybe	 ten	 thousand
rupees	will	do."	But	a	desire	came	that	"Why	ten	thousand?	You	may	never	get
such	a	chance	again	-
-	why	not	one	hundred	thousand?"
And	 then	 another	 desire,	 and	 desires	 upon	 desires...	 because	 mind	 constantly
asks	for	more.	So	whatsoever	he	decided,	the	mind	was	still	asking	for	more.
The	King	said,	"It	seems	you	are	not	yet	ready	to	ask.	I	will	go	for	my	morning
walk,	meanwhile	 you	 decide.	And	when	 I	 return,	whatsoever	 you	 ask	will	 be
given	to	you."
That	half	an	hour	was	a	torture.	He	went	on	and	on,	"I	can	ask	for	this	and	that,
and	a	golden	chariot,	and	so	many	millions	of	rupees,	and	so	much	land	--	I	will
create	a	small	kingdom	of	my	own."
Desires	and	dreams...	and	the	King	came;	that	half	hour	had	passed	so	fast.	The
King	was	standing	there	and	he	said,	"Young	man,	have	you	not	decided	yet?"
And	then	suddenly	the	young	man	thought,	"Whatsoever	I	ask	will	be	less	than
the	King	has,	so	why	not	ask	for	all?	Be	finished	with	the	figures!"
So	he	said,	"Sir,	if	you	are	so	willing	to	give,	I	ask	for	every-thing!	--	all	that	you
have.
Your	whole	kingdom,	all	your	riches,	your	palaces	--	everything.	You	simply	get
out	 of	 the	 palace!	And	 you	 cannot	 go	 back	 in.	You	may	 take	 something.	You
simply	get	out	--
forget	all	about	it.	I	can	allow	you	only	these	clothes	that	you	are	wearing."
Even	that	he	did	reluctantly;	even	that	much	he	would	have	less.
The	King	fell	on	his	knees,	started	praying	to	God,	tears	rolling	down	from	his
eyes	 --	 of	 great	 joy,	 ecstasy!	 And	 he	 was	 thanking	 God	 saying	 "I	 have	 been
waiting	for	such	a	man.
How	long	I	waited!	But	finally	you	heard	my	prayer,	and	now	he	has	come	and	I
am	free	of	all	 this	nonsense.	Thank	you!	You	heard	my	prayer,	although	it	has
been	so	long	and	I	had	to	wait	so	long,	but	still	you	heard	it.	I	am	grateful."
When	he	was	saying	these	things	to	God,	the	young	man	was	standing	there	and
he	 started	 thinking,	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?	 If	 this	 man	 is	 feeling	 so	 happy
renouncing	 the	kingdom,	what	am	I	getting	 into?	 If	 this	man	has	been	praying
for	thirty	years,	as	he	is	saying,	 'Send	a	man	who	can	take	my	whole	kingdom,
who	can	ask	for	my	whole	kingdom!'	--	if	for	thirty	years	he	has	been	praying,
then	it	is	not	worthwhile	at	all.	I	am	getting	into	unnecessary	trouble."
He	also	 fell	on	his	knees,	 touched	 the	King's	 feet	and	said,	"Sir,	 I	am	a	young
man	--	I	am	a	young	fool.	Please	excuse	me.	I	don't	want	anything.	Your	prayer
to	God,	your	thankfulness	to	God	has	finished	my	whole	mind.	I	am	going	back
to	the	forest	to	my	Master."
The	 King	 tried	 to	 persuade	 him,	 "Don't	 go.	 Just	 have	 a	 look.	 Come	 into	 the
palace!	 I	 will	 not	 only	 give	 you	my	 palace,	 my	 kingdom,	my	 riches,	 but	 my
beautiful	daughter	also.
Come	and	just	have	a	look!"
But	 the	 young	 man	 said,	 "I	 cannot	 stay	 here,	 not	 even	 a	 single	 moment	 --
because	the	mind	can	betray	me.	An	insight	has	happened,	and	I	am	thankful	to
you	just	as	you	are	thankful	to	God.	I	am	finished!"
And	when	the	young	man	reached	back	to	his	Master	and	told	the	whole	story,
the	Master	said,	"Your	last	initiation	is	over.	Now	nothing	will	ever	make	a	slave
of	you.	Now	you	are	alert,	conscious,	free.	You	have	passed	--	I	am	happy.	I	was
watching	from	here,	and	when	you	had	asked	for	the	whole	kingdom,	my	heart
was	crying.	I	was	thinking,	'So,	fifteen	years'	work	on	this	fool,	and	all	finished.'
You	can't	 imagine	my	happiness,"	said	the	Master,	"that	you	are	back,	that	you
could	see	the	point,	that	you	were	observant."
Be	 observant,	 just	 watch....	 People	 HAVE	 money,	 people	 have	 great	 palaces,
people	have	all	 that	you	can	desire	 --	 just	watch,	 just	 see:	are	 they	happy?	are
they	contented?	They	may	be	more	happy	 than	you	are	and	more	discontented
than	you	are	--	then	don't	follow	them.	They	are	blind!	They	have	followed	other
blind	people.	Don't	follow	them,	don't	imitate	the	crowd.
The	really	religious	person	is	one	who	gets	out	of	the	entanglement	of	the	mass
psychology,	of	the	mass	hypnosis.	The	mass	conditions	you:	rebel	against	it;	go
out	 of	 this	 mass	 conditioning,	 become	 an	 individual.	 Then	 only	 can	 you	 re-
member	from	where	you	come,	because	only	then	will	you	know	who	you	are.
Right	now	you	know	you	are	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Christian.	You	are
not	 all	 these	 things:	 you	 are	 neither	white	 nor	 black,	 you	 are	 neither	man	 nor
woman	 --	 you	 are	 just	 a	 pure	 consciousness	with	 no	 adjectives	 attached	 to	 it.
There	 is	 no	 frame	 to	 this	 consciousness;	 this	 consciousness	 is	 infinite.	 If	 you
drop	the	mass	conditionings	you	will	be	coming	closer	home.
HANSA	KARO	PURATAN	BAT	--
Let	us	talk	of	those	ancient	times
when	we	were	at	the	source.
SWAN,	I	WOULD	LIKE	YOU	TO	TELL	ME	YOUR	WHOLE	STORY!
WHERE	YOU	FIRST	APPEARED,	AND	WHAT	DARK	SAND
YOU	ARE	GOING	TOWARD...
YOU	ARE	COMING	FROM	LIGHT,	SO	wherever	you	are	going	you	must	be
going	towards	darkness.	And	that's	what	happens.
A	child	has	more	light	in	his	being;	as	he	grows	he	becomes	darker	and	darker
and	darker.	By	the	time	he	is	old	he	is	just	a	dark	night	of	the	soul	and	nothing
else.	 A	 child	 is	 more	 luminous,	 is	 more	 intelligent,	 more	 alert.	 And	 as	 time
passes	and	dust	gathers	on	him,	layers	and	layers	of	dust,	and	all	his	intelligence
disappears,	he	becomes	mediocre.
He	starts	behaving	in	stupid	ways,	because	he	falls	a	victim	to	the	stupid	crowd
that	 surrounds	 him.	 He	 is	 helpless	 --	 he	 has	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 parents,	 to	 the
teachers,	to	the	politicians.	They	are	the	great	leaders,	they	are	the	great	priests	--
they	know,	and	 they	all	 say,	 "We	 love	you.	Listen	 to	us	otherwise	you	will	go
astray.	Obey	us,	otherwise	you	will	go	astray."
Obedience	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 calamities	 that	 has	 befallen	 humanity.
One	should	be	capable	of	disobeying.	I	am	not	saying	to	make	disobeying	your
religion;	 I	 am	 simply	 saying	one	 should	be	 capable	of	 disobeying.	 In	 fact,	 the
person	who	is	capable	of	disobeying	is	also	capable	of	obeying.	The	person	who
is	 only	 capable	 of	 obeying,	 his	 obedience	 carries	 no	 value.	 The	 person	 who
cannot	say	no,	his	yes	is	always	impotent.
Only	the	person	who	can	say	no,	his	yes	has	power,	meaning,	significance.	He
says	yes	only	when	he	means	it.
And	one	should	be	alert	enough	to	say	no	to	all	that	takes	you	deeper	and	deeper
into	the	mire	of	darkness,	of	blindness,	of	superstitiousness.	And	one	should	be
capable	of	saying	yes	to	anything	that	takes	you	towards	the	light,	towards	love,
towards	life.	And	it	is	up	to	you!	If	you	say	yes	to	darkness	you	will	be	saying
no	 to	 light.	 If	 you	 move	 towards	 darkness	 you	 will	 have	 to	 keep	 your	 back
towards	the	light.	And	it	is	only	a	question	of	a	hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn	-
-	a	hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn	and	you	are	in	front	of	the	light	that	you	have
been	 searching	 and	 seeking.	 But	 your	 ways,	 your	 methods,	 your	 habits,	 your
patterns	 of	 thinking,	were	 all	 taking	 you	 towards	 darker	 and	 darker	 realms	 of
life.
WHERE	YOU	FIRST	APPEARED,	AND	WHAT	DARK	SAND
YOU	ARE	GOING	TOWARD,
AND	WHERE	YOU	SLEEP	AT	NIGHT...
This	is	a	night	in	which	you	are	living,	and	the	life	that	you	call	life	is	nothing
but	a	sleep
--	 full	of	dreams.	Sometimes	you	even	dream	that	you	are	awake;	 that	 too	 is	a
dream.
Just	the	other	night	I	was	reading	a	story:
A	man	came	to	the	lake	and	told	the	fisherman,	"I	am	Jesus	Christ!"
The	fisherman	looked	at	him	and	laughed,	and	he	said,	"Jesus	has	been	dead	for
two	thousand	years	--	are	you	mad	or	something?"
The	 man	 said,	 But	 I	 am	 Jesus	 Christ.	 Have	 you	 not	 heard	 that	 after	 he	 was
crucified	he	was	 resurrected	 --	 and	 since	 then	 I	have	not	died?	Have	you	ever
heard	when	Jesus	died	after	resurrection?"
The	fisherman	thought,	"Either	he	is	very	drunk	or	gone	nuts."	He	said,	"Then
you	will	have	to	prove	it:	Jesus	did	miracles...
And	 the	man	was	very	happy;	he	 said,	 "Yes,	what	miracle	do	you	want	me	 to
do?"
The	fisherman	said,	"Then	walk	on	the	lake."
And	 the	madman	walked...	 and	 drowned.	The	 fisherman	 jumped	 in,	 somehow
pulled	him	out;	asked	him,	"What	happened?"
He	 said,	 "That	 time	my	 shoes	 did	 not	 have	 any	 holes.	Two	 thousand	 years	 of
wandering	on	the	earth,	and	the	shoes	are	full	of	holes	--	that's	what	happened."
Mad	people	have	their	own	logic.	Blind	people	have	their	own	logic.	People	who
are	fast	asleep	have	their	own	logic	--	logic	that	supports	their	sleep.
One	man	suddenly	became	certain	that	he	was	dead.	There	was	no	way	to	prove
that	he	was	not,	so	he	was	taken	to	a	psychiatrist.	The	psychiatrist	tried	hard	to
convince	him	in	every	possible	way,	all	kinds	of	arguments	--	but	how	can	you
prove	to	a	man...?	He	said,
"But	I	am	dead	--	with	whom	are	you	talking?	I	am	not,	I	am	no	more.	This	is
not	 a	dialogue,	 this	 is	 a	monologue	 --	you	are	 talking	with	yourself,	 you	have
gone	mad."
Suddenly	an	idea	struck	the	psychiatrist.	He	said,	"Okay,	you	come	close	to	the
mirror."
And	 then	 he	 brought	 a	 needle,	 pushed	 the	 needle	 into	 the	 madman's	 hand	 --
before	pushing	the	needle	in	he	asked,	"Do	you	think	dead	men	bleed?"
He	said,	"No.	How	can	a	dead	man	bleed?"
He	 pushed	 the	 needle	 in,	 blood	 started	 oozing	 out.	 The	 psychiatrist	 was	 very
happy	and	he	said,	"Now	look!"
Do	you	know	what	the	madman	said?	He	said,	"What	is	 there	to	look	at?	That
simply	proves	that	dead	men	do	bleed."
You	can	go	on	supporting	your	illusions	--	very	logically.	You	can	go	on	thinking
you	are	awake	and	you	can	remain	asleep.	Kabir	says:
...	 AND	 WHERE	 YOU	 SLEEP	 AT	 NIGHT,	 AND	 WHAT	 YOU	 ARE
LOOKING
FOR....
Ask	 these	questions	deep	down	 in	your	own	heart:	What	 are	you	 looking	 for?
Where	are	you?	Where	are	you	asleep?	In	what	space	are	you	asleep?
Rothstein	 owed	 a	 hundred	 dollars	 to	 Weiner.	 The	 debt	 was	 past	 due	 and
Rothstein	was	broke,	so	he	borrowed	the	hundred	dollars	from	Spivak	and	paid
Weiner.
A	week	later,	Rothstein	borrowed	back	the	hundred	dollars	from	Weiner	and	paid
Spivak.
Another	week	went	by	and	Rothstein	borrowed	back	 the	hundred	dollars	 from
Spivak	to	pay	Weiner.
He	 repeated	 this	 transaction	 several	 times,	 until	 finally	 he	 called	 them	up	 and
said,
"Fellas,	 this	 is	a	 lotta	bother.	Why	don't	you	two	exchange	the	hundred	dollars
every	week	and	keep	me	out	of	it!"
This	is	what	is	happening	here,	everywhere	in	the	world.	You	can	learn	how	to
keep	yourself	out	of	it,	and	that	is	the	secret	of	awareness.	This	transaction	will
continue;	the	world	will	remain	a	marketplace	--	it	was	so	before,	it	will	remain
so	afterwards	too.	But	you	can	be	out	of	this	transaction	--	you	can	be	a	witness
to	it.	You	can	slip	out	of	your	identity.	It	is	your	identity	where	you	are	asleep.	It
is	your	ego	where	you	are	asleep.
The	ego	means	simply	that	the	self	 is	asleep.	The	moment	the	self	awakes,	 the
ego	disappears,	is	not	found	any	more.
Andrews,	a	white	Georgia	 farmer,	hired	Monroe,	a	black,	 to	chop	some	wood.
Monroe	 took	 the	axe	and	began	hacking	away.	But	 in	a	 little	while	 the	 farmer
noticed	Monroe	sitting	in	the	shade,	watching	another	negro	do	the	work.
"Why	you	sittin'	 there	doing	nothing	when	I	am	paying	you	 to	cut	 the	wood?"
asked	Andrews.	"How	come	you	got	somebody	else	doing	it?"
"I	hired	him	to	do	it	for	me,"	said	Monroe.
"Is	that	a	fact,"	said	the	white	man.	"How	much	are	you	paying	him?"
"I	am	paying	him	a	dollar	and	a	quarter,"	answered	Monroe.	"Why	would	you
want	to	do	that?"	snorted	the	white	man.	"I	am	paying	you	only	a	dollar!"
"I	know,"	said	the	black,	"but	it	is	worth	a	quarter	to	be	boss	for	once."
The	 ego	 is	 constantly	 in	 search	of	 being	 a	 boss	 --	whatsoever	 the	 cost,	 at	 any
cost.	You	are	losing	your	whole	opportunity	of	life	just	to	fulfill	a	shadowy,	non-
substantial	notion
--	the	notion	of	ego:	"I	am	somebody."	Nobody	is	nobody.	We	are	all	one;	we	are
not	separate.
At	the	source	we	are	one,	at	the	goal	we	will	be	one	again.	Just	in	this	dark	night
when	we	have	fallen	asleep	we	are	having	private	dreams.	Remember,	the	real	is
universal,	the	unreal	is	private.	You	cannot	even	invite	your	girlfriend	into	your
dream	--	hence	it	is	false.	It	is	so	private	you	cannot	share	it.	Anything	that	is	so
private	is	bound	to	be	false,	and	there	is	nothing	more	private	than	the	ego	--	and
that	is	the	center	of	all	your	dreaming	mind,	sleeping	mind.
And	 people	 go	 on	wasting	 their	whole	 lives,	 not	 even	 knowing	what	 they	 are
looking	for.
Do	you	know	exactly	what	you	are	looking	for?	Do	you	have	some	idea?	Do	you
have	some	sense	of	direction?
IT	 IS	 MORNING,	 SWAN,	 SAYS	 Kabir,	 wake	 up,	 CLIMB	 IN	 THE	 AIR,
FOLLOW	ME!
The	original	has	something	more:
AB	HI	HANSA	CHET	SABERA	--
Now	is	the	morning,	swan...
NOW	 has	 to	 be	 remembered.	 The	 translation	 has	 missed	 something:	 IT	 IS
MORNING,	SWAN,	WAKE	UP...
The	original	says:	It	is	ALWAYS	morning	--	NOW	wake	up,	because	now	is	the
morning.	The	present	is	always	light,	the	present	is	always	sunrise.	Being	in	the
past	or	being	in	the	future,	you	go	on	missing	the	light,	the	door	from	where	light
penetrates	you.
AB	HI	HANSA	CHET	SABERA	--	This	is	the	door,	now	is	the	time	--	now	or
never!
IT	IS	MORNING,	SWAN,	WAKE	UP,	CLIMB	IN	THE	AIR,	FOLLOW	ME!
AND	 ONE	 CAN	WAKE	 UP	 ONLY	 IF	 ONE	 STARTS	 CLIMBING	 IN	 THE
AIR.
This	is	a	metaphor,	a	mystic	metaphor.	It	means:	you	start	moving	into	the	world
of	quality,	not	 into	 the	world	of	quantity.	People	 live	 in	 the	world	of	quantity:
more	 money,	 more	 power,	 more	 prestige,	 more	 respectability.	 These	 are	 all
quantities.
You	have	so	much	--	you	can	double	it,	treble	it,	you	can	have	it	thousandfold,
but	it	is	all	quantity.	There	is	a	different	dimension:	the	dimension	of	quality.	For
example,	 you	 can	 have	 one	 sex	 experience,	 you	 can	 have	 two,	 you	 can	 have
three,	 you	 can	 have	 four;	 then	 it	 is	 quantity.	But	 if	 your	 sex	 experience	 starts
becoming	 more	 a	 love	 experience,	 and	 your	 love	 experience	 starts	 becoming
more	a	prayer	experience,	then	it	is	quality.
Quantity	is	horizontal,	quality	is	vertical.	Once	you	start	changing	qualitatively,
you	start	soaring	high,	you	move	in	the	vertical	world.	Matter	is	horizontal,	spirit
is	vertical.	That	is	basically	the	meaning	of	the	symbol	of	the	cross.	The	cross	is
not	 a	 Christian	 symbol,	 remember;	 the	 cross	 is	 older	 than	 Christ;	 it	 is	 a	 very
ancient	 symbol.	 The	 cross	 simply	 means	 that	 life	 has	 two	 dimensions:	 one
horizontal,	one	vertical.	If	you	live	on	the	horizontal	you	will	live	asleep	--	that's
why	when	you	have	to	go	to	sleep	you	have	to	be	in	a	horizontal	position;	lying
down	in	the	bed,	you	become	horizontal.	When	you	wake	up,	you	stand	up,	you
become	vertical.
Now,	 even	 scientists	will	 agree	with	 it,	 that	 all	 that	 has	 happened	 to	man,	 all
evolution,	has	happened	because	man	some	day	in	the	past	decided	not	to	walk
on	four	but	 to	stand	on	 two	feet.	Man	became	vertical	 --	 that	was	 the	moment
when	evolution	started.	Man	was	no	more	animal.	Animals	are	horizontal:	man
became	vertical.
Just	 the	 physical	 verticality,	 and	 so	 much	 has	 happened	 to	 man.	 Think	 of
spiritual	 verticality,	 think	 of	 the	 spiritual	 verti-cal	 dimension,	 and	 you	 cannot
even	imagine	what	is	possible,	you	cannot	even	dream	about	it.	You	have	no	idea
at	all!	You	need	not	be	beggars	then	--	the	whole	kingdom,	the	whole	universe,
with	all	its	beauty	and	joy,	is	yours.
IT	IS	MORNING,	SWAN,	WAKE	UP,	CLIMB	IN	THE	AIR...!
I	KNOW	OF	A	COUNTRY	THAT	SPIRITUAL	FLATNESS
DOES	NOT	CONTROL,	NOR	CONSTANT	DEPRESSION,
AND	THOSE	ALIVE	ARE	NOT	AFRAID	TO	DIE.
Kabir	says:	I	KNOW	OF	A	COUNTRY...	I	know	of	a	space	--	if	you	come	with
me,	if	you	dare	to	come	with	me,	it	needs	daring,	if	you	are	courageous	enough
to	soar	with	me,	if	you	are	ready	to	leave	the	muddy	pools	where	you	have	made
your	abodes,	to	go	to	the	Himalayas,	beyond	the	Himalayas,	to	the	purest	lake,
Mansarovar....	The	word	MANSAROVAR	IS	also	beautiful	--	it	means	the	lake
of	consciousness.
I	 KNOW	 OF	 A	 COUNTRY	 THAT	 SPIRITUAL	 FLATNESS	 DOES	 NOT
CONTROL...
Here,	 in	 the	 name	 of	 spirituality,	 something	 pseudo,	 something	 false	 is	 being
sold.	The	 temples	and	 the	mosques	and	 the	churches	and	 the	gurudwaras,	 they
are	selling	you	something	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	spirituality.	Nanak	had
something	 to	 give,	 but	Nanak	 is	 no	more.	And	Mohammed	 had	 something	 to
give,	but	he	is	no	more.	Now	there	are	only	dead	traditions.	You	will	have	to	find
an	 alive	 Master	 who	 KNOWS	 OF	 A	 COUNTRY	 WHERE	 SPIRITUAL
FLATNESS	DOES	NOT	CONTROL.
In	 this	world.	 very	 spiritually	 flat	 people	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 saints.	 In	 fact,	 the
more	spiritually	 flat	you	are,	 the	more	spiritually	stupid	you	are,	 the	more	you
will	be	respected	by	the	masses	--	because	the	more	you	will	oblige	the	masses
by	 being	 according	 to	 their	 ideas	 of	 what	 a	 saint	 should	 be.	 Only	 mediocre,
stupid	people	can	follow	the	masses,	can	fulfill	their	expectations.
A	man	who	has	any	courage,	a	man	who	has	any	guts,	is	bound	to	be	a	rebel.	He
will	not	be	worshipped	as	a	saint	in	his	life	--	he	will	be	worshipped	as	a	saint
only	when	he	 is	gone.	People	worship	dead	saints:	 either	you	have	 to	be	dead
while	alive	--	they	will	worship	you	--	or	they	will	wait:	when	you	really	die	and
nothing	 of	 you	 is	 left,	 and	 the	whole	 fragrance	 has	 evaporated,	 then	 they	will
worship	you.
Jesus	 they	 crucified,	 and	 crucified	 Jesus	 they	 worship.	 Socrates	 they	 killed,
poisoned,	and	now	for	centuries	they	have	honoured	him	as	one	of	the	greatest
human	 beings	 who	 has	 ever	 walked	 on	 the	 earth.	 Mansoor	 they	 murdered,
butchered,	 and	 now	 Sufis	 go	 on	 claiming	 that	 he	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 Sufis.
When	 he	 was	 being	 killed,	 even	 these	 Sufis	 were	 standing	 in	 the	 crowd	 and
watching.	And	nobody	 even	protested	 --	 not	 even	 a	 very	 famous	Sufi,	 Junaid,
who	was	present	 in	 the	crowd	and	who	knew	perfectly	well	 that	Mansoor	was
innocent,	that	Mansoor's	declaration	"I	am	God!"	was	not	against	God.
Mansoor's	declaration	that	"I	am	God!"	was	not	a	sin.	In	fact,	Mansoor	was	no
more	there
--	God	had	declared	himself	through	him.	Junaid	knew	it,	but	still	was	afraid	of
the	 crowd,	 kept	 quiet.	 And	 when	 people	 were	 throwing	 stones	 and	 mud	 to
humiliate	 and	 to	 insult	 the	 dying	 man,	 he	 also	 threw	 a	 roseflower	 --	 for	 two
reasons.	Must	 have	been	 a	very	diplomatic	mind:	 so	people	knew	 that	 he	was
also	 throwing	 something,	 that	 he	was	 not	 in	 favour	 of	Mansoor,	 and	Mansoor
would	 know	 that	 he	 had	 not	 thrown	 a	 stone	 or	 mud	 --	 he	 had	 thrown	 a
roseflower.	But	the	story	is	tremendously	beautiful...
When	he	was	being	hit	by	stones	and	his	whole	body	was	oozing	blood,	he	was
laughing,	he	was	in	a	state	of	celebration,	because	he	was	being	sacrificed	in	the
name	 of	 God.	 It	 was	 a	 moment	 to	 celebrate!	 But	 when	 he	 was	 hit	 by	 the
roseflower,	he	wept	--	the	story	says	Mansoor	wept.
Somebody	standing	nearby	asked	him,	"What	is	the	matter	with	you?	Stones	are
being	thrown	at	you;	all	over	the	body	you	have	been	wounded,	blood	is	flowing
from	everywhere,	and	you	kept	laughing	and	smiling.	And	a	roseflower	hit	you,
and	you	wept?"
Mansoor	said,	"Yes,	because	the	man	who	has	thrown	the	roseflower	knows	that
I	am	innocent.	Still	he	is	not	courageous	enough	to	say	so.	The	others	who	are
throwing	 stones	 at	me	 are	 ignorant	 --	 I	 am	 praying	 for	 them,	 I	 am	praying	 to
God,	 'Forgive	 them	because	 they	know	not	what	 they	are	doing.'	But	 I	 cannot
pray	for	this	man	who	has	thrown	the	rose,	that's	why	I	am	crying	and	weeping.
What	should	I	do	now?	I	cannot	say	to	God,
'Forgive	this	man	because	he	knows	not	what	he	is	doing'	--	he	knows	perfectly
well	 what	 he	 is	 doing,	 and	 he	 knows	 perfectly	 well	 that	 I	 am	 absolutely
innocent."
When	 he	 said	 these	 words,	 Junaid	 disappeared	 into	 the	 crowd,	 became	 very
much	afraid:	people	might	catch	hold	of	him.
Now,	 Sufis	 go	 on	 claiming	 that	Mansoor	was	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 enlightened
people	of	the	world,	now	they	worship	him.
The	 ways	 of	 man	 are	 very	 strange.	 This	 world	 is	 really	 very	 flat	 as	 far	 as
spirituality	 is	concerned.	And	 the	 so-called	spirituality	 is	very	boring	 too.	And
the	 so-called	 spirituality	 is	 more	 or	 less	 rubbish	 --	 rubbish	 that	 has	 gathered
down	the	ages:	theories,	thoughts,	systems,	but	not	a	single	iota	of	experience.
Hence	Kabir	says:
I	 KNOW	 OF	 A	 COUNTRY	 THAT	 SPIRITUAL	 FLATNESS	 DOES	 NOT
CONTROL...
Come	with	me!	 I	 can	 take	 you	 to	 a	 space	 where	 all	 these	 fools	 are	 no	more
pretending	 to	 be	 spiritual,	 where	 all	 these	 dull,	 stupid	 fellows	 are	 no	 more
thought	to	be	saints.
A	priest	dies.	At	 the	Pearly	Gates	he	 is	given	a	warm	welcome	by	Saint	Peter,
who	presents	him	the	keys	of	a	small,	old,	rotten	car	and	a	small	one-bedroom
apartment.
When	he	gets	there,	there	is	another	pleasant	surprise	for	him,	for	his	next	door
neighbour	 turns	 out	 to	 be	 a	 parson	who	 had	 been	 a	 good	 friend	 of	 his	Down
Below.
They	decide	to	stroll	down	to	the	Pearly	Gates	to	check	out	the	action,	and	they
are	horrified	when	they	spot	a	certain	rabbi	strolling	through	the	Pearly	Gates	as
though	he	own	the	place.	For	they	knew	this	particular	rabbi	only	too	well,	and
he	had	been	the	scandal	of	their	community.	Sodomy,	usury	--	name	any	vice,	he
had	committed	it.	The	two	reverends	were	even	more	horrified	when	Saint	Peter
bowed	low	to	the	rabbi,	told	him	what	an	honour	it	was	to	have	him	in	Heaven,
and	 presented	 him	 with	 keys	 to	 a	 Rolls	 Royce,	 a	 town	 house	 and	 a	 country
house.
"This	 is	 outrageous!"	 priest	 and	 parson	 storm	 at	 Saint	 Peter.	 "We	 lead	 pious,
godfearing	 lives	 and	 all	 we	 get	 are	 small	 cars	 and	 small	 apartments.	 But	 this
schmuck	of	a	rabbi,	he	does	everything	vile,	yet	you	give	him	a	Rolls	Royce,	a
town	house,	and	a	country	house.
How	come?"
"Well,	I	am	sorry,	gentlemen,"	Saint	Peter	apologizes,	"but	he	is	a	relative	of	the
management."
Kabir	is	not	talking	about	a	country	like	this.	He	is	not	talking	about	the	heaven
of	your	imagination.	Your	heaven	will	be	an	exact	replica	of	this	world;	maybe	a
little	bit	decorated	here	and	there,	modified,	a	little	better	--	a	better	standard	of
living,	but	not	real	life.
Kabir	is	talking	of	an	inner	space:
I	KNOW	OF	A	COUNTRY	THAT	SPIRITUAL	FLATNESS
DOES	NOT	CONTROL,	NOR	CONSTANT	DEPRESSION.
In	 this	 world	 you	 will	 find	 two	 types	 of	 people:	 one	 who	 is	 just	 boringly
religious,	flat;	another	who	is	just	worldly,	but	depressed.	The	pseudo	religious
at	 least	 hopes	 that	 something	 great	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 after	 death,	 but	 the
worldly	man	does	not	even	have	that	hope	--	he	is	very	depressed.	You	can	see
this...
In	 India	 you	 will	 feel	 the	 difference	 from	 the	 West.	 India	 is	 a	 flat	 spiritual
country,	but	people	are	in	a	way	hopeful.	Life	is	short,	and	soon	it	will	be	gone,
and	then	the	paradise	and	all	the	joys;	and	the	more	you	suffered	in	life,	the	more
you	will	be	rewarded.	So	carry	on,	be	patient.
In	the	West,	people	are	not	flatly	spiritual,	and	they	have	no	hope,	no	future,	no
life	 after	 death.	Then	 there	 is	 great	 depression,	 then	 they	 are	very	heavy,	 as	 if
they	are	carrying	mountains	of	worries,	anxieties.
Both	states	are	wrong.
Kabir	says:
...	AND	THOSE	ALIVE	ARE	NOT	AFRAID	TO	DIE.
I	KNOW	OF	A	COUNTRY...
...	where	 people	 know	death	 is	 a	 lie,	where	 people	 know	 that	 life	 is	 eternal.	 I
know	a	space	where	you	will	also	be	able	to	see	and	feel	and	experience	that	life
never	begins,	never	ends	--	that	death	is	only	a	change	of	garments.
THERE	WILD	FLOWERS	COME	UP	THROUGH	THE	LEAFY	FLOOR,
AND	THE	FRAGRANCE	OF	'I	AM	HE'	FLOATS	ON	THE	WIND.
THERE	THE	BEE	OF	THE	HEART	STAYS	DEEP	INSIDE
THE,FLOWER.
AND	CARES	FOR	NO	OTHER	THING.
He	 is	 talking	 about	 the	 inner	 space,	 the	 inner	 silence,	 the	 contentless
consciousness,	samadhi.
THERE	WILD	FLOWERS	COME	UP...
Wild	 because	 they	 are	 spontaneous,	 wild	 because	 no	 gardener	 has	 tended	 to
them,	wild	because	they	are	SO	full	of	life	--	they	are	not	civilized,	cultured,	pale
--	so	full	of	blood	and	so	full	of	juice.	Wild	because	you	have	not	seen	them	yet,
not	even	in	your	imagination	do	they	cast	any	shadows.
THERE	WILD	FLOWERS	COME	UP	THROUGH	THE	LEAFY	FLOOR,
AND	THE	FRAGRANCE	OF	'I	AM	HE'	FLOATS	ON	THE	WIND.
NOW	 THIS	 IS	 SOMETHING	UNTRANSLATABLE.	 The	 Sanskrit	 word	 that
Kabir	uses	is	SOHAM.	Literally	it	means	'I	am	he'	--	'I	am	that.'	But	that	is	not
the	point.	SOHAM	is	not	a	word	but	a	sound.	If	you	become	utterly	silent,	you
will	hear	this	sound	arising	from	the	deepest	core	of	your	being:	SOHAM.	It	is
not	a	word;	it	is	a	sound,	pure	sound.	It	is	a	kind	of	inner	music	which	is	heard
when	all	 the	noise	of	 the	mind	has	 left	you.	Because	 it	 is	heard	only	when	the
mind	 has	 left	 you,	 when	 there	 are	 no	 longer	 any	 thoughts	 to	 disturb,	 no
interference,	the	whole	world	forgotten,	and	you	are	in	absolute	aloneness,	and
everything	has	stopped,	time	has	stopped,	space	has	disappeared,	when	there	is
only	pure	consciousness	vibrating	--	that's	what	Zen	people	call	the	sound	of	one
hand	CLAPPING:	SOHAM	--	because	this	sound	is	heard	only	when	you	have
reached	the	very	center	of	your	being,	and	because	with	this	sound,	once	heard,
you	become	absolutely	certain,	not	convinced,	not	that	you	start	believing,	you
become	absolutely	certain	through	knowing	that	'I	am	he'	--	hence	the	sound	has
gathered	a	meaning	around	it,	but	basically	it	is	a	sound.
And	 the	 mystics	 say	 that	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 full	 of	 this	 sound,	 SOHAM.
Whenever	 you	 are	 silent,	 you	will	 hear	 it.	 This	 is	 the	 voice	 of	 God,	 and	 this
voice	reveals	to	you	who	you	are.
...	AND	THE	FRAGRANCE	OF	 'I	AM	HE'	 --	SOHAM	--	FLOATS	ON	THE
WIND.
THERE	THE	BEE	OF	THE	HEART	STAYS	DEEP	INSIDE	THE	FLOWER...
Then	who	wants	 to	 go	out?	The	 sound	of	SOHAM	showers	 on	you	 as	 nectar.
Then	who	wants	to	go	out?	for	what?	All	that	you	have	been	desiring	is	suddenly
fulfilled;	all	that	you	have	asked	is	given.	The	door	is	open.
THERE	THE	BEE	OF	THE	HEART	STAYS	DEEP	 INSIDE	THE	FLOWER,
AND
CARES	FOR	NO	OTHER	THING.
DON'T	GO	OUTSIDE	YOUR	HOUSE	TO	SEE	FLOWERS.
MY	FRIEND,	DON'T	BOTHER	WITH	THAT	EXCURSION.
INSIDE	YOUR	BODY	THERE	ARE	FLOWERS.
HE	IS	INDICATING	TOWARDS	THE	SEVEN	CENTERS	--	the	seven	chakras.
Those	 seven	 chakras	 are	 called	 seven	 flowers.	We	 become	 aware	 only	 of	 the
first,	and	that	too	in	a	very	dim	and	dismal	way	--	a	sound	heard	from	far	away,
or	just	an	echo.	We	become	aware	of	the	first	center	only,	the	sex	center,	and	that
too	only	once	in	a	while.
All	your	sexual	experiences	don't	bring	you	to	the	awareness	of	the	flower.	Only
when	you	have	a	deep	orgasm,	only	when	you	have	a	total	orgasm,	when	your
whole	 body	 pulsates	with	 joy,	when	 each	 fiber	 of	 your	 body	 dances	with	 joy,
when	 each	 cell	 of	 your	 body	 goes	 mad,	 wild	 with	 joy	 --	 then	 only	 do	 you
become	aware	of	the	first	flower.
Even	that	is	very	rare;	not	more	than	one	percent	of	people	become	aware	of	it.
Ninety-nine	 percent	 know	 sex	 only	 as	 a	 relief;	 they	 don't	 know	 its	 orgasmic
quality.	Even	if	they	think	they	are	having	an	orgasm,	it	is	not	orgasm	--	it	is	just
genital	relief.
Orgasm	has	nothing	to	do	with	genitals	as	such.	Genitals	are	involved	in	it,	but
orgasm	is	total	--	from	the	head	to	the	toes,	it	is	all	over	you.	Nothing	is	being
held	 behind.	 A	 total	 involvement	 in	 the	 moment,	 a	 total	 merger	 --	 then	 you
become	aware	of	the	first	flower.
And	 there	 are	 six	 higher	 flowers,	 and	 as	 you	 move	 higher,	 deeper	 orgasmic
experiences	are	waiting	for	you.	The	seventh,	the	last,	is	called	SAHASRAR	--
the	one-thousand-petalled	lotus.	And	when	the	seventh,	that	is	in	the	head,	opens
up,	you	have	transcended	humanity,	you	are	no	more	a	human	being.	You	may
be	in	the	human	body,	but	you	are	a	God.
The	Western	mind	 finds	 it	 very	 difficult;	 they	 cannot	 understand	why	we	 call
Buddha	a	God,	why	we	call	Mahavira	a	God,	why	we	call	Krishna	a	God.	They
don't	even	call	 Jesus	a	God;	 they	only	call	him	 'the	son	of	God'.	Their	 idea	of
God	is:	one	who	created	the	world.
But	in	the	East	we	have	gone	far	deeper	than	that.	Nobody	has	ever	created	the
world;	in	the	Christian	sense	there	is	no	God	at	all.	God	is	not	a	creator	but	the
creativity,	the	energy	that	has	become	manifest	in	existence.	God	is	in	the	tree,	in
the	rock,	in	the	river,	in	you,	in	me.	But	then	why	do	we	call	Buddha	a	God	if
God	 is	 everywhere?	 Buddha	 has	 awakened	 to	 his	 godliness,	 others	 are	 fast
asleep.
By	 calling	 Buddha	 a	 God	we	 don't	 mean	 that	 he	 created	 the	 world,	 we	 don't
mean	 that	he	controls	 the	world	 --	we	 simply	mean	 that	he	has	attained	 to	 the
seventh	orgasm,	that	he	has	come	to	the	seventh	flowering,	that	the	ultimate	has
opened	in	him,	that	he	is	no	more	an	individual,	that	he	has	become	universal.
Your	 head	 has	 an	 opening....	 Just	 try	 to	 understand:	 your	 sex	 center	 has	 an
opening;	that	opening	joins	you	with	nature,	that	opening	takes	you	downwards.
Exactly	 like	 the	sex	center,	on	 the	opposite	pole,	 is	SAHASRAR	--	 that	opens
upwards.	Just	as	sex	takes	you	downwards,	SAHASRAR	takes	you	upwards.
Sex	 is	 under	 the	 law	 of	 gravitation	 and	 SAHASRAR	 IS	 beyond	 the	 law	 of
gravitation.	It	functions	under	a	totally	different	law	--	you	can	call	it	levitation,
or	you	can	call	it
'grace'.	The	law	that	pulls	you	down	is	gravitation,	and	the	law	that	pulls	you	up
is	grace.
Science	 is	 not	 yet	 aware	 of	 the	 other	 law;	 that	 is	 unfor-tunate.	But	 religion	 is
basically	the	art	of	helping	you	enter	into	the	realm	of	the	second	law,	the	law	of
grace.	And	once	your	SAHASRAR,	the	one-thousand-petalled	lotus,	has	opened,
you	disappear	as	an	ego:	God	appears	in	you.	Your	form	will	remain	human,	but
in	the	form	of	the	human	the	superhuman	starts	descending.
Hindus	 call	 this	 state	 AVATARA.	 The	 word	 AVATARA	 means	 descendence:
when	a	person	is	open	towards	the	sky,	the	sky	descends	in	him,	he	becomes	an
AVATARA.
DON'T	 GO	 OUTSIDE,	 says	 Kabir,	 YOUR	 HOUSE...	 has	 all	 that	 you	 are
searching	and	seeking	outside.
DON'T	GO	OUTSIDE	YOUR	HOUSE	TO	SEE	FLOWERS.
MY	FRIEND,	DON'T	BOTHER	WITH	THAT	EXCURSION.
INSIDE	YOUR	BODY	THERE	ARE	FLOWERS.
ONE	FLOWER	HAS	A	THOUSAND	PETALS.
Six	are	lower.	Up	to	the	sixth	you	remain	a	human	being	--	you	become	a	very
superior	 human	 being,	 but	 you	 remain	 a	 human	 being.	 Up	 to	 the	 sixth	 you
remain	a	sage.	Entering	into	the	seventh	you	become	a	God.
ONE	FLOWER	HAS	A	THOUSAND	PETALS.
THAT	WILL	DO	FOR	A	PLACE	TO	SIT.
And	once	you	have	arrived	at	the	seventh,	you	have	come	home.	Now	you	can
sit	at	rest,	now	you	can	relax.	Now	there	is	nowhere	to	go.	Now	all	is	completed,
fulfilled.
This	was	the	search...	and	you	ran	in	all	directions.	In	all	the	ten	directions	you
were	running,	hither	and	thither	for	 thousands	of	 lives,	and	not	even	a	glimpse
was	found.	But	once	you	have	reached	the	seventh,	all	is	fulfilled.	Suddenly	now
you	can	rest.	Now	there	is	nowhere	to	go,	no	goal	to	attains	no	object	for	your
dec;ire	--	hence	desirelessness	happens	naturally.
SITTING	THERE	YOU	WILL	HAVE	A	GLIMPSE	OF	BEAUTY...
And	 this	 is	 what	 WE	 call	 beauty	 in	 the	 East.	 Unless	 the	 seventh	 flower	 has
opened	 in	 you,	 you	 know	 nothing	 of	 beauty.	 You	 only	 say	 that	 the	 rose	 is
beautiful,	 the	 sky	 is	 beautiful,	 the	 river	 is	 beautiful.	 You	 are	 using	 the	 word
'beautiful',	but	you	don't	know	exactly	what	beauty	is.
If	somebody	persists,	insists,	"Define	what	beauty	is,"	you	will	be	at	a	loss.	You
will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 define	 it	 --	 in	 fact,	 you	 have	 not	 known,	 you	 have	 simply
heard.	Others	say	the	rose	is	beautiful,	so	you	say	the	rose	is	beautiful.	You	are
simply	repeating	others'
opinions.
Just	 fifty	 years	 ago,	 nobody	 had	 heard	 that	 the	 cactus	 is	 beautiful	 --	 now	 the
cactus	is	on	the	throne,	the	rose	is	dethroned.	Now	to	talk	about	the	rose	and	its
beauty	seems	very	outdated;	now	people	have	not	rose	plants	in	their	houses	but
cactuses.	 The	more	 sophisticated	 a	 person	 is,	 the	more	 he	 will	 appreciate	 the
beauty	of	the	cactus.
The	 fashion	 has	 changed.	 Fashions	 change!	The	 rose	 has	 lost	 its	 face.	After	 a
few	days,	the	rose	will	come	back,	because	people	get	tired	--	cactus	and	cactus
and	cactus	--	and	then	one	day	they	decide	enough	is	enough.	Again,	suddenly,
they	have	to	change.	Watch	people's	dresses:	each	year	they	go	on	changing,	and
after	 ten,	 twelve	 years	 the	 old	 dress	 comes	back,	 because	 from	where	 are	 you
going	to	get	new	ideas?	You	can	ask	Padma	--
just	the	SAME	ideas	go	on	moving	in	a	circle.
You	don't	 know	what	beauty	 is.	You	use	 the	word,	 certainly,	but	your	word	 is
empty.
Beauty	 is	 known	 only	 by	 one	who	 has	 known	 the	 inner	 beauty,	 one	who	 has
known	the	inner	flower	opening.	Then	whenever	a	flower	is	seen,	it	reminds	you
of	your	inner	beauty.
Yes,	Kabir	seeing	a	roseflower	will	start	dancing,	will	start	singing,	because	the
rose	 flower	 on	 the	 outside	will	 simply	 trigger	 his	 inner	 experience	 of	 his	 own
flower.	 Seeing	 the	 starry	 night,	 he	 will	 start	 singing	 or	 playing	 on	 his	 flute,
because	suddenly	the	starry	night	will	remind	him	of	his	own	inner	sky	--	which
is	far	more	beautiful.
SITTING	THERE	YOU	WILL	HAVE	A	GLIMPSE	OF	BEAUTY
INSIDE	THE	BODY	AND	OUT	OF	IT,
BEFORE	GARDENS	AND	AFTER	GARDENS.
Once	you	have	seen	the	inner	beauty,	then	you	will	be	able	to	see	the	outer	also
as	 beautiful.	 Once	 you	 have	 seen	 God	 within,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 him
without	too.	The	original	is	very	beautiful:
BAGO	NA	JA	RE	NA	JA,
TERI	KAYA	MEN	GULJAR.
Don't	go	to	the	gardens!
The	garden	is	within	you.
Don't	go,	don't	go,	don't	go	to	the	gardens.
BAGO	NA	JA	RE	NA	JA,
TERI	KAYA	MEN	GULJAR.
Within	your	own	body	is	the	garden	of	gardens.
SAHAS-KANVAL	PAR	BAITH	KE
TU	DEKHE	RUP	APAR.
Find	out	where	this	one-thousand-petalled	lotus	is	within	you,	and	then	sit	upon
it,
and	then	see	the	beauty	of	the	formless,
then	see	the	beauty	of	the	invisible,
then	see	the	beauty	of	the	intangible,
then	see	the	beauty	of	the	unknowable.
Those	who	have	only	known	the	known	have	known	nothing.	Those	who	have
only	 seen	 the	 seeable	 have	 not	 seen	 anything.	Unless	 you	 become	 capable	 of
seeing	the	unseen	and	hearing	the	unheard,	you	have	not	come	yet	 to	your	full
potential.
God	 gives	 you	 a	 great	 gift	 of	 potential.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 return	 the	 gift	 in
gratitude	and	thankfulness	is	to	make	the	potential	actual.	Be	what	your	seed	is
carrying	within	you.
Become	it!	Be	it!
This	small	body	is	not	small:	it	contains	a	universe.	And	this	body	is	not	just	a
body:	it	is	the	temple	of	God.	Love	it,	respect	it,	explore	it.	And	don't	get	stuck
at	the	first	center.
You	 have	 to	 move	 from	 sex	 to	 samadhi.	 Unless	 your	 sexual	 energies	 are
transformed	 into	 samadhi	 you	 are	 not	 fulfilling	 your	 destiny,	 you	 are	 not
fulfilling	your	nature.	You	are	missing	the	great	opportunity	that	life	is.
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Time	to	be	Getting	Home
18	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904180
ShortTitle:
FISH08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
110
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	YOU	SAY	THAT	IT	IS	ENOUGH	FOR	US	TO	JUST	BE,	THAT	WE
DON'T
NEED	TO	DO	ANYTHING	TO	BE	 IN	GOD.	 I	HAVE	THIS	GUT-FEELING
THAT	 I	 NEED	 TO	 DO	 TO	 BE	 WORTHY,	 TO	 CONTRIBUTE,	 TO	 GIVE
SOMETHING.	AND
YOU	SAY	THAT	GOD	IS	WITHIN	ME.	I	REALIZE	I	AM	LOOKING	INSIDE
FOR
SOME	 CONCEPT	 I	 GOT	 FROM	 THE	 OUTSIDE.	 IT	 IS	 LIKE	 LOOKING
DOWN
INTO	A	WELL	IN	THE	NIGHT.	I	SEE	REFLECTIONS	AND	I	THINK	IT	IS
THE
BOTTOM,	BUT	IT	IS	ONLY	THE	SURFACE.	EVEN	WHEN	I	KNOW	NEED
ONLY
LET	 AND	WAIT	 RATHER	 THAN	 LOOK	 FOR	 ANYTHING,	 I	 AM	 STILL
WAITING
FOR	 MY	 OWN	 CONCEPTS	 OF	 WHAT	 SHOULD	 HAPPEN.	 PLEASE
COMMENT.
Prem	Garima,
THE	FIRST	THING	--	THE	MOST	FUNDAMENTAL	--	TO	BE	understood	is
that	you	are	already	in	God.	It	is	not	a	question	of	being	in	God:	you	are	already
there.	 Just	 as	 the	 fish	 is	 in	 the	 ocean,	 you	 are	 in	God.	God	 simply	means	 the
existence,	that	which	exists.
In	the	ancient	Hebrew,	the	word	'God'	stands	for	that	which	is.	'G'	stands	for	that,
'O'	 for	which,	 and	 'D'	 for	 is	 --	 that	which	 is.	 The	word	 'God'	 is	 tremendously
significant.	It	does	not	indicate	a	person;	it	simply	indicates	a	presence.	And	the
presence	is	everywhere!
Life	is	synonymous	with	God,	universe	is	synonymous	with	God.	To	be	is	to	be
in	God	--
there	is	no	other	way.	To	breathe	is	to	breathe	in	God	--	there	is	no	other	way.	To
sleep	is	to	sleep	in	God	and	to	wake	up	is	to	wake	up	in	God	--	there	is	no	other
way.	You	 can	 choose	 to	 sleep,	 still	 you	 are	 in	God.	You	 can	 choose	 to	 forget
God,	still	you	are	in	God.
You	can	choose	to	deny	God,	still	you	are	in	God.	Not	to	be	in	God	is	the	only
impossible	thing	--	the	only	impossible	thing	I	say.
So	 it	 is	not	a	question	of	becoming	worthy.	But	 I	am	not	 saying	don't	become
worthy.	I	am	not	saying	be	lazy,	lousy.	I	am	not	saying	become	an	escapist.	I	am
not	 saying	 don't	 contribute	 to	 existence.	 But	 your	 contribution	 to	 existence
should	not	be	a	means	to	reach	God	--	that's	what	I	am	saying.	Your	contribution
to	 existence	 should	 be	 in	 gratefulness	 that	 you	 are	 in	God.	 It	 should	 not	 be	 a
means	to	reach	--	because	you	are	already	there.	It	should	be	an	overflowing	of
joy	because	you	are	already	there.	Be	very	clear	about	the	distinction.
Share	your	joy,	your	love,	your	ecstasy.	Make	life	as	beautiful	as	possible.	Just
out	of	 thankfulness	 that	God	has	chosen	you	to	be,	 that	you	are	allowed	to	be,
that	you	are	given	life.	What	else	can	you	do?	If	you	can	sing	a	song,	sing	it	with
your	totality!	If	you	can	paint,	paint,	and	put	your	whole	heart	in	it.	If	you	can
dance,	dance	to	abandon	so	you	disappear	completely	in	the	dance	and	there	is
no	more	any	dancer	but	only	the	dance	remains.
But	 these	are	not	means,	 let	me	remind	you,	 to	reach	God	--	 these	are	 just	our
poor	thanks,	our	heartfelt	gratitude.
Prayer	 is	 true	when	 it	 comes	out	 of	 gratitude.	Prayer	 is	 false	when	 it	 is	 just	 a
means	to	persuade	God,	to	seduce	God,	to	ask	for	something	from	him	--	even	if
you	 are	 asking	God	 himself,	 then	 too	 your	 prayer	 is	 full	 of	 desire.	And	when
prayer	is	full	of	desire,	it	is	too	heavy,	it	can't	have	wings.	It	can	only	grope	in
the	darkness	of	the	earth;	it	cannot	soar	high	in	the	sunlit	sky.
When	prayer	is	without	desire	it	has	wings,	it	can	reach	the	ultimate.	And	when
prayer	 is	without	weight,	when	 it	 is	 out	 of	 thankfulness,	 not	 desiring	 anything
but	just	to	show	your	gratitude	for	all	that	God	has	already	done	for	you....
Garima,	 you	 say:	 IS	 IT	 ENOUGH	 FOR	 US	 TO	 JUST	 BE?	 BUT	MY	 GUT-
FEELING	IS
THAT	I	NEED	TO	DO	SOMETHING	TO	BE	WORTHY,	TO	CONTRIBUTE,
TO
GIVE...
It	is	not	a	gut-feeling:	it	is	just	what	has	been	conditioned	in	you	by	the	society.
The	society	has	been	telling	you	continuously,	persistently,	day	in,	day	out,	from
your	 very	 childhood	 --	 in	 the	 school,	 in	 the	 college,	 in	 the	 university,	 in	 the
church,	 the	 priest,	 the	 politician,	 the	 parent,	 the	 professor,	 they	 are	 all	 joined
together	 in	one	single	conspiracy:	 to	give	you	 the	 idea	 that	as	you	are	you	are
unworthy.	You	have	to	do	something,	you	have	to	prove	yourself,	then	only	will
you	be	worthy.
This	is	the	strategy	of	the	society	to	exploit	you;	this	is	the	society's	ugly	way	to
make	slaves	of	you,	not	creators	but	slaves.	But	in	beautiful,	sophisticated	ways
you	 have	 been	 conditioned.	 Beautiful	 words	 covering	 very	 ugly	 realities.	 The
ugly	reality	is	that	the	society	wants	to	use	you	as	a	slave,	the	society	wants	to
manipulate	you,	the	society	wants	to	control	you.	It	manages	it	in	two	ways.
On	the	outside	is	the	state,	the	policeman,	the	magistrate;	they	enforce	laws,	but
laws	can	never	be	absolute	and	man	can	always	find	ways	to	defy	laws.	Then	the
society	 creates	 another	 safeguard:	 it	 creates	 a	 conscience	 in	 you;	 it	 goes	 on
hypnotizing	you,	saying	again	and	again	that	you	have	to	be	worthy.
And	 the	helpless	 child	has	no	other	way	 than	 to	oblige,	 than	 to	 surrender.	His
whole	 life	 is	 at	 stake;	he	 cannot	 survive	on	his	own.	He	has	 to	depend	on	 the
parents.	He	has	to	watch	continuously	what	THEY	want,	what	THEY	appreciate,
what	is	rewarded	by	them.
If	it	is	rewarded	by	them,	then	he	is	worthy,	he	feels	good;	if	he	is	punished	by
them,	he	feels	unworthy,	he	feels	bad	about	himself
Slowly	 slowly	 the	 idea	 settles,	 sinks	 deep	 in	 your	 heart,	 becomes	 almost	 your
second	 nature,	 that	 just	 to	 be	 is	 not	 enough.	 Trees	 are	 enough,	 animals	 are
enough,	birds	are	enough	--	only	man	has	this	stupid	idea	that	 just	 to	be	is	not
enough.	It	is	a	very	cunning	tactics	to	destroy	the	freedom	of	the	individual,	to
destroy	the	self-respect	of	the	individual,	to	create	in	the	individual	a	deep	guilt
feeling.	It	has	gone	deep,	certainly	--	so	deep,	Garima,	that	you	misunderstand	it
as	a	gut-feeling.	It	is	not	a	gut-feeling	at	all.
But	 I	 am	 not	 against	 being	 creative,	 remember.	 I	 am	 all	 for	 it.	 I	 want	 my
sannyasins	 to	 be	 creative	 --	 but	 for	 a	 totally	 different	 reason,	 with	 a	 totally
different	 intention,	with	 a	 totally	 new	motive.	 I	want	 you	 all	 to	 be	 creative;	 I
don't	want	you	to	escape	to	the	monasteries	--	I	want	you	to	live	in	the	world	and
live	 fully,	 and	 live	 the	 whole	 spectrum	 of	 life.	 Bring	 your	 total	 potential	 to
expression!	Bloom	in	as	many	ways	as	possible!
Because	only	then	will	you	feel	fulfilled.
But	 this	 has	 not	 to	 be	 as	 a	means	 to	 attain	 something.	 This	 has	 to	 be	 just	 an
expression	of	your	joy,	of	your	celebration.	And	then	the	quality	changes.	When
you	use	something	as	a	means,	you	are	not	really	interested	in	it.
For	 example,	 if	 you	 are	 painting	 just	 to	 be	 appreciated,	 your	 focus	 is	 on
appreciation,	 not	 on	 the	 painting;	 your	 heart	 is	 not	 there.	 You	 are	 already
imagining,	dreaming,	how	you	will	be	appreciated.	And	because	your	constant
worry	is	how	to	be	appreciated,	you	will	paint	something	which	will	not	come
out	of	you	spontaneously	--	you	will	paint	something	which	others	are	bound	to
like.	You	will	paint	it	according	to	them.	You	will	become	a	very	poor	painter.
You	will	 not	 allow	 your	 genius	 to	 come	 out,	 because	 the	 genius	 is	 not	 easily
appreciated,	 remember	 it.	 The	 more	 talented	 you	 are,	 the	 more	 genuine	 your
intelligence	is,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	being	easily	appreciated.	The	greater
possibility	 is	 that	 you	 will	 be	 condemned.	 Why?	 Because	 a	 genius	 brings
something	new	into	the	world,	so	new	that	old	criterions	don't	fit	with	it.	And	the
old	criterions	are	deep-rooted	in	the	human	mind;	they	cannot	easily	go	away.
The	genius	has	to	create	not	only	his	poetry,	his	painting,	his	dance,	his	music,
he	also	has	to	create	new	criterions	by	which	to	judge	them.
Vincent	van	Gogh	was	not	appreciated	in	his	time	--	one	of	the	greatest	painters
the	world	has	ever	known.	He	lived	in	utter	poverty;	his	brother	supported	him.
But	his	brother	was	not	much	in	favour	of	his	painting	either,	because	it	was	not
paying	--	so	what	 is	 the	point	of	doing	something	which	does	not	pay?	On	the
contrary,	because	of	his	paintings	people	used	to	think	that	he	was	mad.	He	was
painting	in	such	a	new	way	--	as	it	had	never	been	done	before.	He	had	his	own
vision.	He	was	a	genius!	In	his	paintings,	trees	are	so	high	that	they	reach	to	the
stars;	stars	are	very	small	and	trees	are	very	big.	Now	who	is	going	to	appreciate
this	painting?
Any	schoolchild	can	say,	"This	is	nonsense!	Stars	are	not	so	small,	and	trees	--
who	has	seen	such	big	trees?	reaching	above	the	stars?"	But	Vincent	van	Gogh
used	to	say,
"Whenever	 I	 see	a	 tree,	 this	 is	my	 feeling:	 that	 the	earth	 is	 trying	 to	 reach	 the
stars,	 to	 transcend	the	stars,	 through	the	 trees.	These	are	 the	hands	of	 the	earth
reaching	for	the	unknown,	for	the	transcendental.	And	I	love	my	earth,	hence	my
stars	are	small	and	my	trees	are	big.	I	am	PART	of	this	earth,	I	am	also	a	hand	of
my	earth.	To	me	stars	are	small."
This	is	not	a	question	of	astronomy,	physics,	mathematics:	it	is	a	totally	different
vision.
Trees	are	seen	as	ambitions	of	 the	earth,	 love	affairs	of	 the	earth	with	 the	sky.
But	who	is	going	to	appreciate	him?
In	one	of	his	paintings	the	sun	is	painted	black.	Now	who	has	ever	seen	a	black
sun?	But	he	used	to	say	that	the	sun	that	shines	outside	IS	black	compared	to	the
sun	that	is	inside.
It	is	a	comparison.	Kabir	will	agree;	Kabir	says,	"When	I	saw	the	inner	sun,	then
I	knew	that	the	outer	sun	is	just	a	black	hole.	When	I	saw	my	inner	life,	then	I
knew	that	the	outer	life	is	nothing	but	another	name	for	death."
The	moment	the	inner	is	known,	suddenly	the	outer	starts	fading	away.	Now,	van
Gogh	is	talking	in	d	mystic	way	--	he	is	a	mystic	--	but	who	will	understand?	It
will	take	years	for	people	to	understand.	Van	Gogh	lived	and	died	unappreciated,
unknown.	He	remained	absolutely	unknown.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know:	now	each	of	his	paintings	is	so	valuable	that	no
other	 painting	 can	 compete.	 Even	 Picasso's	 paintings	 are	 not	 so	 valuable	 --
millions	 of	 dollars	 for	 a	 single	 painting.	 In	 his	 own	 day,	 in	 his	whole	 life,	 he
could	not	sell	a	single	painting.
He	had	to	distribute	his	paintings	to	friends	or	to	the	man	who	used	to	give	him	a
cup	of	tea	in	the	morning	free	of	charge.	Those	same	paintings	now	cost	millions
of	dollars.
People	had	discarded	them;	people	accepted	them	out	of	politeness,	because	as
far	as	they	were	concerned	it	was	all	junk	--	so	why	collect	it?
Vincent	 van	 Gogh	 committed	 suicide	 when	 he	 was	 only	 thirty-three.	 It	 was
impossible	to	live;	he	could	not	earn	a	single	pie.	His	brother	used	to	give	him
enough	money,	just	enough,	to	exist,	to	survive.	But	he	needed	money	to	paint	--
for	the	canvas	and	the	colours	and	the	brushes.	So	this	was	his	arrangement:	out
of	seven	days...	he	used	to	get	money	every	Sunday	for	one	week.	Every	week,
for	three	days	he	would	eat	and	for	four	days	he	would	fast,	so	that	money	could
be	saved	to	purchase	canvases,	colours,	and	other	things	that	he	needed.
To	me,	van	Gogh's	fasting	is	far	more	significant	than	all	the	fasts	that	have	been
done	 by	 your	 so-called	 saints.	 THIS	 fasting	 has	 something	 beautiful	 in	 it,
something	spiritual	in	it.
When	your	so-called	saints	go	on	a	 fast,	 it	 is	a	means;	 they	are	 fasting	so	 that
they	can	reach	heaven	and	enjoy	all	 the	heavenly	 joys.	But	van	Gogh's	 fasting
has	a	totally	different	quality	to	it:	his	love	to	create.
And	 why	 did	 he	 commit	 suicide?	 He	 committed	 suicide...	 that	 too	 has	 a
tremendous	significance.	It	is	no	ordinary	suicide.	In	fact,	a	man	like	van	Gogh
cannot	do	anything	in	an	ordinary	way.	He	committed	suicide	because	he	said,
"Whatsoever	I	wanted	to	paint,	I	have	painted.	Now,	just	to	exist	is	pointless.	I
have	given	that	which	I	came	to	give;	now	I	can	go	back	to	the	original	source.
There	is	no	need	to	live	in	the	body	any	more.	I	have	contributed."
Years	 and	 years	 passed,	 then	 slowly	 slowly	 he	 was	 appreciated.	 Now	 he	 is
thought	to	be	one	of	the	greatest	painters	in	the	world.
And	this	has	been	so	with	all	the	geniuses:	in	their	own	time	they	are	condemned
--
condemned	by	the	masses,	condemned	by	the	crowd,	condemned	by	the	priests,
condemned	by	the	politicians.	They	are	appreciated	by	only	very	few	people	--
sensitive,	receptive,	intelligent	--	only	by	very	few	people	who	have	the	capacity
to	see	something	that	is	new,	unknown,	that	has	never	happened	before;	only	by
very	few	people	who	can	put	their	minds	aside	and	look.
I	would	like	you	to	be	creative,	but	don't	be	bothered	about	appreciation,	don't	be
bothered	that	you	will	be	gaining	fame,	name	through	it.	Whenever	the	motive	is
to	gain	something	out	of	creativity,	you	are	no	more	interested	in	it.	You	become
a	technician;	you	are	no	more	an	artist.	You	may	do	the	painting,	and	you	may
do	it	perfectly,	 technically	perfectly,	but	it	will	not	have	the	soul,	 it	will	not	be
alive,	 because	 you	 will	 not	 be	 there.	 You	 will	 be	 looking	 all	 around	 for	 the
appreciators	 to	 come.	And	you	will	 always	paint	 accordingly,	 so	 that	 they	 can
appreciate.
There	are	people	who	say	only	that	which	people	want	to	hear.	These	people	will
be	 very	 famous,	 known,	 appreciated,	 respected,	 but	 they	 are	mediocre	 people.
The	genius	speaks	that	which	arises	in	his	heart;	he	does	not	care	a	bit	whether
anybody	is	going	to	like	it	or	not.	He	says	it	straight,	he	says	it	direct	--	he	never
thinks	of	the	results	and	the	consequences.
Be	 creative	 in	 that	 sense	 and	 your	 creativity	will	 become	 an	 offering	 to	God.
God	has	 given	you	 so	many	gifts,	Garima;	 something	HAS	 to	be	done	 just	 in
deep	thankfulness.
But	remember:	with	no	motive,	not	as	a	means	but	as	an	end	unto	itself.	Art	for
art's	sake,	and	creation	for	creation's	sake,	and	 love	for	 love's	sake,	and	prayer
for	prayer's	sake.
And	that's	how	one,	slowly	slowly,	becomes	religious.	The	religious	person	lives
in	 the	 moment;	 he	 has	 no	 worry	 about	 the	 future,	 not	 even	 about	 the	 next
moment.	When	it	comes,	it	will	come.	He	does	not	prepare	for	it.	He	lives	this
moment,	and	out	of	this	moment	the	next	will	be	born.	And	if	this	moment	has
been	beautiful,	if	this	moment	has	been	a	benediction,	the	next	is	going	to	be,	of
course,	a	deeper	benediction,	a	greater	blessing.
Garima,	 you	 say:	 I	 HAVE	 THIS	 FEELING	 THAT	 I	 NEED	 TO	 DO	 TO	 BE
WORTHY...
THE	NEED	TO	DO	CAN	BE	A	GUT-FEELING,	 because	we	 have	 too	much
energy	 and	 the	 energy	 wants	 to	 dance,	 the	 energy	 wants	 to	 paint,	 the	 energy
wants	to	sing,	the	energy	wants	to	DO	something.	But	this	can't	be	a	gut-feeling:
I	NEED	TO	DO	TO	BE
WORTHY.	That	 is	 a	 feeling	 that	 has	 been	put	 inside	 you	 --	 like	 scientists	 put
electrodes	in	the	brain	and	then	a	person	can	be	manipulated.
Just	 like	 that	 the	 society	 has	 been	 going	 on	 down	 the	 ages	 --	 it	 creates	 a
conscience	in	you:	"Do	this,	this	is	right,	approved,	respected.	Don't	do	that;	that
is	unworthy	of	you.
You	will	be	condemned	 if	you	do	 it."	And	a	kind	of	division	 is	created	within
you	between	right	and	wrong,	between	the	'should'	and	the	'should-not'.
And	the	problem	is	that	no	'should'	can	ever	be	a	fixed	phenomenon;	it	changes
with	life.
No	right	is	always	right,	and	no	wrong	is	always	wrong,	so	to	decide	beforehand
is	dangerous.	 I	 don't	 teach	you	conscience;	 conscience	means	 right	 and	wrong
are	like	things,	decided:	this	is	a	rose	and	that	is	a	lotus,	and	this	is	a	stone	and
that	is	a	diamond	-
-	decided.	Decided	for	ever!	Right	and	wrong	are	not	things.	They	change.	Life
is	a	riverlike	phenomenon.	What	is	right	today	may	not	be	right	tomorrow.
One	Zen	Master	asked	his	disciple,	"What	is	God?"
The	 disciple	 bowed	 down,	 remained	 silent.	 The	Master	 blessed	 him	 and	 said,
"This	is	good.	I	am	happy."
Next	day,	again,	the	Master	asked	the	disciple,	"What	is	God?"
And	 of	 course	 now	 he	 had	 learnt,	 so	 he	 bowed	 down,	 an	 even	 deeper	 bow,
remained	quiet,	even	closed	his	eyes,	and	 the	Master	hit	him	hard	on	 the	head
and	 said,	 "You	 stupid!"	 The	 disciple	 was	 puzzled.	 He	 said,	 "But	 what	 has
happened?	Yesterday	 you	were	 so	 happy,	 and	 the	 answer	 is	 the	 same	 --	 even
better	than	yesterday!"
And	the	Master	said,	"That	is	where	you	went	wrong:	yesterday	was	yesterday,
today	is	 today.	Now	you	are	simply	repeating	a	ready-made	formula.	Now	you
are	not	being	true,	not	being	spontaneous,	not	being	responsible.	Now	you	have
learnt	a	trick.	How	can	the	same	answer	be	right	today?	Twenty-four	hours	have
passed,	so	much	water	has	gone	down	the	Ganges!"
Existence	is	dynamic,	it	is	not	static	--	it	is	not	a	stagnant	pool.	It	is	a	constant
continuum,	 flow.	No	 answer	 can	 ever	 be	 fixed	 --	 and	 that's	where	 the	 society
deceives	you:	it	gives	you	fixed	answers.	with	fixed	answers	one	thing	is	good	--
that's	why	we	cling	to	them	--
they	give	you	a	sort	of	certainty,	security,	safety.	You	can	remain	certain	that	you
are	right.
But	life	goes	on	changing,	And	your	'right'	remains	fixed.	And	then	your	whole
life	becomes	a	misery,	because	your	answers	never	fit	the	questions.	Then	your
whole	life	is	an	effort	to	put	square	plugs	into	round	holes	--	your	whole	life	you
go	on	trying.	And	it	is	very	frustrating.	And	the	reason	is:	you	never	see	that	life
is	changing.
And	the	really	conscious	person	changes	with	life.	The	really	conscious	person
cannot	afford	to	be	consistent.	Consistency	is	part	of	a	mediocre	mind.	I	am	not
saying	 be	 deliberately	 inconsistent;	 I	 am	 simply	 stating	 a	 fact,	 that	 to	 be
consistent	means	 to	be	 stupid,	 to	 be	 consistent	means	 to	 remain	with	 the	past,
blind	to	the	present.	If	you	look	at	the	present	you	have	to	change	with	life.
Hence	you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	contradictions	in	Jesus'	statements,	and
so	is	the	case	with	Gautam	Buddha.	And	that	has	always	been	the	case	with	the
enlightened	people,	because	they	don't	have	any	ready-made	answer.	You	hanker
for	the	ready-made	answer	so	you	can	jump	upon	it,	you	can	hold	it	tight	in	your
hand	and	you	can	be	certain.
You	suffer	from	uncertainty	--	and	uncertainty	is	the	nature	of	life.	Certainty	is
part	 of	 death.	 Be	 certain	 and	 you	 will	 be	 dead.	 Remain	 flowing,	 remain
uncertain,	remain	available	to	the	changing	circumstances,	and	you	will	remain
more	and	more	alive.
To	be	totally	alive	means	to	live	in	the	moment	with	no	past	interfering	at	all	--
then	 you	 respond	 to	 the	 moment	 and	 the	 response	 comes	 from	 your
consciousness	not	from	your	conscience.	Conscience	is	a	deception;	conscience
is	a	social	trick.	The	society	has	created	the	conscience.	And	the	function	of	the
Master	is	to	destroy	your	conscience	so	that	your	consciousness	can	be	freed.
Your	gut-feeling	is	not	a	gut-feeling.	You	have	been	deceived.	There	is	no	need
to	do	anything	to	be	worthy	--	you	are	already	worthy.	If	you	were	not	worthy,
you	would	not	be	here	at	all.	God	has	given	you	birth,	has	created	you	--	must
have	 seen	 some	 worth	 in	 you.	 If	 you	 are	 unworthy,	 then	 God	 is	 not	 a	 very
original	 creator,	 then	he	 is	not	much	of	a	creator	either.	How	can	he	create	an
unworthy	person?
Society	makes	you	unworthy,	because	 that	 is	 the	only	way	 to	exploit	you	--	 to
make	you	feel	unworthy.	Then	you	will	try	hard	to	become	worthy	because	that
is	the	only	way	to	gain	self-respect.	And	to	become	worthy	you	will	follow	the
dictates	of	the	society.
Society	creates	fear	in	you	--	fear	of	being	unworthy,	fear	of	being	condemned,
fear	 of	 being	 left	 alone,	 fear	 of	 being	 nobody,	 fear	 of	 being	 anonymous.	And
then	you	are	ready	to	yield,	to	bow	down,	to	any	kind	of	nonsense.
Simon's	 parents	 were	 in	 despair	 when	 he	 flunked	 out	 of	 school.	 They	 tried
sending	him	 to	every	school	 in	 the	city	 --	private,	public,	progressive,	military
academy	--	but	he	 took	no	 interest.	Finally	 they	 tried	a	Catholic	school.	When
Simon	came	home	with	his	first	report	card,	his	parents	were	surprised	to	see	a
straight	A	report.
"What	happened?"	they	asked	him.
"Well,"	he	replied.	"When	I	saw	that	poor	guy	nailed	to	the	cross	everywhere	I
looked,	I	knew	they	meant	business!"
Create	 fear...	 create	 as	much	 fear	 as	 you	 can.	 That	 has	 been	 the	 policy	 of	 the
society.
Hells	have	been	created	just	to	catch	hold	of	you;	heavens	have	been	created	just
to	reward	those	who	will	follow	the	dictates.	All	are	imaginary:	there	is	no	hell,
no	heaven.
But	these	rewards	and	punishments	are	subtle	strategies,	and	they	have	worked
up	to	now,	and	they	have	destroyed	all	human	dignity.
This	is	not	a	gut-feeling	in	you.	Your	gut-feeling	and	the	conscience	created	by
the	society	have	got	mixed	up.	The	gut-feeling	is	to	DO	something	--	yes,	that	is
a	gut-feeling.	When	energy	is	there,	one	wants	to	do	something;	that	is	natural.
Energy	 wants	 to	 be	 expressed.	 But	WITH	 the	 motive	 to	 be	 worthy,	 that	 is	 a
conscience	part	which	is	getting	mixed	with	your	gut-feeling.	Be	clear	about	it!
You	have	been	messed	around	by	 the	society	 in	every	possible	way.	You	have
been	confused	so	much	that	you	have	to	depend	on	somebody.	Either	you	go	to
the	priest	--	in	the	old	days	you	used	to	go	to	the	priest.	In	India	they	still	go	to
the	 priest.	 In	 the	 West	 the	 new	 priest	 has	 arisen:	 the	 psychotherapist,	 the
psychiatrist,	the	psychologist	--	go	to	him.
And	 the	miracle	 is	 that	 the	priest	 is	 just	 like	you,	maybe	even	more	 in	a	mess
than	you	are,	but	still	you	go	to	him	to	find	good	advice.	Yes,	he	repeats	good
advice	like	a	parrot.
Your	 psychotherapist,	 your	 psychiatrist,	 your	 psychoanalyst,	may	 be	 in	 deeper
anxiety,	in	more	tensions	than	you	are.
Just	 the	other	night	one	of	my	sannyasins	was	asking	me,	"Osho,	you	had	told
me	last	time	when	I	came	here,	'Look	for	the	lighter	side	of	life,	count	the	roses,
ignore	 the	 thorns.	 They	 are	 there,	 take	 note	 of	 them,	 but	 don't	 pay	 too	much
attention	 to	 them.'	 But	 my	 psychoanalyst	 has	 said,	 'This	 is	 dangerous,	 this	 is
going	to	repress	your	emotions.'	So	I	am	puzzled	--	what	to	do?"
I	told	him,	"You	just	wait	a	few	days,	your	psychoanalyst	will	be	here...!"	But	I
was	not	aware	that	this	sannyasin	himself	is	a	psychoanalyst.	Just	later	on	Vivek
told	me	 that	 he	 himself	 is	 a	 psychoanalyst.	 Now,	 one	 psychoanalyst	 going	 to
another	psychoanalyst	--	for	what?	And	that	one	may	be	going	to	somebody	else.
THE	 FOUNDER	 OF	 PSYCHOANALYSIS,	 Sigmund	 Freud,	 was	 one	 of	 the
most	pathological	persons	you	can	imagine	--	very	superstitious.	You	will	laugh
if	you	go	into	his	biography	about	how	such	a	man	could	become	the	founder	of
psychoanalysis,	and	how	such	a	man	could	be	trusted,	that	what	he	was	saying
was	true.
One	of	his	friends	gave	him	the	idea	that	just	as	each	woman	has	a	twenty-eight-
day	 period	 when	 her	 menstruation	 comes,	 exactly	 like	 that	 each	 man	 has	 a
twenty-three-day	 period.	 There	 is	 some	 truth	 in	 it	 --	 not	 twenty-three	 days,
exactly	twenty-eight	days.	Now	much	more	research	has	been	done	on	it.
Those	four,	five	days	when	a	woman	goes	through	the	period	are	sad,	depressive,
dull,	negative	--	exactly	like	that	man	also	goes	into	a	negative	state	each	month
for	four,	five	days.	Of	course,	his	period	is	not	very	visible,	but	it	is	there;	it	is	a
psychological	 fact.	 It	 should	 be	 there,	 because	 men	 and	 women	 are	 not	 very
different.
So	the	friend's	idea	was	on	the	right	track.	Sigmund	Freud	suddenly	got	one	idea
--	lying	down	in	his	bed,	he	was	thinking	about	twenty-eight	and	twenty-three	--
suddenly	 an	 idea	 flashed	 in	 his	 mind:	 twenty-eight	 plus	 twenty-three	 means
fifty-one,	 and	 he	 could	 not	 sleep	 the	 whole	 night.	 He	 became	 certain	 by	 the
morning	that	he	was	going	to	live	fifty-one	years	--	a	very	great	gut-feeling.	And
he	started	 talking	about	 it	 twenty-eight	plus	 twenty-three	--	 fifty-one	years	and
he	will	die.
And	 the	fifty-first	year	came	and	passed...	and	he	did	not	die.	Then	something
else	had	 to	be	 found.	The	day	he	was	expecting	 to	die,	his	phone	number	was
changed	 and	 the	 end	 of	 the	 phone	 number	was	 sixty-two.	 So	 he	 said,	 "Look,
another	 indication:	 so	 now	 I	 am	 going	 to	 die	 at	 sixty-two."	 But	 that	 day	 also
came	and	was	passing.
But	 the	people	 like	Sigmund	Freud	 are	not	 easy...	 they	will	 find	 something	or
other.	He	was	staying	in	a	hotel	and	the	number	of	the	room	was	eighty-two,	so
he	said,	"Look,	another	indication	from	above	--	at	eighty-two	I	am	going	to	die
--	that	is	absolutely	certain."
And	that	day	also	passed.	He	died	when	he	was	eighty-three.
Such	superstitious	people...	he	was	so	afraid	of	death,	that's	why	he	was	so	much
concerned	about	it.	He	was	so	afraid	of	death	that	five	times	in	his	life	he	fainted
publicly	because	somebody	started	talking	about	death.	He	used	to	faint	flat	on
the	 ground.	 Just	 the	 IDEA	of	 death!	And	 such	 a	 pathological,	 neurotic	 person
became	the	founder	of	psychoanalysis.
And	he	used	to	project	himself:	whatsoever	was	true	for	him	he	thought	was	true
for	every	human	being.	That	 is	 the	very	limit	of	nonsense.	All	 that	he	has	said
about	man	is	not	about	man	--	it	is	about	Sigmund	Freud.	And	Sigmund	Freud	is
a	single	individual;	he	does	not	represent	man.	Nobody	represents	man!	Nobody
can	ever	represent	man.
So	maybe	a	few	people	are	helped	by	psychoanalysis,	very	few	people	--	rarely
have	I	seen	a	person	who	has	been	helped	by	psychoanalysis	--	but	those	are	the
people	who	are	of	the	same	type	as	Sigmund	Freud.
And	 now	much	 research	 has	 happened	 and	 it	 has	 been	 found	 that	 even	 those
people	who	are	helped	are	not	helped	by	psychoanalysis	but	by	something	else.
In	 one	 experiment,	 twenty-five	 persons	 were	 given	 psychoanalysis	 for	 six
months,	 and	 twenty-five	 persons	were	 just	 kept	waiting	 and	were	 told,	 "Soon
your	psychoanalysis	will	 start."	They	were	all	 suffering	 from	the	same	kind	of
illness,	and	the	result	was	very	surprising.
The	twenty-five	who	were	given	psychoanalysis	were	helped	a	little	bit,	but	the
twenty-five	who	were	 kept	waiting	were	 helped	 far	more.	 Just	waiting	 helped
them	 far	 more.	 In	 fact,	 this	 secret	 has	 been	 known	 in	 the	 East,	 it	 has	 been
practised	for	centuries.	If	you	take	a	mental	case	into	a	Zen	monastery,	they	put
him	 in	 isolation	 for	 three	 weeks;	 nobody	 talks	 to	 him	 --	 just	 the	 opposite	 of
psychoanalysis	 --	 nobody	 talks	 to	 him,	 nobody	 listens	 to	 him.	 They	 just	 keep
him	isolated;	somebody	goes,	absolutely	silently,	and	puts	the	food	there,	comes
back.	 He	 has	 to	 live	 with	 himself	 for	 three	 weeks...	 and	 miracles	 have	 been
happening	down	the	ages.
Just	putting	him	there	for	three	weeks	in	isolation,	slowly	slowly	he	cools	down
--	 no	 psychoanalysis,	 no	 therapy,	 just	 isolation.	 In	 fact,	 he	 was	 suffering	 too
much	from	people
--	the	stress	of	being	in	a	crowd	continuously.
Psychoanalysis	may	not	be	the	real	cause	of	help,	but	the	length	of	time	--	two
years,	three	years,	four	years,	the	psychoanalysis	continues.	It	continues	as	long
as	 you	 can	 afford	 it;	 it	 depends	 on	 you.	 If	 you	 have	 enough	 money,	 it	 can
continue	your	whole	life.
In	 fact,	 psychoanalysis	 never	 comes	 to	 a	 termination.	 It	 cannot	 come,	 because
the	mind	is	very	inventive.	It	goes	on	inventing	more	and	more	rubbish.	It	starts
enjoying,	slowly	slowly,	because	the	more	rubbish	it	brings	up,	the	more	happy
the	psychotherapist	feels.
Seeing	him	happy,	it	obliges	more.
Whatsoever	the	expectations	of	the	psychotherapist	are,	the	patient	fulfills	them.
Patients	 are	 really	 patient	 people,	 very	 obliging,	 courteous.	 Good	 people	 they
are!	That's	why	they	are	suffering;	they	are	not	hard	people	--	not	hardware	but
software.	 Because	 they	 are	 soft	 they	 are	 suffering.	 The	 hard	 guys	 are	 not
suffering;	 the	 hard	 guys	 make	 others	 suffer.	 The	 soft	 guys	 become	 victims.
Three,	four	years	Lying	down	on	the	couch,	talking	nonsense,	waiting,	waiting,
waiting	--	it	helps	one	to	unwind,	one	becomes	a	little	more	relaxed.
And	somebody	is	listening	to	you	very	attentively,	at	least	pretending	that	he	is
listening	very	attentively.
My	own	observation	 is	 that	 the	attention	of	 the	psychotherapist	 is	of	 immense
value.	 This	 is	 a	 world	 where	 nobody	 gives	 you	 any	 attention.	 If	 the	 husband
wants	 to	 talk	 to	 the	wife	 she	 says,	 "There	 is	 so	much	work	 to	 be	 done	 in	 the
kitchen	 --	 and	 the	 dishes	 have	 to	 be	washed	 and	 I	 have	 no	 time."	 If	 the	wife
wants	to	talk	to	the	husband,	he	is	tired	from	the	whole	day	at	the	office	and	the
work	and	the	traffic,	and	he	wants	to	watch	the	TV.
A	survey	says	that	the	average	husband/wife	communication	in	America	is	only
thirty-three	minutes	per	day	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	average.	And	 in	 that	 thirty-three
minutes	 you	 can	 count	 fighting,	 nagging,	 pillow-throwing,	 and	 every	 kind	 of
thing.	Thirty-three	minutes	only	between	husband	and	wife	--	out	of	twenty-four
hours?
A	 great	 need	 has	 arisen	 that	 somebody	 should	 listen	 to	 you.	 Hence	 the
psychotherapist	helps	--	he	is	a	professional	listener.	That	is	the	only	quality	that
he	 has,	 the	 only	 qualification	 really.	 You	 can	 start	 the	 business	 --	 no	 other
qualification	 is	 needed	 --	 if	 you	 know	 only	 one	 thing:	 how	 to	 be	 attentively
sitting	 there	 by	 the	 side	 and	 listening.	 Just	 listening	 attentively	will	 help.	 The
person	starts	feeling,	"I	have	some	worth.
Somebody..."	And	 the	more	he	has	paid,	 the	more	 it	 helps	because	 the	person
who	 is	 listening	 is	 no	 ordinary	 psychotherapist,	 not	 run-of-the-mill."...
Somebody	special,	very	famous,	world-known	--	and	listening	so	attentively	to
me?"	The	very	idea	gives	worth,
"Then	I	must	be	saying	something	immensely	beautiful."
Gibberish	 he	may	be	 bringing	 up.	That's	what	 in	 psycho-babble	 is	 called	 'free
association'
--	 anything	 that	 comes	 to	 your	 mind,	 bring	 it	 up.	 If	 such	 gibberish	 is	 being
listened	 to	 so	 attentively,	 a	 great	 need	 is	 fulfilled	 --	 he	 feels	 worthy,	 he	 feels
important,	he	feels	somebody.
Remember,	this	society	has	messed	you	up	so	much	that	man	as	such	is	almost
on	 the	verge	of	going	 insane.	All	 love	has	disappeared,	all	communication	has
disappeared,	 all	 friendship	 has	 disappeared,	 all	 aesthetic	 sensitivity	 has
disappeared.	People	have	become	like	zombies.	They	talk	to	each	other	yet	they
don't	talk,	they	don't	meet.
This	society	is	an	ill	society,	and	when	I	say	'this	society'	I	mean	all	the	societies
that	exist	in	the	world,	more	or	less,	in	this	way	or	that,	they	are	ill	--	because	in
the	past,	 for	centuries,	we	have	been	creating	a	model	of	man	which	is	wrong.
We	are	 giving	people	 ideals	 and	 saying	 "Unless	 you	 fulfill	THESE	 ideals	 you
will	 never	 be	worthy."	And	 those	 ideals	 are	 impossible.	We	 are	 giving	 people
ideas	of	being	perfect.	and	once	the	idea	of	being	perfect	enters	in	one's	being,	it
turns	one	into	a	neurotic.
Accept	your	limitations,	accept	your	imperfections.	That's	what	it	means	to	be	a
human	being!	And	 accept	 yourself	 as	 you	 are	 --	with	 joy,	 not	 in	 helplessness.
Because	GOD
accepts	you	--	this	is	my	basic	teaching	--	God	accepts	you,	accept	yourself;	love
yourself.	Let	there	be	a	great	upsurge	of	self-love.	And	out	of	that	love	you	will
start	 becoming	 creative;	 a	 person	 who	 loves	 himself	 is	 bound	 to	 become
creative.	I	am	not	saying	he	will	become	famous;	I	am	not	saying	that	he	will	be
a	Picasso	or	an	Ezra	Pound	or	a	Pablo	Neruda,	no	--	he	may	be,	he	may	not	be.
But	 that	 is	 irrelevant!	The	real	 thing	is	 to	enjoy	creativity.	Whatsoever	you	do,
do	it	with	joy,	bring	your	total	intelligence	to	it,	be	meditative	in	it.
Garima,	you	say:	AND	YOU	SAY	THAT	GOD	IS	WITHIN	ME.	I	REALIZE	I
AM
LOOKING	INSIDE	FOR	SOME	CONCEPT	I	GOT	FROM	THE	OUTSIDE.
THAT	KIND	OF	GOD	YOU	WILL	NEVER	 FIND	WITHIN	YOU.	You	will
have	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 concepts	 that	 have	 been	 given	 to	 you	 from	 the	 outside,
because	God	is	not	a	person.	No	picture	of	God	exists,	no	statue	is	possible.	God
is	 an	 experience!	 If	 you	 have	 the	 idea	 of	 a	God	which	 your	 parents	 and	 your
society	have	given	to	you,	you	will	go	inside	with	that	idea	and	that	idea	will	be
the	hindrance	--	it	will	not	allow	you	to	see	that	which	is.	And	God	IS	that	which
is.	It	needs	no	concepts	to	see;	concepts	blind	you.	Drop	all	concepts.
If	you	really	want	to	go	in,	go	as	an	agnostic.	This	word	is	beautiful.	You	must
have	heard	 the	word	 'gnostic';	 'gnostic'	means	one	who	knows	--	gnosis	means
knowledge.
'Agnostic'	means	one	who	knows	not;	'agnostic'	means	one	who	knows	only	one
thing,	that	he	knows	not.	Be	an	agnostic	--	that	is	the	beginning	of	real	religion.
Don't	believe,	don't	disbelieve.	Don't	be	a	Hindu,	and	don't	be	a	Jaina	and	don't
be	 a	Christian,	 otherwise	 you	will	 go	 on	 groping	 in	 darkness	 for	 ever	 and	 for
ever.	Unless	you	drop	all	ideologies,	all	philosophies,	all	religions,	all	systems	of
thought,	and	go	 inside	empty,	with	nothing	 in	your	hand,	with	no	 idea....	How
can	you	have	an	idea	of	God?
You	have	not	known	him.	Just	go...	with	a	great	desire	to	know,	but	with	no	idea
of	 knowledge	with	 intensity	 to	 know,	with	 a	 passionate	 love	 to	 know	what	 is
there,	but	don't	carry	any	ideas	given	to	you	by	others.	Drop	them	outside.	That
is	the	greatest	barrier	for	the	seeker	on	the	path	of	truth.
God	is	there	but	you	cannot	see	because	your	eyes	are	blinded	by	the	concepts
given	to	you.	God	is	not	a	Jew,	so	if	you	have	a	Jewish	idea	of	God	you	will	not
find	him.	I	have	heard	a	beautiful	story	about	a	Sufi	mystic,	Farid:
One	night	he	dreams	that	by	the	grace	of	Allah,	he	has	reached	Paradise.	And	the
whole	 of	 Paradise	 is	 decorated,	 millions	 of	 lights.and	 flowers	 everywhere	 --
some	 celebration	 is	 going	on	 --	 and	great	music.	He	 enquires,	 "What	 is	 going
on?"
And	they	say,	"This	is	God's	birthday	--	we	are	celebrating	it.	You	have	come	at
the	right	time."
So	 he	 stands	 underneath	 a	 tree	 to	 see	 what	 is	 happening,	 because	 a	 great
procession	starts	moving	on	the	road.	A	man	is	sitting	on	a	horse;	he	enquires,
"Who	 is	 this	 man?"	 and	 they	 say,	 "Don't	 you	 know	 him?	 He	 is	 Hajrat
Mohammed."
And	 then	millions	 and	millions	 of	 people	 behind	 him,	 and	 he	 asks,	 "Who	 are
these	 people?"	 and	 he	 is	 replied	 to.	 "They	 are	 Mohammedans,	 followers	 of
Mohammed."
And	then	comes	Jesus,	and	millions	are	following	him.	And	then	comes	Krishna
on	his	golden	chariot,	and	millions	again	are	following	him.	And	so	on	and	so
forth...	the	procession	continues,	continues,	continues.
And	 then	 finally,	 in	 the	 end,	 on	 an	 old	 donkey	 an	 old	 man	 is	 coming.	 And
nobody	is	behind	him;	he	is	just	alone.	Farid	starts	laughing	looking	at	this	man	-
-	 it	 is	 hilarious:	 nobody	 following	 him.	 And	 why	 should	 he	 be	 going	 on	 his
donkey?	He	asks,	"Who	are	you,	sir?	I	have	seen	Mohammed,	Christ,	Krishna,
Mahavira,	Buddha	--	who	are	you?
You	look	like	a	kind	of	joke!	And	nobody	following	you."
And	the	old	man	is	very	sad	and	he	says,	"Yes,	I	am	God.	This	is	my	birthday.
But	 some	 people	 have	 become	Mohammedans,	 some	 have	 become	Christians,
some	have	become	Jews,	some	have	become	Hindus	--	nobody	is	left	to	be	with
me."
Just	out	of	shock,	Farid	woke	up.	He	told	his	disciples	the	next	day,	"Now	I	am
no	more	a	Mohammedan.	The	dream	has	been	a	great	revelation.	Now	I	am	no
more	part	 of	 any	organized	 religion	 --	 I	 am	 simply	myself.	 I	would	 like	 to	be
with	God,	at	least	one	person	following	him."
If	you	have	a	certain	idea	of	God,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	him.	Your	very	idea
will	become	a	barrier.	Drop	all	ideas	that	you	have	gathered	from	without;	only
then	can	you	go	within.
You	 say:	 IT	 IS	LIKE	LOOKING	DOWN	 INTO	A	WELL	 IN	THE	NIGHT.	 I
SEE
REFLECTIONS	AND	I	THINK	IT	IS	THE	BOTTOM,	BUT	IT	IS	ONLY	THE
SURFACE.	EVEN	WHEN	I	KNOW	I	NEED	ONLY	LET	AND	WAIT	RATHER
THAN	LOOK	FOR	ANYTHING...
TRUE,	 GARIMA,	 STICK	 WITH	 THAT	 INSIGHT.	 If	 you	 are	 looking	 for
something	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 see,	 because	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 looking	 for
something	means	that	you	have	an	idea	of	what	you	are	looking	for.	To	look	for
something	is	a	kind	of	blindness.
Seeing	happens	only	when	you	are	not	 looking	 for	 anything	 in	particular;	 you
are	just	there,	open,	available.	So	whatsoever	is	is	revealed.	Don't	look	for	God	if
you	want	 to	 see	him.	 Just	wait	 --	 let	and	wait.	God	 is	a	happening!	 If	you	are
silent,	 open,	 loving	 towards	your	 own	being,	 conscious,	 it	 is	 going	 to	 happen.
Any	moment,	when	you	are	in	the	right	tuning	with	existence,	it	will	happen.
God	 is	 there:	you	are	 there:	 just	 right	 tuning.	And	 that's	what	 I	am	teaching	 to
you:	 right	 tuning.	 Dropping	 all	 ideologies	 helps	 you	 to	 be	 rightly	 tuned.	 And
once	you	are	in	tune	with	existence,	that	is	bliss.	You	have	come	home....
Second	question:
Question	2
OSHO,	IS	IT	TIME	THAT	I	SHOULD	BECOME	A	SANNYASIN?
IT	 IS	 ALREADY	 LATE!	 Naresh,	 you	 have	 already	 waited	 too	 long.	 I	 have
known	you	for	years,	you	have	known	me	for	years.	For	what	are	you	waiting?
The	meeting	should	happen	now.	Still	you	are	asking:
IS	IT	TIME	THAT	I	SHOULD	BECOME	A	SANNYASIN?
Are	 you	dead?	 If	 you	 have	 any	 life	 in	 you,	 then	 this	 is	 the	 time.	NOW	 is	 the
time!
Remember	Kabir	--	just	the	other	day	Kabir	was	saying:	Now,	wake	up	--	wake
up	in	the	now,	wake	up	here!	Don't	postpone.
Branigan	was	driving	down	the	road.	By	the	way	the	car	weaved	in	and	out	of
traffic,	you	could	tell	that	Branigan	was	pickled	to	the	gills.
"Where	 do	 you	 think	 you	 are	 going?"	 asked	 the	 motorcycle	 cop	 who	 finally
stopped	him.
"I	am	coming	home	--	hic	--	from	a	New	Year's	Eve	party!"
"Are	you	kidding?"	asked	the	cop.	"New	Year's	was	three	weeks	ago!"
"I	know,"	said	Branigan.	"That's	why	I	figured	I	better	be	getting	home	now."
Is	 it	 not	 time,	Naresh,	 to	 be	 getting	 home	 now?	You	 have	waited	 already	 too
long,	too	many	lives.	Sannyas	is	nothing	but	a	passionate	jump	into	the	enquiry
for	the	truth,	a	passionate	search	from	where	we	come	and	to	where	we	are	going
and	who	we	are.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
But	you	seem	to	be	almost	in	a	kind	of	sleep,	and	that's	how	everybody	else	is.
The	worldly	dreams	still	seem	to	be	 important	 to	you,	hence	 the	question.	The
world	 still	 seems	 to	 intoxicate	 you;	money,	 power,	 prestige,	 are	 still	 haunting
you.	And	you	 cannot	 be	 a	 sannyasin	unless	 you	 are	utterly	 frustrated	with	 the
world.	 And	 remember,	 I	 am	 not	 teaching	 escapism	 from	 the	 world:	 I	 teach
transcendence,	not	escape.	Be	in	the	world,	but	don't	be	of	it.
A	 sannyasin	 is	 a	 person	 who	 lives	 in	 the	 world	 but	 lives	 meditatively,	 and
meditation	creates	a	distance.	Then	you	can	go	on	doing	all	kinds	of	things	but
you	don't	become	intoxicated,	you	don't	become	identified	with	them.	To	live	in
awareness,	without	any	intoxication	with	money,	power,	prestige,	is	the	way	of
the	sannyasin.
Hallihan	and	Flannigan	were	having	a	few	at	a	new	tavern	in	town.	After	an	hour
of	heavy	imbibing,	Hallihan	asked	the	bartender	for	the	washroom.
"Go	to	 the	door,	 left	of	 the	elevator,"	said	 the	barkeeper,	"then	walk	down	two
steps	and	there	you	are."
Hallihan	forgot	to	turn	left.	He	opened	the	elevator	door,	took	ONE	step	and	fell
down	the	shaft.
Ten	minutes	later,	Flannigan	followed	Hallihan	and	saw	him	lying	at	the	bottom
of	the	shaft.
"Look	out	for	the	SECOND	step,"	shouted	up	Hallihan.	"It's	a	son	of	a	bitch!"
And	 you	 have	 taken	 many	 second	 steps,	 many	 many	 times.	 You	 have	 fallen
many	many	times.	Are	you	not	yet	frustrated,	Naresh?	Are	you	not	yet	finished
with	the	world?	Are	you	still	carrying	some	hope	deep	down	in	your	heart?	Are
you	 still	 expecting	 that	 the	world	 is	 going	 to	deliver	 something	 to	you?	 It	 has
never	happened	--	 to	no	one	has	 it	happened.	And	 it	 is	not	going	 to	happen	 to
you.
The	 world	 only	 promises,	 it	 never	 delivers	 the	 goods.	 That's	 its	 illusoriness;
that's	why	in	the	East	we	call	it	maya.	'Maya'	does	not	mean	that	it	is	not	there	--
it	is	very	much	there,	but	it	only	promises.	It	never	gives	anything.
I	have	heard	a	story:
A	man	worshipped	for	many	many	years	--	he	must	have	tortured	God	as	much
as	possible.	Morning,	afternoon,	evening,	he	was	praying	and	praying	and	crying
and	weeping.	And,	finally,	God	has	to	appear,	and	he	said,	"What	do	you	want?
Be	finished!
Just	take	it	and	forgive	me	and	forget	all	about	me.
And	 the	 man	 said,	 "I	 want	 something,	 a	 power,	 so	 that	 whatsoever	 I	 need	 is
immediately	fulfilled."
So	God	gave	him	a	box,	a	golden	box	--	exactly	like	the	magic	box	that	I	give	to
you	--
and	told	him,	"Whenever	you	are	in	need	you	can	ask.	Whatsoever	you	ask,	the
box	will	immediately	give	it	to	you."
The	man	forgot	all	about	God,	he	even	forgot	to	thank	him.	God	waited	a	little...
but	 the	man	was	no	more	 interested	 in	him.	He	was	 looking	at	 the	box	and	he
started	asking,
"Give	me	ten	thousand	rupees!"	Suddenly	ten	thousand	rupees	appeared,	and	he
was	very	happy.
And	it	continued:	whatsoever	he	wanted	used	to	come	out	of	the	box.	Then	one
day,	one	SADHU	--	one	wandering	monk	--	stayed	with	the	man.	The	sadhu,	the
wandering	monk,	 also	 had	 a	 box	 --	 bigger	 than	 the	man's	 --	 exactly	 the	 same
shape.	The	man	became	interested.	He	said,	"What	is	this?"
The	sadhu	said,	"This	is	a	magic	box.	You	ask	anything.	it	gives	you	double."
"Double!"	 The	 man	 asked,	 "If	 I	 ask	 ten	 thousand	 rupees,	 He	 said,	 "It	 gives
twenty	thousand."
He	fell	at	the	feet	of	the	monk	and	said,	"You	are	a	monk,	you	have	renounced
the	world
--	can't	you	exchange?	I	have	a	small	box:	it	gives	only	whatsoever	you	ask."
So	 they	 changed	 the	 boxes.	 It	 was	 late	 at	 night,	 so	 the	 man	 thought,	 "In	 the
morning	I	will	try	out	this	new	box."	And	in	the	morning	he	tried;	he	asked	for
ten	thousand	rupees...
and	the	box	said,	"Why	not	twenty	thousand?"	And	the	man	said,	"Okay,	twenty
thousand."	 And	 the	 box	 said,	 "Why	 not	 forty	 thousand?"	 And	 the	 man	 said,
"Okay,	forty	thousand."	And	the	box	said,	"Why	not	eighty	thousand?"
Then	he	became	afraid,	because	nothing	was	coming	out!	He	rushed	to	see	the
monk,	but	he	had	left;	he	had	disappeared	in	the	night.
In	the	East,	we	have	called	the	world	'maya',	illusory	--	it	is	like	that	box	of	the
monk.
You	ask	anything	and	it	says,	"Okay,	you	can	have	double."	But	it	never	delivers
any	 goods;	 it	 only	 promises.	 The	 world	 is	 almost	 like	 the	 politicians	 --	 they
promise	but	they	never	fulfill
Naresh,	are	you	not	yet	finished?	Have	you	not	seen	it	happening	many	times?
Each	 time	 you	 are	 living	 an	 illusion,	 hoping,	 dreaming,	 sooner	 or	 later
disillusion	comes	 in,	 frustration	comes	 in.	But	 rather	 than	 seeing	 the	 reality	of
this	world,	you	 immediately	 jump	on	another	 illusion	 --	you	 immediately	 start
dreaming	again.
Sannyas	 is	 seeing	 the	 reality	 of	 the	world,	 that	 it	 never	 fulfills,	 that	 it	 cannot
fulfill,	 that	 it	 is	 beyond	 its	 capacity	 to	 fulfill...	 one	 turns	 in.	 One	 has	 been	 a
beggar	 begging	 from	 this	 door	 and	 that	 door;	 when	 one	 turns	 in,	 begging
disappears	--	one	becomes	an	emperor.
Then	all	is	yours.
And	you	need	not	even	ask	for	 it	 --	 it	 is	simply	yours.	This	whole	existence	is
yours,	 its	 whole	 beauty,	 its	 whole	 splendour,	 its	 starry	 nights,	 its	 sunsets	 and
sunrises,	its	flowers	and	birds	--	all	is	yours.	Not	in	the	sense	that	you	possess	it,
but	in	the	sense	that	you	can	enjoy	it.
A	 sannyasin	 learns	 how	 to	 enjoy,	 and	 the	 worldly	 mall	 learns	 only	 how	 to
possess.
Remember	these	two	things;	they	are	basic.	The	worldly	man	only	thinks	of	how
to	 possess	more	 --	 he	 never	 enjoys	 because	 he	 is	 concerned	with	 pos-sessing
more	and	more	and	more.	The	sannyasin	enjoys,	whatsoever	he	has	he	enjoys	--
and	he	enjoys	the	whole	existence	--	which	need	not	be	possessed.
Do	you	think	first	you	have	to	possess	 the	starry	night,	 then	you	will	enjoy	it?
Do	you	 think	 first	 you	have	 to	 possess	 all	 the	 birds,	 then	you	will	 enjoy	 their
songs?	 This	 existence	 need	 not	 be	 possessed!	 And	 you	 can	 still	 enjoy.	 It	 is
YOURS	if	you	want	to	enjoy	--	it	is	not	yours	if	you	want	to	possess.	To	possess
it	is	aggressive;	it	is	aggression	on	God.	To	enjoy	it	is	prayerful.
The	last	question:
Question	3
OSHO,	WILL	YOU	RECOGNIZE	ME	AT	THE	FINAL	JUDGEMENT	DAY?
Suresh,
IT	ALL	DEPENDS	ON	YOU:	 remember	 to	 be	 in	 orange	 and	with	 the	mala,
because	it	is	going	to	be	difficult	to	recognize	you.	Just	think	of	all	the	men	and
all	 the	women	 that	 have	 existed...	 they	will	 all	 be	 there.	 There	 is	 going	 to	 be
much	difficulty	in	recognizing	people,	so	just	you	remember	that	thing.
A	 timid,	 conservative,	 unmarried	 shopkeeper	 suddenly	 came	 into	 a	 small
fortune.
Overnight,	 this	mild-mannered,	mincing	 little	man	had	all	 the	money	he	could
possibly	use.
Bravely	 he	 snapped	 his	 fingers,	 clicked	 his	 heels,	 and	 decided	 to	 become	 a
swinger.	He	bought	expensive,	mod	clothes,	had	his	hair	styled,	rented	a	lavish
beach	villa	in	Florida,	and	got	a	dark,	virile	tan.
Driving	home	from	the	Rolls	Royce	dealer	in	his	new	car,	wearing	his	flashiest
sports	 clothes	 and	 swingiest	 sunglasses,	 he	 was	 suddenly	 struck	 dead	 by	 a
lightning	bolt.	Right	there	in	the	Florida	sun	--	a	fatal	lightning	bolt.
Up	at	 the	Pearly	Gates,	 the	 shopkeeper	angrily	 faced	Saint	Peter.	 "Why	would
you	 pick	 on	me	 like	 that?	 I	 have	 been	 a	 good	man	 all	my	 life.	 The	Lord	 has
always	watched	over	me."
"He	 was	 trying	 to	 watch	 over	 you,"	 explained	 Saint	 Peter.	 "He	 just	 didn't
recognize	you."
So,	Suresh,	please	remember	it,	don't	forget:	be	in	orange	and	with	the	mala	so
that	I	can	recognize	you.
But	why	are	you	worried	about	the	Last	Judgement	Day?	I	teach	you	about	the
immediate	 and	 you	 ask	 about	 the	 Last	 Judgement	 Day!	 I	 teach	 you	 the
immediate	is	the	ultimate	and	you	ask	about	the	Last	Judgement	Day.	In	reality
there	can	be	no	day	which	can	be	the	last.	The	world	never	begins,	never	ends	--
it	is	a	continuum.
Secondly,	the	very	word	'judgement'	is	ugly.	God	is	not	a	judge,	God	is	a	lover	--
and	the	lover	cannot	be	a	judge.	Jesus	said	to	his	disciples:	Judge	ye	not!	Why?
Because	 the	moment	you	 judge	you	start	destroying	 the	other.	Who	are	you	 to
judge?	 The	 moment	 you	 judge	 you	 start	 comparing,	 and	 who	 are	 you	 to
compare?
Each	 individual	 is	unique,	and	each	 individual	brings	variety	 to	existence.	The
world	will	not	be	better	 if	 there	are	only	saints	and	saints	and	saints.	It	will	be
one	of	the	most	boring	worlds	if	there	are	only	saints	and	saints	and	saints.	The
sinners	also	contribute	 something:	 they	make	 it	a	 little	 salty,	 they	bring	a	 little
taste	to	life.
God	is	not	a	Judge,	god	is	a	lover,	and	how	can	love	judge?	Be	assured	that	in
the	eyes	of	God	 there	 is	no	sinner,	no	saint	 --	 in	 the	eyes	of	God	all	are	alike.
And	when	his	sun	rises,	it	rises	for	the	sinners	too,	as	much	as	for	the	saints.	And
when	his	roses	bloom,	they	give	fragrance	to	the	saints	as	much	as	to	the	sinners.
No	 distinction	 is	 ever	 made.	 Just	 simple	 observation	 will	 show	 to	 you	 that
existence	 makes	 no	 distinctions.	 All	 right	 and	 wrong,	 all	 good	 and	 bad,	 are
human	creations,	are	man-made	concepts	and	ideas.
And	 each	 society	 has	 created	 its	 own	 ideas	 of	 good	 and	 bad,	 and	 they	 go	 on
changing.
They	are	utilitarian,	 remember.	One	 thing	can	be	a	sin	 in	one	society	and	may
not	 be	 a	 sin	 in	 another	 society.	 The	 same	 thing	 can	 be	 a	 great	 virtue	 in	 One
society,	and	may	be	thought	just	the	opposite	in	another	society.
If	a	person	beats	his	own	body	so	that	blood	oozes	out,	what	will	you	call	him?
Will	 you	 call	 him	 a	 saint	 or	 a	 sinner?	 It	 depends...	 because	 there	 has	 been	 a
Christian	sect	that	believes	in	beating	your	body	so	that	blood	comes	out,	and	the
more	blood	you	can	bring	out	of	your	body,	the	greater	a	saint	you	are.
In	Russia,	before	Communism,	there	was	a	sect,	a	great	sect	of	Christians,	who
used	to	cut	their	genital	organs.	Women	used	to	cut	their	breasts	--	and	they	were
thought	to	be	great	saints.	What	do	you	think	about	them?	You	will	think	them
pathological,	mentally	ill,	deranged.
There	are	ideas	and	ideas,	but	all	ideas	are	human.	Don't	be	worried.	There	are
people	who	are	worried	about	small	 things	--	 they	have	been	MADE	to	worry.
Somebody	smokes	and	he	is	afraid	that	he	is	going	to	be	thrown	into	hell.	If	you
have	 smoked	 tao	much,	 one	 thing	 is	 certain,	 that	 you	will	 not	 be	 sent	 to	 hell
because	there	is	too	much	smoke	there,	and	you	have	already	done	it	to	yourself.
Smoking	may	be	bad	for	your	health	but	is	not	a	sin;	you	cannot	be	thrown	into
hell	for	smoking.	But	there	are	people	who	think	even	drinking	tea...	in	Mahatma
Gandhi's	ashram	drinking	 tea	was	a	sin.	 If	you	were	caught	drinking	 tea,	 there
was	a	great	fuss	about	it.	Mahatma	Gandhi	might	have	gone	for	a	three-day	fast
to	purify	his	soul	and	his	disciples'	souls	because	people	are	drinking	tea.
And	Buddhist	monks	down	the	ages	have	been	drinking	tea.	Tea	is	part	of	their
meditation	 --	 and	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 something	 in	 it,	 because	 tea	 has	 some
chemicals	which	can	keep	you	awake	more	easily.	It	can	be	a	help	in	meditation.
If	you	are	trying	to	be	alert,	tea	can	be	a	help.
In	fact,	 tea	was	discovered	by	Buddhist	monks;	 it	 is	 their	discovery,	because	it
was	discovered	in	a	monastery	in	China	called	Ta,	that's	why	it	is	called	tea.	That
'ta'	can	be	pronounced	also	as	'cha';	that's	why	in	Marathi	it	is	called	'cha'	and	in
Hindi	it	is	called
'chai'.	But	it	is	from	the	monastery	of	Ta.
And	the	man	who	is	reputed	to	have	grown	the	first	tea	plants	was	nobody	else
but	 Bodhidharma,	 the	 great	 Bodhidharma.	 The	 story	 is	 beautiful:	 He	 was
meditating,	and	such	a	meditator	happens	only	once	in	a	while.	For	nine	years	he
sat	 facing	 the	wall	 --	 just	 the	wall	 and	 for	 nine	 years	 looking	 at	 the	wall	 and
doing	nothing	else.	And	sometimes	he	used	to	fall	asleep	--	naturally,	if	you	look
at	the	wall	that	long,	what	else	is	there	to	do?	And	he	did	not	want	to	go	to	sleep.
So	he	 tore	out	his	eyelids	and	his	eyelashes	and	 threw	 them	so	 that	now	 there
was	no	way	 to	close	his	eyes.	And	 the	story	 is	 that	out	of	 those	eyelids,	 those
pieces	of	skin,	and	the	eye-lashes,	the	first	teaplant	grew.
This	is	a	beautiful	story:	it	simply	says	one	thing,	that	tea	can	keep	you	awake.	It
will	not	allow	you	and	your	eyes	to	close.
Buddhists	drink	tea	with	religious	ritual.	In	Japan,	they	have	tea	ceremonies.	Tea
is	 not	 an	 ordinary	 thing	 for	 them,	 because	 it	 keeps	 you	 awake,	 it	 gives	 you
energy	to	remain	more	alert.	They	have	made	a	very	prayerful,	graceful	ritual	out
of	it:	the	tea	ceremony.
In	each	Zen	monastery	there	is	a	separate	tea	temple,	the	most	beautiful	place	--
maybe	 surrounded	 by	 a	 lake,	 rocks,	 sand,	 trees.	 And	 when	 you	 go	 into	 the
temple,	you	have	to	go	in	a	certain	manner,	in	a	certain	posture	you	have	to	sit
there,	and	it	takes	hours.
The	tea	will	be	prepared,	the	samovar	will	start	humming,	and	all	will	be	sitting
in	 silence	 listening	 to	 the	humming	of	 the	 samovar.	And	slowly	 the	 flavour	of
the	tea	will	reach	your	nostrils,	and	you	have	to	drink	that	too.	And	then	the	tea
is	 served	 --	 with	 great	 grace,	 with	 great	 beauty,	 art.	 And	 the	 tea	 is	 served	 in
beautiful	cups,	hand-made	with	great	 love	and	care.	And	then	everybody	starts
sipping	the	tea.	And	it	is	done	very	prayerfully	and	everybody	remains	silent,	no
gossiping,	no	chattering	 --	 as	 if	 there	 is	nobody.	Then	 they	bow	down	 to	each
other	with	great	respect,	and	disperse	without	saying	a	word.
In	one	country,	tea	is	so	religious,	so	spiritual,	and	in	Mahatma	Gandhi's	ashram
it	was	a	sin.	It	depends.	These	are	all	human	ideas.	You	should	not	be	worried
about	these	things.
My	message	is	simple:	live	alert,	and	live	spontaneously,	and	live	totally	--	and
forget	 all	 about	 the	 Last	 Judgement	 Day.	 I	 recognize	 you	 today,	 and	 that's
enough.	Today	is	enough	unto	itself.
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	In	Search	of	the	Miraculous
19	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904190
ShortTitle:
FISH09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
99
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	I	AM	A	SCIENTIST	WORKING	ON	THE	QUESTION	OF	HOW	LIFE
ORIGINATED	 FROM	 NON-LIVING	 MATTER.	 IT	 SEEMS	 TO	 ME	 THAT
THIS
STUDY	OF	HOW	NON-LIFE	IS	TRANSFORMED	INTO	LIVING	MATTER
IS
VITAL	 TO	 UNDERSTANDING	 THE	 RELATIONSHIP	 OF	 SCIENCE	 TO
RELIGION.
THE	 REASON	 IS	 THAT	 THE	 STUDY	 IS	 A	 CLUE	 TO	 HOW	 OUR
EMOTIONS	AND
SPIRITUALITY	 DEVELOPED	 IN	 THE	 FIRST	 PLACE.	 WHAT	 DO	 YOU
THINK?
Adolph	Smith,
RELIGION	AND	SCIENCE	ARE	DIAMETRICALLY	OPPOSITE,	and	because
they	 are	 diametrically	 opposite	 they	 are	 complementaries.	 Religion	 cannot
support	science,	science	cannot	support	religion.	They	are	bound	to	oppose	each
other	--	in	their	very	opposition	is	their	complementariness.	Hence,	anything	that
science	is	going	to	discover	is	of	no	value	to	religion.	In	fact,	EACH	scientific
discovery	makes	the	existence	of	religion	more	and	more	difficult.
Science	 tries	 to	demystify	 existence,	 hence	 the	question	 'how?'	 --	 how	did	 life
arise	out	of	matter?	Religion	is	basically	a	different	approach:	it	does	not	want	to
demystify	existence;	its	whole	approach	is	to	reveal	the	mystery	of	it.	It	is	not	a
search	for	the	answer:	it	is	diving	deep	in	the	question	itself	k	does	not	ask	any
questions;	 it	 takes	 life	 for	 granted.	 The	 question	 is	 not	 how	 life	 arose:	 the
question	 is	 how	 life	 should	 be	 lived,	 the	 question	 is	 how	 life	 should	 be
celebrated.
The	scientific	question	will	be:	What	is	love?	How	docs	love	arise?	What	is	the
causality?	And	 the	 religious	question	will	 be:	How	 to	drown	yourself	 in	 love?
How	to	be	in	love?	How	to	be	love	itself?
Science	 will	 come	 to	 certain	 clues;	 those	 clues	 look	 stupid	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 a
mystic.	 If	 you	 ask	 about	 love,	 science	 will	 answer	 with	 something	 which	 is
nothing	 but	 chemistry:	 hormones,	 chemicals.	 And	 the	 grandeur	 and	 the
splendour	of	 love	are	reduced	--	 reduced	 to	a	very	mundane	world.	What	does
love	 have	 to	 do	 with	 chemistry?	 Love	 certainly	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with
alchemy,	 but	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 chemistry.	 It	 is	 a	 transforming	 force,	 but	 it
cannot	be	reduced	to	hormones.
Life	cannot	be	reduced	to	any	answer.	Once	life	 is	reduced	to	a	certain	answer
life	becomes	meaningless,	it	is	no	more	worth	living.	It	is	like	coming	across	a
lotus	flower.
The	 poet	 will	 enjoy	 the	 beauty	 of	 it;	 he	will	 not	 be	 bothered	where	 it	 comes
from.	He	will	simply	enjoy	the	fragrance,	the	colour,	the	sun	shining	over	it,	the
dewdrops	on	the	lotus	petals.	And	the	mystic	will	dance	around	it,	because	he	is
not	seeing	only	the	lotus	flower	but	he	is	seeing	something	of	the	transcendental
in	it.	Hidden	behind	the	lotus,	its	beauty,	its	splendour,	its	majesty,	its	magic,	are
the	hands	of	God.	The	mystic	not	only	feels	the	roseflower	or	the	lotus	flower,
he	 also	 feels	 the	 mysterious	 presence	 of	 the	 unknown	 force	 called	 God
surrounding	it,	protecting	it,	caring	for	it,	caressing	it.
The	poet	simply	sees	the	lotus	flower,	the	mystic	goes	beyond,	he	goes	higher	--
he	 takes	 the	 roseflower	 or	 the	 lotus	 flower	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak.	 And	 the
scientist?	 --	 he	will	 think	 about	where	 it	 comes	 from.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	mud.
The	 scientist	 will	 start	 moving	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 the	 mud;	 he	 will	 start
enquiring	about	the	mud	and	the	elements	that	are	in	the	mud.
Just	 look	at	 these	 three	approaches:	 the	scientist	goes	 lower	 than	 the	 lotus,	 the
mystic	goes	higher	than	the	lotus,	the	poet	remains	with	the	lotus.	In	the	ultimate
analysis	the	scientist	will	think	that	the	lotus	is	nothing	but	mud	--	a	form	of	mud
--	and	the	mystic	will	think	the	lotus	is	nothing	but	a	manifestation	of	God.	And
for	 the	 poet,	 a	 lotus	 is	 simply	 a	 lotus.	 Now,	 how	 can	 these	 three	 approaches
meet?
The	mystic	cannot	agree	with	the	scientist	--	in	fact,	the	mystic	will	think	that	the
scientist	 is	 destroying	 something	 tremendously	 important.	 By	 all	 his	 logical
answers,	 objective	 answers,	 he	 is	 destroying	 the	 subjectivity	 of	 the	 lotus.	 The
mystic	may	 agree	 a	 little	 bit	with	 the	 poet,	 but	 only	 a	 little	 bit,	 not	 the	whole
way.	He	will	nod	to	the	poet:	he	will	say,	"You	are	on	the	right	track,	you	have
taken	the	first	step.	but	don't	get	stuck	there	--	go	on.	The	lotus	 is	not	enough:
you	have	to	find	the	face	of	God	in	the	lotus.	And	if	you	cannot	find	the	face	of
God	in	the	lotus,	where	else	are	you	going	to	find	it?"
Adolph	Smith,	your	question	 is	 important	 --	but	don't	 remain	 in	 this	confusion
that	if	you	can	find	some	clue	as	to	now	matter	becomes	life	you	will	be	bringing
some	 understanding	 between	 religion	 and	 science...	 you	 will	 be	 talking	 about
mud!	And	 the	poet	will	not	be	convinced	by	you,	because	he	knows	 the	 lotus.
And	what	to	say	about	the	mystic?	He	will	simply	feel	pity	for	you.
Everything	can	either	be	reduced	to	its	beginnings	--	that's	what	science	goes	on
doing	--
or	it	can	be	raised	to	the	ultimate	peak;	that's	what	the	work	of	religion	is.	And
poetry	is	just	the	bridge	between	the	two.	The	poetic	approach	is	in	a	way	closer
to	both	science	and	religion.	If	you	really	want	to	understand	religion,	you	have
taken	a	wrong	route.
Religion	does	not	think	that	life	needs	any	answers.	Life	needs	to	be	lived	in	its
totality,	life	needs	to	be	celebrated.	Life	needs	to	be	penetrated	--	that	is	the	only
way	to	know	it.
Not	in	the	lab,	not	going	deep	into	life	cells,	not	by	analysing	the	elements;	those
are	constituents	of	life,	but	life	is	more	than	the	sum	total	of	its	parts.
Somebody	 is	 playing	 on	 a	 guitar,	 beautiful	 music.	 The	 scientist	 will	 become
interested	 in	 the	 guitar,	 not	 in	 the	 music.	 He	 will	 think,	 "From	 where	 is	 it
coming?"	He	may	become	 interested	 in	 the	 fingers	 of	 the	musician	 and	 in	 the
instrument.	He	will	 analyse	 the	 instrument	 and	 he	will	 find	 some	wood	 some
strings,	this	and	that	--	but	that	is	NOT
music!	And	if	he	analyses	the	fingers	of	the	musician	he	will	find	some	blood,
some	bones,	skin	--	and	that	is	not	music!	Music	is	something	more.	The	hands
of	 the	 musician	 and	 the	 guitar	 are	 simply	 an	 opportunity	 for	 the	 beyond	 to
descend	to	the	earth.
The	poet	will	listen	to	the	music;	he	will	not	be	worried	about	the	musician	and
the	musical	 instrument.	He	will	 be	 drunk	with	 the	music.	But	 the	mystic	will
dance	with	abandon,	because	in	music	he	will	hear	the	ultimate	music.	The	poet
will	 forget	 about	 the	 musician	 and	 the	 instrument,	 and	 the	 mystic	 will	 even
forget	 about	 the	music,	 because	 it	 reminds	 him	of	 something	 deep	 in	 his	 own
being.	It	reminds	him	of	what	Kabir	calls	the	music	of	SOHAM	--	I	am	that.	He
will	forget	all	 that	is	happening	outside;	it	has	triggered	a	process	in	his	being.
He	is	transported	into	another	world.
ADOLPH	SMITH,	if	you	really	have	any	interest	in	religion	then	you	will	have
to	 meditate	 --	 analysis	 won't	 help,	 scientific	 investigation	 won't	 help.	 And
remember,	I	am	not	against	scientific	investigation	--	if	you	are	interested	in	it,
DO	it!	But	know	perfectly	well:	it	is	not	going	to	bridge	science	and	religion	--
they	 cannot	 be	 bridged.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 bridge	 them	 either.	 They	 have
different	functions	to	fulfill;	there	is	no	need	to	create	a	synthesis	between	them	-
-	because	the	synthesis	will	impoverish	both,	it	will	not	enrich.
Existence	remains	alive	through	the	tension	of	the	polar	opposites:	the	negative
and	the	positive,	man	and	woman,	birth	and	death,	darkness	and	light,	love	and
hate	 --	 religion	 and	 science.	 These	 are	 the	 polar	 opposites.	 Life	 needs	 them.
Without	them	life	will	become	a	stagnant	pool,	it	will	not	be	a	dialectical	process
any	more.	Life	 is	dialectics;	 it	moves	through	the	thesis	and	the	antithesis,	and
again	the	synthesis	becomes	a	thesis	and	creates	antithesis.	That's	how	life	goes
on	progressing.
Religion	 and	 science	 don't	 need	 to	 be	 synthesized	 --	 they	 need	 to	 be	 purified.
Science	 should	 be	 pure	 science,	 utterly	 scientific;	 and	 religion	 should	 be	 pure
religion,	utterly	mystic.
I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 be	 reminded	 of	 a	 great	 statement	 of	 a	 Christian	 mystic,
Tertullian.
Somebody	 asked	 him,	 "Why	 do	 you	 believe	 in	 God?"	 And	 he	 said,	 CREDO
QUIA	ABSURDUM	--	I	believe	in	God	because	he	is	absurd."
Now,	what	 kind	 of	 answer	 is	 this?	But	 this	 is	 the	 answer	 of	 a	mystic,	 not	 the
answer	 of	 a	 scientist.	 The	 scientist	 will	 try	 to	 prove,	 will	 answer	 WHY	 he
believes;	 he	 will	 argue.	 But	 Tertullian	 simply	 says,	 "Because	 God	 is	 absurd,
hence	 I	 believe.	 I	 believe	 in	 the	 mysterious,	 in	 the	 miraculous,	 in	 the
unanswerable,	in	the	unknowable."
If	you	have	any	interest	in	religion...	and	you	can	be	both!	I	am	not	saying	that	a
man	who	 is	 a	 scientist	 cannot	 be	 religious	 --	 a	man	who	 is	 a	 scientist	 can	 be
religious	--	but	then	he	will	have	to	create	a	dialectics	in	his	own	being.	He	will
have	 to	be	very	 conscious.	When	he	 is	working	 in	 the	 lab	he	has	 to	 forget	 all
about	religion;	religion	should	not	interfere	in	his	scientific	work.	And	when	he
leaves	 the	 lab	 and	 sits	 in	 his	 meditation	 chamber	 he	 should	 forget	 all	 about
analysis,	experimentation,	observation	--
there	he	should	be	a	lover,	in	prayer,	in	meditation.
A	scientist	can	be	both.	And	my	approach	is	this,	that	I	would	like	many	many
people	to	be	both	scientists	and	religious.	And	if	some	person	can	be	all	 three,
that	 is	my	vision	of	a	 real,	 true	sannyasin:	a	scientist,	a	poet,	a	mystic.	 In	him
humanity	will	have	blossomed	to	its	ultimate	possibilities.	The	potential	in	him
will	have	been	transformed	into	actuality.
He	will	have	bloomed	in	all	possible	ways.	He	will	be	a	multi-dimensional	man.
And	to	be	a	scientist	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	be	a	physicist	or	a	chemist
or	this	and	that	--	to	be	a	scientist	means	having	a	scientific	approach.	There	are
problems	which	can	be	tackled	only	by	science.	When	somebody	comes	with	an
illness	to	me,	I	tell	him	to	go	to	Navanit,	to	Darshan,	to	Amrit,	to	Hamid	--	go	to
the	doctors!	Your	illness	needs	a	scientific	approach.
In	India	it	happens	that	ill	people	go	to	the	saints	for	their	blessings,	and	the	East
has	remained	ill,	poor,	because	of	this	nonsense.	If	you	are	poor,	don't	go	to	the
saints;	go	to	the	technologists,	go	to	the	scientists,	go	to	the	economists,	enquire
"Why	are	we	poor?"
But	you	go	to	the	saints	and	enquire	"Why	are	we	poor?"	You	are	foolish	and	so
are	your	saints.	And	they	answer	you,	why	you	are	poor;	they	tell	you,	they	have
to,	because	when	you	question	them	they	cannot	show	their	ignorance.	They	tell
you	because	 in	your	past	 lives	you	have	been	 committing	 so	many	 sins,	 that's
why	 you	 are	 suffering.	 You	 ask	 a	 foolish	 question	 and	 you	will	 get	 a	 foolish
answer.
Go	 to	 the	 scientist	when	 it	 is	 a	 question	 about	 the	material	world.	And	 if	 you
have	 fallen	 in	 love,	 then	don't	go	 to	a	scientist	 --	avoid	him!	Even	 if	he	meets
you	on	the	way,	escape,	because	he	will	destroy	your	whole	love.	He	will	say,	"It
is	 all	 nonsense.	 It	 is	 just	 the	 attraction	 between	 female	 and	male	 hormones	 --
don't	be	befooled.	Those	hormones	are	deceiving	you."	Don't	go	to	the	scientist;
if	you	want	 to	kiss	your	woman,	don't	go	to	 the	scientist.	He	will	say,	"This	 is
dangerous.	 All	 kinds	 of	 infections	 are	 possible.	 And	 millions	 of	 germs	 are
transferred	 in	a	 single	kiss."	He	will	make	you	so	afraid	 that	even	 if	you	kiss,
you	will	not	be	totally	there	in	it.	And	you	will	start	carrying	Dettol	and	things
like	 that	 with	 you	 --	 so	 kiss	 and	 then	 immediately	 wash,	 or	 before	 you	 kiss,
wash.
Don't	go	to	the	scientist	when	you	are	in	love	--	go	to	the	poet.	He	knows	about
love.
And	when	you	want	to	know	the	ultimate	mystery,	the	poet	cannot	be	of	much
help	 either;	 he	 remains	 on	 the	 surface.	When	 you	 want	 to	 know	 the	 ultimate
mystery,	go	to	a	mystic,	become	a	disciple	to	a	Master,	because	those	secrets	can
only	be	imbibed	in	deep	trust,	surrender,	love.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO	 TODAY	 YOU	 SAID	 TO	 BE	 CONSTANT	 IS	 TO	 BE	 STUPID.	 THE
TRUTH
CANNOT	CHANGE	IT	REMAINS	FOR	EVER	CONSTANT.	NOW	WHAT?
I	HAVE	NOT	SAID	that	to	be	constant	is	to	be	stupid	--	I	had	certainly	said	to	be
consistent	is	 the	way	of	the	mediocre	mind,	the	stupid	mind.	But	don't	you	see
the	difference	between	being	constant	and	being	consistent?
Consistency	is	a	 logical	phenomenon.	When	I	say:	Don't	be	consistent,	 I	mean
you	need	not	remain	confined	to	your	past	--	that's	what	consistency	is.	You	have
done	 something	 today;	 tomorrow	 life	will	 change,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 repeat	 the
same	thing	to	be	consistent.
Tomorrow	will	not	be	today;	today	is	not	your	yesterday.	The	answers	that	were
adequate	 yesterday	 are	 no	 more	 adequate	 today.	 Consistency	 means	 that	 it	 is
always	yesterday	that	has	to	dominate,	it	is	always	the	past	that	has	to	dominate
the	 present.	 That's	 what	 I	 mean	 by	 'consistency'.	 Then	 you	 will	 never	 grow,
because	your	youth	has	to	be	consistent	with	your	childhood,	and	your	old	age
has	to	be	consistent	with	your	youth	--	that	means	you	will	remain	childish	your
whole	life.
And	 that's	 how	 people	 are.	 The	 average	 mental	 age	 of	 human	 beings	 is	 only
twelve	years.
This	 is	what	 happens	 if	 you	 enforce	 consistency.	 In	 childhood,	 a	 few	 answers
were	 given	 to	 you;	 they	 were	 good	 for	 the	 time	 being,	 but	 only	 for	 the	 time
being.	More	 than	 that	you	would	not	have	understood.	But	as	you	grow,	 those
answers	 become	 out	 of	 date,	 those	 answers	 become	 confinements,
imprisonments,	 those	 answers	 become	 chains.	 You	 have	 to	 constantly	 throw
them	so	that	you	can	remain	fresh,	so	that	you	can	respond	to	the	reality	as	it	is.
But	 this	 is	how,	Zareen,	 it	goes	on	happening:	I	say	one	 thing,	you	understand
something	else.	I	say	one	thing,	you	hear	something	totally	different.	Your	minds
are	so	full	of	your	own	thoughts	that	I	say,	"Don't	be	consistent,"	and	you	hear,
"Don't	be	constant."
Pasquel	was	 being	 examined	 for	 naturalization	 as	 a	U.S.	 citizen.	 "Who	 is	 the
President	of	the	United	States?"	The	foreigner	answered	correctly.	"And	the	Vice
President?"	Again	he	gave	the	right	answer.	"Could	you	be	President?"
"No,	no!"
"Why	not?"
"I	am-a	too	busy.	I	work-a	in	the	barbershop	all-a	day	now."
Now,	his	own	occupation...	he	says,	 "No,	no!	 I	am-a	 too	busy.	 I	work-a	 in	 the
barbershop	all-a	day	now."
Zareen,	 you	 have	 heard	 something	 which	 I	 have	 not	 said.	 Your	 question	 has
come	out	of	your	own	idea.	You	know,	at	Least	you	believe	you	know,	that	the
truth	cannot	change.
Who	told	you?	And	how	do	you	know?	Do	you	know	truth?	You	have	heard	it
being	told	to	you	that	truth	never	changes;	it	remains	for	ever	constant.	Is	it	your
experience?	Have	you	known	anything	 in	 life	which	 remains	always	constant?
Anything,	I	say,	have	you	known	in	life	which	remains	constant?
Everything	 is	changing	 if	you	 look	at	 life.	 If	you	watch	 life,	 then	Heraclitus	 is
right:	 you	 cannot	 step	 in	 the	 same	 river	 twice,	 because	 the	 river	 is	 constantly
flowing,	changing.	Old	Heraclitus	says:	The	ONLY	thing	that	never	changes	is
change.	Only	change	is	constant,	otherwise	everything	is	changing.
In	fact,	 life	 is	not	a	noun	but	a	verb.	If	one	day	we	want	to	be	really	scientific
about	our	language,	we	will	have	to	drop	all	nouns.	A	really	scientific	language
will	 consist	 only	 of	 verbs.	 You	 see	 these	 trees	 all	 around	 and	 you	 think,
"Beautiful	 trees!"	 But	 to	 call	 a	 tree	 'a	 tree'	 is	 not	 true,	 because	 a	 tree	 is	 not
something	static	--	it	is	a	movement.	By	the	time	you	utter	the	word	'tree'	it	has
changed.	It	is	no	more	the	same	tree	about	which	you	were	talking	One	dead	leaf
has	 fallen,	 a	 new	 leaf	 is	 just	 growing,	 a	 bud	 is	 opening.	 The	 tree	 is	 growing
higher	--	each	moment!	Otherwise	how	is	it	going	to	grow?
To	be	exactly	true	about	it,	it	is	better	to	call	it	 'treeing'	rather	than	'a	tree'.	But
we	even	call	a	river	'a	river'	--	a	river	is	a	rivering.	It	is	a	CONSTANT	change!
Life	 is	not	 really	 life	but	only	 living	--	 there	 is	no	 life	as	such	but	only	 living.
Our	languages	give	us	a	very	wrong	notion	of	 the	world.	There	 is	nothing	like
love,	but	loving.
Always	 remember...	 we	 have	 to	 use	 nouns	 because	 otherwise	 it	 will	 be	 very
difficult	to	explain	things	to	each	other.	For	centuries	we	have	used	nouns.	But
whenever	you	use	the	word	'love',	remember	it	is	'loving'	--	it	is	a	process.	It	is
not	a	thing,	constant.
If	you	have	loved,	Zareen,	you	will	know:	morning	it	has	one	colour,	afternoon	it
has	 another	 colour,	 by	 the	 evening	 it	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon.
Sometimes	 the	 river	 is	 very	 deep	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 very	 shallow.	 And
sometimes	 it	 makes	 much	 noise,	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 very	 silent.	 So	 is	 love.
Sometimes	 it	 is	 sad,	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 a	 rejoicing.	 It	 changes	 its	 moods
constantly.	So	the	only	constant	thing	is	change.	But	you	say:
THE	TRUTH	cannot	change...
WHO	 HAS	 ORDAINED	 IT,	 THAT	 TRUTH	 CANNOT	 CHANGE?	What	 do
you	mean	by	it?	Have	you	known	anything	in	life	that	never	changes?	The	child
becomes	the	young	man,	the	young	man	becomes	the	old	man,	and	the	old	man
is	gone	one	day	--	dust	unto	dust.	You	go	on	seeing	that	everything	is	constant
change,	but	there	seems	to	be	a	fear	deep	down	in	the	human	heart:	 the	fear	is
death.	If	change	is	there,	then	death	is	bound	to	happen.	Change	brings	death	in.
So	we	want	to	believe	in	something	permanent,	absolutely	permanent.	It	may	be
truth,	it	may	be	God,	it	may	be	soul,	but	something	is	needed	for	the	fearful	heart
to	 cling	 to	 so	 that	 death	 can	 be	 defied.	 At	 least	 one	 can	 believe,	 "There	 is
something	 permanent	 in	 which	 I	 can	 have	 a	 shelter,	 which	 can	 become	 my
security."
Do	you	know	truth?	Do	you	know	God?	Do	you	know	the	soul?	No,	you	know
only	death	 --	which	happens	every	moment,	 all	 around.	But	we	go	on	defying
death;	we	don't	want	to	look	at	it,	because	it	reminds	us	that	we	are	going	to	die.
We	would	like	something	that	remains	for	ever	and	for	ever.	And	we	would	like
to	be	part	of	it	so	that	we	can	also	remain	for	ever	and	for	ever.
But	 what	 is	 permanent	 in	 you?	 Your	 body	 changes	 --	 you	 can	 ask	 medical
science:	your	body	changes	constantly.	Just	ten	years	ago	they	used	to	think	that
the	body	changes	totally	in	seven	years'	time,	becomes	completely	new,	not	even
a	 single	 cell	 remains	 of	 the	 old;	 but	 now	 further	 research	 has	 shown	 that	 the
body	changes	totally	in	one	year.
The	body	is	continuously	renewing	itself.
That's	why	when	you	cut	your	hair	and	your	nails	it	does	not	hurt	--	why?	The
hair	is	part	of	your	body	and	the	nails	too,	and	you	are	cutting	them	and	it	doesn't
hurt?	The	 reason	 is	 that	 your	hair	 is	 not	 alive.	These	 are	 the	dead	 cells	 of	 the
body	 that	 are	being	 thrown	out	 of	 the	body.	So	 are	 the	nails	 --	 just	 dead	 cells
being	thrown	out	of	the	body	to	make	place	for	the	new	ones	to	happen.	That's
why	it	doesn't	hurt	if	you	cut	them.
In	a	single	year,	your	body	is	no	more	the	same.
Buddha	used	to	say	again	and	again	that	life	is	like	a	flame.	You	burn	a	candle,
you	light	a	candle	in	the	evening;	the	whole	night	it	burns.	In	the	morning	you
are	 just	 going	 to	 put	 it	 out	 --	 a	 question	 can	 be	 asked	 of	 you:	 "Is	 it	 the	 same
flame	you	started	 in	 the	evening	 that	you	are	putting	out?"	 In	a	 sense	 it	 is	 the
same	flame,	because	it	continued	the	whole	night;	but	in	truth	it	is	not	the	same
flame,	because	the	flame	has	been	constantly	changing,	becoming	smoke,	and	a
new	flame	is	replacing	it.	And	the	replacement	is	so	quick	that	the	old	going	into
smoke	and	the	new	coming	into	existence	is	so	fast	that	there	is	no	gap	between
the	two	--	hence	you	cannot	see	it,	hence	you	cannot	see	that	it	is	not	the	same
flame.	Then	Buddha	had	to	invent	a	new	idea.
The	scientists	now	call	it	'continuum',	'continuity'	--	it	is	neither	the	same	nor	not
the	same,	 it	 is	a	continuity,	a	continuum.	Buddha	calls	 it	SANTATI	 --	 the	 first
flame	 gives	 birth	 to	 another	 and	 that	 gives	 birth	 to	 another,	 and	 so	 on	 and	 so
forth,	 one	 flame	 goes	 on	 giving	 birth	 to	 another.	 The	 whole	 night	 the	 birth
process	 continued.	So	 it	 comes	 into	 the	 same	 line,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 the	 same.	You
cannot	 say	 that	 it	 is	 different,	 you	 cannot	 say	 it	 is	 the	 same.	 In	 a	 sense	 it	 is
different,	in	a	sense	it	is	the	same.
Have	 you	 known,	 Zareen,	 anything	 in	 life	 which	 is	 really	 permanent?	 --
anything?	Your	body	changes,	your	mind	changes	continuously,	your	emotions
go	on	changing.	About	WHAT	truth	are	you	talking?
Yes,	there	is	one	truth	which	never	changes,	but	that	has	to	be	experienced.	Don't
take	 it	 as	 a	 belief.	 And	 that	 truth	 is	 not	 something	 outside	 you;	 that	 truth	 is
hidden	 in	you	 --	 that	 truth	 is	your	 capacity	 to	witness.	Only	 the	witness	never
changes,	everything	else	goes	on	changing.	There	is	a	consciousness	inside	you
that	goes	on	watching	and	watching	all	the	changes	--	the	childhood	comes	and
goes,	 the	 youth	 comes	 and	 goes,	 the	 old	 age	 comes	 and	 goes,	 and	 there	 is	 a
witness	inside	who	is	simply	watching.
All	meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 an	 effort	 to	 know	 this	witness.	There	 is	 no	God
outside	 you	 who	 is	 permanent,	 never	 changing;	 there	 is	 no	 truth	 outside	 you
which	is	for	ever.	Yes,	there	is	a	certain	reality	inside	you,	at	the	deepest	core	of
your	being...	but	to	find	it,	Zareen,	you	will	have	to	go	deep	in	meditation.	When
all	 thoughts	 disappear,	 and	 all	 desires	 are	 gone,	 and	when	 there	 is	 nothing	 to
witness,	 then	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 witness.	 Then	 witnessing	 turns	 upon
itself.	 Having	 nothing	 else	 to	 see,	 it	 starts	 seeing	 itself	 If	 something	 remains
there	as	an	object,	it	remains	focussed	on	the	object.
Meditation	is	a	process	of	taking	all	objects	away	from	you;	all	contents	of	the
mind	 are	 to	 be	 taken	 away.	 Slowly	 slowly,	 one	 day...	 the	 interval,	 the	 gap.
Sudden	emptiness.
When	there	is	nothing	to	see,	no	content	to	focus	on,	then	the	miracle	happens.
The	witnessing	energy,	finding	nothing	else	to	obstruct	it,	turns	in	a	circle	back
upon	itself.
This	is	what	Jesus	calls	'metanoia',	which	has	been	wrongly	translated	as	'repent'.
It	 should	 be	 translated	 as	 'return',	 not	 'repent';	 it	 should	 be	 translated	 as
'revolution',	a	one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn	--	and	then	suddenly	you	see
yourself.	And	this	witness	has	no	name.	It	is	neither	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan;	it
is	neither	man	nor	woman:	it	is	just	pure	consciousness.
Yes,	this	pure	consciousness	is	absolutely	the	same.	Except	this,	everything	else
changes.
And	when	 I	was	 talking	 to	 you	 about	 consistency	 I	was	 not	 talking	 about	 the
witness,	I	was	talking	about	your	ideologies,	about	your	knowledge,	about	your
experiences.	They	have	all	to	be	dropped	every	day:	die	every	day	to	the	past	so
you	 can	 remain	 fresh,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 respond	 to	 the	 reality	 as	 it	 is	 in	 the
moment,	not	according	to	the	past.
And	listening	to	me,	be	alert,	be	very	alert	about	each	single	word;	otherwise,	I
will	say	one	thing	and	you	will	understand	something	else.	And	you	will	go	on
thinking	that	I	have	said	it.
These	 cats	 are	having	 themselves	 a	 little	 jam	 session.	They	are	 really	wailing.
Pretty	soon	they	hear	a	knock	on	the	door;	one	of	them	opens	up	and	the	owner
of	the	building	is	standing	there.	"I	am	sorry	to	burst	in	on	you	like	this,"	said	the
landlord,	"but	do	you	know	there	is	a	sick	old	lady	moaning	upstairs?
"No,"	said	the	cat,	"but	if	you	give	us	the	first	few	bars	we	can	pick	up	on	it."
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	IMPORTANT?
Sambodh,
IT	DEPENDS	ON	YOU.	If	you	ask	me,	to	me	it	is	all	the	same.	You	can	say	that
everything	 is	 important,	 or	 you	 can	 say	 nothing	 is	 important.	 Both	 mean	 the
same.
Everything	is	ordinary,	or	everything	is	extraordinary.	Whatsoever	you	want	 to
choose,	whichever	word	appeals	 to	you	 --	 everything	 is	 important,	 everything,
not	 excluding	 anything	 at	 all;	 or	 nothing	 is	 important.	 Both	 mean	 the	 same,
because	the	moment	everything	is	important,	or	everything	is	not	important,	the
very	 word	 'important'	 loses	 meaning.	 The	 meaning	 remains	 only	 if	 there	 are
some	things	which	are	important	and	some	things	which	are	not	important,	a	few
things	ordinary	and	a	few	things	extraordinary.	Then	the	word	carries	meaning.
But	if	everything	is	exactly	either	important	or	unimportant,	then	the	word	loses
meaning.
My	own	suggestion	is	you	can	choose	either,	because	the	ultimate	result	will	be
the	same.
If	you	have	a	negative	mind,	 then	 the	Buddhist	 answer	will	be	perfectly	 right.
Buddha	 says:	 "Nothing	 is	 important."	 Then	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	make	 any	 fuss
about.	When	hungry,	 eat;	when	 thirsty,	 drink;	when	 sleepy,	 sleep	 --	 nothing	 is
important.	And	this	will	give	you	a	kind	of	relaxedness,	a	calmness	--	nothing	is
important,	so	whether	you	succeed	or	fail	it	is	all	the	same,	whether	you	become
famous	or	notorious,	it	is	all	the	same,	whether	anybody	knows	you	or	nobody
knows	you	doesn't	matter.	It	will	give	you	a	very	relaxed,	still,	tranquil	state	of
being	--	and	that	is	the	purpose!
Or	 you	 can	 choose	 Shankara's	 answer.	 He	 says:	 "Everything	 is	 important,
because	all	is	God,	even	the	dust	is	divine."	That	too	is	perfectly	right;	you	can
choose	 that.	 Then,	 too,	 when	 hungry,	 eat,	 because	 it	 is	 important;	 and	 when
thirsty,	 drink,	 because	 it	 is	 important;	 and	when	 sleepy,	 sleep,	 because	God	 is
feeling	sleepy	--	the	God	within	you.
These	are	the	two	answers,	the	basic	answers:	positive	and	negative.	Just	watch
your	own	mind...	whichever	appeals	to	you.	There	are	people	who	are	basically
attracted	towards	the	positive,	or	towards	the	negative.	Feel	your	own	attraction,
what	attracts	you	more.
And	whichever	attracts	you	more,	 that	can	become	your	path:	NO	can	become
your	path,	res	can	become	your	path.
Kabir's	path	is	that	of	YES.	Buddha's	path	is	that	of	NO.	But,	really,	YES	and	no
are	not	significant.	What	is	significant	is	totality.	If	you	say	yes	with	your	total
being	 it	 is	 totality	 that	 liberates.	 If	 you	 say	 no	 with	 totality,	 it	 is	 totality	 that
liberates.	But	it	all	depends	on	you.
There	 are	 not	 some	 things	 labelled	 as	 important	 and	 other	 things	 labelled	 as
unimportant.
A	 roseflower	 may	 be	 important	 to	 a	 poet	 and	 may	 be	 utterly	 unimportant	 to
somebody	who	 is	 only	 interested	 in	money.	 For	 him,	 a	 note,	 a	 hundred-rupee
note,	is	more	important.	He	will	ask,	"What	is	the	use	of	the	roseflower?"	In	fact,
he	will	be	very	much	worried	why	people	go	on	singing	songs	of	rose	flowers	--
"Why	don't	they	sing	songs	of	hundred-rupee	notes?"
When	I	was	at	university	I	had	a	colleague	who	was	really	a	money-maniac;	his
whole	 interest	 was	money.	 Even	 somebody	 else's	 hundred-rupee	 note,	 and	 he
would	take	it	in	his	hand	and	he	would	touch	it	with	such	love	that	you	may	not
have	 even	 touched	 your	 woman	 with	 that	 love	 --	 with	 such	 care,	 with	 such
tender	hands,	as	if	the	note	was	alive.
And	his	eyes	would	shine,	candles	would	burn	in	his	eyes	when	he	saw	a	note	--
even	 if	 it	was	 somebody	else's	note.	A	note	 is	 a	note!	And	his	whole	 thinking
was	money:	how	to	have	more	money?
And	then	there	is	the	one	about	the	shipwrecked	Englishman:	as	he	gets	out	of
the	 water	 onto	 the	 beach	 of	 a	 remote	 island,	 he	 is	 greeted	 by	 another	 man
standing	 in	 the	shade	of	a	palm	 tree.	 "Pleased	 to	meet	you,"	 says	he,	and	 then
enquires,	"Eton?"
"Yes,"	responds	the	new	arrival.
"Oxford?"
"Yes."
"Guards?"
"Yes."
"Homosexual?"
"No."
"Pity!"
It	depends	on	you	what	is	important.	How	can	I	say	what	is	important?	To	me,
nothing	is	and	everything	is.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO	WHAT	TO	DO	WITH	THE	FEELING	OF	HELPLESSNESS	AT	THE
FRUSTRATION	 IN	 FINDING	 THAT	 NOTHING	 IS	 ULTIMATELY
SATISFYING	--
ALL	IS	NOT	ENOUGH?
Deva	Alla,
IF	THIS	IS	YOUR	OWN	EXPERIENCE,	then	the	question	won't	arise	--	 then
how	can	you	ask	 the	question?	The	question	arises	out	of	some	lingering	hope
somewhere	in	the	unconscious:	"Maybe	there	is	a	way	to	make	it	still.	Maybe	I
have	not	tried	enough,	maybe	I	have	not	put	my	energy	totally	in	it.	Hence	it	is
not	satisfying.	But	if	you	yourself	have	felt	that	nothing	is	ultimately	satisfying,
if	this	is	your	experience,	how	can	the	question	arise?	It	is	so.
In	that	very	experiencing,	in	that	very	understanding,	you	will	be	relaxed.	Why
ask	 that	 anything	 should	 be	 ultimately	 satisfying?	 Why	 not	 be	 satisfied	 with
whatsoever	life	gives	you?	--	even	if	it	is	only	for	the	moment.	Why	be	greedy?
Alla,	 you	 seem	 to	 be	 very	 greedy.	You	 seem	 to	 be	 of	 that	 old,	 rotten	 type	 of
spiritual	person	--	greedy.	He	wants	everything	for	ever,	 for	ever.	 If	he	 falls	 in
love	with	a	woman,	he	wants	her	to	remain	of	the	same	age	for	ever,	for	ever.	He
himself	will	be	growing	old	--	that	is	another	thing.
But	the	woman	has	to	remain	young.
It	is	these	greedy	people	who	have	created	the	ideas	of	paradise,	FIRDAUS.	In
their	paradise,	women	never	grow	old.	All	women	 in	paradise	are	 stuck	at	 the
age	of	sixteen.
Must	be	getting	tired...	for	millions	and	millions	of	years	stuck	at	sixteen.	But	it
says	 nothing	 about	 the	men	 --	 it	may	 be	 because	 the	 scriptures	 are	written	 by
men.	 If	women	were	writing	 scriptures	 then	 they	would	write	 something	 else:
men	will	be	stuck	somewhere	at	eighteen.
And	 the	 same	 people	 who	 go	 on	 condemning	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 here	 go	 on
promising	the	same	things	a	thousandfold,	for	eternity,	in	paradise.	What	kind	of
logic	 is	 this?	 Alcohol	 is	 prohibited	 here	 by	 the	 Mohammedans,	 but	 in	 their
firdaus,	 in	their	paradise,	rivers	of	alcohol	flow	--	rivers!	You	need	not	go	to	a
pub;	you	need	not	only	drink,	you	can	swim,	you	can	dive.
This	is	strange!	--	but	not	really.	The	greedy	mind	is	there.	The	greedy	mind	is
ready	to	sacrifice	the	momentary	joy	of	being	in	a	pub,	of	drinking	a	little	bit,	for
the	ultimate	joy	of	drinking	and	drinking	forever.
These	same	religious	people	who	go	on	condemning	the	feminine	body	--	all	the
religions	have	committed	that	crime	--	that	shows	simply	only	one	thing,	that	the
people	who	were	writing	those	scriptures	were	deeply	sexually	repressed	people.
It	 shows	 nothing	 else.	 It	 says	 nothing	 about	 the	 women,	 it	 simply	 shows
something	about	the	scripture	writers,	that	they	were	deeply	repressed	people	--
they	were	afraid	of	women.
But	 here	 they	 are	 afraid,	 and	 here	 they	 go	 on	 telling	 everybody:	 "Beware!
Woman	 is	 the	 door	 to	 hell!"	And	 the	 same	 people	 provide	 you	with	 beautiful
women	 in	 heaven	 --	 the	most	 beautiful.	 Do	 you	 know?	 --	 in	 paradise	women
don't	 perspire,	 they	 don't	 need	 deodorants.	 Their	 bodies	 have	 a	 perfume	 of
flowers	 --	 a	 natural	 perfume,	 not	 created	 by	 some	 artificially	 manufactured
perfume.	 Just	 naturally	 like	 flowers	 --	 roses.	 Their	 bodies	 are	 made	 of	 gold.
What	greed!	And	what	are	you	going	to	do	with	a	woman	whose	body	is	made
of	gold?	You	will	be	stuck!	But	the	greed,	the	greedy	mind	fantasizing.
All	these	scriptures	are	pornographic.	This	is	real	spiritual	pornography:	women
with	 bodies	 of	 gold,	 studded	with	 diamonds,	 no	 perspiration,	 natural	 perfume,
and	always	young,	and	all	beautiful.
One	great	saint	died,	and	by	coincidence	his	great	disciple	also	died	after	a	few
hours.
The	great	disciple	was	very	much	excited	about	seeing	his	master	again.	And	he
was	thinking	on	the	way	--	it	 is	a	long	journey	from	the	earth	to	paradise	--	he
was	thinking,
"My	 master	 must	 have	 been	 received	 by	 angels	 playing	 on	 their	 harps	 and
beautiful	 women	 dancing,	 and	 he	 must	 have	 been	 given	 the	 most	 beautiful
women	because	he	was	such	a	great	saint,	such	an	ascetic.	When	he	was	on	the
earth	 he	 had	 never	 touched	 any	woman.	What	 to	 say	 about	 touching?	He	 had
never	allowed	any	woman	to	enter	into	his	house.	He	had	never	seen	any	woman
face	to	face;	if	he	had	to	talk	to	a	woman	he	would	always	look	downwards	or
would	 keep	 his	 eyes	 closed.What	 great	 austerities	 he	 went	 through!	 Now	 he
must	be	being	rewarded."
And	he	reached	and	he	saw	his	master	--	and,	really,	he	was	rewarded.	He	was
sitting	under	a	tree,	a	beautiful	tree,	a	golden	tree;	leaves	of	emerald	and	flowers
of	diamonds	--
and	Marilyn	Monroe,	utterly	naked!	hugging	him.	The	disciple	fell	at	the	feet	of
the	master	and	said,	"My	great	master,	I	was	waiting	for	this.	This	was	due!	You
have	been	rewarded	well."
And	the	master	said,	"You	stupid	fool!	Keep	your	big	mouth	shut	--	you	have	not
grown	at	all.	You	don't	understand	anything.	She	 is	not	my	reward	--	 I	am	her
punishment!"
But	these	greedy	people....
Deva	 Alla,	 if	 you	 know	 from	 your	 own	 experience	 that	 all	 is	 frustrating
ultimately,	 everything	only	brings	 joy	 for	 the	moment,	 then	why	not	be	happy
with	the	moment?
Why	ask	that	it	should	be	there	for	ever?
I	 teach	 you	 the	 joy	 of	 the	 moment.	 Live	 in	 the	 moment,	 and	 whatsoever	 the
moment	makes	available,	enjoy	it,	celebrate	it.	While	it	lasts,	dance!	And	when
it	 has	 gone,	 be	 grateful	 that	 it	 had	 come.	 Why	 ask	 that...	 NOTHING	 IS
ULTIMATELY	SATISFYING	--
ALL	IS	NOT	ENOUGH?	Nothing	can	be	done	about	it!	This	is	so.	This	is	how
the	 reality	 is,	 and	 the	 reality	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change	 its	 ultimate	 law	 for	 you.
Nobody	can	be	all	exception.
But	if	this	experience	has	not	yet	become	your	own,	then	you	will	have	to	suffer
a	 little	more.	You	will	 have	 to	 hope	 a	 little	more.	When	understanding	 arises,
hope	disappears.
That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 one	 becomes	 hopeless:	 that	 simply	 means	 that	 one
accepts	 the	 life	as	 it	 is,	and	whatsoever	 it	gives	one	accepts	with	gratitude	and
has	no	complaint.
In	order	to	get	a	job	with	the	railroad,	Angelo	had	to	pass	a	test.	"Suppose	two
trains	 were	 heading	 for	 each	 other	 at	 a	 hundred	 miles	 per	 hour	 on	 the	 same
track,"	asked	the	personnel	manager,	"what	would	you	do?"
"I	take-a	the	red	flag	and	wave-a	them	to	e-stop,"	Angelo	answered.
"But	you	don't	have	a	red	flag,"	pointed	out	the	man.
"Then	I	am-a	take-a	the	switch	iron	and	change-a	the	tracks."	"You	don't	have	a
switch	iron	either."
"Well,	in	that	case,"	decided	the	Italian,	"I'm	gonna	call	up-a	my	wife,	Maria."
"What	has	your	wife	got	to	do	with	two	trains	coming	at	each	other	at	a	hundred
miles	an	hour?"	exclaimed	the	man	in	charge	of	hiring.
"I	 tell-a	her	 to	come	down	 'cos	 she	has-a	gone	see	 the	biggest-a	mess-a	 in	 the
whole	world!"
YOU	can	do	whatsoever	you	can	do,	and	when	nothing	can	be	done	it	is	better	to
call	the	wife	and	see	--	and	enjoy	it!	Learn	to	enjoy	not	only	the	pleasures	of	life
but	the	pains	too,	not	only	the	ecstasies	but	the	agonies	too.	And	the	person	who
can	enjoy	the	agonies	is	liberated.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,	 DURING	 THE	 TWO	 MONTHS	 THAT	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 HERE,	 I
OFTEN	FEEL
THE	 THREAT	 OF	 A	 NEW	 KIND	 OF	 TOTALITARIANISM.	 IT	 IS
CONTINUALLY
PRESENTED	AS	THE	SOLUTION:	BE	TOTAL	IN	THIS	AND	THAT	EVEN
IN	NOT
BEING	 TOTAL.	 BEING	 TOTAL,	 WITHOUT	 FRAGMENTATION	 ANY
MORE,	IS
NOT	THAT	A	FINAL	STATE,	THE	LAST	STAGE	ON	THE	WAY?	SO	IS	NOT
THIS
ADAGE	CREATING	A	NEW	IDEAL	WITH	ALL	ITS	FRUSTRATIONS	AND
NEUROSIS	 TO	 FOLLOW?	 ANYWAY,	 FOR	 ME,	 NOT	 BEING	 A
SUPERMAN,	IT	IS
VERY	 RARE	 THAT	 I	 AM	ABLE	 TO	 DO,	 TO	 EXIST,	 TO	 FEEL	MYSELF
TOTAL	IN
ANYTHING,	AND	I	HAVE	NO	REASON	TO	HOPE	THAT	IT	WILL	EVER
HAPPEN
AS	A	CONTINUOUS	STATE.	SINCE	 IT	SEEMS	TO	BE	THE	CONDITION
FOR	THE
THINGS	THAT	ARE	PROMISED	HERE	IS	THERE	STILL	ANY	HOPE	FOR
ME?
Eduard	Povel,
TOTALITY	IS	NOT	A	GOAL.	Totality	is	not	perfectionism.	Totality	is	simply	a
vision	of	seeing	the	life	in	a	different	light.	For	example,	you	are	angry.	You	can
be	half-heartedly	angry,	then	the	remaining	part	that	has	not	been	expressed	will
remain	in	you	as	a	poison.
And	 if	 again	 and	 again	 this	has	been	done,	 you	go	on	 accumulating	poison	 in
yourself.
Then	a	moment	comes	when	you	may	not	be	angry	in	particular,	but	you	are	still
in	 anger	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 That's	 how	 people	 are	 --	 they	 are	 just	 angry,
illogically	 angry,	 because	 right	 now	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 to	 be	 angry,	 but	 all	 the
anger	that	 they	have	repressed	in	the	past	has	accumulated,	has	gone	deep	into
their	bloodstream,	has	poisoned	them,	has	become	toxic.	It	has	created	a	certain
musculature,	a	wrong	kind	of	musculature	 in	 their	bodies.	And	that	 is	going	to
destroy	many	many	beautiful	things	in	their	lives.
If	such	a	man	is	going	to	see	a	sunset,	he	will	not	see	any	beauty	in	it.	He	is	in
such	a	rage!	If	such	a	man	goes	to	listen	to	music,	he	will	not	be	able	to	listen	to
it,	because	to	be	able	to	listen	to	great	music	you	need	a	relaxed	state.	He	cannot
relax.	He	is	carrying	so	many	tensions,	the	whole	life's	accumulated	tensions....
When	I	say	be	total	I	simply	mean...	I	am	not	giving	you	a	superhuman	ideal.	I
am	 simply	giving	you	 a	 very	human	vision	 that	when	you	 are	 angry,	 then	BE
angry!	Then	don't	repress	it.	If	it	is	too	risky	to	be	angry	with	somebody,	then	go
into	your	room	and	be	angry	alone,	but	express	it.	Beat	the	pillow,	shout	at	the
walls,	make	a	picture	of	your	wife	and	beat	it!	But	do	something	--	do	what	you
really	wanted	to	do	with	the	wife.
It	is	really	a	good	idea	to	have	an	effigy	of	your	wife,	or	if	you	are	a	wife	then	an
effigy	of	your	husband,	so	whenever	the	need	arises	you	can	go	and	be	as	nasty
as	 you	 feel	 like	 being	 --	 and	 with	 no	 danger	 of	 retaliation.	 And	 you	 will	 be
surprised:	 after	 beating	 your	wife,	 in	 her	 absence,	 after	 shouting	 nasty	 things,
using	four-letter	words,	then	when	you	see	your	wife	you	will	be	surprised	--	you
will	feel	compassion	for	her.	You	may	even	feel	ready	to	apologize.	You	may	be
able	to	see	her	in	a	different	way,	because	you	are	no	longer	carrying	that	subtle
layer	of	anger	--	it	has	been	released.	You	may	be	able	to	see	her	face	again	after
years.
When	 I	 say	be	 total	 I	 simply	mean	don't	 repress	 things,	 because	 the	 repressed
things	 are	 bound	 to	 rebound	 on	 you,	 those	 repressed	 things	 are	 going	 to	 take
revenge,	 they	 are	 going	 to	 explode	 with	 vengeance	 one	 day.	 Those	 repressed
feelings	are	creating	all	kinds	of	neurotic,	psychotic	people	in	the	world.	To	be
total	is	not	a	goal!	To	be	total	is	only	a	way	of	life.
And	you	 say:	BEING	TOTAL	WITHOUT	 'FRAGMENTATION	ANY	MORE,
IS	NOT
THAT	A	FINAL	STATE...?
Yes,	it	is	a	final	state	too	--	but	the	first	step	is	the	last	step,	and	the	beginning	is
the	end.
It	is	a	means	and	an	end	too.	You	have	to	begin.	I	know	you	cannot	be	total	right
now.
Slowly	 slowly,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 become	 total,	 because	 the	 society	 has	 not
allowed	you	to	be	total	in	anything;	it	has	allowed	you	only	so	far.	It	has	made
you	 very	 lukewarm;	 it	 has	 taken	 away	 all	 passionate	 energy	 from	your	 being.
Hence,	 you	don't	 really	 love	madly,	 you	don't	 really	go	 into	 anger	madly,	 you
don't	share	totally,	you	cannot	commune
--	everything	is	just	so-so.	And,	hence,	so	much	dust	has	gathered	on	your	face.
Totality	has	to	be	started;	it	is	the	beginning	and	the	end	too.	In	the	beginning	it
is	 going	 to	 be	 difficult	 because	 you	 will	 be	 going	 against	 the	 current	 of	 the
society,	 but	 that's	 what	 sannyas	 is:	 taking	 courage	 to	 be	 oneself	 And	 I	 don't
expect	you	to	become	total	right	now,	But	the	decision	will	help.	If	you	decide	to
be	total,	slowly	slowly	you	will	be	more	and	more	total,	degrees	and	degrees,	by
degrees	one	day	you	will	attain	to	the	hundred-degree	point.
And	the	miracle	is:	when	one	can	go	into	one's	emotions	a	hundred	percent,	all
that	is	wrong	starts	disappearing.	That	is	the	miracle!	And	all	that	is	right	starts
growing.	 A	 really	 total	 person	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 be	 angry.	 In	 the	 beginning
when	you	start	you	will	be	more	and	more	angry,	but	soon	the	point	comes	when
you	 are	 totally	 angry	 and	 you	 have	 seen	 the	 naked	 futility	 of	 anger,	 the	 utter
absurdity	of	anger,	the	insanity	of	anger	--
When	YOU	have	seen	it	--	not	because	Buddha	has	said	so	or	I	have	said	so	--
when	you	have	seen	it,	it	will	drop.	The	seeing	is	enough.	You	need	not	drop	it:
it	drops	of	its	own	accord.
A	total	person	will	be	able	to	love	and	will	be	unable	to	hate.	A	total	person	will
be	able	to	be	compassionate	and	will	be	unable	to	be	angry.	But	that	is	the	end.	I
am	not	telling	you	to	be	a	Buddha	right	now.	But	one	has	to	begin	somewhere;
one	has	to	start	moving	in	the	direction	of	being	a	Buddha.
You	are	right:	it	is	the	final	state,	the	last	stage	on	the	way.	But	the	w	ay	is	also
part	of	the	last	stage.	The	way	and	the	goal	are	not	separate.	The	goal	is	just	the
other	end	of	the	way.	And	the	beginning	is	THIS	end	and	the	goal	is	THAT	end,
and	the	way	joins	both,	is	the	bridge.
Eduard,	 I	am	not	 teaching	you	any	kind	of	perfectionism,	 I	am	not	saying	you
any	ideals.
Totality	is	certainly	not	all	ideal	--	it	sounds	as	if	it	is.	It	is	just	a	different	style	of
life.
Right	now	you	are	living	a	life-style	which	can	be	called	partial	--	only	parts	of
your	being	are	allowed	to	surface,	only	the	tip	of	the	iceberg.	You	are	living	in
fragments,	you	are	living	split.	This	is	a	kind	of	schizophrenic	life.
Misery	is	bound	to	be	the	outcome	of	it	--	misery	and	only	misery.	Bliss	is	the
consequence	 of	 being	 one,	 integrated.	 That's	 exactly	 the	meaning	 of	 the	word
'yoga':	union,	integration,	oneness.
YOU	say:	I	HAVE	NO	REASON	TO	HOPE	THAT	IT	WILL	EVER	HAPPEN
AS	A	CONTINUOUS	STATE.
Who	is	telling	you	to	make	it	a	continuous	state?	Why	do	we	always	think	of	the
future?
Why	do	we	make	things	unnecessarily	difficult?	For	a	certain	reason	--	there	is	a
motive.
First	you	make	something	very	difficult,	then	you	can	say,	"This	is	not	possible.
I	cannot	do	it,"	and	it	is	finished.	There	is	no	need	for	it	to	be	total,	there	is	no
need	for	it	to	be	continuous.
That's	 why	 it	 looks	 contradictory,	 paradoxical,	 but	 I	 say	 to	 you	 that	 when
sometimes	you	are	not	total	then	be	total	in	it	--	then	don't	be	total!	Then	accept
it	--	that	"This	is	the	moment	when	I	am	not	total."	Then	don't	hide	it,	then	don't
fight	it.	If	it	is	not	possible,	it	is	not	possible.	Don't	feel	guilty	for	it;	you	are	not
committing	 a	 sin.	 It	 is	 your	 life:	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 total	 sometimes,	 good;	 if
sometimes	you	enjoy	not	being	total,	for	a	change,	perfectly	good!
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,	THE	RAJKOT	NEWSPAPER,	JAI	HIND,	RECENTLY	QUOTED	THE
PRIME
MINISTER,	 MORARJI	 DESAI,	 AS	 SAYING,	 WHEN	 HE	 WAS	 ASKED
ABOUT
WESTERNERS	 COMING	 TO	 THIS	 ASHRAM,	 THAT	 THEY	 WERE	 THE
RUBBISH
OF	 THE	WEST	 THOSE	 THROWN	OUT	 FROM	THEIR	 SOCIETIES.	 AND
WHEN	HE
WAS	 ASKED	 ABOUT	 THE	 ESTABLISHMENT	 OF	 RAJNEESH
INTERNATIONAL
UNIVERSITY,	 HE	 SAID	 THAT	 ALL	 SUCH	 UNIVERSITIES	 WHEREVER
THEY
EXIST,	SHOULD	BE	CLOSED	DOWN.	HE	SAID	HE	DID	NOT	WANT	ANY
SUCH
UNIVERSITY	TO	COME	INTO	BEING,	AND	THAT	YOU	ONLY	TALKED
OF	SEX
THROUGHOUT	THE	DAY.
HE	ALSO	EXPRESSED	HIS	GREAT	RESENTMENT	OF	SUCH	OBSCENE
INSTITUTIONS,	 AND	 SAID	 HE	 WOULD	 LIKE	 THEM	 CLOSED	 DOWN
ALL	OVER
THE	WORLD	AND	 THAT	 THEY	WERE	 NOT	 AT	 ALL	 NECESSARY.	 DO
YOU
HAVE	ANY	COMMENT?
Krishna	Prem,	IT	IS	JUST	BULLSHIT!
The	last	question
Question	7
OSHO	WHY	DO	YOU	USE	SUCH	DIRECT	LANGUAGE	AGAINST	THE
POLITICIANS?	CAN'T	YOU	BE	A	LITTLE	INDIRECT	AND	DIPLOMATIC?
Girish,
I	DON'T	EXPECT	THE	POLITICIANS	to	understand	even	the	direct	language.
If	 I	 am	 indirect	 there	 is	 no	 hope	 that	 they	will	 ever	 understand.	 They	 do	 not
understand	 even	 my	 absolutely	 direct,	 frank,	 blunt	 language.	 I	 don't	 mince
words.	I	simply	say	it	as	it	is.	That	too	they	cannot	understand.
In	fact,	only	the	third-rate	minds	become	interested	in	politics.	Anyone	who	has
some	kind	of	intelligence	will	do	something	else.	He	may	become	a	scientist,	he
may	become	a	poet,	a	dancer,	a	musician.	He	may	become	a	mystic.	Why	in	the
world	would	he	like	to	become	a	politician?	That	is	only	for	those	who	have	no
other	possibility	of	expressing	themselves,	who	have	no	other	intelligence.
The	 politician	 needs	 no	 other	 qualification,	 no	 talent.	 In	 fact,	 the	 more
unintelligent	he	is,	the	greater	is	the	possibility	of	his	being	successful.
A	tourist	was	visiting	New	Delhi.	Walking	on	a	side	street	late	one	evening,	the
visitor	was	held	up	by	a	bandit.	"Give	me	your	money!"	he	threatened,	"or	I	will
blow	out	your	brains."
"Blow	away..."	said	the	tourist.
In	New	Delhi	you	can	 live	without	brains	but	not	without	money.	I	have	 to	be
direct.	And	I	am	not	a	politician,	so	why	should	I	be	diplomatic?	Truth	is	never
diplomatic	--	it	is	straight.
And	the	politicians	cannot	understand	what	I	am	doing	here,	and	I	don't	expect
them	to	understand.	 It	will	be	great	 if	 they	simply	 ignore	us.	That's	enough.	 If
they	forget	all	about	us.	that	is	more	than	can	be	expected.
A	German	philosopher	pleaded	with	Adolf	Hitler	not	to	mistreat	the	Jews	if	for
no	other	reason,	he	said,	than	just	because	they	are	so	smart.
"What	makes	you	think	the	Jews	are	so	smart?"	asked	the	dictator.
"Come,	and	I	will	show	you.	'
He	 took	 the	 Nazi	 leader	 to	 Gutman's	 Gift	 Shop	 and	 said,	 "Ask	 him	 for	 a
lefthanded	teapot."
The	Fuhrer	did.	Gutman	went	to	the	back	of	the	store,	picked	up	a	teapot,	turned
it	 around,	and	 returned.	 "You	are	 in	 luck,"	 said	Gutman,	handing	 the	 teapot	 to
Hitler,	"I	just	happen	to	have	one	left."
Back	out	on	the	street	the	philosopher	said,	"You	see,	that's	what	I	mean	about
the	Jews	being	so	smart."
"What	is	so	smart	about	that?"	exclaimed	Hitler.	"He	just	happened	to	have	one
left."
You	 can't	 expect	 politicians	 to	 understand	 much.	 They	 are	 bound	 to
misunderstand	 even	 my	 direct	 statements.	 And	 if	 I	 start	 making	 indirect
statements	they	will	create	more	complexities.	Then	there	will	be	more	chances
of	misunderstandinng.
Levi	closed	his	shop	Friday	night	and	headed	for	 temple	services	not	 realizing
his	 fly	was	unzipped.	At	 the	 entrance	he	met	Mrs.	Weiss,	 the	president	 of	 the
Ladies'	Auxiliary.	"I	don't	like	to	say	nothing,"	she	said	shyly,	"but	your	business
is	open."
"You	are	mistaken	lady,	'	said	Levi.
"Believe	me,"	said	Mrs.	Weiss,	blushing,	"your	business	is	open."
"You	are	crazy!"	shouted	Levi	rushing	inside.	"I	close	the	store	every	Friday	to
come	here."
Later	at	home,	Levi	saw	that	his	fly	was	open	and	realized	that	Mrs.	Weiss	had
only	been	trying	to	tell	him	so	in	a	delicate	way.	He	telephoned	her	immediately.
"I	want	to	apologize."	he	said,	also	trying	to	be	tactful,	"but	tell	me	somethin'	--
when	my	business	was	open,	was	my	salesman	in	or	out?"
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Music	That	No	Fingers	Enter	Into
20	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904200
ShortTitle:
FISH10
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
107
mins
HAVE	YOU	HEARD	THE	MUSIC	THAT	NO	FINGERS
ENTER	INTO?
FAR	INSIDE	THE	HOUSE
ENTANGLED	MUSIC	--
WHAT	IS	THE	SENSE	OF	LEAVING	YOUR	HOUSE?
SUPPOSE	YOU	SCRUB	YOUR	ETHICAL	SKIN
UNTIL	IT	SHINES,
BUT	INSIDE	THERE	IS	NO	MUSIC,
THEN	WHAT?
MOHAMMED'S	SON	PORES	OVER	WORDS,
AND	POINTS	OUT	THIS
AND	THAT,
BUT	IF	HIS	CHEST	IS	NOT	SOAKED	DARK	WITH	LOVE,
THEN	WHAT?
THE	YOGI	COMES	ALONG	IN	HIS	FAMOUS	ORANGE.
BUT	IF	INSIDE	HE	IS	COLOURLESS,	THEN	WHAT?
Kabir	says:	EVERY	INSTANT	THAT	THE	SUN	IS	RISEN,
IF	I	STAND	IN	THE	TEMPLE,	OR	ON	A	BALCONY,
IN	THE	HOT	FIELDS,	OR	IN	A	WALLED	GARDEN,
MY	OWN	LORD	IS	MAKING	LOVE	WITH	ME.
WHAT	IS	GOD?	THE	MOMENT	THE	QUESTION	IS	ASKED,	 the	 idea	of	a
person	arises	in	the	mind	--	and	God	is	not	a	person.	Those	who	think	of	God	as
a	person	start,	from	the	very	beginning,	moving	in	a	wrong	direction.	They	will
never	arrive.	They	will	go	round	and	round	in	circles,	they	will	travel	much,	but
they	will	never	reach	anywhere.
If	 the	 first	 step	 is	 wrong	 then	 all	 else	 goes	 wrong.	 The	 first	 step	 has	 to	 be
absolutely	right,	because	the	first	step	is	half	the	journey	already.	In	fact,	as	fact,
as	 you	 are	 concerned,	 the	 first	 step	 is	 the	whole	 of	 the	 journey	 --	 because	 the
other	step	is	to	be	taken	towards	you	by	God.
You	 take	one	step,	he	 takes	 the	other	step...	and	 the	meeting.	And	 the	distance
between	you	and	God	is	only	two	steps.	The	initiative	has	to	be	from	your	side.
God	is	not	a	person,	but	that's	what	you	have	been	told	down	the	ages.	God	is	a
presence.
God	is	not	substance	but	significance.	Once	God	is	understood	as	significance,
your	life	starts	changing.	Then	you	don't	argue	about	God,	whether	he	exists	or
not;	then	you	are	no	more	interested	in	theology.	The	whole	of	theology	becomes
rubbish.	 Then	 you	 start	 moving	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 way,	 in	 an	 altogether
different	dimension.
If	God	 is	 significance,	 then	you	have	 to	 create	 a	 certain	meaning	 in	 your	 life,
because	only	meaning	can	meet	the	meaning.	You	have	to	create	significance	in
your	 life,	 because	 only	 significance	 can	 meet	 the	 significance.	 You	 have	 to
become	more	aware,	more	loving,	more	aesthetic,	more	sensitive.
If	God	were	a	person	it	would	have	been	a	totally	different	approach.	God	is	not
a	person	but	only	a	fragrance.	You	will	need	great	sensitivity	to	comprehend	that
significance,	that	fragrance,	that	music.
In	these	sutras	today,	Kabir	is	talking	about	something	very	fundamental.	Listen
to	his	words	--	don't	only	hear:	listen.	And	don't	only	listen:	meditate	with	him,
go	with	him.	He	is	not	a	philosopher,	he	is	not	propounding	a	system	of	thought
--	 he	 is	 a	 poet.	 He	 is	 singing	 his	 own	 experience.	 He	 is	 not	 concerned	 with
concepts.	He	 is	pouring	his	heart	 into	his	songs,	he	 is	pouring	himself	 into	his
words.
You	 have	 to	 be	 very	 sensitive	 to	 understand	 this	 great	 poetic	 expression	 of
mysticism,	 this	 great	 poetic	 expression	 of	 religion.	 And	 religion	 can	 only	 be
expressed	 through	 poetry,	 through	 music,	 through	 dance.	 Any	 other	 way	 of
expressing	religion	falls	short,	is	inadequate.	The	mysterious	has	to	be	indicated
only	by	something	mysterious.	God	cannot	be	approached	through	the	mind	of
calculation,	mathematics.	It	is	not	possible	to	approach	God	through	prose.	The
door	opens	only	when	you	approach	him	through	poetry.
Poetry	is	more	liquid,	more	vague,	not	so	solid	as	prose.	Prose	says	something
clearly,	 poetry	 only	 hints.	 Prose	 shouts,	 poetry	 only	whispers.	 Prose	 is	 for	 the
mundane	world,	poetry	is	for	the	sacred.
So	whenever	it	happens	that	a	person	becomes	a	Buddha,	his	expression,	without
any	 effort,	 becomes	 that	 of	 poetry.	 He	 may	 not	 compose	 poetry	 literally,	 but
whatsoever	he	says,	whatsoever	he	is,	is	poetry.
Kabir	was	absolutely	illiterate,	never	went	to	any	school,	was	not	able	to	read	or
write;	still,	when	it	happened,	he	exploded	in	great	poetry.When	the	experience
arose	 in	 his	 being,	 when	 the	 doors	 opened	 and	 mysteries	 were	 revealed,	 he
bloomed	 in	 thousands	 of	 flowers.	No	 other	 poet	 can	 be	 compared	with	Kabir.
There	have	been	greater	poets	than	Kabir,	but	they	were	mere	poets	--	talented,
with	great	art,	but	Kabir	has	a	personal	experience	of	the	divine	which	is	missing
in	other	poets.	They	may	be	talking	about	God,	but	it	is	mere	talk.	With	Kabir	it
is	not	just	talking:	it	is	his	heartfelt	experience	--	it	is	existential.
HAVE	YOU	HEARD	THE	MUSIC	THAT	NO	FINGERS
ENTER	INTO?
The	original	is:
SUNTA	NAHIN	DHUN	KI	KHABAR,
ANAKAD	KA	BAJA	BAJTA?
SUNTA	NAHIN	DHUN	KI	KHABAR...
Why	are	you	not	 listening	 to	 the	 inner	music	which	 is	constantly	arising?	You
are	made	 of	 it!	 It	 is	 not	 something	 foreign	 to	 you.	 It	 does	 not	 come	 from	 the
outside.	It	is	the	music	of	your	very	existence,	of	your	being;	it	is	the	music	of
your	inner	harmony,	it	is	the	music	of	your	inner	rhythm.
SUNTA	NAHIN	DHUN	KI	KHABAR...
Why	don't	you	listen	to	the	inner	rhythm	of	your	being?
Where	do	you	go	on	rushing	to?	And	you	are	searching	for	this	inner	rhythm	--
sometimes	in	money,	sometimes	in	power,	sometimes	in	prestige,	sometimes	in
so	 many	 kinds	 of	 relationships.	 You	 go	 on	 begging.	 You	 want	 to	 know
something	of	the	transcendental,	you	are	thirsty	for	the	transcendental.
And	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 even	 in	 ordinary	 life,	 it	 happens.	 You	 how	 those	 few
moments	when	 suddenly	one	day	you	wake	up	 in	 the	morning	 and	 everything
seems	to	fit	perfectly.	The	birds	are	singing,	the	air	is	fragrant,	the	sun	is	rising,
and	 suddenly	 you	 feel	 that	 all	 is	 quiet.	 You	 are	 no	 longer	 separate	 for	 a
moment...	you	feel	a	great	joy	arising	in	you	for	no	reason	at	all.	You	suddenly
feel	vibrant,	utterly	rejuvenated,	at	home.	Maybe	the	night's	deep	sleep	and	rest,
maybe	the	beautiful	morning,	 the	song	of	the	birds,	 the	fresh	air,	 the	dewdrops
on	the	grass	leaves	shining	in	the	early	sun	--	all	this	created	the	context.	Not	by
your	 effort,	 but	 just	 by	 accident.	 you	 fell	 in	 harmony	 with	 yourself	 and	 with
existence.	 And	 remember,	 it	 happens	 always	 together:	 whenever	 you	 fall	 in
harmony	with	yourself,	you	fall	in	harmony	with	existence	too.
Harmony	has	two	sides:	the	individual	and	the	universal.	If	 the	individual	is	in
harmony,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 why	 he	 should	 not	 be	 in	 harmony	 with	 the
whole.	 If	 inside	you	all	conflict	has	disappeared,	even	 for	a	 single	moment,	 in
that	moment	you	are	part	of	 the	whole,	you	are	no	more	an	 island,	you	are	no
more	 separate.	 All	 walls	 have	 suddenly	 disappeared;	 you	 are	 no	 more
imprisoned.
In	that	moment	you	know	the	glory,	the	splendour,	that	life	is.	That	splendour	is
God,	that	feel	is	God.	That	experience	of	harmony	is	God.	God	is	not	a	person
but	 the	 presence	 that	 is	 felt	 when	 you	 are	 in	 harmony	 and	 you	 are	 also	 in
harmony	with	existence	--	that	accord.	That	accord	is	called	DHUN.
SUNTA	NAHIN	DHUN	KI	KHABAR...
Listen	to	that	accord!	which	is	available	every	moment	of	your	life.	It	happens
only	 accidentally,	 because	 you	 have	 not	 prepared	 yourself	 for	 it,	 to	 receive	 it
consciously.	So	it	happens	only	once	in	a	while.
Once	Leo	Tolstoy	was	 asked,	 "How	many	experiences	did	you	have	of	divine
ecstasy	in	your	life?"
He	started	crying,	great	 tears	 started	 rolling	down	 from	his	 eyes.	He	 said,	Not
more	 than	seven	 in	my	 life	of	seventy	years,	but	 I	am	grateful	 for	 those	seven
moments.	I	am	miserable	also,	because	in	those	moments	it	was	so	self-evident
that	is	could	be	the	flavour	of	my	whole	life.	In	those	moments	I	was	so	certain
that	this	could	be	my	experience	day	in,	day	out,	year	in,	year	out	--	this	could
spread	over	my	whole	life,	this	could	become	my	flavour.	But	it	didn't	happen.
Those	moments	came	on	 their	own	and	 they	went	on	 their	own.	But	 I	am	still
grateful	 to	God	 that	 even	without	 any	 conscious	 effort	 on	my	 part,	 once	 in	 a
while	he	has	been	knocking	at	my	doors."
THIS	HAPPENS	TO	EVERYBODY	--	 it	 happens	 in	 spite	of	you.	 If	you	 look
back	you	can	remember	a	few	moments....	and	those	will	be	the	moments	when
you	were	relaxed,	those	will	be	the	moments	when	there	was	no	particular	desire
in	 your	 mind,	 when	 you	 were	 not	 worried,	 when	 you	 were	 not	 tense,	 when
somehow	you	simply	were.
Watch	 these	 sudden	 accidental	 moments	 minutely,	 because	 there	 is	 the	 secret
key.	 That's	 how	 the	 fundamentals	 of	 religion	 have	 been	 discovered:	 watching
these	sudden	moments	which	come	and	go,	and	one	never	knows	why	they	come
and	why	they	go,	watching	the	context,	the	space	in	which	they	happen,	people
started	trying	to	create	that	context.
If	it	happens	in	a	relaxed	state,	when	you	are	very	loose,	non-tense,	then	you	can
create	the	context!	You	can	relax.	If	it	happens	to	you	while	swimming,	then	you
can	 swim	 and	 create	 the	 context.	 If	 it	 happens	 to	 you	 while	 running...	 and	 it
happens	to	different	people	in	different	ways.	Many	runners	know	it,	that	beyond
a	certain	limit	 if	you	go	on	running,	go	on	running,	go	on	running,	suddenly	it
happens	--	because	man's	energies	have	three	layers.
The	first	layer	is	only	for	day-to-day	activities;	it	is	a	very	thin	layer.	It	is	enough
for	 your	 office,	 wife,	 children	 --	 the	 ordinary	 life.	 The	 second	 layer	 is	 for
emergencies:	your	house	 is	on	fire;	you	may	have	been	feeling	very	 tired	after
the	whole	 day's	work	 and	you	were	 coming	home	 and	hoping	 to	 have	 a	 good
rest,	and	suddenly	when	you	come	home	your	house	is	on	fire.	Immediately,	all
fatigue	disappears	 --	 you	 are	 no	more	 tired.	You	have	 forgotten	 all	 about	 rest,
and	the	whole	night	you	try	to	put	the	fire	out.	And	even	after	the	whole	night's
work,	you	are	not	tired.	It	was	not	the	ordinary	level	of	energy	that	worked
--	that	was	exhausted	--	the	emergency	layer	started	working.
And	the	third	layer	is	deeper	than	that.	If	you	go	on	and	on....	For	example,	if	for
one	day,	two	days,	three	days,	you	go	on	working,	then	the	emergency	level	will
also	be	finished	-
-	and	then	you	come	in	contact	with	the	cosmic	layer.	And	that	is	the	source	of
life,	 and	 that	 is	 inexhaustible.	 And	 whenever	 you	 are	 in	 contact	 with	 it,
tremendous	joy	starts	overflowing	you.
It	happens	 to	 joggers,	 to	 runners,	 to	swimmers	sometimes.	First	 layer	 finished,
then	the	second	layer,	and	if	you	go	on	running	the	second	is	also	finished	--	and
the	moment	you	are	in	contact	with	the	third,	tremendous	ecstasy	happens	for	no
reason	at	all.
It	may	happen	to	you	while	making	love.	It	may	happen	to	you	while	listening	to
music.
It	 may	 happen	 to	 you	 while	 simply	 lying	 in	 your	 bed	 doing	 nothing.	 It	 may
happen	to	you	while	painting,	absorbed,	utterly	absorbed	in	it.	Or	it	may	happen
in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 ways.	 But	 watch:	 whenever	 it	 happens,	 whenever	 that
tremendous	 blissful	 moment	 comes	 to	 you,	 when	 God	 knocks	 on	 your	 door,
watch	in	what	context	it	is	happening.	Be	alert!
Look	 around	 --	 in	 what	 space	 it	 is	 happening.	 And	 then	 you	 have	 the	 key.
Whenever	you	will	 be	 able	 to	 create	 that	 context,	 that	 space,	 the	moment	will
come	again.
You	cannot	make	it	happen,	but	you	can	make	yourself	available	for	it	to	happen.
You	cannot	force	 it	 to	happen,	but	you	can	create	all	 that	 is	necessary	for	 it	 to
happen.	It	is	not	a	doing	on	your	part:	it	is	a	happening.	But,	still,	you	can	play	a
great	role.	That's	how	all	techniques	of	meditation	have	been	developed.	That's
how	Yoga	came	into	existence.
SUNTA	NAHIN	DHUN	KI	KHABAR...
That	accord	is	present	in	you,	because	without	it	you	cannot	be	alive.	That	music
is	 already	 there,	 flowing	 underground	 in	 you,	 because	 that	 music	 is	 your
connection	with	the	whole.	Once	it	is	cut	you	will	be	dead.	You	are	alive	--	that
is	enough	proof	that	the	music	is	happening.	The	only	thing	is	to	go	deep	inside
your	own	being	and	to	find	WHERE	it	is	happening.
HAVE	YOU	HEARD	THE	MUSIC	THAT	NO	FINGERS
ENTER	INTO?
And	 this	 is	 a	music	 that	 is	 not	 created	 by	 fingers	 on	 any	musical	 instrument.
There	 is	no	musical	 instrument	within	you,	and	there	 is	nobody	playing	on	the
instrument.	It	is	pure	music.
The	Indian	mystics	use	a	special	word	for	 it:	ANAHAD	KA	BAJA	BAJITA	--
ANAHAD
--	it	is	boundless,	and	it	is	uncreated.	It	is	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.	But
the	 Indian	 mystics	 go	 a	 little	 deeper;	 they	 say	 there	 is	 not	 even	 one	 hand
clapping	--	there	is	neither	hand	nor	instrument,	but	pure	music,	just	music.
The	experience	of	the	mystics	is	that	life	consists	of	the	stuff	called	music.	Just
as	physics	says	life	consists	of	electrons,	electricity,	mystics	say	life	consists	of
music.	And	in	a	way	they	are	both	right,	because	music	is	nothing	but	a	certain
vibration	 of	 electricity,	 and	 it	 may	 be	 true	 vice	 versa	 also:	 electricity	may	 be
nothing	but	a	certain	density	of	music,	of	sound.
HAVE	YOU	HEARD	THE	MUSIC	THAT	NO	FINGERS
ENTER	INTO?
KABIR	 IS	 TALKING	 TO	 HIS	 DISCIPLES	 who	 have	 come	 to	 seek	 God.
Somebody	must	have	asked	him	about	God,	and	he	 is	 talking	about	music.	To
talk	 about	God	 is	 almost	 useless,	 but	 to	 talk	 about	music	 is	 certainly	 of	 great
significance.	If	you	can	hear	your	inner	music,	you	will	know	God	is.
FAR	INSIDE	THE	HOUSE	ENTANGLED	MUSIC	--
WHAT	IS	THE	SENSE	OF	LEAVING	YOUR	HOUSE?
And	Kabir	says:	Where	are	you	going	 to	find	God?	People	go	 to	Kashi	and	 to
Kaaba,	and	people	go	 to	Jerusalem	and	 to	Tibet,	and	people	go	 to	all	kinds	of
places	 in	 search	 of	 some	 significance.	 They	 are	 feeling	 that	 their	 life	 is
meaningless,	 they	are	feeling	 that	 their	 life	 is	empty,	 they	are	feeling	 that	 their
life	is	nothing	but	a	long	long	tale	told	by	an	idiot.	They	know	that	their	life	is
just	noise,	meaningless,	gibberish.	They	know	that	deep	down	 there	 is	nothing
but	 a	 kind	 of	 hollowness.	 And	 they	 search:	 there	 must	 be	 some	 source
somewhere	which	can	quench	their	thirst.	There	must	be	some	place	somewhere
where	 they	 can	 encounter	 God,	 where	 they	 can	 attain	 to	 some	 significance,
where	their	 life	can	have	some	meaning.	But	 this	search	is	futile.	They	will	be
frustrated	again	and	again	--	because	the	truth	they	are	searching	for	is	already
within	their	being.	What	they	are	seeking	is	in	the	seeker	himself;	the	sought	is
in	the	seeker.	You	need	not	go	anywhere.	You	simply	have	to	learn	how	not	to	go
anywhere.
The	greatest	art	is	just	to	be,	without	going	anywhere.	Not	going	to	the	past,	not
going	 to	 the	 future,	 not	 going	 into	 desires,	 into	 psychological	 spaces,	 into
psychic	travels	--	not	to	go	anywhere,	just	to	be.	And	right	now!	if	you	are	just
here...	immediately	something	is	felt,	something	which	is	intangible.	You	cannot
show	it	to	anybody	else;	you	cannot	share	your	experience	with	somebody	who
has	not	known	it.	But	your	whole	being	starts	feeling	a	kind	of	intoxicatedness,	a
drunkenness.	You	become	full	of	juice,	you	become	full	of	aliveness,	and	a	very
indirect,	subtle,	delicate	experience	of	the	presence	of	something	bigger	than	you
--	that's	what	God	is	all	about.
FAR	INSIDE	THE	HOUSE...
The	original	is:
RAS	MAND	MANDIR	BAJTA
BAHAR	SUNE	TO	KYA	HUA?
Kabir	says:	That	music	is	already	happening	inside	your	own	temple.	Kabir	calls
you	 'the	 temple'	 --	 except	 for	your	body	 there	 is	no	other	 temple	 in	 the	world.
Your	bodies	are	temples,	sacred	places,	because	the	holiest	of	the	holy	resides	in
you.	And	 look	 at	 what	 the	 priests	 have	 been	 telling	 you,	what	 your	 so-called
saints	 have	 been	 telling	 you.	 They	 have	 been	 teaching	 you	 life-negative
attitudes,	body-negative	attitudes.	They	have	been	telling	you	that	the	body	is	the
culprit,	that	the	body	is	the	source	of	sin.	They	have	been	telling	you	to	torture
the	 body,	 to	 destroy	 the	 body.	 They	 have	 been	 teaching	 you	 that	 unless	 you
destroy	your	body	totally	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	God.
The	truth	is	just	the	contrary:	unless	you	love	your	body	immensely,	respect	your
body	immensely,	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	God	at	all	--	because	the	body	is
his	outer	expression.	If	the	body	is	the	temple,	then	God	is	the	deity	inside	it.
RAS	MAND	MANDIR	BAJTA...
Within	the	temple	of	your	body	the	music	is	already	happening	--	just	go	in.	And
the	word	RAS	has	to	be	understood.	RAS	literally	means	juice.	And	you	will	be
surprised	to	know	that	the	mystics	of	this	country	have	called	God	the	ultimate
juice:	RASAO	VAI	SAHA	--	he	is	the	ultimate	juice.	But	if	you	go	to	your	so-
called	saints,	you	will	find	them	very	dry,	with	no	juice	at	all.	You	will	find	them
almost	dead,	with	no	life	flowing	in	them.	And	they	have	destroyed	their	bodies;
they	are	living	a	kind	of	death.	But	this	is	thought	to	be	very	respectable.	What
has	 really	 happened?	 What	 has	 gone	 wrong?	 Why	 have	 these	 pathological
people,	 mentally	 deranged	 people,	 psychologically	 ill	 people,	 become	 so
dominant?	Why	have	they	possessed	religion?
The	neurotic	people	have	one	quality	in	them:	the	quality	of	being	fanatics.	Only
neurotics	can	be	fanatics,	and	it	is	very	difficult	to	fight	with	fanatics.	Wherever
a	fanatic	is,	sooner	or	later	he	is	going	to	become	a	leader.	He	is	so	troublesome,
he	 is	 such	a	 trouble-maker,	 that	you	have	 to	make	him	a	 leader;	 that	 is	 just	 to
pacify	him.	He	will	only	be	at	rest	when	he	is	at	the	top,	when	he	is	the	boss.
Neurotics	have	a	tendency	to	become	leaders.	Adolf	Hitler	was	a	neurotic,	and
became	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 leaders	 of	 human	 history.	 He	was	 a	madman,	 but
madmen	have	a	 few	qualities	 in	 them	which	no	 sane	man	can	ever	have:	 they
compete,	 and	 they	 compete	 with	 their	 total	 energy,	 and	 they	 compete	 madly.
Because	 they	 are	 so	 mad,	 they	 don't	 think,	 they	 act.	 While	 the	 sane	 person
thinks,	 the	 mad	 person	 acts.	 The	 sane	 person	 goes	 on	 thinking	 and	 the	 mad
person	 has	 already	 reached	 and	 acted	 and	 done.	 The	 sane	 person	 thinks	 of
consequences,	the	mad	person	thinks	nothing	--	he	simply	rushes	in.
Adolf	Hitlers	become	 leaders	 in	politics,	 and	 the	 same	kind	of	people	become
leaders	 in	 religion	 too.	 And	 the	 pathological	 people	 also	 have	 a	 tendency	 to
become	organized.	The	sane	person	wants	to	be	left	alone	because	he	enjoys	his
aloneness;	 he	 wants	 his	 own	 space,	 he	 wants	 freedom	 --	 freedom	 from	 the
crowd.	And	the	mad	person	wants	the	crowd.	Left	alone	he	becomes	disturbed;
in	his	aloneness	he	starts	seeing	his	madness.	He	goes	always	into	the	crowd;	he
wants	 to	 live	 with	 the	 crowd	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day	 --	 he	 is	 a	 lover	 of	 the
crowd.
The	sane	person	moves	in	solitude	and	the	insane	person	searches	for	the	crowd.
And	 your	 religions	 are	 nothing	 but	 crowds.	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,	 Islam,
Jainism	 --	 different	 crowds.	 When	 Mohammed	 became	 enlightened,	 he	 was
alone,	meditating	 in	 the	mountains.	When	Buddha	became	enlightened	he	was
alone,	meditating	by	the	side	of	the	River	Niranjana,	under	a	tree	--	alone.	When
Mahavira	 became	 enlightened	 he	 was	 absolutely	 alone	 in	 the	 forest,	 standing
underneath	a	tree,	naked	in	the	sun.
Enlightenment	 has	 happened	 to	 people	 when	 they	 were	 utterly	 alone.	 But
leadership	does	not	come	that	way.	Leadership	comes	when	you	move	into	the
crowd.	Not	 only	 that:	when	you	 fulfill	 the	 expectations	of	 the	 crowd	 --	 stupid
expectations,	superstitious	expectations,	but	you	have	to	fulfill	 the	expectations
of	 the	 crowd	 --	 then	you	become	 the	 leader	 religious	 or	 political.	Mad	people
have	 a	 great	 organizing	 capacity.	 Because	 they	 fulfill	 the	 expectations	 of	 the
crowd,	 the	crowd	looks	up	to	 them,	 the	crowd	respects	 them,	and	the	crowd	is
afraid	--	everybody	is	afraid	--	and	the	crowd	wants	to	be	organized	because	in
organization	there	seems	to	be	power.
An	 NAACP	 official	 telephoned	 the	 Library	 of	 Congress	 and	 told	 the	 chief
librarian	 that	 the	 library	had	eighteen	 thousand	books	with	 the	word	 'nigger'	 in
them	and	that	all	the	books	had	to	be	removed	in	a	week.
"But,"	 protested	 the	 librarian,	 "we	 have	 fifty	 thousand	 volumes	with	 the	word
'bastard'	in	them."
"I	know,"	said	the	official,	"but	those	bastards	are	not	organized."
In	this	world,	organization	is	power,	and	mad	people	have	a	great	magnetic	force
to	organize.	They	cannot	be	alone,	 they	seek	others;	and	others	who	cannot	be
alone,	they	are	also	seeking.	It	becomes	a	mutual	arrangement.
Religions,	at	the	source,	are	born	out	of	a	meditative	aloneness,	but	the	moment
it	becomes	known	that	a	Buddha	has	happened,	the	mad	people	start	organizing,
the	mad	people	start	gathering	a	crowd.	And	that	crowd	finally	crystallizes	into
Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,	Christianity.	All	their	notions	are	based	not	in	the
enlightenment	of	 their	 founders,	 real	 founders,	no,	but	 in	 the	pseudo	 founders,
the	priests.
And	these	priests	have	been	telling	you	that	life	is	irreligious,	that	the	body	has
to	be	denied,	it	is	not	a	temple,	it	is	not	a	place	to	be	worshipped	in.
Kabir	is	saying	a	totally	different	thing,	and	that's	what	my	emphasis	is:	the	body
is	sacred	--	because	ALL	IS	sacred!
HAVE	YOU	HEARD	THE	MUSIC	THAT	NO	FINGERS
ENTER	INTO?
FAR	INSIDE	THE	HOUSE
ENTANGLED	MUSIC	--
WHAT	IS	THE	SENSE	OF	LEAVING	YOUR	HOUSE?
Where	are	you	going?	You	need	not	leave	the	body,	you	need	not	leave	anything,
you	need	not	renounce	anything!	Remember	--	Kabir	never	renounced	anything.
He	 lived	 a	 very	 ordinary	 life	 just	 as	 everybody	 else	 lives	 --	 the	 life	 of	 a
householder.	 He	 was	 a	 father,	 a	 husband,	 and	 his	 whole	 life	 he	 continued	 to
work.	He	was	 a	weaver	 --	 he	 continued	 to	weave	 clothes.	 Even	when	 he	 had
thousands	 of	 disciples.	And	many	 times	 his	 disciples	would	 come	 to	 him	 and
say,	You	need	not	work	at	all.	We	are	ready	to	provide	everything	for	you,	and
your	needs	are	not	many.	Why	do	you	go	on	working?
And	Kabir	would	laugh	and	say,	"You	don't	understand.	I	work	for	God,	I	weave
clothes	for	God	--	because	the	customers	who	come	to	purchase	clothes	from	me
are	divine.	How	can	I	stop	my	work?"
This	quality	is	true	religiousness.	And	this	quality	is	possible	only	if	you	are	in
love	with	 life,	and	 to	be	 in	 love	with	 life	creates	RAS	--	 juice.	Then	you	don't
become	dry,	then	you	don't	become	a	desert,	then	you	become	an	oasis
The	 so-called	 religious	 people	 of	 this	 country	 are	 against	 me	 because	 I	 am
teaching	you	the	way	of	RAS	--	the	way	of	life,	love,	juice,	music	--	because	I
am	teaching	you	to	become	an	oasis,	not	a	desert;	because	I	would	like	you	to	be
in	a	constant	rejoicing;	because	I	am	not	teaching	you	renunciation	but	rejoicing,
all	 the	 people	 who	 have	 been	 carrying	 this	 nonsense	 idea	 of	 renouncing	 the
world	are	bound	to	be	against	me.	That	is	natural.	It	is	expected.	This	has	been
happening	always,	and	it	seems,	unfortunately,	that	man	has	not	learnt	anything
at	all	down	the	ages.	It	is	exactly	the	same	today	as	it	was	in	the	days	of	Buddha,
as	it	was	in	the	days	of	Jesus,	as	it	was	in	the	days	of	Kabir.
SUPPOSE	YOU	SCRUB	YOUR	ETHICAL	SKIN
UNTIL	IT	SHINES,
BUT	INSIDE	THERE	IS	NO	MUSIC,
THEN	WHAT?
MORALITY	IS	NOT	RELIGION,	although	a	religious	person	is	always	moral	--
but	not	vice	versa:	 a	moral	person	need	not	be	 religious.	A	 religious	person	 is
necessarily	moral,	because	 religion	means	experience	of	 the	divine	 --	one	who
has	experienced	the	presence	of	God,	how	can	he	be	immoral?	In	fact,	he	is	the
criterion,	the	decisive	factor	as	to	what	is	moral.
Whatsoever	an	enlightened	person	does	is	moral;	there	is	no	other	way	to	decide.
It	is	not	that	he	is	thing	to	do	that	which	is	moral	--	whatsoever	he	does	is	moral.
He	cannot	do	any	harm	to	anybody;	he	is	a	blessing	to	existence.	When	God	has
blessed	him,	what	else	is	 left	for	him,	except	to	be	a	blessing	to	the	existence?
What	God	has	given	 to	him,	he	goes	on	giving	 to	everybody	else.	His	heart	 is
full	 of	 bliss,	 and	 the	 bliss	 starts	 overflowing.	 That	 overflowing	 bliss	 is	 real
morality.
Morality	 means	 compassion,	 morality	 means	 love,	 morality	 means	 creativity;
morality	 means	 making	 the	 world	 a	 little	 more	 beautiful	 than	 you	 found	 it,
leaving	 it	 a	 little	 more	 beautiful,	 giving	 it	 a	 new	 plane,	 a	 new	 level,	 a	 new
dimension	of	existence.
The	immoral	person	is	destructive;	because	he	is	miserable	he	can	only	share	his
misery	with	others.	Remember,	you	can	give	to	others	only	that	which	you	have.
If	 you	 are	miserable,	whatsoever	 you	 say	 is	 immaterial,	 you	will	make	 others
miserable.	If	you	are	blissful,	you	need	not	say	anything	--	you	will	make	others
blissful.	Your	very	presence	will	 trigger	 some	blissfulness	 in	 their	being.	Your
very	presence	will	create	a	synchronicity	in	others.	Your	music,	your	juice,	will
create	ripples	of	joy	--	whoever	is	close	to	you	will	become	infected	with	your
joy,	with	your	ecstasy,	will	become	drunk	--
and	that's	what	morality	is.
Kabir	says:
SUPPOSE	YOU	SCRUB	YOUR	ETHICAL	SKIN
UNTIL	IT	SHINES,
BUT	INSIDE	THERE	IS	NO	MUSIC,
THEN	WHAT?
Then	what	is	the	use	of	it?	Yes,	that	can	be	done,	that	is	being	done.	There	are
people	 who	 go	 on	 cultivating	 character,	 who	 go	 on	 cultivating	 morality.	 And
they	become	great	moralists.	puritans,	very	righteous.	They	do	only	that	which	is
right	but	it	is	a	forced	doing,	it	is	not	spontaneous	--	it	is	not	out	of	their	being,	it
is	just	a	forced	phenomenon.	It	is	a	facade.	They	have	created	a	beautiful	curtain
around	themselves,	behind	it	is	the	corpse,	the	stinking	corpse,	but	on	the	surface
they	have	decorated	themselves	with	flowers.	And	the	crowd	can	be	deceived	by
them,	but	deep	down	they	are	the	same	people,	even	worse,	because	all	that	they
are	showing	on	the	surface	is	pseudo.	They	are	just	the	opposite	inside.	They	are
hypocrites.	They	say	one	thing,	they	are	just	the	opposite	of	it;	they	do	one	thing,
but	 their	 being	 has	 no	 correspondence	 with	 it.	 They	 are	 split,	 they	 are
schizophrenic.
Because	of	this	cultivated	morality,	we	have	put	the	whole	of	humanity	in	a	state
of	schizophrenia.	Everybody	is	more	or	less	made	into	a	hypocrite.	The	society
forces	you	to	do	it.	If	you	don't	do	it,	you	cannot	live,	you	cannot	survive.	It	has
become	almost	a	necessity	that	you	don't	show	your	reality.	You	show	only	that
which	people	want	you	to	show,	and	you	keep	everything	else	hidden	inside.	But
then	your	 inner	 being	goes	 on	 accumulating	poisons	 and	poisons	 and	poisons,
and	you	live	a	hell	within,	decorated	with	beautiful	flowers.	And	those	flowers
are	also	plastic,	because	they	cannot	be	true	flowers.
True	flowers	need	roots	in	your	being.
A	 really	 religious	 person	 has	 no	morality	 imposed	 upon	 himself.	His	morality
arises	out	of	his	consciousness.	He	is	not	trying	to	do	the	right,	he	is	not	trying	to
avoid	the	wrong	-
-	 -he	 simply	 remains	 conscious	 and	 acts	 out	 of	 his	 consciousness,	 and
whatsoever	 he	 does	 is	 right.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 do	 anything	 wrong
consciously.
A	beautiful	story	is	told	about	a	great	mystic,	Nagarjuna:	He	was	a	naked	fakir,
but	 he	 was	 loved	 by	 all	 real	 seekers.	 A	 queen	 was	 also	 deeply	 in	 love	 with
Nagarjuna.	She	asked	him	one	day	 to	come	 to	 the	palace,	 to	be	a	guest	 in	 the
palace.	Nagarjuna	went.	The	queen	asked	him	a	favour.	Nagarjuna	said,	"What
do	you	want?"	The	queen	said,	"I	want	your	begging	bowl."
Nagarjuna	gave	it	--	that	was	the	only	thing	he	had	--	his	begging	bowl.	And	the
queen	 brought	 a	 golden	 begging	 bowl,	 studded	with	 diamonds	 and	 gave	 it	 to
Nagarjuna.	She	said,	"Now	you	keep	this.	I	will	worship	the	begging	bowl	that
you	have	carried	for	years
--	 it	 has	 some	 of	 your	 vibe.	 It	 will	 become	my	 temple.	 And	 a	 man	 like	 you
should	 not	 carry	 an	 ordinary	wooden	 begging	 bowl	 --	 keep	 this	 golden	 one.	 I
have	had	it	made	specially	for	you."
It	was	really	precious.	If	Nagarjuna	had	been	an	ordinary	mystic	he	would	have
said,	"I	cannot	touch	it.	I	have	renounced	the	world."	But	for	him	it	was	all	the
same,	so	he	took	the	bowl.
When	 he	 left	 the	 palace,	 a	 thief	 saw	 him.	 He	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes:	 "A
naked	man	with	such	a	precious	thing!	How	long	can	he	protect	it?"	So	the	thief
followed....
Nagarjuna	was	staying	outside	the	town	in	a	ruined	ancient	temple	--	no	doors,
no	windows.	It	was	just	a	ruin.	The	thief	was	very	happy:	"Soon	Nagarjuna	will
have	to	go	to	sleep	and	there	will	be	no	difficulty	--	I	will	get	the	bowl."
The	thief	was	hiding	behind	a	wall	just	outside	the	door	--	Nagarjuna	threw	the
bowl	 outside	 the	 door.	 The	 thief	 could	 not	 believe	 what	 had	 happened.
Nagarjuna	threw	it	because	he	had	watched	the	thief	coming	behind	him,	and	he
knew	perfectly	well	 that	he	was	not	 coming	 for	him	 --	he	was	coming	 for	 the
bowl,	"So	why	unnecessarily	let	him	wait?	Be	finished	with	it	so	he	can	go,	and
I	can	also	rest."
"Such	a	precious	thing!	And	Nagarjuna	has	thrown	it	so	easily."	The	thief	could
not	go	without	thanking	him.	He	knew	perfectly	well	that	it	had	been	thrown	for
him.	He	peeked	in	and	he	said,	"Sir,	accept	my	thanks.	But	you	are	a	rare	being	-
-	I	cannot	believe	my	eyes.	And	a	great	desire	has	arisen	in	me.	I	am	wasting	my
life	 by	 being	 a	 thief	 --	 and	 there	 are	 people	 like	 you	 too?	Can	 I	 come	 in	 and
touch	your	feet?"
Nagarjuna	laughed	and	he	said,	"Yes,	 that's	why	I	 threw	the	bowl	outside	--	so
that	you	could	come	inside."
The	thief	was	trapped.	The	thief	came	in,	touched	the	feet...	and	at	that	moment
the	thief	was	very	open	because	he	had	seen	that	this	man	was	no	ordinary	man.
He	was	very	vulnerable,	open,	receptive,	grateful,	mystified,	stunned.	When	he
touched	the	feet,	for	the	first	time	in	his	life	he	felt	the	presence	of	the	divine.
He	asked	Nagarjuna,	"How	many	lives	will	it	take	for	me	to	become	like	you?"
Nagarjuna	said,	"How	many	lives?	--	it	can	happen	today,	it	can	happen	now!"
The	 thief	said,	"You	must	be	kidding.	How	can	 it	happen	now?	I	am	a	 thief,	a
well-known	 thief	The	whole	 town	knows	me,	although	 they	have	not	yet	been
able	 to	 catch	hold	of	me.	Even	 the	king	 is	 afraid	of	me,	because	 thrice	 I	have
entered	and	stolen	from	the	treasury.	They	know	it,	but	they	have	no	proof.	I	am
a	master	thief	--	you	may	not	know	about	me	because	you	are	a	stranger	in	these
parts.	How	can	I	be	transformed	right	now?"
And	Nagarjuna	 said,	 "If	 in	 an	old	house	 for	 centuries	 there	has	been	darkness
and	you	bring	a	candle,	can	the	darkness	say,	'For	centuries	and	centuries	I	have
been	here	--	 I	cannot	go	out	 just	because	you	have	brought	a	candle	 in.	 I	have
lived	 so	 long'?	 Can	 the	 darkness	 give	 resistance?	Will	 it	make	 any	 difference
whether	the	darkness	is	one	day	old	or	millions	of	years	old.
The	 thief	 could	 see	 the	 point:	 darkness	 cannot	 resist	 light;	 when	 light	 comes,
darkness	 disappears.	 Nagarjuna	 said,	 You	 may	 have	 been	 in	 darkness	 for
millions	of	lives	--	that	doesn't	matter	--	but	I	can	give	you	a	secret,	you	can	light
a	candle	in	your	being."
And	the	thief	said,	"What	about	my	profession?	Have	I	to	leave	it?"
Nagarjuna	said,	"That	is	for	you	to	decide.	I	am	not	concerned	with	you	and	your
profession	 I	 can	only	give	you	 the	 secret	of	how	 to	kindle	 a	 light	within	your
being,	and	then	it	is	up	to	you."
The	thief	said,	"But	whenever	I	have	gone	to	any	saints,	they	always	say,	 'First
stop	stealing	--	then	only	can	you	be	initiated.'"	It	is	said	that	Nagarjuna	laughed
and	said,
"You	 must	 have	 gone	 to	 thieves,	 not	 to	 saints.	 They	 know	 nothing.	 You	 just
watch	 your	 breath	 --	 the	 ancient	method	 of	 Buddha	 --	 just	watch	 your	 breath
coming	in,	going	out.
Whenever	you	remember,	watch	your	breath.	Even	when	you	go	to	steal,	when
you	enter	into	somebody's	house	in	the	night,	go	on	watching	your	breath.	When
you	have	opened	the	treasure	and	the	diamonds	are	there,	go	on	watching	your
breath,	 and	 do	 whatsoever	 you	 want	 to	 do	 --	 but	 don't	 forget	 watching	 the
breath."
The	thief	said,	"This	seems	to	be	simple.	No	morality?	No	character	needed?	No
other	requirement?"
Nagarjuna	said,	"Absolutely	none	--	just	watch	your	breath."
And	after	fifteen	days	the	thief	was	back,	but	he	was	a	totally	different	man.	He
fell	at	the	feet	of	Nagarjuna	and	he	said,	"You	trapped	me,	and	you	trapped	me
so	beautifully	that	I	was	not	even	able	to	suspect.	I	tried	for	these	fifteen	days	--
it	is	impossible.	If	I	watch	my	breath,	I	cannot	steal.	If	I	steal,	I	cannot	watch	my
breath.	Watching	the	breath,	I	become	so	silent,	so	alert,	so	aware,	so	conscious,
that	even	diamonds	look	like	pebbles.
You	have	created	a	difficulty	 for	me,	 a	dilemma.	Now	what	 am	 I	 supposed	 to
do?"
Nagarjuna	said,	"Get	lost!	--	whatsoever	you	want	to	do.	If	you	want	that	silence,
that	peace,	that	bliss,	that	arises	in	you	when	you	watch	your	breath,	then	choose
that.	If	you	think	all	those	diamonds	and	gold	and	silver	is	more	valuable,	then
choose	that.	That	is	for	you	to	choose!	Who	am	I	to	interfere	in	your	life?"
The	man	 said,	 "I	 cannot	 choose	 to	 be	 unconscious	 again.	 I	 have	never	 known
such	moments.	Accept	me	as	one	of	your	disciples,	initiate	me."
Nagarjuna	said,	"I	have	initiated	you	already."
Religion	 is	 based	 not	 in	morality	 but	 in	meditation.	 Religion	 is	 rooted	 not	 in
character	but	in	consciousness.	A	really	religious	person	has	no	character	at	all	--
he	is	characterless.
But	 let	 me	 define	 what	 I	 mean	 by	 'characterless':	 I	 don't	 mean	 the	 ordinary
meaning	that	you	will	find	in	the	dictionary	--	because	in	the	dictionary,	the	man
of	bad	character	is	called	characterless.	That	is	wrong,	because	he	has	a	character
--	maybe	 it	 is	 bad,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 characterless.	 Somebody	 has	 good	 character,
somebody	has	 bad	 character	 --	 both	have	 characters.	The	 sinner	 and	 the	 saint,
both	have	characters,	but	the	really	religious	man	is	characterless.	He	is	neither
good	nor	bad	--	he	is	beyond.	He	has	no	character	because	he	does	not	function
out	 of	 his	 past:	 he	 acts	moment-to-moment,	 he	 acts	 spontaneously;	 he	 has	 no
ready-made	formula,	he	has	no	routine.	He	does	not	act	out	of	habits	--	and	that's
what	character	is:	creating	good	habits	 is	good	character,	creating	bad	habits	 is
bad	character.	Creating	consciousness,	not	habits,	is	religiousness.
SUPPOSE	YOU	SCRUB	YOUR	ETHICAL	SKIN
UNTIL	IT	SHINES,
BUT	INSIDE	THERE	IS	NO	MUSIC,
THEN	WHAT?
You	 can	 go	 on	 scrubbing	 your	 ethical	 skin,	 you	 can	 go	 on	 polishing	 your
morality,	you	can	become	a	really	polished	man,	but	if	inside	there	is	no	music,
if	meditation	has	not	happened,	if	you	have	not	heard	the	unheard,	if	you	have
not	 seen	 the	 unseen,	 if	 you	 have	 not	 penetrated	 into	 the	 unknowable,	 if	 that
soundless	sound	is	not	heard,	it	is	all	futile.
You	are	simply	wasting	your	time.
A	Zen	story:
A	disciple	is	meditating	and	he	has	been	meditating	for	at	least	twenty	years.	He
has	 been	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 things:	 yoga	 postures,	meditative	 techniques.	One
day	 the	 Master	 appears,	 and	 the	 disciple	 is	 sitting	 like	 a	 Buddha,	 absolutely
silent	--	at	least	on	the	outside	--	unmoving	like	a	marble	statue.	And	the	Master
starts	rubbing	a	brick	on	a	stone	just	in	front	of	him.	The	Master	creates	so	much
noise	by	rubbing	the	brick	on	the	stone	that	 the	disciple	has	to	open	his	eyes	a
little	bit	and	see	who	is	creating	the	nuisance.
Seeing	that	the	Master	himself	is	doing	this,	he	cannot	believe	it.	A	Master	is	not
supposed	to	disturb	the	disciple	while	he	is	meditating.	What	kind	of	Master	is
he?	But	a	Master	is	a	Master,	so	you	cannot	be	rude	to	him.	He	waits,	but	how
long	can	you	wait?
Constant	 rubbing	 of	 the	 brick	 on	 the	 stone	 --	 his	 teeth	 are	 getting	 on	 edge.
Finally	he	says,	"Stop	it!	What	are	you	doing?"
And	 the	 Master	 says,	 "And	 what	 have	 you	 been	 doing	 for	 twenty	 years?
Scrubbing,	 scrubbing...	 trying	 to	 polish	 your	mind?	 That	 you	 call	meditation?
Your	postures,	your	techniques	--	they	are	all	mind-based.	I	am	trying	to	make	a
mirror	of	this	brick!"
The	disciple	says,	"That	is	impossible.	You	can	go	on	rubbing,	but	the	brick	will
never	become	a	mirror."
And	the	Master	says,	"That's	what	I	have	come	to	say	to	you.	Twenty	years	you
have	 been	 rubbing,	 scrubbing,	 polishing,	 and	 the	 mind	 has	 not	 become
meditation	and	the	mind	has	not	become	a	mirror.	Drop	the	mind!	Don't	cultivate
it."
By	dropping	the	mind	it	becomes	a	mirror.	Mind	itself	never	becomes	a	mirror.
Mind	 is	 the	 barrier.	Hidden	 behind	 the	mind	 is	 your	 consciousness.	And	 once
you	enter	behind	the	mind	you	hear	the	music.	That	music	transforms	you	into	a
new	being	--	it	is	a	rebirth.
MOHAMMED'S	SON	PORES	OVER	WORDS,
AND	POINTS	OUT	THIS
AND	THAT,
BUT	IF	HIS	CHEST	IS	NOT	SOAKED	DARK	WITH	LOVE,
THEN	WHAT?
KABIR	SAYS	THIS	IS	SO	WITH	EVERYBODY	--	the	Hindu	pundit	goes	on
speculating	 upon	 words,	 playing	 upon	 words.	 The	 Mohammedan	 scholar,
Mohammed's	son,	PORES	OVER	WORDS....	Words	have	become	so	important
that	 we	 have	 forgotten	 that	 we	 have	 to	 enter	 into	 a	 wordless	 state	 of
consciousness.	Go	on	repeating	the	Koran,	or	the	Bible,	or	the	Vedas,	and	it	is	of
no	use	at	all,	because	you	will	only	be	gathering	more	and	more	knowledge	--	all
borrowed.	 And	 a	 truth	 borrowed	 becomes	 a	 lie.	 A	 truth	 expressed	 in	 words
immediately	loses	its	truthfulness.	Words	are	too	small;	they	cannot	contain	the
great	sky	of	the	truth	within	themselves.	They	crush	the	truth,	they	destroy	it.
And	when	words	reach	you,	you	will	give	a	meaning	to	them	which	is	yours.
Krishna	 speaks,	 Jesus	 speaks,	 I	 am	 speaking	 to	 you...	 if	 here	 there	 are	 two
thousand	people,	do	you	 think	everybody	 is	hearing	 the	same	 thing?	There	are
two	 thousand	 meanings.	 The	 speaker	 is	 one,	 my	 meaning	 is	 one,	 but
immediately	I	assert	it	it	becomes	two	thousand	--	two	thousand	meanings.
A	shaggy	tale	used	by	New	Testament	scholars	to	poke	a	little	fun	at	their	more
skeptical	associates	begins	when	several	archaeologists	working	near	Jerusalem
unearth	 some	human	 skeletal	 remains.	Upon	examination	 they	prove	 to	be	 the
bones	of	Jesus.
Overwhelmed	 by	 the	 burden	 of	 such	 unsettling	 knowledge,	 the	 archaeologists
decide	to	inform	the	Pope.	The	Pope,	of	course,	is	shocked.	What	does	this	mean
for	the	future	of	the	Christian	faith?
If	those	bones	are	really	those	of	Jesus,	that	means	he	was	never	resurrected,	that
means	 the	 resurrection	was	 false,	 that	 the	whole	 story	was	 invented.	And	with
the	 resurrection	 disappearing	 the	 whole	 ground	 underneath	 Christianity	 will
disappear.
Before	releasing	this	information	to	the	press	and	allowing	it	to	be	sensationally
exposed	to	the	stunned	eyes	of	the	faithful,	the	Holy	Father	determines	to	call	a
council	of	 the	world's	great	 theologians	 to	see	 if	 they	can	help	him	understand
and	 interpret	 this	 calamitous	 event.	What	 is	more,	 because	 the	 implications	 of
the	 news	 obviously	 affect	 all	 Christians,	 it	 seems	 wise	 to	 make	 this	 an
ecumenical	 council,	 one	 to	 which	 theologians	 of	 all	 denominations	 will	 be
invited.	 Slowly	 and	 painfully,	 his	 Holiness	 works	 his	 way	 down	 the	 list	 of
theologians,	making	telephone	calls	to	each	of	them.	All	are	heard	to	make	the
appropriate	gasps	of	dismay,	after	which	they	promise	to	hasten	to	Rome	for	the
conference.
The	last	name	on	the	Pope	s	list	is	that	of	a	German	New	Testament	scholar	with
a	 reputation	 for	 being	 highly	 skeptical	with	 respect	 to	 all	manner	 of	 historical
information	 about	 Jesus.	 The	 Holy	 Father	 debates	 with	 himself	 whether	 this
gentleman	 should	 be	 informed,	 but	 finally,	 in	 the	 interests	 of	 ecumenism	 and
because	in	this	case	such	an	already	formed	attitude	of	skepticism	might	actually
be	of	some	use,	he	makes	the	telephone	call.	The	German	critic,	instead	of	being
overwhelmed	by	the	news	that	Jesus'
bones	had	not	been	resurrected,	registers	his	surprise	in	a	fashion	which	takes	the
Pope's	own	breath	away.
"Ach	so,"	the	scholar	responds,	"then	he	did	live!"
One	is	worried	about	resurrection	--	the	same	news	--	but	the	other's	response	is
totally	 different.	 His	 worry	 is,	 "Ach	 so,	 then	 he	 did	 live!"	 If	 the	 bones	 are
genuine,	then	Jesus	becomes	a	historical	figure.
Whenever	you	hear	something	it	is	always	from	your	background	that	you	hear
it;	it	is	your	background	that	interprets	it.	The	meaning	is	given	by	you.
"Young	man	said	 the	 judge,	 looking	sternly	at	 the	defendant,	"it	 is	alcohol	and
alcohol	alone	that	is	responsible	for	your	present	sorry	state!"
"I	 am	 glad	 to	 hear	 you	 say	 that,"	 replied	 Mooney	 with	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief,
"Everybody	else	says	it	is	all	my	fault!"
It	is	natural	that	words	will	be	interpreted	by	each	person	according	to	his	own
past.
That's	why	it	is	so	much	insisted	on	again	and	again	by	me	to	please	listen	to	me
without	bringing	in	your	past,	listen	to	me	without	any	background;	listen	to	me
not	 as	Christians,	Hindus	 and	Mohammedans,	 otherwise	 you	will	miss	 it.	Not
only	will	you	miss	it:	you	will	misunderstand	it.
Listen	 to	me	as	you	 listen	 to	music	or	 the	sound	of	 running	water	or	 the	wind
passing	 through	 the	 pine	 trees,	 and	 then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 some
communion	 happening,	 a	 possibility	 that	 some	 meaning	 that	 I	 am	 trying	 to
convey	reaches	you.	But	it	is	really	difficult.	It	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	things
in	the	world	to	be	a	disciple.
To	be	a	disciple	means	listening	without	any	background,	just	listening	without
interpreting,	 just	 listening	 without	 for	 or	 against,	 without	 believing,	 without
disbelieving	-
-	a	pure	kind	of	listening.	And	the	beauty	of	truth	is	that	if	you	can	listen	silently
with	no	judgement,	if	it	is	true	it	will	ring	bells	in	your	heart.	But	the	bells	will
be	rung	in	the	heart,	not	in	the	head.	If	it	is	untrue,	no	bells	will	be	rung	in	the
heart.	You	will	know	whether	it	is	true	or	untrue	--	not	by	thinking	about	it,	but
just	by	listening	in	total	silence.
MOHAMMED'S	SON	PORES	OVER	WORDS,
AND	POINTS	OUT	THIS
AND	THAT,
BUT	IF	HIS	CHEST	IS	NOT	SOAKED	DARK	WITH	LOVE,
THEN	WHAT?
Unless	your	heart	responds,	the	head	cannot	become	a	bridge	to	God.	Your	heart
needs	to	be	soaked	with	love.	But	you	don't	know	anything	about	the	heart.	The
society	has	not	allowed	you	to	go	through	the	heart;	it	has	tried	in	every	way	to
bypass	 the	 heart.	 The	 whole	 effort	 of	 the	 society	 is	 to	 pull	 you	 to	 the	 head
directly	 without	 moving	 through	 the	 heart,	 because	 the	 ways	 of	 the	 heart	 are
mysterious,	uncontrollable.
The	 ways	 of	 the	 head	 are	 controllable,	 manipulatable.	 Hence	 the	 society	 is
interested	in	your	head,	not	in	your	heart.	The	society	wants	you	to	understand
that	there	is	no	heart	but	only	the	head.	The	heart	is	nothing	but	a	blood-pumping
system;	that's	what	 the	society	wants	you	to	believe	This	 is	one	of	 the	greatest
untruths	ever	told.
By	 'heart'	 is	 not	meant	 the	 physical	 part.	 The	 physical	 part	 is	 simply	 a	 blood
circulation	system,	but	hidden	behind	the	physical,	just	corresponding	to	it,	very
close	to	it,	behind	it,	is	the	real	heart.	Just	as	hidden	behind	the	brain	is	mind,	so
hidden	behind	the	lungs	is	the	heart,	hidden	behind	the	body	is	the	soul.
Don't	 be	 finished	with	 the	 physical.	Always	 remember:	 corresponding	 to	 each
physical	phenomenon	in	you	there	is	a	spiritual	phenomenon.	Unless	your	heart
starts	functioning,	IS	SOAKED	DARK	WITH	LOVE...	and	why	dark?	Because
love	 has	 the	 depth	 of	 darkness,	 the	 density	 of	 darkness.	 Love	 grows	 in
mysterious	ways	 not	 in	 the	 light,	 because	 light	makes	 everything	 demystified.
Love	is	more	dark	than	anything	else.	It	is	a	dark,	dense,	mysterious	world.
And	if	you	are	afraid	of	the	dark,	you	will	be	afraid	of	love	too.	If	you	are	afraid
of	 the	 night,	 you	will	 be	 afraid	 of	 love	 too.	 If	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 dark,	 the
night,	death,	love,	then	you	are	afraid	of	all	that	is	mysterious	--	then	you	have	to
exist	only	on	the	surface,	then	you	will	never	be	able	to	penetrate	to	the	center	of
being.
The	original	is:
IK	PREM-RAS	CHAKHA	NAHIN,
AMLI	HUA	TO	KYA	HUA?
You	have	not	tasted	the	juice	of	love	--	and	you	have	become	a	great	saint?	and
you	have	great	character	and	great	morality?	And	you	have	not	even	tasted	the
juice	of	love?	Then	all	your	saintliness	and	all	your	morality	is	holy	cow-dung.
You	are	carrying	an	unnecessary	weight.	The	sooner	you	drop	it	the	better.
THE	YOGI	COMES	ALONG	IN	HIS	FAMOUS	ORANGE.
BUT	IF	INSIDE	HE	IS	COLOURLESS	THEN	WHAT?
The	 real	 question	 is	 of	 getting	 coloured	 inside.	 The	 outer	 colour	 is	 only
symbolic.	It	is	a	gesture;	it	is	not	the	end	--	it	is	the	beginning.	It	is	simply	your
saying	that	I	am	ready."
But	don't	think	that	if	you	are	wearing	orange	then	sannyas	has	happened.	Your
gesture	has	happened,	you	have	moved	on	the	way.
There	are	 two	 initiations.	One	 is	 the	 formal:	 the	day	you	become	a	 sannyasin,
you	change	 to	orange	 --	 that	 is	 formal.	But	without	 the	 formal,	 the	 informal	 is
difficult.	 If	 you	 cannot	 even	 change	 your	 clothes,	 how	 will	 you	 change	 your
being?	But	 just	 changing	 your	 clothes	 is	 not	 synonymous	with	 changing	 your
being.
Kabir	says:
THE	YOGI	COMES	ALONG	IN	HIS	FAMOUS	ORANGE.
BUT	IF	INSIDE	HE	IS	COLOURLESS,	THEN	WHAT?
VAKIF	NAHIN	US	RANG	SE
KAPARE	RANGE	SE	KYA	HUA?
You	have	not	known	the	colour	of	God,	you	have	not	know	the	colour	of	love,
you	have	not	known	the	colour	of	life.	Orange	is	the	colour	of	blood,	life;	orange
is	the	colour	of	fire,	love;	orange	is	the	colour	of	the	sunrise,	the	transforma-tion
--	the	declaration	that	the	night	has	ended.
But	 the	being	has	 to	be	coloured.	Your	soul	has	 to	become	red	with	 love,	with
joy,	with	celebration.	In	India,	orange	is	the	colour	of	spring	--	a	springtime	has
to	 come	 into	your	 inner	being	 so	 that	 flowers	 that	have	waited	and	waited	 for
centuries	can	bloom,	so	that	buds	can	open.
Kabir	says:
EVERY	INSTANT	THAT	THE	SUN	IS	RISEN,
IF	I	STAND	IN	THE	TEMPLE,	OR	ON	A	BALCONY,
IN	THE	HOT	FIELDS,	OR	IN	A	WALLED	GARDEN,
MY	OWN	LORD	IS	MAKING	LOVE	WITH	ME.
Meditate	over	this	tremendously	important	statement:
...	MY	OWN	LORD	IS	MAKING	LOVE	WITH	ME.
THE	MAN	OF	ABSOLUTE	CONSCIOUSNESS	remains	in	a	constant	orgasmic
state.
Just	 as	 two	 lovers	 reach	 an	orgasmic	 climax	only	 for	 a	moment	 and	 then	 it	 is
gone,	 and	 a	 sadness	 comes	 in	 the	 wake,	 so	 the	 man	 of	 total	 awareness,	 the
Buddha,	 the	 enlightened	 person,	 remains	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day	 in	 an
orgasmic	state:
...	MY	OWN	LORD	IS	MAKING	LOVE	WITH	ME.
And	wherever	I	am,	Kabir	says,	it	makes	no	difference	--	in	the	temple	or	in	the
mosque	or	 in	 the	 fields	 or	 in	 a	walled	 garden	 --	 it	 doesn't	matter	where	 I	 am.
Wherever	I	am,	my	Lord,	my	Beloved,	is	making	love	with	me.
Love	is	the	quintessence	of	religion.	And	to	be	orgasmic	is	to	be	a	sannyasin	--
and	to	become	so	orgasmic	that	it	continues	day	in,	day	out;	even	when	you	are
asleep,	 the	meeting	 continues.	You	 go	 on	melting	 and	merging	 into	God,	 and
God	goes	on	melting	and	merging	into	you.
The	wall	between	you	and	the	whole	has	been	removed,	there	is	no	separation.
That	state	of	non-separation,	that	state	of	UNIO	MYSTICA	--	the	mystic	union	-
-	 is	 the	ultimate	expression	of	 love.	The	 lowest	 is	 the	man/woman	relationship
and	the	ultimate,	the	highest,	is	the	meeting	of	the	meditator	with	the	whole.
Hence	I	say	the	journey	is	from	sex	to	superconsciousness.	Sex	is	the	beginning
of	the	journey	--	don't	reject	it.	If	you	reject	the	beginning,	you	will	never	reach
the	end.	But	 remember	 that	 it	 is	only	 the	beginning;	don't	get	stuck	 there.	You
have	 to	go	 farther	 and	 farther	 ahead;	 you	have	 to	 transcend	 it.	And	 as	you	go
higher	in	meditation,	the	less	and	less	sexual	you	are	bound	to	become.
This	 is	 happening	 every	 day	 to	my	 sannyasins.	The	whole	 country	 thinks	 that
here	nothing	but	sex	is	happening,	but	the	reality	is	just	the	opposite.	This	may
be	the	only	place	where	thousands	of	people	are	totally	losing	interest	in	sex	--
because	going	through	it	is	going	beyond	it.	To	go	beyond	one	has	to	go	through,
because	without	knowing	it	there	is	no	way	to	transcend	it.
The	sexual	orgasm	reveals	 two	secrets	 to	you:	one	 is	 that	 in	 the	climax,	at	 the
peak,	the	ego	disappears;	and	the	second,	time	disappears.	And	these	are	the	two
secrets	of	meditation.	One	day	meditating	you	will	come	to	know	that	sex	is	not
needed	at	all	because	the	ego	and	time	can	disappear	without	going	into	sex	at
all.
Sex	is	a	natural	way	of	meditation;	it	is	a	gift	of	nature,	to	keep	reminding	you
that	this	is	possible.	Mind,	time,	ego,	all	can	disappear;	if	they	can	disappear	for
a	single	moment,	then	why	not	for	ever?	Sex	is	a	natural	window	into	God,	but
only	a	window.	You	need	not	remain	confined	behind	it.	You	can	jump	out	of	the
window	 and	 you	 can	 come	 into	 the	 open,	 in	 the	 sun,	 under	 the	 sky.	 But	 the
window	made	it	possible	for	you.
Because	 sex	 helps	 you	 to	 know	 a	 few	moments	 of	 egolessness,	 timelessness,
mindlessness,	it	makes	it	possible	that	you	can	long	for,	desire	a	permanent	state,
an	eternal	state	of	orgasmic	joy	--	satchitanand.
Kabir	 is	 absolutely	 right.	Nobody	 else	 has	 said	 it	 so	 clearly:	My	 own	Lord	 is
making	love	with	me,	and	every	moment	of	the	day,	irrespective	of	where	I	am,
of	what	I	am	doing.
This	has	to	become	the	experience	of	each	of	my	sannyasins.
This	is	my	message	to	you.	You	have	to	actualize	this	potential	in	you.	One	day
you	have	to	be	able	to	declare	to	the	world:	"The	Lord	is	making	love	with	me
twenty-four	hours	a	day.	I	am	in	an	orgasmic	state.	Not	only	am	I	in	an	orgasmic
state,	but	I	am	the	orgasmic	state."
That's	what	enlightenment	is	all	about.	Once	it	is	achieved,	nobody	can	fall	from
it.	Once	it	is	achieved,	all	is	achieved.
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	The	Paradox	that	Life	is.
21	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904210
ShortTitle:
FISH11
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
110
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 PLEASE	COMMENT	ON	THE	ART	OF	BALANCED	LIVING.	MR
LIFE	IS
OFTEN	AN	EXPERIENCE	OF	EXTREMES,	WITH	THE	MIDDLE	ROAD
DIFFICULT	TO	MAINTAIN	FOR	ANY	LENGTH	OF	TIME.
Gregg	Johnson,
LIFE	CONSISTS	OF	EXTREMES.	Life	is	a	tension	between	the	opposites.	To
be	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle	 for	 ever	 means	 to	 be	 dead.	 The	 middle	 is	 only	 a
theoretical	possibility;	only	once	in	a	while	are	you	in	the	middle,	as	a	passing
phase.	It	is	like	walking	on	a	tightrope:	you	can	never	be	exactly	in	the	middle
for	any	length	of	time.	If	you	try,	you	will	fall.
To	be	in	the	middle	is	not	a	static	state,	it	is	a	dynamic	phenomenon.	Balance	is
not	a	noun,	it	 is	a	verb;	 it	 is	BALANCING.	The	tightrope-walker	continuously
moves	from	the	left	to	the	right,	from	the	right	to	the	left.	When	he	feels	now	he
has	 moved	 too	 much	 to	 the	 left	 and	 there	 is	 fear	 of	 falling,	 he	 immediately
balances	himself	by	moving	to	the	opposite,	to	the	right.	Passing	from	the	left	to
the	right,	yes,	there	is	a	moment	when	he	is	in	the	middle.	And	again	when	he
has	moved	too	much	to	the	right,	there	is	fear	of	falling,	he	is	losing	balance,	he
starts	moving	towards	the	left.	Passing	from	the	right	to	the	left,	again	he	moves
through	the	middle	for	a	moment.
This	is	what	I	mean	when	I	say	balance	is	not	a	noun	but	a	verb	--	it	is	balancing,
it	 is	 a	 dynamic	 process.	You	 cannot	 be	 in	 the	middle.	You	 can	 go	 on	moving
from	left	to	right	and	right	to	left;	this	is	the	only	way	to	remain	in	the	middle.
Don't	 avoid	 extremes,	 and	 don't	 choose	 any	 one	 extreme.	Remain	 available	 to
both	 the	polarities	 --	 that	 is	 the	art,	 the	secret	of	balancing.	Yes,	 sometimes	be
utterly	happy,	and	sometimes	be	utterly	sad	--	both	have	their	own	beauties.
Our	mind	 is	a	chooser;	 that's	why	 the	problem	arises.	Remain	choiceless.	And
whatsoever	happens	and	wherever	you	are,	right	or	left,	in	the	middle	or	not	in
the	 middle,	 enjoy	 the	 moment	 in	 its	 totality.	 While	 happy,	 dance,	 sing,	 play
music	--	be	happy!	And	when	sadness	comes,	which	is	bound	to	come,	which	is
coming,	which	has	to	come,	which	is	inevitable,	you	cannot	avoid	it...	if	you	try
to	avoid	 it	you	will	have	 to	destroy	 the	very	possibility	of	happiness.	The	day
cannot	be	without	the	night,	and	the	summer	cannot	be	without	the	winter,	and
life	cannot	be	without	death.
Let	this	polarity	sink	deep	in	your	being	--	there	is	no	way	to	avoid	it.	The	only
way	is	to	become	more	and	more	dead.	Only	the	dead	person	can	be	in	a	static
middle.	The	alive	person	will	be	constantly	moving	--	from	anger	to	compassion,
from	compassion	 to	anger.	And	he	accepts	both!	And	he	 is	not	 identified	with
either.	He	remains	aloof	and	yet	involved.	He	remains	distant	yet	committed.	He
enjoys	and	yet	he	 remains	 like	a	 lotus	 flower	 in	water	 --	 in	water,	 and	yet	 the
water	cannot	touch	it.
Gregg	Johnson,	your	very	effort	to	be	in	the	middle,	and	to	be	in	the	middle	for
ever	and	always,	is	creating	an	unnecessary	anxiety	for	you.	In	fact,	to	desire	to
be	in	the	middle	for	ever	is	another	extreme,	the	worst	kind	of	extreme,	because
it	is	the	impossible	kind.
It	cannot	be	fulfilled.
Just	 think	of	an	old	clock:	 if	you	hold	 the	pendulum	exactly	 in	 the	middle,	 the
clock	will	stop.	The	clock	continues	only	because	the	pendulum	goes	on	moving
from	 the	 left	 to	 the	 right,	 from	 the	 right	 to	 the	 left.	 Yes,	 each	 time	 it	 passes
through	 the	 middle,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 moment	 of	 that	 middleness,	 but	 only	 a
moment.	 And	 it	 is	 beautiful!	When	 you	 pass	 from	 happiness	 to	 sadness,	 and
from	 sadness	 to	 happiness,	 there	 is	 a	 moment	 of	 utter	 silence	 exactly	 in	 the
middle	--	enjoy	that	too.
Life	has	to	be	lived	in	all	its	dimensions,	only	then	is	life	rich.	The	leftist	is	poor,
the	rightist	is	poor,	and	the	middlist	is	dead!	The	alive	person	is	neither	rightist
nor	leftist	nor	middlist	--	he	is	a	constant	movement,	he	is	a	flow.
Why	do	we	want	to	be	in	the	middle	in	the	first	place?	We	are	afraid	of	the	dark
side	of	life;	we	don't	want	to	be	sad,	we	don't	want	to	be	in	a	state	of	agony.	But
that	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 are	 also	 ready	 to	 drop	 the	 possibility	 of	 being	 in
ecstasy.	There	are	a	few	who	have	chosen	it	--	that	is	the	way	of	the	monk.	For
centuries	 that	 has	 been	 the	 way	 of	 the	 monk.	 He	 is	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	 all
possibilities	of	ecstasy	just	to	avoid	agony.	He	is	ready	to	destroy	all	roseflowers
just	to	avoid	the	thorns.	But	then	his	life	is	just	flat...	a	long	long	boredom,	stale,
stagnant.	He	does	not	really	live.	He	is	afraid	to	live!
Life	 contains	 both:	 it	 brings	 great	 pain,	 it	 also	 brings	 great	 pleasure.	 Pain	 and
pleasure	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	If	you	leave	one,	you	have	to	leave	the
other	 too.	This	has	been	one	of	 the	most	fundamental	misunderstandings	down
the	ages,	that	you	can	leave	pain	and	save	pleasure,	that	you	can	avoid	hell	and
have	 heaven,	 that	 you	 can	 avoid	 the	 negative	 and	 can	 have	 only	 the	 positive.
This	is	a	great	fallacy.	It	is	not	possible	in	the	very	nature	of	things.	The	positive
and	 negative	ARE	 together,	 inevitably	 together,	 indivisibly	 together.	 They	 are
two	aspects	of	the	same	energy.
My	sannyasins,	or	 those	who	understand	me,	have	 to	accept	both.	 I	am	giving
you	 a	 totally	 new	 insight:	 Be	 all!	 And	 when	 you	 are	 on	 the	 left,	 don't	 miss
anything	--	enjoy!
Being	on	 the	 left	has	 its	own	beauty;	you	will	not	 find	 it	when	you	are	on	 the
right.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 different	 scene.	 And,	 yes,	 to	 be	 in	 the	 middle	 has	 its	 own
silence,	 peace,	 and	 you	 will	 not	 find	 it	 on	 any	 extreme.	 So	 enjoy	 all!	 Go	 on
enriching	your	life.
Can't	you	see	any	beauty	in	sadness?	Meditate	over	it.	Next	time	when	you	are
sad	don't	fight	with	it,	don't	waste	time	in	fighting.	Accept	it,	welcome	it	--	let	it
be	a	welcome	guest.	And	see	deep	into	it,	with	love,	care.	Be	a	real	host!	And
you	will	be	surprised	--
you	 will	 be	 surprised	 beyond	 your	 comprehension	 --	 that	 sadness	 has	 a	 few
beauties	which	happiness	can	never	have.	Sadness	has	depth,	 and	happiness	 is
always	shallow.
Sadness	 has	 tears,	 and	 tears	 go	 deeper	 than	 any	 laughter	 can	 ever	 go.	 And
sadness	has	a	silence	of	 its	own,	a	melody,	which	happiness	can	never	have.	It
will	have	its	own	song,	more	noisy,	but	not	so	silent.
I	am	not	saying	choose	sadness:	I	am	just	saying	enjoy	it	too.	And	when	you	are
happy,	enjoy	happiness.	Swim	on	the	surface	too,	and	sometimes	dive	deep	into
the	river.	It	is	the	same	river!	On	the	surface	the	play	of	ripples	and	waves,	and
the	sunrays	and	the	wind	--	it	has	its	own	beauty.	And	diving	deep	into	the	water
has	its	own	quality,	its	own	adventure,	its	own	danger.
And	 don't	 become	 attached	 to	 anything.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 have	 become
attached	 to	 sadness	 too	 --	 psychology	 knows	 about	 them.	 They	 are	 called
masochists:	 they	go	on	creating	 situations	 in	which	 they	can	 remain	miserable
for	ever.	Misery	is	the	only	thing	that	they	enjoy,	they	are	afraid	of	happiness.	In
misery	they	are	at	home.
Many	masochists	become	religious,	because	religion	provides	a	great	protection
for	 the	 masochist	 mind.	 Religion	 gives	 a	 beautiful	 rationalization	 for	 being	 a
masochist.	 Just	 being	 a	 masochist	 without	 being	 religious,	 you	 will	 feel
condemned	and	you	will	feel	ill	-
-	ill-at-ease	--	and	you	will	know	that	you	are	abnormal,	and	you	will	feel	guilty
about	what	you	are	doing	to	your	life.	You	will	hide	the	fact.
But	 if	 a	masochist	 becomes	 religious	he	 can	 exhibit	 his	masochism	with	great
pride,	because	now	it	is	no	more	masochism	--	it	is	asceticism,	it	is	austerity	--
tapascharya	--	it	is	self-discipline,	not	torture.	Just	the	labels	have	been	changed!
Now	 nobody	 can	 call	 him	 abnormal	 --	 he	 is	 a	 saint.	 Nobody	 can	 call	 him
pathological	--	he	is	pious,	holy.
Masochists	have	always	moved	towards	religion.	Religion	has	a	great	attraction
for	masochists.	In	fact,	so	many	masochists	down	the	ages	have	moved	towards
religion	--	it	was	very	natural,	that	movement	--	that	religion	became	dominated
by	the	masochists.
That's	why	religion	goes	on	insisting	on	being	life-negative,	life-destructive.	It	is
not	 for	 life,	 it	 is	 not	 for	 love,	 it	 is	 not	 for	 joy.	 It	 goes	 on	 insisting	 that	 life	 is
misery.	By	calling	life	misery,	it	rationalizes	its	own	clinging	to	misery.
I	have	heard	a	beautiful	story	--	I	don't	know	how	far	it	is	correct,	I	cannot	vouch
for	it:	In	paradise,	one	afternoon,	in	the	most	famous	cafe,	Lao	Tzu,	Confucius
and	Buddha	are	sitting,	and	talking	sweet	nothings.
The	bearer	comes	and	in	a	 tray	brings	 three	glasses	of	 the	 juice	called	life	and
offers	them.	Buddha	immediately	closes	his	eyes	and	he	says,	"Life	is	misery."
Confucius	closes	his	eyes	half-way	--	the	middlist,	he	used	to	preach	the	golden
mean	--
and	asks	the	bearer	to	give	him	the	glass	because	he	would	like	to	have	a	sip,	just
a	sip,	because	without	tasting	how	can	one	say	whether	life	is	misery	or	not?	He
had	a	scientific	mind.	Confucius	was	not	very	mystic;	he	was	a	very	pragmatic,
earthbound	 mind.	 He	 was	 the	 first	 behaviourist	 the	 world	 has	 known,	 very
logical.
And	it	looks	perfectly	right:	he	says,	"First	I	will	have	a	sip	and	then	I	will	say."
He	takes	a	sip	and	he	says,	"Buddha	is	right	--	life	is	misery."	Lao	Tzu	takes	all
the	 three	 glasses	 and	 he	 says,	 "Unless	 one	 drinks	 totally	 how	 can	 one	 say
anything?"
He	 drinks	 all	 the	 three	 glasses	 and	 starts	 dancing!	Buddha	 and	Confucius	 ask
him,	"Are	you	not	going	to	say	anything?"	He	says,	"This	is	what	I	am	saying	--
my	dance,	my	song."
Unless	you	taste	totally,	you	cannot	say.	And	when	you	taste	totally,	you	cannot
say	because	what	you	know	is	so	much	that	no	word	is	adequate.
Buddha	is	on	one	extreme,	Confucius	is	in	the	middle,	Lao	Tzu	has	drunk	all	the
three	glasses.	The	one	 that	was	brought	 for	Buddha	he	has	drunk,	and	 the	one
that	was	brought	for	Confucius	he	has	drunk,	and	the	one	that	was	brought	for
him	he	has	drunk	--	he	has	lived	life	in	its	three-dimensionality.
My	own	approach	is	that	of	Lao	Tzu.
Gregg	Johnson,	live	life	in	all	possible	ways;	don't	choose	one	thing	against	the
other,	 and	 don't	 try	 to	 be	 in	 the	 middle.	 And	 don't	 try	 to	 balance	 yourself	 --
balance	is	not	something	that	can	be	cultivated	by	you.	Balance	is	something	that
comes	out	of	the	experience	of	all	the	dimensions	of	life.	Balance	is	something
that	HAPPENS;	it	is	not	something	that	can	be	BROUGHT.	If	you	bring	it	it	will
be	 false,	 forced;	 and	 if	 you	 bring	 it	 you	 will	 remain	 tense,	 you	 will	 not	 be
relaxed,	because	how	can	a	man	who	is	trying	to	remain	balanced,	in	the	middle,
be	relaxed?	He	will	always	be	afraid:	if	he	relaxes	he	may	start	moving	towards
the	left	or	towards	the	right	--	he	is	bound	to	remain	uptight.
And	to	be	uptight	is	to	miss	the	whole	opportunity,	the	whole	God-given	gift.
Don't	be	uptight.	Don't	 live	 life	according	to	principles.	Live	life	 in	 its	 totality,
drink	life	in	its	totality!	Yes,	sometimes	it	tastes	bitter	--	so	what?	That	taste	of
bitterness	will	make	 you	 capable	 of	 tasting	 its	 sweetness.	You	will	 be	 able	 to
appreciate	 the	 sweetness	 only	 if	 you	 have	 tasted	 its	 bitterness.	 The	man	 who
knows	 not	 how	 to	 cry	 will	 not	 know	 how	 to	 laugh	 either.	 And	 the	man	who
cannot	have	a	deep	laughter,	a	belly-laughter,	his	tears	will	be	crocodile	tears	--
they	cannot	be	true,	they	cannot	be	authentic.
I	don't	teach	you	the	middle	way:	I	teach	you	the	total	way.	And	then	a	balance
comes	of	its	own	accord.	And	then	that	balance	has	tremendous	beauty	and	grace
--	you	have	not	forced	it,	it	has	Come.	By	moVing	gracefully	to	the	left,	to	the
right,	 in	 the	 middle,	 slowly	 slowly,	 a	 balance	 COMES	 to	 you,	 because	 you
remain	so	unidentified.	When	sadness	comes	you	know	 it	will	pass,	and	when
happiness	comes	you	know	it	will	pass	too.	Nothing	remains.	Everything	passes
by.
The	 only	 thing	 that	 always	 abides	 is	 your	 witnessing.	 That	 witnessing	 brings
balance.
That	witnessing	is	balance.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 HOW	 CAN	 ONE	 DEVELOP	 A	 CONSCIENCE	 --	 SOMETHING
WITHIN
THAT	WILL	GUIDE	ONE	IN	ONE'S	EVERYDAY	LIFE	TOWARDS	WHAT	IS
NECESSARY	FOR	ONE'S	DEVELOPMENT?	TO	DO	WHAT	IS	REQUIRED
FOR
THE	 UNFOLDING	 OF	 ONE'S	 INNER	 LIFE?	 IT	 SEEMS	 AS	 IF	 I	 AM
ALWAYS	TORN
AND	YET	THERE	DOES	EXIST	SOMETHING	WITHIN	AT	TIMES	WHICH
I	HOPE
COULD	BE	HELPED	TO	GROW	AND	BECOME	A	LIGHT	FOR	ME.	CARL
ONE
LEARN	 TO	 INTENSIFY	 ONE'S	 FEELINGS	 AND	 EMOTIONS	 IN	 ORDER
TO
BRING	ONE	CLOSER	TO	A	PLACE	OF	REAL	BEING?
Steven,
THERE	 IS	NO	NEED	TO	DEVELOP	 a	 conscience	 at	 all.	What	 is	 needed	 is
consciousness,	 not	 conscience.	 Conscience	 is	 a	 pseudo	 thing.	 Conscience	 is
created	in	you	by	the	society.	It	is	a	subtle	method	of	slavery.	The	society	teaches
you	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	And	it	starts	teaching	the	child	before	the
child	is	aware,	before	the	child	can	decide	on	his	own	what	is	right	and	what	is
wrong,	before	 the	child	 is	even	conscious	of	what	 is	happening	 to	him,	before
the	child	is	even	awake.	In	a	kind	of	sleep,	in	a	kind	of	dream,	the	child	lives	in
the	beginning.
In	the	mother's	womb	the	child	sleeps	for	twenty-four	hours.	Then	after	the	birth
he	 sleeps	 for	 twenty-three	 hours,	 twenty-two	 hours,	 twenty-one	 hours,	 twenty
hours...	 slowly	 slowly.	 But	 he	 remains	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 limbo,	 neither	 awake	 nor
asleep.	The	child	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	what	is	real	and	what	is
unreal.	And	we	 start	 teaching	 the	 child	what	 is	 right,	what	 is	wrong	 --	we	are
conditioning	 him.	We	 are	 conditioning	 him	 according	 to	 our	 ideas.	 All	 these
ideas	--	from	parents,	from	priests,	teachers,	politicians,	saints	--	-all	these	ideas
jumble	together	inside	him.	They	become	his	conscience.
And	because	of	 this	conscience	he	will	never	be	able	 to	grow	consciousness	--
because	conscience	is	a	pseudo	consciousness.	And	if	you	are	satisfied	with	the
pseudo	you	will	never	even	 think	of	 the	 real.	 It	 is	very	deceptive;	 the	way	we
have	 been	 bringing	 up	 children	 is	 very	 deceptive.	 It	 is	 ugly,	 it	 is	 violent,	 it	 is
against	humanity.
That's	why	millions	of	people	live	without	any	consciousness.	Before	they	could
have	 grown	 into	 consciousness,	we	 gave	 them	 pseudo	 toys	 to	 play	with.	And
their	whole	lives	they	think	this	is	all	that	is	needed	to	live	a	good	life.	And	their
whole	lives	they	will	be	rewarded	if	they	follow	the	conscience,	and	they	will	be
punished	if	they	don't	follow	the	conscience.
From	the	outside	they	will	be	punished	and	rewarded,	and	from	the	inside	also.
Whenever	you	do	something	that	your	conscience	says	is	wrong,	you	feel	guilty,
you	 suffer,	 you	 feel	 inner	 pain.	 You	 are	 afraid,	 you	 are	 trembling...	 it	 creates
anxiety.	And	 the	 fear	 about	heaven,	 that	you	may	 lose	heaven,	 and	 the	 fear	of
hell,	that	you	may	fall	into	hell...	and	with	great	inventiveness	your	saints	have
painted	the	joys	of	heaven	and	the	miseries	of	hell.
This	 is	 conscience.	 Conscience	 is	 artificial,	 arbitrary.	 Conscience	 is	 needed
because	 the	 society	 does	 not	 want	 you	 to	 be	 intelligent.	 Hence,	 rather	 than
making	you	 intelligent	 it	 gives	you	 fixed	 rules	of	behaviour:	Do	 this,	 don't	 do
that.
The	day	humanity	 drops	 this	whole	 nonsense	 of	 conscience	 and	 starts	 helping
children	 to	 grow	 their	 consciousness	will	 be	 the	 greatest	 day,	will	 be	 the	 real
birth	of	humanity,	a	new	human	being	and	a	new	earth.	Then	we	will	help	 the
child	 to	 become	more	 intelligent,	 so	whenever	 a	 problem	 arises	 the	 child	 has
enough	intelligence	to	encounter	it,	to	face	it,	to	respond	to	it.	Why	should	one
need	any	conscience?	Intelligence	is	enough,	consciousness	is	enough.
Consciousness	will	make	you	capable	of	responding	to	the	present	immediately,
and	 your	 response	will	 be	 true.	Conscience	 is	 old,	 and	 the	 situation	 is	 always
new	--	and	your	conscience	is	ALWAYS	old.	There	is	no	meeting-ground.	You
go	on	 responding	according	 to	 the	conscience	cultivated	 in	you	by	 the	society,
forced	 into	 you	 by	 the	 society,	 conditioned	 in	 you	 by	 the	 society	 --	 and	 the
situation	is	totally	different!
One	of	my	friends	went	to	Tibet.	He	is	a	very	religious	brahmin,	very	orthodox.
He	went	there	to	study	Buddhist	scriptures,	but	he	could	not	stay	in	Tibet	--	he
had	 to	 come	 back	 as	 quickly	 as	 possible.	 The	 journey	 was	 simply	 a	 sheer
wastage,	an	unnecessary	trouble,	because	to	go	into	Tibet	is	not	easy.
And	the	problem	was	that	from	his	very	childhood	he	had	been	taught	to	take	a
cold	bath	before	the	sun	rises.	Now.	to	take	a	cold	bath	in	Tibet	before	the	sun
rises...	he	was	telling	me	that	it	was	impossible.	And	if	he	did	not	take	the	cold
bath	before	sunrise,	 the	whole	day	he	would	 feel	guilty.	He	had	been	 told	 that
without	 taking	 a	 cold	 bath	 in	 the	 morning	 you	 cannot	 pray,	 your	 prayer	 is
useless.	And	without	prayer	you	cannot	 eat	 anything.	So	he	was	 taking	a	cold
bath	 in	 the	morning,	 and	 that	was	dangerous	 to	 life.	 In	Tibetan	 scriptures	 it	 is
said	that	once	a	year	it	is	a	must	that	one	should	take	a	bath!
Once	a	few	Tibetan	lamas	came	to	stay	with	me,	and	those	were	the	days	when
Maneesha	was	not	there	and	Radha	was	not	there	to	smell	these	people	--	and	I
suffered	so	much...
For	those	few,	seven,	eight	days	that	they	stayed	in	my	house,	I	was	almost	out
of	the	house.	Any	excuse	and	I	would	escape	from	the	house	--	the	whole	house
was	stinking,	because	they	would	not	take	a	bath.	And	a	hot	summer	in	India...
and	they	would	not	take	any	bath!	They	were	following	their	conscience.
It	 has	 been	 such	 a	 difficult	 thing	 for	me	 to	 talk	 to	 Jaina	monks.	They	used	 to
come	to	see	me;	it	was	so	difficult	to	talk	with	them	--	because	they	don't	cleanse
their	mouths,	rinse	their	mouths,	they	don't	clean	their	teeth.	That	is	not	allowed.
That	is	thought	to	be	a	part	of	beautifying	the	body	--	-and	how	can	a	Jaina	monk
beautify	the	body?	He	is	so	dead	set	against	it.
Just	to	talk	to	them	is	so	difficult	--	they	have	such	bad	breath.	It	is	bound	to	be
so.	 And	 the	 Jaina	 monks	 are	 not	 allowed	 to	 take	 a	 bath	 either,	 because	 why
should	you	be	so	careful	about	your	body?	--	the	anti-body	attitude.	Their	bodies
stink,	their	mouths	stink.
One	 Jaina	 nun	 became	 so	 much	 impressed	 by	 me	 and	 be-came	 so	 much
interested	in	me	that	I	 told	her,	"You	can	at	 least	 take	a	sponge	bath	--	nobody
will	know.	Just	a	wet	towel,	you	can...	and	nobody	will	ever	know	that	you	have
taken	the	bath."
The	idea	appealed	to	her.	She	took	one	sponge	bath,	felt	very	good	and	very	bad
too.	She	 told	me,	 "It	 feels	very	good	and	 I	 feel	 fresh,	but	 it	hurts	 inside	 that	 I
have	committed	a	sin.
Do	you	ever	think	when	you	take	a	bath	that	you	have	committed	a	sin?	And	she
had	not	even	taken	a	full	bath	--	just	a	sponge	bath,	just	a	wet	towel	rubbed	all
over	 the	 body.	 But	 she	 felt	 so	 guilty	 that	 she	 had	 to	 fast	 for	 three	 days	 as
repentance.
This	 is	 conscience.	Conscience	goes	on	making	you	 a	 fool.	Situations	 change,
but	 the	conscience	cannot	change,	 it	 cannot	grow	 --	 conscience	 remains	 static.
You	go	on	living	with	ideas	that	were	given	to	you	in	your	childhood,	by	your
ignorant	 parents,	 ignorant	 teachers.	 And	 you	will	 live	 according	 to	 them,	 and
you	will	suffer	much.	And	your	response	will	never	be	true	because	it	will	never
fit	with	the	situation.	You	will	always	be	lagging	behind.
Responsibility	simply	means	the	capacity	to	respond	to	the	reality	as	it	is	--	and
it	 changes,	 the	 reality	 changes,	 and	 the	 conscience	 remains	 fixed.	 That's	 the
difference	between	conscience	and	consciousness.
Consciousness	 is	 a	 mirror.	 Conscience	 is	 a	 photoplate.	 Once	 a	 photoplate	 is
exposed,	 it	 is	 finished;	 it	 catches	 the	 picture	 and	 then	 that	 picture	 remains	 for
ever,	fixed.	It	cannot	grow,	remember.
One	woman	was	 showing	her	 child	 the	 family	 album,	 and	 they	 came	across	 a
picture	 of	 a	 beautiful	 man	 with	 black	 hair,	 very	 fresh,	 young.	 And	 the	 child
asked,	"Who	is	this,	Mom?"	And	the	mother	said,	"Don't	you	recognize	him?	He
is	 your	 father!"	And	 the	 child	 said,	 "He	 is	my	 father?	Then	who	 is	 that	 bald-
headed	man	who	lives	with	us?"
In	 reality,	 things	 change.	Beautiful	black	hair	disappears	 --	one	becomes	bald-
headed.
But	in	pictures	things	are	fixed.
Conscience	is	a	photoplate	and	consciousness	is	a	mirror.	It	also	reflects,	but	it
never	clings	to	any	reflection.	It	remains	empty,	and	hence	it	remains	capable	of
reflecting	new	situations.	If	it	is	morning,	it	reflects	the	morning.	If	it	is	evening,
it	reflects	the	evening.
The	 photoplate	 is	 fixed;	 if	 you	 exposed	 it	 in	 the	morning	 then	 it	 will	 always
remain	morning	in	the	photo,	it	will	never	become	evening,	night.
There	 is	 no	 need,	 Steven,	 to	 develop	 a	 conscience.	 The	 need	 is	 to	 drop	 the
conscience	 and	 develop	 consciousness.	Drop	 all	 that	 you	 have	 been	 taught	 by
others,	 and	 start	 living	 on	 your	 own	 and	 searching	 and	 seeking....	 Yes,	 in	 the
beginning	 it	 will	 be	 difficult	 because	 you	 won't	 have	 any	 map.	 The	 map	 is
contained	by	the	conscience.	You	will	have	to	move	without	the	map,	you	will
have	 to	 move	 into	 the	 uncharted,	 with	 no	 guidelines.	 Cowards	 cannot	 move
without	 guidelines;	 cowards	 cannot	move	without	maps.	And	when	you	move
with	maps	and	guidelines,	you	are	not	really	entering	into	new	territory,	into	new
realms	--	you	are	going	in	circles.	You	go	on	moving	into	the	known;	you	never
take	a	jump	into	the	unknown.	It	is	only	courage	that	can	drop	conscience.
Conscience	means	all	 the	knowledge	 that	you	have.	And	consciousness	means
being	 empty,	 being	 utterly	 empty,	 and	 moving	 into	 life	 with	 that	 emptiness,
seeing	through	that	emptiness	and	acting	out	of	that	emptiness	--	then	action	has
tremendous	grace.	And	 then	whatsoever	you	do	 is	 right.	 It	 is	not	a	question	of
what	 is	 right	and	what	 is	wrong,	because	something	 that	 is	 right	 today	may	be
wrong	tomorrow.	And	borrowed	knowledge	never	helps.
Homer	and	Jethro	were	digging	a	ditch	in	the	blazing	Mississippi	sun.	Seeing	the
boss	 sitting	 coolly	 in	 the	 shade	 above	 them,	Homer	 put	 down	 his	 shovel	 and
said,	"How	come	he	is	up	there	and	we	are	down	here?"
"I	dunno,"	said	Jethro.
Homer	went	up	to	the	boss	and	asked	him,	"How	come	you	boss	up	here	and	we
work	down	there?"
The	boss	answered,	"Because	I	am	smart."
"What	is	smart?"	asked	Homer.
"Here,"	said	the	boss	putting	his	hand	on	a	tree,	"I	will	show	you.	Try	to	hit	my
hand."
Homer	wound	up	a	mighty	swing	and	let	fly.	Just	as	he	swung,	the	boss	moved
his	hand	away,	and	Homer	crashed	into	the	tree.
"Owwww!!!"	he	screamed.
The	boss	said	coolly,	"Now	you	are	smart	too."
Homer	 went	 back	 to	 the	 ditch.	 Jethro	 asked	 what	 happened	 and	 Homer	 said,
"Now	I	am	smart."
Jethro	said,	"What	is	smart?"
Homer	said,	"I	will	show	you."
He	looked	around	for	a	 tree,	and	not	seeing	one,	he	put	his	hand	over	his	own
face.
"Here,"	he	said,	"try	to	hit	my	hand...."
That's	 what	 goes	 on	 with	 your	 so-called	 knowledge,	 conscience	 --	 situations
change,	trees	are	no	more	found...	but	you	have	a	fixed	routine	and	you	cannot
do	anything	else,	you	go	on	repeating	your	routine.	And	life	has	no	obligation	to
fit	with	your	routine.	You	have	to	fit	with	life.
A	VERY	STRANGE,	mysterious	 thing	 happened	 just	 twenty	 years	 ago	 in	 the
world	of	modern	physics.	It	destroyed	the	whole	Aristotelian	logic;	it	destroyed
all	 ancient	 certainties.	 Physicists	 came	 to	 know	 that	 electrons	move	 in	 a	 very
strange	way:	 they	behave	 simultaneously	as	 if	 they	are	particles	 and	also	as	 if
they	are	waves.	This	is	impossible!	Either	something	can	be	a	particle	or	it	can
be	a	wave.	In	the	language	of	geometry,	either	something	can	be	a	point,	a	dot,
or	 a	 line.	 but	 one	 thing	 cannot	 be	 both	 together:	 a	 point,	 a	 dot,	 and	 a	 line
together.	That	is	impossible.	But	that's	what	was	happening.
They	observed	and	observed,	and	the	behaviour	was	such	that	the	electrons	were
behaving	 in	 a	very	 illogical	way.	They	 tried	hard	 to	 figure	 it	 out,	 to	 somehow
manage	the	old	Aristotelian	logic,	that	A	is	A	and	A	is	never	not	A.	That	was	the
two-thousand-year-old	 thought,	 deep-rooted,	 that	 A	 can	 never	 not	 be	 A.	 And
that's	 what	 was	 happening:	 the	 particle	 was	 behaving	 like	 a	 wave	 --	 A	 was
behaving	not	like	A.	Now	what	to	do?
It	was	difficult	 to	discard	Aristotle,	very	difficult	--	a	 two	thousand	years'	 long
love	affair.
But	electrons	have	no	obligation,	 they	don't	bother	at	all	about	Aristotle.	They
were	 saying	 "Get	 lost!"	 And	 finally	 the	 physicists	 had	 to	 agree	 with	 the
electrons.	And	when	they	were	asked	again	and	again	"How	is	it	possible?"	they
said,	 "What	 can	we	do?	 It	 is	 not	 a	question	of	possible	or	not	possible	 --	 it	 is
happening!	It	is	so!	We	understand	that	it	is	illogical,	that	it	should	not	be	so,	but
what	can	we	do?	We	are	helpless!	The	electrons	don't	believe	in	Aristotle."
Aristotle	has	been	discarded	--	 the	two-thousand-year-old	tradition	of	 logic	has
become	simply	irrelevant.
Another	phenomenon	happened	after	a	few	years:	they	came	to	know	that	when
the	electron	moves	from	point	A	to	B,	in	the	middle	it	disappears.	Moving	from
point	A	to	B,	you	find	it	on	the	point	A,	then	suddenly	you	find	it	on	point	B,	but
in	the	middle	you	don't	find	it	at	all.
Now	this	 is	even	more	impossible.	Somebody	coming	from	Bombay	to	Poona;
you	 find	 him	 in	 Bombay,	 and	 then	 you	 find	 him	 in	 Poona,	 and	 on	 the	 way
nowhere	is	he	found!
This	is	strange,	unbelievable,	but	what	to	do?	That's	how	it	is.	So	another	great
ancient	idea	simply	had	to	be	dropped.	The	old	idea	was	that	nothing	can	come
out	of	nothing.
Now	 that	 is	 happening:	 in	 the	 middle	 it	 is	 nothing,	 in	 the	 beginning	 it	 is
something,	in	the	end	it	is	again	something.	So	out	of	something	nothing	comes,
and	out	of	nothing	something	comes	again.
But	this	has	been	the	experience	of	the	mystics	always.	This	is	new	for	modern
physics,	but	this	is	not	new	for	metaphysics	--	this	is	very	ancient.	Mystics	have
never	 believed	 in	Aristotle;	 they	 have	 always	 been	 anti-Aristotle	 --	 they	 have
always	been	illogical,	because	they	don't	know	what	 the	way	of	 the	electron	is
but	they	know	their	own	inner	consciousness.	And	there	too	they	have	observed
these	 miracles:	 that	 the	 ego	 is	 something,	 comes	 out	 of	 nothing,	 and	 then
disappears	into	nothing	again.	The	ego	arises	out	of	nothing,	becomes	very	solid,
and	then	one	day	in	meditation	you	simply	find	it	has	evaporated	again.
This	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient	 experiences	 about	 the	 ego:	 that	 one
moment	it	is	there,	another	moment	it	is	not	there,	and	again	it	is	there.	And	this
has	been	 the	 experience	 about	 time	 too,	 that	when	you	 are	 in	deep	meditation
time	simply	disappears	and	when	you	come	out	of	meditation	time	is	again	there.
The	mystics	have	known	it,	that	life	follows	no	logic,	that	life	is	basically	supra-
logical,	that	life	follows	no	reason,	that	fundamentally	it	is	irrational.	Conscience
is	very	arbitrary,	artificial.	 It	gives	you	a	 fixed	pattern,	a	 fixed	gestalt,	and	 life
goes	on	changing,	and	life	 is	very	uncertain,	 it	 id	very	zig-zag.	Unless	you	are
conscious	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 live	 your	 life	 truly;	 your	 life	will	 be	 only	 a
pretension,	a	pseudo-phenomenon.
You	will	always	be	missing	the	train.
And	 always	 missing	 the	 train	 is	 what	 creates	 anguish	 in	 man.	 Just	 think	 of
yourself	always	missing	the	train:	rushing	to	the	station,	and	whenever	you	reach
the	 train	 is	 leaving	 the	 platform.	That's	what	 happens	 to	 the	 person	who	 lives
according	 to	 the	 conscience:	 he	 never	 catches	 the	 train.	 He	 cannot!	 He	 has	 a
fixed	gestalt,	and	life	is	a	fluid	phenomenon.	He	has	a	rocklike	thing	inside	him
and	life	is	more	like	water.
Be	conscious.	Don't	ask	how	to	grow,	how	to	develop	a	conscience.	Here	we	are
trying	to	do	just	the	opposite:	destroying	conscience	--	the	Christian	conscience,
the	Hindu	conscience,	the	Mohammedan	conscience,	the	Jaina	conscience	--	we
are	destroying	all	kinds	of	conscience.	And	consciences	come	in	all	shapes	and
all	sizes.
Consciousness	 is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan	 --	 it	 is	 simply
consciousness.	Conscience	divides	people,	consciousness	unites.
Steven,	forget	all	about	conscience.	You	ask:
HOW	 CAN	 ONE	 DEVELOP	 A	 CONSCIENCE	 --	 SOMETHING	 WITHIN
THAT	WILL
GUIDE	ONE	IN	ONE'S	EVERYDAY	LIFE...?
What	 is	 the	 need	 of	 carrying	 a	 guide	 with	 you?	 Consciousness	 is	 enough!
Whenever	 a	 certain	 need	 arises,	 your	 consciousness	will	 respond.	You	 have	 a
mirror,	you	will	reflect	it.	And	the	answer	will	be	spontaneous.
When	I	was	a	student	at	university,	my	professors	were	very	much	worried	about
me.
They	 were	 worried	 --	 they	 loved	 me	 --	 they	 were	 worried	 because	 I	 never
prepared	 for	 the	examinations.	They	were	even	worried	 that	 I	might	answer	 in
such	a	way	that	the	examiner	may	not	even	be	able	to	see	the	point.
My	old	professor,	Dr.	S.	K.	Saxena,	he	used	to	come	just	early	in	the	morning	to
wake	 me	 up	 so	 that	 I	 could	 study	 a	 little	 bit.	 And	 he	 would	 sit	 in	 my	 room
saying,	"You	do	a	little	preparation."	And	he	would	leave	me	in	the	examination
hall,	then	he	would	go	home,	because	he	was	even	worried	that	I	may	not	go.
And	 when	 it	 came	 to	 the	 final	 oral	 examination,	 he	 was	 very	 very	 worried,
because	 I	 might	 say	 something	 that	 could	 offend	 the	 examiner.	 He	 was	 also
present;	he	was	the	head	of	the	department	so	he	was	present	and	the	examiner
was	present.	And	he	had	told	me,	warned	me	again	and	again,	"Simply	stick	to
the	 question!	Whatsoever	 he	 asks,	 you	 simply	 answer	 that.	 Don't	 go	 into	 any
depth	about	it	--	just	a	plain	answer,	the	answer	that	is	given	in	the	books	will	do.
And	I	will	be	there	and	if	I	see	that	you	are	going	astray,	I	will	just	give	you	a
push	with	my	foot	underneath	the	table	--	so	then	come	back	again	and	just	stick
to	the	question."
The	 first	 question	 and	 the	 problem	 arose.	 The	 professor	 who	 had	 come	 to
examine	asked,
"What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 Indian	 philosophy	 and	Western	 philosophy?"
And	my	professor	became	afraid,	because	he	knew	 that	 the	words	 'Indian'	 and
'Western'	were	enough	for	me...	and	that	was	so.	I	said,	"What	do	you	mean	by
Indian?	Can	 philosophy	 be	 Indian	 and	Western	 also?	 Then	 philosophy	 can	 be
Bengali	and	Maharashtran.	If	science	is	not	Indian	and	Western,	then	why	should
philosophy	be?"
And	my	professor	started	hitting	me,	and	I	told	my	professor,	"Don't	hit	me!	You
just	keep	yourself	away.	This	is	between	me	and	him.	You	are	not	supposed	to
give	me	any	hints.
Now	 the	 old	 examiner	 was	 at	 a	 loss:	 what	 to	 do?	 Whatsoever	 he	 asked,	 I
answered	him	by	another	question.	He	was	at	a	loss	because	he	was	just	carrying
ready-made	answers.	I	told	him,	"You	look	at	a	loss	because	you	can't	respond.
Now,	it	is	such	a	simple	thing	that	philosophy	is	philosophy	--	what	has	it	to	do
with	East	and	West?	Say	yes	or	no...!"
But	 the	 fixed	 gestalt:	 Indian	 philosophy	 --	 everything	 has	 to	 be	 Indian,
everything	has	to	be	Western,	everything	has	to	be	this	and	that...	adjectives	and
adjectives.	We	can't	think	of	this	earth	as	one.	We	can't	think	of	humanity	as	one.
Now,	what	is	Indian	about	Buddha?	and	what	is	Jewish	about	Jesus?	Nothing	at
all.	I	have	tasted	both	and	the	taste	is	the	same.	But	borrowed	knowledge	always
remains	 in	 you	 as	 a	 fixed	 thing,	 and	whenever	 you	 respond	 out	 of	 your	 fixed
ideas.	your	response	falls	short.	It	is	not	a	true	answer	to	the	reality.
So,	Steven,	there	is	no	need	to	develop	a	conscience	to	guide	you	--	there	is	no
need	 to	 have	 any	 guide!	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 intelligence,	 awareness,
consciousness,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 respond	 whatsoever	 the	 case	 is.	 Life	 brings
challenges,	 you	 bring	 consciousness	 to	 those	 challenges.	 And	 meditation	 is	 a
way	of	dropping	conscience	and	moving	into	consciousness.
The	miracle	 is:	 if	you	can	drop	conscience,	 consciousness	arises	on	 its	own	 --
because	consciousness	 is	 a	natural	phenomenon.	You	are	born	with	 it;	 just	 the
conscience	 has	 become	 a	 hard	 crust	 around	 it	 and	 is	 not	 allowing	 its	 flow.
Conscience	 has	 become	 the	 rock	 and	 the	 small	 spring	 of	 consciousness	 is
blocked	by	 the	 rock.	Remove	 the	 rock	and	 the	spring	starts	 flowing.	And	with
that	 spring	your	 life	 starts	moving	 in	a	 totally	different	way	 that	you	have	not
even	imagined	before,	you	could	not	have	even	dreamt.	And	everything	starts	to
fall	 in	 harmony	with	 existence.	And	 to	 be	 in	 harmony	with	 existence	 is	 to	 be
right	--	not	to	be	in	harmony	with	existence	is	wrong.
So	conscience	as	such	is	the	root	cause	of	ALL	wrong,	because	it	doesn't	allow
you	to	fall	in	harmony	with	existence.	And	consciousness	is	always	right	just	as
conscience	is	always	wrong.
And	you	ask:	CAN	ONE	LEARN	TO	INTENSIFY	ONE'S	FEELINGS	AND
EMOTIONS	IN	ORDER	TO	BRING	ONE	CLOSER	TO	A	PLACE	OF	REAL
BEING?
Neither	thoughts	will	help	to	bring	you	closer	to	your	being	nor	feelings	--	but
feelings	are	better	than	thoughts,	closer,	but	not	yet	the	real	thing.	First	one	has
to	drop	thoughts,	then	one	has	to	drop	feelings,	so	that	the	inner	world	becomes
totally	empty.	In	that	emptiness	your	consciousness	turns	upon	yourself	and	the
reality	is	known.
Truth	is	neither	a	thought	nor	a	feeling	nor	an	emotion.	Truth	is	the	experience	of
consciousness	 of	 itself.	 Soren	 Kierkegaard	 is	 right	 when	 he	 says:	 "Truth	 is
subjectivity."
Meditate	and	go	on	dropping...	there	are	layers	and	layers	and	layers.	Man	is	like
an	 onion	 --	 go	 on	 peeling.	Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 peeling	 the	 onion.	And	 of
course,	 when	 you	 peel	 the	 onion,	 tears	 come	 to	 the	 eyes	 --	 that	 has	 to	 be
accepted.	It	is	painful.	Go	on	peeling	the	onion	till	nothing	is	left	in	your	hand	--
that	nothing	is	reality.
You	can	call	 it	God,	you	can	call	 it	nirvana,	enlightenment,	or	whatsoever	you
want	 to	 call	 it.	 Names	 don't	 matter.	 But	 the	 real	 thing	 happens	 only	 when
NOTHING	has	happened.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	I	ALWAYS	DREAM	OF	SEX	AND	SEX	AND	SEX	--	WHY?
Ram	Das,
ARE	 YOU	 A	 FOLLOWER	 of	 Morarji	 Desai?	 Something	 is	 basically	 wrong
with	you.
Your	 dreams	 simply	 show	 that	 you	 are	 living	 a	 repressed	 life.	 Your	 dreams
reflect	how	you	are	living	your	life.	Your	dreams	are	not	just	dreams	--	they	are
reflections.
In	 the	waking	 time	 you	must	 be	 repressing	 sex;	 then,	 naturally,	 it	 is	 bound	 to
assert	itself	in	your	dreams.	Dreams	only	indicate	that	you	are	doing	something
wrong	with	your	life.
When	your	life	 is	really	harmonious,	 lived	consciously,	dreams	disappear	--	all
kinds	 of	 dreams	 disappear.	 Your	 whole	 sleep	 becomes	 dreamless.	 That	 is	 the
indication	 that	 the	 transformation	 is	 happening	 --	 that	 happens	 to	 every
meditator.	As	meditation	goes	deeper,	dreams	start	disappearing.
But	dreams	 show	something	about	you.	And	you	have	 to	 rethink,	you	have	 to
rearrange	your	life.	If	you	are	dreaming	only	of	sex,	that	simply	shows	you	are
sex-obsessed.	 And	 who	 is	 sex-obsessed?	 Whoever	 represses	 is	 bound	 to	 be
obsessed	by	 it.	Your	dreams	cannot	 just	be	 rejected	as	dreams	--	as	people	do.
They	think	they	are	 just	dreams,	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Your	dreams	are
symbolic.	Your	unconscious	 is	 trying	 to	convey	a	certain	message	 to	you,	 that
you	are	doing	something	wrong.
Ram	Das,	sex	is	part	of	life.	You	cannot	deny	it	--	you	can	transcend	it,	but	you
cannot	deny	it.	If	you	deny	it,	you	will	create	unnecessary	complexities	--	it	will
become	an	obsession.	And	it	will	create	perversions	in	your	life.
Morarji	Desai	drinks	his	own	urine	--	not	for	no	reason.	It	is	a	perversion.	It	is
rooted	in	sexual	repression.	Sexual	repression	can	take	many	kinds	of	perverted
forms.
Trying	to	fall	asleep,	a	Greek	shepherd	is	counting	sheep:	"One,	two,	three,	four,
five,	hello	darling...."
Antonio:	"Last	night	I	had	a	night-a	mare
Angelo:	"What-a	happened?"
Antonio:	"I	dreamt-a	I	was	eating	a-spaghetti
Angelo:	"Why	is	that	so	bad?"
Antonio:	"I	woke	up	and	a-the	string	on	a-my	pyjamas	was	a-gone."
Now	 Italians	 go	 on	 and	 on	 with	 spaghetti,	 spaghetti,	 spaghetti.	 Dreams	 will
reflect,	dreams	are	reflections.	If	sex	is	reflected	in	your	dreams,	reconsider	your
life.	Drop	all	 the	old	nonsense.	You	must	be	a	 typical	 Indian,	Ram	Das.	That's
what	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 Indian	 mind	 continuously.	 Even	 your	 saints	 are	 full	 of
obsessive	sex,	because	all	ways	to	transcend	sex	have	been	denied	them.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	all	kinds	of	sexual	perversions	were	invented
by	monks	and	nuns.	And	these	are	the	people	who	condemn.	But	psychologists
say	 that	 homosexuality	 was	 invented	 by	 the	 monks	 and	 the	 nuns	 --
homosexuality	is	a	religious	phenomenon.	And	so	are	other	things...
If	you	repress	something,	nature	is	going	to	take	revenge	on	you	And	remember,
you	cannot	fight	with	nature.	You	can	Will	nature,	not	by	fighting	with	it	but	by
being	with	it.
You	 can	 persuade	 nature	 to	 be	 with	 you	 and	 help	 you.	 And	 nature	 is	 very
compassionate.
But	once	you	 start	 fighting,	you	are	bound	 to	 lose.	Nature	 is	vast	 and	you	are
very	tiny.	It	is	like	a	wave	fighting	with	the	ocean,	a	small	leaf	fighting	with	the
whole	tree	--	it	is	stupid!	The	wave	can	win,	but	not	against	the	ocean	--	with	the
ocean.
And	that's	my	basic	teaching.
Sex	can	be	transcended	and	should	be	transcended,	but	transcendence	has	to	be
not	against	nature	but	with	nature,	Through	nature.	Accept	your	sexuality	--	it	is
part	of	you!
and	a	 tremendously	 important	part.	You	are	born	out	of	 sex.	Each	cell	of	your
body	is	a	sex	cell.	Sex	energy	is	your	life	energy!	--	respect	it,	 it	 is	a	gift	from
God.	Understand	it.
Be	 more	 and	 more	 meditative	 about	 it.	 But	 drop	 all	 prejudices,	 drop	 all
condemnations.
because	when	you	carry	a	condemnation	you	cannot	understand	a	thing.	Drop	all
judgements.	Sex	is	sex	--	it	is	a	pure	natural	energy.	With	great	acceptance,	love,
respect,	meditate	over	it.	Go	deeper	and	deeper	into	it	to	see	what	exactly	it	is.
And	in	that	very	seeing	you	will	be	going	beyond	it.
The	 day	 one	 has	 known	 what	 sex	 energy	 really	 is,	 one	 has	 transcended.	 Sex
disappears,	 but	 it	 disappears	 not	 by	 denying.	 But	 by	 understanding.	 And	 the
disappearance	is	not	really	the	destruction	of	the	energy	but	a	transformation.	In
existence	nothing	is	ever	destroyed,	things	are	only	transformed.
It	 is	 sex	 when	 it	 is	 transformed	 that	 becomes	 love.	 And	 it	 is	 love	 when	 it	 is
transformed	that	becomes	prayer.	And	it	is	prayer	in	its	ultimate	transformation
that	becomes	God.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 I	 DON'T	ACCEPT	YOUR	CRITICISM	OF	 SIGMUND	FREUD.	DO
YOU
ACCEPT	 A	 SANNYASIN	WHO	 SOMETIMES	 SAYS	 NO	 TO	WHAT	 YOU
SAY?	I	AM	NOT	LESS	NEUROTIC	THAN	FREUD,	BUT	I	THINK	THAT	I
CAN	BECOME
CREATIVE	 ONLY	 IF	 I	 LEARN	 TO	 ACCEPT	 THE	 NEUROTIC	 PART	 OF
MYSELF.
WHAT	DO	YOU	SAY	TO	THIS?
Wolfgang,
WHO	 HAS	 CRITICIZED	 SIGMUND	 FREUD?	 I	 was	 simply	 stating	 a	 few
facts!	To	state	a	fact	is	not	a	criticism.	If	I	call	a	blind	man	a	blind	man,	I	may	be
rude	but	I	am	not	criticizing.	I	may	be	blunt,	I	may	not	be	polite,	but	I	am	not
criticizing.
Freud	was	neurotic,	and	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	facts	supporting	this.	Just
look	into	Freud's	biographies	and	you	will	come	across	those	facts	yourself.	He
was	a	homosexual.
He	wrote	such	stupid	homosexual	letters	to	a	man	that	later	on	he	asked	the	man
again	and	again	to	destroy	those	letters,	because	when	he	became	famous	he	was
afraid	that	some	day	or	other	those	letters	would	come	to	public	notice.
The	major	part	of	those	letters	was	destroyed,	but	a	few	somehow	survived.	His
whole	 life	 he	 was	 condemning	 homosexuality,	 and	 he	 had	 deep	 homosexual
tendencies.
It	happens	almost	always	that	whatsoever	you	condemn	in	others	is	really	your
inner	problem.	The	other	is	just	a	scapegoat.
You	say:	I	AM	NOT	LESS	NEUROTIC	THAN	FREUD,	BUT	I	THINK	THAT	I
CAN
BECOME	 CREATIVE	 ONLY	 IF	 I	 LEARN	 TO	 ACCEPT	 THE	 NEUROTIC
PART	OF
MYSELF.
That	 is	 true.	 That's	 what	 I	 teach	 here:	 accept	 it!	 Freud	 never	 accepted	 his
neurotic	part.	He	not	only	never	accepted	it:	he	tried	to	deny	it,	he	tried	to	cover
it	up.
Once	Freud	and	 Jung	were	 travelling	 in	 a	 train,	 and	 they	 started	 talking	about
psychoanalysis.	 Suddenly	 Jung	 had	 a	 great	 idea	 --	 he	 said,	 "You	 have
psychoanalysed	so	many	people,	but	you	yourself	are	not	psychoanalysed.	It	will
be	 good	 if	 you	 also	 go	 through	 psychoanalysis.	 Somebody	 whom	 you	 have
psychoanalysed	and	whose	psychoanalysis	is	complete	can	psychoanalyse	you!"
And	Freud	became	so	afraid	--	even	just	the	idea	--	that	he	started	trembling	and
he	 fainted.	When	he	came	back	he	said,	 "I	cannot	allow	 that	 --	 I	cannot	allow
myself	to	be	psychoanalysed.	That	will	expose	me."
And	Jung	said,	"Then	you	are	already	exposed."
Freud	never	accepted	that	he	had	any	psychological	problems.	He	tried	to	deny
them,	 because	 the	 fear	was	 that	 if	 you	 have	 psychological	 problems,	 how	 can
you	be	the	founder	of	psychoanalysis?	He	tried	to	prove	that	he	was	superhuman
--	and	he	was	not	a	Buddha,	he	was	not	an	enlightened	person.	He	suffered	from
the	 same	 jealousies,	 paranoia,	 as	 everybody	 --	 in	 fact	more	 than	 the	 ordinary,
average	person.
All	his	old	colleagues	left	him	by	and	by,	and	the	reason	was:	he	was	so	jealous	-
-
anybody	who	was	reaching	closer	 to	him,	becoming	famous,	known,	he	would
feel	 so	 jealous,	 so	 afraid,	 that	 a	 competitor	 was	 born,	 that	 he	 would	 start
attacking	him.	He	did	 that	 to	Adler,	 to	 Jung,	and	 to	many	others.	ANYBODY,
his	OWN	disciples	--	he	was	afraid	of	his	own	disciples,	that	they	would	become
competitors	 or	 they	 may	 prove	 themselves	 more	 important	 than	 he	 was.	 He
could	 not	 conceive	 anybody	 being	 more	 important	 in	 the	 world	 of
psychoanalysis.
This	is	a	very	poor	kind	of	mind,	a	very	ordinary,	mediocre	mind.	And	he	was	so
political	 that	 the	 whole	 movement	 of	 psychoanalysis	 was	 continuously	 in	 a
turmoil.	Conspiracies	were	going	on	for	and	against	--	for	this,	against	that.	He
was	making	 his	 followers	 fight	with	 each	 other,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	way:
divide	 and	 rule.	He	was	putting	one	 follower	 against	 another.	He	was	 running
psychoanalysis	as	a	political	thing.
I	am	not	criticizing	him.	I	have	a	great	respect	for	the	man	--	in	spite	of	all	his
faults	 he	 made	 a	 great	 breakthrough.	 In	 spite	 of	 all	 his	 human	 limitations	 he
started	 a	 new	 dimension	 in	 human	 consciousness.	 He	 IS	 the	 founder	 of
psychoanalysis,	and	Jung,	Adler	and	others,	nobody	comes	close	to	him;	he	was
unnecessarily	 afraid.	 He	 was	 simply	 suffering	 from	 paranoia:	 nobody	 comes
close	to	him!	He	was	a	giant	among	pygmies.
But	the	giant	was	afraid	of	the	pygmies.	He	was	not	aware	of	his	own	strength	--
he	was	not	aware	at	all;	that	is	the	problem.
Wolfgang,	I	am	not	against	Freud.	And	you	ask	me:
DO	 YOU	 ACCEPT	 A	 SANNYASIN	 WHO	 SOMETIMES	 SAYS	 NO	 TO
WHAT	YOU
SAY?
Yes,	 that's	what	I	 teach.	When	your	consciousness	says	no,	say	no.	When	your
consciousness	 says	 yes,	 say	 yes.	 I	 don't	 create	 a	 conscience	 in	 you.	 I	 am	 not
creating	 followers	 here	 --	 no,	 not	 at	 all	 --	 but	 friends.	 Your	 no	 is	 as	 much
respected	as	your	yes.
That's	the	only	way	to	show	respect	towards	you	You	may	not	respect	yourself,
you	 may	 have	 a	 self-condemnatory	 attitude,	 but	 for	 me	 you	 are	 all	 potential
Buddhas.	 How	 can	 I	 disrespect	 a	 Buddha?	 --	 even	 though	 the	 Buddha	 is
potential,	even	though	you	are	in	the	seed.	But	I	can	see	the	flower!
In	Kirlian	photography	they	have	discovered	one	thing	which	is	very	significant:
with	very	 sensitive	photoplates	 pictures	 can	be	 taken	of	 a	 bud,	 but	 the	picture
will	show	not	the	bud	but	the	flower	that	is	going	to	happen	--	because	before	the
bud	opens,	 the	energy	 field	around	 the	bud	opens.	 Just	a	 few	hours	before	 the
bud	 really	 opens,	 its	 energy	 field	 opens.	 and	 Kirlian	 photography	 takes	 the
photograph	of	the	energy	field.	The	bud	has	not	opened	yet,	the	bud	is	still	a	bud,
but	Kirlian	photography	can	give	you	a	picture	of	the	future.	It	is	not	future	for
the	sensitive	plate	--	for	the	sensitive	plate	it	is	already	present.
Through	Kirlian	photography,	illnesses	can	be	caught	before	they	happen	to	you.
To	be	precise:	a	few	illnesses	have	been	caught	six	months	before	they	happened
--	there	was	no	possibility	to	even	suspect	that	the	man	was	going	to	fall	ill	after
six	months	from	a	certain	illness	--	there	is	no	way	to	know	about	it.	Nothing	has
happened	yet	 in	 the	body,	but	something	has	happened	 in	 the	energy	field	 that
surrounds	 the	 body.	 And	 Kirlian	 photography	 can	 take	 the	 photograph	 of	 the
energy	field	and	can	infer	through	the	photograph	that	this	man	is	going	to	have
cancer	 after	 six	 months.	 Now	 Kirlian	 photography	 is	 going	 to	 become	 a
tremendously	powerful	instrument	in	the	hands	of	the	future	medicine.	If	we	can
know	six	months	before,	then	much	can	be	done	--	then	nobody	need	fall	ill.	The
illness	can	be	prevented	even	before	it	has	happened.
And	that's	how	I	see	you.	Before	my	eyes	you	are	not	buds	but	flowers,	before
my	eyes	you	are	not	seeds	but	fully	grown	trees	--	great	foliage,	flowers,	fruits.
Before	me	you	are	Buddhas!	Hence	I	call	you	'friends'.	Kabir	calls	his	disciples:
Friends,	wake	up!
You	 are	 accepted,	Wolfgang,	with	 all	 your	 nos,	with	 all	 your	 yeses	 --	 you	 are
accepted	as	you	are.	 I	don't	make	any	condition.	 If	you	are	 ready	 to	become	a
sannyasin,	who	am	I	to	prevent	you?	The	chance	has	to	be	given	to	you	to	grow,
to	be.
The	last	question
Question	5
OSHO,	WHY	 IS	 THE	 NEW	 GENERATION	 SUCH	 A	 PROBLEM	 TO	 THE
PARENTS?
Narayana,
BECAUSE	THE	NEW	GENERATION	IS	MORE	INTELLIGENT.	Intelligence
brings	 problems.	 And	 it	 is	 natural	 that	 the	 new	 generation	 should	 be	 more
intelligent.	That's	 how	 evolution	 happens.	Each	 new	generation	 is	 going	 to	 be
more	 intelligent	 than	 the	preceding	one.	Your	children	will	be	more	 intelligent
than	 you,	 and	 your	 children's	 children	 will	 be	 more	 intelligent	 than	 your
children.
It	is	a	momentum,	a	gathering	momentum.	You	are	standing	on	the	shoulders	of
the	Buddhas	--	 the	whole	part	 is	yours.	For	example,	 in	my	being	Buddha	 is	a
part,Jesus	is	a	part,	Abraham	is	a	part,	Krishna	is	a	part,	Mohammed	is	a	part...
in	that	way	Buddha	was	poorer	 than	me,	Jesus	was	poorer	 than	me.	And	some
future	 enlightened	person	will	 be	 richer	 than	me,	because	 I	will	 be	part	 of	 his
being	but	he	cannot	be	part	of	my	being.
Evolution	goes	on	gathering	momentum.
Each	child	should	be	more	intelligent	than	the	parents	--	but	that	brings	trouble,
because	that	is	what	offends	the	parents.	Parents	would	like	to	pretend	that	they
are	all-knowing.
In	 the	 past	 it	 was	 easy	 to	 pretend	 because	 there	 was	 no	 other	 way	 to	 impart
knowledge	to	the	children	than	by	the	oral	communication	from	the	parents.
For	example,	a	carpenter's	son	would	learn	all	that	he	would	ever	learn	through
the	father.
The	father	would	not	only	be	the	father	but	the	teacher	also.	And	the	son	would
always	 be	 in	 awe	 and	 respect	 of	 him,	 because	 the	 father	 knew	 so	much	 --	 he
knew	everything	about	all	kinds	of	trees	and	wood	and	this	and	that,	and	the	son
knew	nothing.	He	would	have	tremendous	respect.
Age	 used	 to	 be	 respected:	 the	 older	 a	man	was	 in	 the	 ancient	 days,	 the	more
wise,	 of	 course,	 because	 of	 his	 experiences.	But	 now	we	 have	 invented	 better
means	of	communication.	The	 father	 is	no	more	 the	 teacher;	now	 the	 teaching
profession	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 profession.	 The	 child	 goes	 to	 the	 school.	 The
father	had	gone	 to	 the	 school	 thirty	or	 forty	years	before.	 In	 these	 thirty,	 forty
years	there	has	happened	a	knowledge	explosion.	The	child	will	learn	something
which	the	father	 is	not	aware	of,	and	when	the	child	comes	home,	how	can	he
feel	any	awe?	--	because	he	knows	more	than	the	father,	he	is	more	up	to	date
than	the	father.	The	father	seems	to	be	out-moded.
This	 is	 the	 problem,	 and	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 so	 more	 and	 more,	 because	 our
expectations	are	old	and	we	still	want	the	child	to	respect	the	parents	as	he	used
to	respect	them	in	the	past	--	but	the	whole	situation	has	changed.	You	will	have
to	learn	something	new	now:	start	respecting	the	child.	Now,	the	new	has	to	be
respected	 more	 than	 the	 old.	 Start	 learning	 from	 the	 child	 because	 he	 knows
better	 than	you.	When	your	son	comes	from	the	university,	he	certainly	knows
better	than	you.
That	 has	 been	my	 experience	 at	 university.	 One	 of	 my	 philosophy	 professors
used	 to	 talk	 such	nonsense,	 and	 the	 reason	was	 that	 he	had	been	 to	 university
thirty	 years	 before.	 In	 those	 days,	when	 he	was	 a	 student,	Hegel	 and	Bradley,
they	were	 the	most	 important	 figures	 in	 the	world	of	philosophy.	Now	nobody
cares	about	Hegel	and	Bradley.	Now	Wittgenstein	and	G.	E.	Moore	have	taken
their	place.
This	professor	had	no	 idea	of	Wittgenstein,	no	 idea	of	G.E.	Moore.	He	was	so
outmoded	that	I	had	to	tell	him.	"You	are	so	old,	so	useless,	that	either	you	start
reading	what	is	happening	now	in	philosophy	or	you	stop	teaching!"
Naturally,	he	was	angry	--	I	was	expelled	from	the	university.	He	wrote	a	letter	to
the	 vice	 chancellor	 and	 said,	 "Either	 I	 am	 going	 to	 teach	 or	 this	 student	 is	 to
remain	in	the	university.	but	we	cannot	both	remain	together	--	he	is	trouble."
He	was	 not	 ready	 to	 read	Wittgenstein.	 In	 fact,	 I	 can	 understand	 his	 problem:
even	 if	 he	 had	 read	 he	 would	 not	 have	 understood.	 Wittgenstein	 is	 a	 totally
different	 world	 from	Hegel.	 And	 he	 used	 to	 talk	 about	 Hume	 and	 Berkeley...
which	are	 rotten	names,	no	more	of	 any	 significance	 --	part	of	history,	part	of
footnotes.
This	is	the	problem.	You	ask	me,	Narayana:
WHY	IS	THE	NEW	GENERATION	SUCH	A	PROBLEM	TO	THE	PARENTS?
They	 are	 not	 really	 a	 problem:	 your	 expectation	 that	 they	 should	 respect	 you,
that	they	should	respect	you	as	children	have	always	respected	their	parents	--	it
is	 impossible.	You	 start	 respecting	 them.	You	 start	 respecting	 the	 new.	Age	 in
itself	 cannot	 now	 be	 any	 reason	 for	 respect.	 Intelligence,	 consciousness,	 they
should	be	respected.	And	if	you	respect	your	children,	they	will	respect	you.	But
only	if	you	respect	your	children	will	they	respect	you.	The	old	way	was	that	you
go	on	humiliating	the	children,	you	go	on	insulting	them	in	every	possible	way,
and	they	have	to	respect	you	--	now	this	cannot	be	so	any	more.
The	preacher's	wife,	while	shopping,	noticed	a	sign	in	the	butcher's	shop:	"Dam
Ham	on	Sale."	Slightly	taken	aback	by	such	a	name,	she	confronted	the	butcher
about	the	use	of	profanity,	but	was	reassured	when	he	explained	that	this	was	a
new	breed	of	hogs	being	raised	up	by	Hoover	Dam,	hence	the	name	'Dam	Ham'.
She	decided	to	take	some	home	and	fix	it	for	her	family	that	evening.
When	 her	 husband	 arrived	 home,	 she	was	 cooking	 and	 he	 asked,	 "What's	 for
dinner?	'
"Dam	ham,"	she	replied.
The	 minister,	 who	 had	 never	 heard	 such	 language	 in	 his	 house,	 began	 to
reproach	her,	but	after	she	explained	he	felt	a	little	embarrassed	for	doubting	his
wife.
That	evening	as	they	sat	down	to	dinner	with	their	six-year-old	son,	the	minister
said	grace	and	then	asked,	"Pass	the	dam	ham,	please."
The	 little	 kid	 looked	 up,	 his	 eyes	 got	 big,	 and	 he	 said,	 "Now	you	 are	 talking,
Dad.	Pass	the	fucking	potatoes	too!"
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	Who	Am	I?
22	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904220
ShortTitle:
FISH12
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
102
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
HOW	TO	SACRIFICE	THE	EGO?
Deva	Ahuti,
IT	IS	IMPOSSIBLE.	THE	EGO	CANNOT	BE	SACRIFICED	because	 the	ego
exists	not.
The	ego	is	just	all	idea:	it	has	no	substance	in	it.	It	is	not	something	--	it	is	just
pure	nothing.	You	give	it	reality	by	believing	in	it.	You	can	withdraw	belief	and
the	reality	disappears,	evaporates.
The	ego	is	a	kind	of	absence.	Because	you	don't	know	yourself,	hence	the	ego.
The	 moment	 you	 know	 yourself,	 no	 ego	 is	 found.	 The	 ego	 is	 like	 darkness;
darkness	has	no	positive	existence	of	 its	own;	 it	 ii	simply	 the	absence	of	 light.
You	cannot	fight	with	darkness,	or	can	you?	You	cannot	throw	darkness	out	of
the	room;	you	cannot	take	it	out,	you	cannot	take	it	in.	You	cannot	do	anything
with	darkness	directly.	If	you	want	to	do	anything	with	darkness,	you	will	have
to	do	something	with	light.	If	you	put	the	light	on,	 there	is	no	darkness;	 if	you
put	the	light	off,	there	is	darkness.
Darkness	 is	 only	 the	 absence	of	 light	 --	 so	 is	 ego:	 absence	of	 self-knowledge.
You	cannot	sacrifice	it.
It	has	been	told	to	you	again	and	again:	"Sacrifice	your	ego"	--	and	the	statement
is	 patently	 absurd,	 because	 something	 that	 does	not	 exist	 cannot	 be	 sacrificed.
And	if	you	try	to	sacrifice	it,	something	which	is	not	there	in	the	first	place	at	all,
you	will	be	creating	a	new	ego	--	the	ego	of	the	humble,	the	ego	of	the	egoless,
the	ego	of	the	person	who	thinks	he	has	sacrificed	his	ego.	It	will	be	a	new	kind
of	darkness	again.
No,	I	don't	say	to	you:	Sacrifice	the	ego.	On	the	contrary,	I	say:	Try	to	see	where
the	ego	is.	Look	DEEP	into	it;	try	to	locate	it,	where	it	exists,	whether	it	exists	at
all	or	not.
Before	one	can	sacrifice	anything	one	must	be	certain	about	its	existence.
But	don't	be	against	it	from	the	very	beginning.	If	you	are	against	it,	you	cannot
look	 deep	 into	 it.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 against	 anything.	 The	 ego	 is	 your
experience	--	maybe	it	is	just	apparent,	but	it	is	still	your	experience.	Your	whole
life	moves	around	the	phenomenon	of	the	ego.	It	may	be	a	dream.
But	to	you	it	is	so	true.
There	is	no	need	to	be	against	it.	Dive	deep	into	it,	go	into	it.	Going	into	it	means
bringing	 awareness	 into	 your	 house,	 bringing	 light	 into	 darkness.	 Be	 alert,
watchful.
Watch	the	ways	of	the	ego,	how	it	functions,	how	it	manages	at	all.	And	you	will
be	surprised:	the	deeper	you	go	into	it,	the	less	it	is	found.	And	when	you	have
penetrated	 to	 the	 very	 core	 of	 your	 being,	 you	 will	 find	 something	 totally
different	which	 is	not	ego,	which	 is	egolessness.	 It	 is	self,	 supreme	self	 --	 it	 is
God.	You	have	disappeared	as	a	separate	entity;	you	are	no	more	an	island,	now
you	are	part	of	the	whole.
In	that	experience	of	being	one	with	the	whole,	the	ego	IS	sacrificed,	but	that	is
only	a	way	of	speaking,	a	metaphor.	Don't	take	it	literally.
Try	 to	 understand	 the	 ego.	Analyse	 it,	 dissect	 it,	watch	 it,	 observe	 it,	 from	 as
many	 angles	 as	 possible.	And	don't	 be	 in	 a	 hurry	 to	 sacrifice	 it,	 otherwise	 the
greatest	 egoist	 is	 born:	 the	 person	 who	 thinks	 he	 is	 humble,	 the	 person	 who
thinks	that	he	has	no	ego.
That	 is	 again	 the	 same	 story	 played	 on	 a	 more	 subtle	 level.	 That's	 what	 the
religious	people	have	been	doing	down	the	ages:	pious	egoists	 they	have	been.
They	 have	 made	 their	 ego	 even	 more	 decorated;	 it	 has	 taken	 the	 colour	 of
religion	 and	 holiness.	 Your	 ego	 is	 better	 than	 the	 ego	 of	 a	 saint;	 your	 ego	 is
better,	 far	 better	 --	 because	 your	 ego	 is	 very	 gross,	 and	 the	 gross	 ego	 can	 be
understood	 and	 dropped	 more	 easily	 than	 the	 subtle.	 The	 subtle	 ego	 goes	 on
playing	such	games	that	it	is	very	difficult.	One	will	need	absolute	awareness	to
watch	it.
The	ego	of	the	sinner	is	more	easily	dropped	than	the	ego	of	the	saint.	And	the
saint	can	always	manage	to	pretend.	And	his	ego	is	so	polished,	so	decorated,	so
holy,	so	sanctified	by	tradition,	by	convention,	by	the	crowd,	that	he	may	almost
forget	about	it.
The	 real	 search	 is	 not	 to	make	 your	 ego	 humble;	 that	 is	 ego	 standing	 upside-
down,	ego	doing	SHIRSHASAN	--	headstand.	Avoid	it.	Rather,	follow	a	totally
different	path:	meditate	on	the	phenomenon	of	ego,	enquire	what	it	is.	And	as	the
enquiry	deepens,	the	ego	disappears.	Enquiring	into	the	ego	you	will	come	to	the
self.
And	 remember:	 the	 self	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 ego,	 because	 the	 self	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 you	 at	 all.	 The	 self	 is	 always	 the	 supreme	 self:	 AHAM
BRAHMASMI!	--	I	am	God!
At	 that	 point,	 you	 are	 not,	 only	 God	 is:	 Tat-tvam-asi	 --	 thou	 art	 that.	 At	 that
point,	 there	 is	 no	 distinction	 between	 thou	 and	 that.	 The	 dewdrop	 has
disappeared	into	the	ocean	and	has	become	the	ocean	itself.
But	 no	 sacrifice	 --	 the	 non-substantial	 cannot	 be	 sacrificed,	 it	 can	 only	 be
understood.
And	 in	 the	 very	 understanding	 is	 the	 disappearing.	 And	 this	 disappearance	 is
beautiful,	because	it	does	not	leave	any	traces	behind,	no	scars,	no	wounds.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	RATIONALIZATION?	I	AM	ASKING	THIS	QUESTION
BECAUSE	MY	HUSBAND	IS	A	PROFESSOR	OF	PHILOSOPHY	AND
WHATSOEVER	I	SAY	HE	ALMOST	ALWAYS	SAYS	IT	IS	NOTHING	BUT
A	RATIONALIZATION.
Malti,
RATIONALIZATION	IS	A	TRICK	OF	THE	MIND	to	deceive	not	only	others
but	 yourself	 too.	 Your	 husband	 may	 be	 practising	 rationalization	 himself.
Whenever	 he	 says	 to	 you,	 "This	 is	 a	 rationalization,"	 it	may	 be	 nothing	 but	 a
rationalization	on	his	part.	He	wants	 to	avoid,	he	wants	 to	escape;	he	does	not
want	to	answer	directly.	He	condemns	you.
And	of	 course	he	uses	a	big,	very	big	word:	 rationalization.	And	naturally	 the
wife	is	cowed	down	--	there	must	be	something	wrong.	And	the	husband	knows,
and	 he	 is	 a	 professor	 of	 philosophy,	 so	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 know.	He	 is	 practising
rationalization	himself.
Rationalization	is	not	true	reasoning;	it	is	a	strategy,	a	pretension.	It	pretends	to
be	rational	but	it	is	not.
"Why	do	you	drink?"	asked	Hogan.
"Booze	killed	me	mother,"	answered	Kehoe,	"and	booze	killed	me	father	--	I	am
drinking	for	revenge!"
This	is	a	rationalization.	If	you	want	to	drink,	drink!	But	this	is	a	very	subtle	way
of	deceiving	yourself	and	others.
From	a	diary	of	an	Italian	girl	on	a	Caribbean	cruise:
Monday	--	was	invited	to	dine	at	the	Captain's	table.
Tuesday	--	spent	the	day	with	the	Captain.
Wednesday	--	Captain	made	ungentlemanly	proposals	to	me.
Thursday	 --	 Captain	 said	 he	 would	 sink	 the	 ship	 if	 I	 did	 not	 agree	 to	 his
proposals.
Friday	--	saved	five	hundred	lives.
This	 is	 rationalization.	Man	 is	 very	 cunning;	 man's	 cunningness	 is	 unlimited.
And	people	go	on	doing	things	in	the	name	of	reason.
Today	Acharya	Vinoba	Bhave	is	going	to	start	his	fast	unto	death	--	because	he
wants	a	total	ban	on	cow	slaughter.	He	calls	it	his	religious	duty.	How	can	this	be
a	 religious	 duty?	 This	 is	 blackmail;	 this	 is	 threatening	 the	 country.	 And	 from
where	has	he	got	 the	 idea?	He	says	 that	his	mother	appeared	 in	his	dream	and
told	him,	"This	is	the	work	that	you	have	to	do."
Now,	for	his	dream,	and	a	mother	of	the	dream,	he	is	threatening	the	country:	"I
will	commit	suicide	if	you	don't	listen	to	me."	But	rather	than	saying	it	directly,
"I	will	commit	suicide,"	he	says	he	will	fast	unto	death.
And	 these	people	are	 thought	 to	be	 saintly,	 and	 these	people	are	 thought	 to	be
great	 preachers	 of	 non-violence.	 That's	 exactly	 what	 his	 master,	 Mahatma
Gandhi,	did	his	whole	life;	now	he	is	perpetuating	the	rotten	tradition.	For	these
thirty	years	at	least,	India	has	suffered	from	these	people	--	and	there	seems	to	be
no	end	to	it.
This	 is	 called	non-violence.	 If	 I	 threaten	 somebody	 that	 "I	will	kill	you	 if	you
don't	listen	to	me,"	I	will	be	caught	by	the	police.	I	will	be	a	criminal	against	the
law.	But	 if	 I	 threaten	 that	 "I	will	 kill	myself	 if	 you	don't	 listen	 to	me,"	 this	 is
thought	to	be	some	holy	act.
This	 is	 strange	 that	nobody	says,	 "These	people	 should	 immediately	be	caught
and	 brought	 into	 the	 court	 --	 because	 they	 are	 threatening	 suicide,	 and	 it	 is	 a
crime	against	the	law."	Any	attempt	to	commit	suicide	is	a	crime	against	the	law.
But	Vinoba	Bhave	is	a	saint.
Morarji	 Desai	 went	 to	 see	 him	 to	 persuade	 him:	 "Don't	 do	 it!"	 because	 he
himself	has	been	doing	it,	the	same	thing.	That's	how	he	bas	come	in	power:	by
threatening	to	commit	suicide.
These	are	subtle	ways	of	coercion,	violence.	Who	is	one	single	person	to	decide
for	 the	whole	 country?	Then	 somebody	 can	 say,	 "I	will	 fast	 unto	 death	 unless
everybody	stops	smoking	--	because	my	mother	appeared	in	the	dream	and	she
said,	'Son,	this	great	work	you	have	to	do.'"
Coercion	becomes	non-violence.	A	threat	to	commit	suicide	becomes	a	beautiful
thing	 when	 you	 call	 it	 'fast	 unto	 death'!	 And	 rather	 than	 being	 caught	 by	 the
police	 and	brought	 before	 the	 court,	 the	 prime	minister	 runs,	 the	ministers	 are
running	 and	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	persuade	him:	 "Don't	 go	on	your	 fast	 unto
death."	And	nobody	is	saying	that	this	is	a	crime!
These	are	rationalizations.	One	can	do	anything	if	one	has	a	cunning	and	clever
mind	to	rationalize	it.
Malti,	sometimes	you	may	be	rationalizing	--	watch	it.	But	my	own	experience
of	women	is	that	they	are	not	great	rationalizers	--	men	are	bigger	rationalizers,
because	 women	 live	 more	 intuitively,	 more	 instinctively,	 and	 man	 lives	 more
through	the	head,	through	reason.
Women	don't	bother	much	about	logic.	Their	behaviour	is	more	or	less	illogical	-
-
instinctive,	spontaneous.	They	don't	 try	to	masquerade	it	 in	a	logical	way;	they
simply	jump	from	one	point	to	another	without	bothering	about	the	Aristotelian
process	of	logic.
They	 simply	 jump!	 Their	 leaps	 are	 quantum,	 from	 one	 point	 to	 another.	 You
cannot	see	what	the	bridge	is,	how	they	manage	to	get	from	one	point	to	another.
Their	ways	are	totally	different	from	men's.
Malti,	more	possibility	is	that	your	husband	is	rationalizing,	that	this	is	his	way
of	 putting	 you	 down.	 He	 uses	 philosophical	 jargon:	 rationalization.	 And,	 of
course,	 you	 become	 afraid	 --	 you	 have	 done	 something	 wrong.	 I	 can't	 think,
Malti,	that	you	can	do	much	of	a	rationalization;	women	don't	indulge	in	it.	But
it	 is	 better	 to	 understand,	 because	 to	 be	with	 a	 husband	who	 is	 a	 professor	 of
philosophy	it	is	better	to	understand	what	rationalization	is.	And	now,	next	time,
whatsoever	your	husband	says,	you	simply	say,
"This	is	a	rationalization,'	and	watch	what	happens.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	about	a	psychiatrist	who	was	mending	his	car,
and	his	boy	was	playing	with	a	little	girl	from	the	neighbourhood	on	the	balcony
on	the	first	story.	And	down	below	he	was	tinkering	with	his	car.
Suddenly	 the	 boy	 pushed	 the	 girl	 from	 the	 balcony	 and	 she	 fell	 down	 on	 the
ground.	The	father	was,	of	course,	angry.	He	looked	up	and	before	he	could	say
anything,	the	boy	asked,	"Dad,	can	you	tell	me	why	I	did	it?	You	are	supposed	to
be	the	psychoanalyst,	psychiatrist	--	tell	me	why	I	did	it."
Next	time	your	husband	says	anything,	don't	be	worried	about	it	--	just	say,	"This
is	a	rationalization."	He	is	using	a	big	word;	a	few	people	are	obsessed	with	big
words.	But	rationalization	is	a	subtle	process;	people	indulge	in	it	--	men	more.	I
have	rarely	come	across	a	woman	who	indulges	in	rationalization;	except	the	lib
women	nobody	 indulges	 in	 rationalization.	They	 are	 following	 all	 the	way	 the
footsteps	of	men.
But	it	is	good	to	understand	what	it	is,	and	if	you	indulge	in	it,	it	is	better	not	to
indulge	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 camouflage.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 be	 authentic,	 true,	 rather	 than
hiding	yourself	behind	smoke	screens.
Now,	it	will	be	good	if	Vinoba	Bhave	simply	says,	"I	want	to	impose	my	will	on
this	country,"	that	will	be	simple.	"I	am	ready	to	die	if	my	will	is	not	accepted."
But	that	he	will	not	say,	"I	want	to	impose	my	will	on	this	country,"	because	then
he	will	be	exposed:
"Who	 are	 you	 to	 impose	 your	 will?	 This	 is	 a	 democracy.	 You	 cannot	 impose
your	will.
You	have	a	single	vote	--	a	single	vote	equal	to	everybody	else's	vote.	Nobody's
vote	is	more	valuable,	so	who	are	you?"
But	this	is	how	this	goes	on....
Morarji	 Desai	 wants	 to	 impose	 prohibition	 on	 the	 country.	 Who	 are	 you	 to
impose	 such	 things?	Then	where	 is	 freedom	 and	where	 is	 democracy?	Yes,	 if
you	 are	 against	 alcohol,	 teach,	 express	 yourself,	 argue,	 persuade...	 that's	 what
democracy	means.	Persuade	people!
If	you	are	against	cow	slaughter,	go	around	and	persuade	people	not	to	eat	cow
meat.	But	threatening	that	you	will	commit	suicide	is	very	totalitarian	dictatorial,
undemocratic.	 It	 is	 a	 crime	 against	 the	 people,	 against	 the	 law,	 against
democracy.
But	 you	 can	 hide	 the	 fact	 in	 religious	 terminology,	 you	 can	 go	 on	 doing
something	with	 a	mask.	And	 people	wear	masks:	 rationalization	 is	 one	 of	 the
ways	of	wearing	masks.
Be	 true.	Be	authentic.	There	 is	no	need	 to	be	untrue,	because	 the	more	untrue
you	become,	the	farther	and	farther	you	will	be	from	God.
I	am	not	worried	about	your	husband	--	 I	am	worried	about	your	being	farther
and	farther	away	from	God.	If	you	indulge	in	strategies	like	rationalization,	you
will	never	come	closer	to	your	own	inner	self	where	God	resides.	Drop	all	false
faces	so	that	you	can	find	your	original	face.	And	to	find	the	original	face	is	the
greatest	blessing	and	the	greatest	benediction	in	life.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	WHEN	THIS	QUESTION	ARISES	 --	WHO	AM	 I?	 --	 I	GET	VERY
AFRAID.
IS	THERE	SOMETHING	TO	BE	SAID	ABOUT	IT?
Prem	Dada,
THIS	QUESTION	MAKES	EVERYBODY	AFRAID.	It	is	nothing	exceptional;
it	 is	 absolutely	 the	 case	 with	 everybody.	Whoever	 wants	 to	 go	 deep	 into	 the
question,	into	the	quest,	of	"Who	am	I?"	is	bound	to	feel	fear	at	a	certain	point.
Why?	Because	there	comes	a	point	where	you	cross	the	boundary	of	the	ego	and
enter	into	the	world	of	egolessness.
That	point	is	the	point	of	great	fear	--	because	it	looks	like	death.	And,	in	fact,	it
is	a	kind	of	death:	the	ego	disappears.
And	up	to	now	that	has	been	your	identity.	Up	to	now	that's	what	you	have	been
thinking	you	are.	And	suddenly	it	starts	evaporating.	A	great	fear	grips	the	heart:
"I	am	dying!"
because	your	 identity	 is	dying.	You	are	not	really	dying;	 in	fact,	you	are	being
born.	It	is	a	rebirth,	it	is	a	true	birth.
It	is	like	the	seed	dying	into	the	soil.	The	seed	must	be	feeling	afraid,	nervous,
trembling.
How	can	the	seed	trust	that	once	he	is	gone	there	will	be	a	great	tree	and	great
flowering?
The	seed	will	not	be	 there	 to	witness	 it;	no	seed	has	ever	witnessed	 it,	 so	how
can	this	seed	believe	and	trust?
And	the	same	happens	with	the	ego:	the	ego	cannot	trust	that	there	is	anything
more	than	itself	And	the	ego	is	dying,	and	the	ego	starts	breathing	its	 last,	and
you	become	afraid.
Many	people	turn	back	from	that	point,	rush	back	out.
This	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 to	 every	 meditator.	 Hence,	 Dada,	 your	 question	 is
significant,	very	significant.	Every	meditator	has	to	encounter	this	situation,	this
challenge.	ManY
times	people	come	to	 the	point	from	where	they	would	have	entered	into	God,
but	 they	 could	 not	 risk,	 they	 could	 not	 gather	 courage.	 They	 became	 afraid,
scared;	they	rushed	out.
You	 have	 to	 take	 the	 risk.	 And	 I	 tell	 you,	 from	my	 own	 experience,	 it	 is	 not
death.	Yes,	 it	 is	 a	death	 to	 the	ego,	but	 the	death	of	 the	ego	 is	 the	birth	of	 the
soul.	You	will	die	as	a	drop,	but	you	will	be	born	as	the	ocean.	It	is	worth	it.	You
will	be	dying	only	as	a	limited	being,	as	a	defined	being,	and	you	will	be	born	as
undefined,	undefinable.
Yes,	you	will	disappear,	with	all	your	neurosis,	psychosis.	with	all	your	tensions,
anxieties,	 anguishes:	 you	 will	 disappear	 with	 all	 your	 problems,	 worries;	 you
will	disappear	as	you	have	known	yourself	up	to	now.	But	your	disappearance	is
only	a	change	of	garments,	and	you	will	be	getting	closer	to	your	reality,	deeper
into	your	reality.	You	will	get	more	rooted	into	being.
That's	the	whole	search!
You	 ask	 me:	 WHEN	 THIS	 QUESTION	 ARISES	 --	 WHO	 AM	 I?	 --	 I	 GET
VERY
AFRAID.
It	 is	natural.	 It	 is	a	good	sign	 that	you	are	coming	closer	 to	 the	boundary.	You
may	 be	 standing	 exactly	 on	 the	 boundary;	 that's	 why	 whenever	 the	 question
arises,	immediately	you	become	afraid.	Feel	blessed	that	you	are	so	close	to	the
boundary	from	where	a	totally	new	world	and	a	totally	new	life	can	have	a	start.
Just	one	single	step...	 and	you	will	be	a	new	man,	and	you	will	be	an	original
man.	Just	a	single	step,	and	all	the	garbage	that	the	society	has	dumped	on	you
will	 have	 dropped,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 just	 a	 pure	 consciousness.	 You	 will	 have
wings!	Now	you	 are	 just	 crawling	on	 the	 earth...	 and	 then	you	will	 be	 able	 to
soar	high	towards	the	sun.
To	be	with	a	Master	 simply	means	 to	 learn	 trust,	 to	 learn	 the	art	of	 risking,	 to
learn	the	ways	of	adventuring	into	the	unknown.	Yes,	the	sea	is	uncharted,	and	it
is	dangerous	to	leave	the	shore,	but	it	is	only	the	people	who	leave	the	shore	who
taste	something	of	immortality.	It	is	only	the	people	who	take	the	risk	of	going
into	danger	who	really	 live;	others	only	pass	 through	 life,	but	 they	really	don't
live.	Others	only	vegetate;	others	only	move	through	empty	gestures.
So	now	this	is	a	very	decisive	moment	for	you.	You	can	go	back,	you	can	cling
to	your	identity,	or	you	can	go	ahead,	not	looking	hack	at	all.	Be	courageous!	I
can	only	say	this	much:	that	the	same	has	happened	to	me,	the	same	fear	--	it	is
human.	I	had	also	gone	back	and	forth.	To	cross	this	line	is	really	difficult.	But
sooner	or	later,	one	decides	--
because	going	and	coming	back	does	not	help.	And	once	you	have	come	so	close
to	the	line,	you	cannot	be	satisfied	with	your	ordinary	life	any	more.	So	you	can
go	 out,	 but	 there	 you	will	 find	 everything	 has	 become	meaningless.	Now	you
will	be	in	a	dilemma.
And	this	 is	 the	work	of	a	Master:	 to	create	 the	dilemma.	The	without	becomes
meaningless,	 and	 the	 within	 seems	 to	 be	 dangerous.	 To	 live	 the	 ordinary	 life
again	 becomes	 impossible,	 and	 to	 take	 the	 jump	 into	 the	 new	 also	 seems
impossible.	But	sooner	or	later,	one	decides	to	take	the	jump	--	because	what	is
the	point	of	clinging	to	something	that	has	become	meaningless,	which	has	lost
all	significance!	How	long	can	you	cling	to	it?
The	Master	waits,	 the	Master	 remains	 patient.	 He	 allows	 you	 to	 go	 back	 and
forth,	he	goes	on	watching	that	you	are	shunting	in	and	out.	But	he	knows	one
thing:	that	every	day	the	outer	will	go	on	losing	its	significance	more	and	more.
One	 day	 it	will	 be	 utterly	 useless,	 absurd,	 to	 be	 there.	And	 as	 the	 outer	 loses
significance,	 the	 inner	will	become	more	and	more	magnetic	 --	 simultaneously
the	process	happens.
And	one	day	it	becomes	irresistible	--	one	has	to	cross	the	line.	And	that	day	is
the	 greatest	 day	 in	 a	 human	being's	 life,	when	you	drop	your	 old	 identity	 and
enter	into	the	unknown	--	you	have	encountered	God,	you	have	come	home.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 I	 ALWAYS	 BELIEVED	 THAT	 AN	 AMERICAN,	 A	 CHINESE,	 AN
AFRICAN,	A	SWEDE,	AN	 INDIAN,	COULD	BE	HAPPY	AND	CONTENT
AND
COMMUNICATE	 WITH	 ONE	 ANOTHER	 DESPITE	 THEIR	 VARYING
COLOURS,	 HABITS,	 BELIEFS,	 ETCETERA,	 JUST	 AS	 LONG	 AS	 THEY
WERE	NATURAL	AND
HONEST	WITH	THEMSELVES	AND	EACH	OTHER.	WHY	 IS	MANKIND
MAKING
THIS	IMPOSSIBLE	FOR	MANKIND?
Darius	M.	Mody,
IT	 IS	 IMPOSSIBLE	TO	HAVE	BELIEFS	and	still	 live	 in	peace.	The	belief	 is
the	 root	 cause	 of	 all	 conflict.	 Only	 a	 world	 of	 agnostic	 seekers	 can	 be	 one.
Believers	cannot	allow	the	world	to	be	one.
For	example,	the	Christian	believes	that	it	is	only	through	Christ	that	salvation	is
possible
--	now,	how	is	a	Mohammedan	going	to	tolerate	it?	The	very	idea	is	a	danger	for
him.	He	believes	 that	only	 through	Mohammed	 is	 true	salvation	possible.	And
how	 can	 this	 be	 tolerated	 by	 the	Buddhist	who	 thinks	 that	 except	 for	Buddha
there	 has	 never	 been	 another	 enlightened	 person?	Buddha	 and	Mahavira	 lived
together,	 they	were	contemporaries,	but	Buddhists	don't	 think	 that	Mahavira	 is
enlightened;	neither	do	Jainas,	 the	followers	of	Mahavira,	 think	 that	Buddha	 is
enlightened.	Now,	how	is	a	Jaina	going	 to	believe	 that	Jesus	 is	enlightened?	--
because	he	is	not	a	vegetarian,	he	is	a	non-vegetarian.	How	can	a	non-vegetarian
become	 enlightened?	 The	 belief	 of	 the	 Jaina	 is	 that	 one	 who	 becomes
enlightened	 is	bound	 to	be	vegetarian.	How	can	he	kill?	His	belief	 is	going	 to
become	a	barrier.
And	ask	the	Christian	--	he	cannot	believe	in	Mahavira	because	he	never	helped
the	poor.
Just	standing	under	a	tree	naked,	meditating	with	closed	eyes,	looks	very	selfish
to	the	Christian.	Mahavira	should	have	opened	at	least	a	few	hospitals,	schools;
he	never	did	anything.	He	did	not	do	any	miracles	either	 --	giving	eyes	 to	 the
blind,	 raising	dead	people	back	 to	 life.	What	kind	of	enlightened	person	 is	he?
No	 miracle,	 no	 service	 to	 humanity	 --	 only	 talks	 about	 non-violence,	 but	 no
compassion	 in	 his	 acts,	 in	 deed.	 The	 Christian	 cannot	 believe	 that	 Buddha	 is
enlightened.	What	service	has	he	done	for	humanity...?
Now,	 these	 differing	 beliefs	 divide	 people.	 Belief	 is	 the	 way	 of	 division.
Humanity	can	be	one	only	when	people	drop	beliefs.	And	that's	what	I	am	trying
to	do	here.	Be	an	enquirer,	don't	be	a	believer.	Enquire	into	truth,	but	don't	start
with	a	prejudice	--	don't	start	as	a	Christian	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Hindu.
Darius,	you	say:	I	ALWAYS	BELIEVED	THAT	AN	AMERICAN,	A	CHINESE,
AN
AFRICAN,	 A	 SWEDE,	 AN	 ITALIAN,	 ALL	 COULD	 BE	 HAPPY	 AND
CONTENT
AND	COMMUNICATE	WITH	ONE	ANOTHER	DESPITE	THEIR	VARYING
COLOURS,	 HABITS,	 BELIEFS,	 ETCETERA,	 JUST	 AS	 LONG	 AS	 THEY
WERE
NATURAL	AND	HONEST	WITH	THEMSELVES	AND	EACH	OTHER.
The	American	believes	in	the	American	way	of	life,	and	the	Indian	believes	in
the	Indian	way	of	life	--	the	conflict	is	there.	And	the	Indian	believes	that	India	is
the	 only	 holy	 country	 in	 the	 world,	 the	 only	 religious	 country	 in	 the	 world.
American.	The	very	word	smells	of	materialism.	To	the	Indian	mind,	 the	word
'American'	 means	 something	 absolutely	 irreligious,	 unholy.	 The	 American
represents	to	him	the	man	of	indulgence.
And	 to	 the	American	 the	Indian	symbolizes	snobbery,	hypocrisy,	egoism.	How
can	these	people	meet?	The	American	has	to	drop	his	being	American,	and	the
Indian	 has	 to	 drop	 his	 being	 Indian.	We	have	 to	 start	 thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 the
whole	 earth.	 Religious	 beliefs,	 political	 beliefs,	 beliefs	 of	 all	 kinds,	 divide
people.	And,	hence,	all	beliefs	are	dangerous,	poisonous.
You	can	see	here,	Darius,	people	of	all	races,	all	countries,	all	religions,	meeting
--	with	NO	problem.	And	never	is	it	being	told	to	them:	"Be	tolerant	of	others"	--
because	the	very	idea	of	being	tolerant	carries	intolerance	in	it.	Why	should	it	be
told	to	somebody:
"Be	tolerant	of	others"?	It	simply	means	that	there	is	intolerance	and	one	has	to
learn	to	tolerate.
It	 is	 never	 told	 here	 to	 anybody	 that	Hinduism	 and	Christianity	 and	 Islam	 all
mean	the	same	thing;	to	say	so	means	that	you	are	suspicious.	Mahatma	Gandhi
used	to	say	that	the	Koran	and	the	Gita	and	the	Dhammapada,	they	all	mean	the
same	 thing.	 And	 with	 great	 effort	 he	 used	 to	 try	 to	 find	 similarities	 --	 why
bother?	 The	 very	 effort	 shows	 that	 there	 is	 suspicion.	 And	 the	 effort	 cannot
succeed,	because	they	are	not	similar.	The	Koran	has	its	own	beauty	and	the	Gita
has	its	own	beauty,	and	they	are	not	similar,	not	at	all.
Trying	 to	 impose	 similarity	 on	 such	 unique,	 original	 scriptures	 is	 really
sickening.	How	can	Mahavira	and	Krishna	have	the	same	message?	It	is	not.	Just
think	 if	Arjuna	had	 told	Mahavira,	 "I	want	 to	 renounce	 the	world	and	 the	war
and	I	want	to	go	to	the	forest"	--
Mahavira	 would	 have	 immediately	 initiated	 him	 into	 renunciation.	 He	 would
have	said,
"That's	 what	 you	 should	 have	 done.	 It	 is	 already	 late;	 but,	 still,	 good.	War	 is
violence,	and	it	is	good	that	an	insight	is	born	in	you	--	renounce	the	world	and
go	to	the	forest."
But	Krishna	persuaded	him	not	to	go	to	the	forest:	"Fight	the	war	because	this	is
your	duty.	And	your	very	being	is	such	that	you	can	only	be	a	warrior;	your	type
is	such.
Renunciation	won't	suit	you,	 it	won't	 fit	you.	You	will	be	a	misfit,	and	even	in
the	forest	you	will	start	hunting;	you	will	not	be	able	to	meditate,	you	will	hunt.	I
know	you	well,	I	know	you	from	your	very	childhood.	And	all	this	nonsense	that
you	are	talking	about	is	nothing	but	a	rationalization.	You	are	not	against	war!"
And	he	was	not	--	Krishna	was	right,	his	insight	was	deep	--	he	was	not	against
war.	He	was	really	against	killing	his	own	people.
The	 war	 was	 a	 family	 war	 between	 brothers,	 and	 on	 both	 the	 sides	 were
relatives.
Because	the	fight	was	between	cousin-brothers,	all	the	relatives	had	to	divide	--	a
few	 had	 gone	 to	 this	 side,	 a	 few	 to	 that	 side.	 One	 brother	 was	 on	 this	 side,
another	 brother	was	on	 that	 side.	Even	Krishna	himself	 had	divided;	 his	 army
was	fighting	on	the	other	side	and	he	himself	was	fighting	with	Arjuna,	because
both	were	 his	 friends	 and	 both	 had	 asked	 his	 help.	 So	 he	 had	 said,	 "You	 can
choose:	one	can	take	my	army	and	one	can	take	me."
Arjuna's	own	teacher	from	whom	he	had	learnt	all	that	he	knew	about	war,	who
had	made	 him	 a	 perfect	 warrior,	 Drona,	 he	 was	 on	 the	 other	 side	 --	 his	 own
master,	 from	whom	he	had	 learnt	archery,	he	was	fighting	on	 the	other	side.	 It
was	really	a	family	war.	And	Arjuna	was	not	against	war:	he	was	against	killing
one's	own	people.	Seeing	the	whole	war-field	full	of	his	own	people	--	a	few	on
this	 side,	 a	 few	 on	 that	 side	 --	 and	 both	would	 be	 killed	 and	many	would	 be
killed	--	he	started	thinking,	"What	is	the	point	of	it	all?
Killing	my	own	family!	It	is	better	I	should	renounce."
He	was	not	against	violence.	If	his	own	people	had	not	been	involved,	he	would
have	enjoyed	the	war	like	anything.	Krishna	persuaded	him	to	see	the	fact	 that
he	was	 rationalizing;	 all	 this	 nonsense	 talk	 about	 non-violence,	 no	war,	 peace,
renunciation,	 was	 just	 a	 rationalization.	 He	 forced	 him	 to	 see	 the	 trick	 of	 his
mind.
Now,	how	can	you	say	Mahavira	and	Krishna	are	saying	the	same	thing?	They
are	not	saying	the	same	thing.
My	own	experience	 is	 this,	 that	 all	 those	who	have	become	enlightened	 in	 the
world	--
and	 Moses	 is	 enlightened,	 and	 Zarathustra	 is	 enlightened,	 and	 Lao	 Tzu	 is
enlightened	and	Mohammed	and	Jesus	and	Krishna,	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Kabir,
and	many	many	more	--
what	 they	 have	 experienced	 is	 the	 same.	 But	 still	 their	 personalities	 are	 so
different,	 their	 individuality	 is	 so	 unique,	 that	 their	 expressions	 are	 utterly
different	 and	you	cannot	 force	by	ally	 strategy	 to	make	 it	 appear	 that	 they	are
saying	the	same	thing	--	they	are	not.
Their	 experience	 is	 the	 same,	 their	 ultimate	 experience	 is	 the	 same,	 but	 their
choice	 of	 how	 life	 should	 be	 lived,	 how	 that	 ultimate	 experience	 should	 be
approached,	 is	 totally	different.	Their	paths	are	different,	 their	goal	may	be	the
same	--	but	the	goal	will	be	known	only	when	you	have	arrived,	not	before	that.
Before	the	goal	you	will	have	to	follow	the	path.
MAHATMA	 GANDHI	 WAS	 TRYING	 somehow	 to	 prove	 that	 the
Mohammedan	and	the	Hindu	and	the	Jaina	are	all	saying	the	same	thing.	It	was	a
forgery,	 because	 he	 was	 choosing	 from	 the	 Koran	 only	 sentences	 which	 are
harmonious	with	the	Gita,	and	not	choosing	sentences	which	are	disharmonious
with	the	Gita.	The	Gita	is	his	criterion.	He	calls	the	Gita	his	mother,	but	he	does
not	 call	 the	 Koran	 his	 father.	 The	 Gita	 is	 his	 mother;	 he	 remains	 a	 Hindu,
basically	a	Hindu.	And	according	to	the	Gita	he	goes	on	finding...
wherever	anything	can	be	found	which	is	similar,	he	chooses	it,	picks	it	up;	but
anything	that	is	not	similar	to	the	Gita,	he	simply	drops	it,	he	forgets	all	about	it.
This	is	not	a	right	approach.	And	still	he	could	not	convince	anybody.	In	fact,	the
very	 effort	 was	 futile,	 an	 exercise	 in	 futility	 --	 he	 could	 not	 convince	 the
Mohammedans,	 he	 could	 not	 convince	 the	 Hindus.	 Mohammedans	 remained
Unconvinced;	they	continued	demanding	a	separate	country,	and	they	succeeded
in	having	a	separate	country.	And	he	could	not	convince	 the	Hindus	 --	 in	 fact,
one	 Hindu	 murdered	 him,	 one	 fanatic	 Hindu	 murdered	 him.	 He	 could	 not
convince	anybody.
And	 I	 cannot	 believe	 that	 he	 convinced	 himself	 either.	His	whole	 life	 he	was
singing	in	his	ashram:	"ALLAH-ISHWAR	TERI	nam	--	Allah	and	Ishwar,	both
are	 thy	 names!"	 But	 when	 he	 was	 shot	 dead,	 Allah	 didn't	 come	 to	 his	 heart.
When	the	bullet	passed	into	his	heart,	he	cried,	"Ram!"	not	Allah	--	"Hey	Ram!"
That	is	very	decisive.	At	that	moment	all	philo-sophizing	was	forgotten,	the	real
Hindu	 surfaced.	 He	 could	 not	 remember	 Allah	 at	 that	 moment,	 could	 not
remember	Buddha,	could	not	 remember	Mahavira.	The	person	he	 remembered
was	Ram	--	the	Hindu	ideal,	the	Hindu	incarnation	of	God.	That	shows	that	he
could	not	even	convince	himself	--	what	to	say	of	others?
In	this	place	I	am	not	trying	to	convince	anybody,	and	still	things	are	happening.
I	am	not	trying	to	bring	a	synthesis	of	all	religions,	because	I	know	it	is	utterly
futile.	They	ARE
different,	 they	are	unique.	And	 I	 respect	 their	uniqueness.	 In	 fact,	 the	world	 is
richer	because	there	is	a	Koran	and	there	is	a	Gita	and	there	is	a	Dhammapada.
The	world	 is	 richer	because	Zarathustra	happened,	Lao	Tzu	happened,	Buddha
happened;	 the	world	 is	 richer	because	 there	 is	Nanak	and	Kabir	 and	Farid.	So
many	different	flowers!	The	world	is	a	beautiful	garden.
And	 the	 rose	 is	not	 the	 lotus,	 and	 the	 lotus	 is	not	 the	 rose	 --	both	are	 flowers,
both	have	bloomed,	that	is	true.	Buddha	has	bloomed	and	Jesus	has	bloomed	--
both	are	flowers	--
but	a	rose	is	a	rose	and	a	lotus	is	a	lotus.	And	it	is	good	that	not	all	are	roses,	that
not	all	are	lotuses.
But	something	very	mysterious	is	happening	here,	Darius,	you	can	see:	all	kinds
of	people	are	here,	from	almost	every	country,	from	every	religion,	and	nobody
teaches	 them	 to	 be	 tolerant	 and	 nobody	 teaches	 them	 to	 be	 respectful	 of	 the
other's	religion.
These	things	are	simply	not	talked	about,	and	still	nobody	is	intolerant.	In	fact,
nobody	thinks	in	terms	that	the	other	is	other.	This	is	a	totally	different	vision.
My	approach	is	that	you	have	to	drop	--	not	to	imbibe	tolerance,	not	to	imbibe	a
certain	 synthesis,	 manipulated,	 man-made	 --	 you	 have	 to	 drop	 this	 whole
nonsense	of	the	American	way	of	life	and	the	Indian	way	of	life	and	the	Chinese
way	 of	 life.	 You	 have	 to	 drop	 this	 whole	 nonsense	 that	 "I	 am	 a	 Hindu,
Mohammedan,	Parsi,	Sikh."	You	are	just	a	human	being!	Maybe	your	colour	is
different	--	so	what?	It	is	good	that	there	are	people	of	different	colours,	different
flowers.	Your	 hair	 is	 different	 --	 good!	 It	makes	 life	more	worth	 living,	more
interesting.	The	variety	gives	richness.
Your	 idea,	 Darius,	 that	 people	 can	 live	 in	 harmony	 even	 though	 they	 have
different	 beliefs	 is	 wrong.	 Those	 different	 beliefs	 are	 the	 problem.	 In	 fact,	 to
believe	is	to	go	wrong:	knowing	is	good,	believing	is	wrong.	Enquiring	is	good,
gathering	prejudice	is	wrong.	Be	a	seeker	and	be	an	agnostic.
By	'agnostic'	is	meant:	say	clearly	to	others	and	to	yourself	that	"I	don't	know	--
so	how	can	I	cling	to	any	belief?	I	was	born	in	a	Hindu	family,	so	I	have	been
taught	the	Hindu	religion	by	my	parents,	but	I	don't	know	what	is	right	and	what
is	wrong	--	 it	 is	 just	 incidental.	Had	I	been	brought	up	by	a	Christian,	 I	would
have	believed	in	the	Christian	religion	in	the	same	way.	Or,	if	I	had	been	born	in
Soviet	 Russia	 then	 I	 would	 have	 been	 a	 communist;	 then	 I	 would	 not	 have
believed	in	the	trinity	of	God	the	Father	and	God	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Ghost.	I
would	have	believed	 in	a	 totally	different	 trinity:	Marx,	Engels,	Lenin,	and	 the
Kremlin	would	have	been	my	Kaaba,	and	DAS	KAPITAL	would	have	been	my
Bhagavad	Gita."
Just	see	--	it	is	simple!	Nobody	is	born	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Christian
--	these	things	are	imposed	on	you.	This	is	ugly	that	these	things	are	imposed	on
you.	In	a	really	free	world	no	religion	will	be	imposed	on	anybody.	All	religions
will	be	available	to	everybody!	One	should	be	free	to	shop	around.	One	can	go
to	the	temple,	to	the	mosque,	to	the	gurudwara,	and	one	can	move	around,	do	a
little	 religious	 shopping;	 one	 can	 look	 into	 the	 Koran	 and	 the	 Bible	 and	 the
Vedas,	and	decide	on	one's	own.
Parents	 should	 not	 decide	 the	 religion	 of	 their	 children.	 It	 should	 be	 a	 crime
against	humanity	to	force	any	child	into	any	religion.	Yes,	parents	should	teach
the	child	to	enquire	and	how	to	enquire.	They	should	make	available	to	him	all
alternatives,	so	if	the	child	wants	one	day	to	become	a	Mohammedan,	you	may
be	 a	Hindu	 but	 if	 your	 child	wants	 to	 become	 a	Mohammedan,	 it	 is	 perfectly
good.	You	should	be	happy	your	child	has	chosen	a	religion.	It	is	good	that	he	is
becoming	religious.	How	does	it	matter	where	he	will	pray?	--	in	the	temple	or	in
the	mosque.	The	only	thing	that	matters	is	that	he	will	pray.
But	 now,	 right	 now,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 case.	 Nobody	 is	 interested	 in	 prayer:
everybody	 is	 interested	 --	 where?	 Nobody	 is	 interested	 in	 making	 you	 really
religious;	 everybody	 is	 interested	 in	 making	 you	 a	 Christian,	 Catholic,
Protestant,	this	and	that.	This	is	an	ugly	situation	--	and	that	divides	people.
We	have	to	fight	for	a	world	where	children	will	not	be	forced	into	any	religion.
And	every	child	should	be	given	all	opportunities	to	choose.	Who	knows	what	is
going	to	fit	him?	My	own	observation	is	that	it	happens	that	a	man	is	born	in	a
Jaina	family,	but	he	is	not	that	type	--	he	is	not	the	type	of	Mahavira.	Then	his
whole	life	he	will	be	doing	something	for	which	he	is	not	meant.	He	will	follow
Mahavira,	but	his	heart	will	not	be	in	it.	His	heart	can	go	far	more	deeply	with
Meera,	with	Krishna	--	but	that	is	not	possible,	he	is	a	Jaina.	And	vice	versa:	a
man	may	be	born	into	a	family	which	worships	Krishna	but	seeing	Krishna	no
bells	ring	in	his	heart.	Then	what	is	he	supposed	to	do?
Pretend?	Be	a	hypocrite?	Go	on	believing	because	his	parents	are	Hindus	so	he
has	 to	 remain	 a	Hindu?	 Seeing	 the	 statue	 of	Mahavira	 naked,	 silent,	 his	 heart
may	be	stirred,	he	may	feel	a	new	fluttering	in	his	being,	a	new	energy,	a	new
flash	of	lightning.	It	may	click!	Then	that	is	his	religion.
Religion	has	to	be	found	by	your	own	heart.	All	religions	are	good.	All	religions
are	different.	All	religions	are	ways:	They	reach	the	same	goal.	But	nobody	can
follow	all	 the	ways.	 If	you	follow	all	 the	ways	you	will	go	crazy.	You	have	 to
follow	one	way,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	all	the	ways	are	leading	to	the	same
peak	of	the	mountain.	Still	one	has	to	follow	one	way.
But	if	the	beginning	is	not	a	belief	but	enquiry,	the	world	will	be	totally	different.
Darius,	with	 beliefs	 it	 is	 not	 possible.	Habits	 are	 okay;	 habits	 are	 going	 to	 be
different.
In	the	Indian	atmosphere	there	will	be	different	habits.	But	habits	are	not	a	big
problem;	you	can	understand	that	in	a	cold	country	there	will	be	different	habits
than	in	a	hot	country.	That	 is	very	natural.	But	beliefs	have	nothing	to	do	with
cold	or	hot,	beliefs	have	nothing	to	do	with	climate.	Beliefs	have	nothing	to	do
with	nature:	beliefs	are	man-made.
Beliefs	are	all	basically	political,	 tactics,	strategy,	 to	manipulate	 the	crowds,	 to
control	the	crowds.
You	 ask:	 WHY	 IS	 MANKIND	 MAKING	 THIS	 IMPOSSIBLE	 FOR
MANKIND?
BECAUSE	MAN	IS	NOT	YET	BORN:	mankind	exists	only	in	theory.	Once	a
man	said	to	George	Bernard	Shaw.	"What	do	you	think	of	civilization?"	He	said,
"It	is	a	good	idea,	but	somebody	has	to	try	it."
Mankind	 is	 also	 a	 good	 idea	 --	 but	 somebody	 has	 to	 try	 it.	 It	 has	 not	 yet
happened.
Humanity	 has	 not	 yet	 arrived.	 Hindus	 are	 there,	 Mohammedans	 are	 there,
Christians	 are	 there,	 Indians	 and	Germans	and	 Italians	 are	 there,	but	humanity
has	not	yet	arrived.	It	is	a	simple	word,	but	empty,	with	no	substance.
If	 somebody	 asks	 you,	 "Darius,	 who	 are	 you?"	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to
conceive	 that	 you	 will	 say,	 "A	 human	 being."	 You	 will	 say,	 "A	 Christian,	 a
Hindu,	 a	 Parsi,	 a	 Mohammedan...."	 You	 may	 say,	 "A	 doctor,	 an	 engineer,	 a
professor,	a	scientist..."	so	on	and	so	forth,	ad	nauseam,	but	almost	impossible	to
comprehend,	even	to	imagine	that	you	will	say,	"A	human	being."
And	 if	you	say	 it,	 the	other	person	who	 is	asking	will	 feel	 that	you	are	a	 little
crazy	or	something.	"Yes,	of	course,	you	are	a	human	being!	But	 I	am	asking:
who	are	you?"
Humanity	has	yet	to	happen,	and	we	have	to	prepare	the	ground	for	humanity	to
happen.
It	 can	 happen	 only	 by	 dropping	ALL	 kinds	 of	 beliefs.	 It	 can	 happen	 only	 by
creating	 a	great	 upsurge	of	 enquiry,	 creating	 an	 atmosphere,	 a	 space,	 in	which
belief	simply	means	that	you	are	ignorant	--	you	don't	know,	still	you	are	trying
to	pretend	that	you	know.
Belief	is	not	knowing	but	a	deception.
A	real	man	does	not	believe.	Either	he	knows	or	he	does	not	know.	If	somebody
asks	you,	"Does	God	exist?"	if	you	are	honest,	sincere,	you	cannot	say,	"I	believe
in	God,	 I	believe	 that	he	exists."	And	you	cannot	 say,	 "I	don't	believe	 in	God,
and	I	say	that	he	does	not	exist."	No.	If	you	are	a	sincere	man,	if	you	have	any
respect	 for	 truth,	 you	 will	 say,	 "I	 don't	 know.	 I	 am	 searching,	 seeking.	 I	 am
neither	a	believer	nor	a	non-believer.	I	am	a	seeker,	a	searcher."
And	the	day	you	know,	do	you	think	you	will	believe	then?	Then	there	will	be
no	need	to	believe.	You	don't	believe	in	 the	sun!	You	don't	see	people	fighting
that	the	sun	exists,	that	the	sun	does	not	exist,	that	the	sun	rises	in	the	east	or	the
sun	 rises	 in	 the	west,	 south,	north	 --	 you	don't	 see	people	 fighting.	Everybody
knows	the	sun	rises	in	the	east,	and	everybody	knows	that	the	sun	IS	--	there	IS
no	question	of	belief.
If	you	ask	me,	"Do	you	believe	in	God?"	I	will	say,	"No,	because	I	know	God	is.
I	 need	 not	 believe."	 Knowing	 is	 the	 real	 thing;	 belief	 is	 just	 a	 camouflage,	 a
cover-up.
Help	people	 to	 drop	beliefs.	Help	people	 to	 become	enquirers.	Help	people	 to
start	 functioning	 from	 not	 knowing.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 state	 of	 meditation:	 to
function	 from	 a	 state	 of	 not	 knowing	 is	 to	 function	meditatively.	 To	 function
from	the	state	of	knowledge	is	to	miss	the	whole	point.	Knowledge	is	always	old
and	life	is	never	old.	Knowledge	and	life	never	meet.
Hence	 I	 am	 using	 the	 word	 'knowing'	 deliberately,	 instead	 of	 'knowledge'.
'Knowledge'	 is	 a	 noun,	 'knowing'	 is	 a	 verb.	 Knowing	 is	 a	 flow,	 knowledge	 is
static.	Knowledge	has	a	full	point,	knowing	has	no	full	point	 --	 it	 is	simply	an
ongoing	 process.	 One	 never	 knows	God	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 knowledge;	 one	 only
knows	God	in	the	sense	of	knowing.	Yes,	there	is	a	beginning,	but	then	there	is
no	 end.	 One	 goes	 on	 knowing	 more	 and	 more	 and	 more,	 and	 the	 more	 one
knows,	the	more	one	feels	there	is	more	to	knower.
You	 say,	Darius:	 I	ALWAYS	BELIEVED	THAT	 JUST	AS	LONG	AS	THEY
WERE
NATURAL	 AND	 HONEST	 WITH	 THEMSELVES	 AND	 EACH	 OTHER,
THEY
COULD	 ALL	 BE	 HAPPY	 AND	 CONTENT	 AND	 COMMUNICATE	WITH
EACH
OTHER	 DESPITE	 THEIR	 VARYING	 COLOURS,	 HABITS,	 BELIEFS,
ETCETERA.
But	 how	 can	 people	 be	 natural	 and	 honest	 when	 they	 are	 carrying	 so	 many
beliefs?	To	be	natural	means	 to	be	without	any	belief	Children	are	natural,	but
you	are	not	natural.
Animals	are	natural,	but	you	are	not	natural.	Trees	are	natural,	but	you	are	not
natural.
And	what	has	made	you	unnatural	and	artificial?	Your	belief	system.
But	it	is	very	difficult	to	drop	the	belief	system.	And	how	can	you	be	honest	if
you	 believe?	 It	 is	 a	 contradiction	 in	 terms,	 to	 be	 honest	 and	 to	 believe.	 If
somebody	says,	"I	believe	in	God,"	he	is	saying,	"I	don't	know	--	I	have	heard,	I
have	been	taught,	I	have	been	told.	I	believe	in	God;	I	don't	know	myself	"	How
can	he	be	honest?	This	is	the	beginning	of	dishonesty.	Not	knowing	himself,	and
still	believing,	what	more	dishonesty	can	there	be?
Parents	 teach	 their	 children,	 "Believe	 in	 God	 and	 be	 honest."	 This	 is	 such	 a
contradiction	 in	 terms:	 "Believe	 in	God	 and	be	 honest!"	Only	 one	 is	 possible:
either	you	can	believe	in	God,	then	you	cannot	be	honest;	or	you	can	be	honest,
then	you	have	to	say	clearly	and	loudly,	"I	cannot	believe	in	God,	because	I	don't
know."
But	 this	 is	 a	double	bind	 that	 is	being	created	 in	every	person.	You	are	 taught
contradictory	 things	 --	 hence	 your	 schizophrenic	 state.	 You	 are	 taught	 such
contradictory	things	that	you	remain	split.	And	you	have	been	taught	so	long	that
you	don't	see	the	contradiction	either.	The	so-called	religious	person	--	Christian,
Mohammedan,	Hindu	--
he	 cannot	 be	 honest.	 If	 he	 is	 honest,	 he	 cannot	 be	 Christian,	 Hindu	 or
Mohammedan.
How	can	you	be	honest	and	still	believe	that	Christ	was	born	of	a	virgin	mother?
Just	 tell	 me	 --	 how	 can	 you	 be	 honest	 and	 still	 believe	 it?	 How	 can	 you	 be
honest?	Deep	down	you	know	it	is	not	possible.	Children	are	not	born	of	virgin
mothers.
How	can	you	be	honest	and	still	believe	that	when	a	snake	attacked	Mahavira,
instead	of	blood,	milk	flowed	from	his	foot?	How	can	you	believe	it	--	and	still
be	honest?	There	is	only	one	possibility,	that	in	Mahavira's	body	instead	of	blood
milk	was	circulating.	But	 to	keep	milk	circulating	 for	 so	 long	 --	he	must	have
been	 nearabout	 fifty	when	 this	 snake	 attacked	 him	 --	milk	would	 have	 turned
into	curd	long	before.
And	curd	cannot	 flow.	Mahavira	would	have	been	dead	 long	before.	How	can
you	be	honest	 and	 still	 believe	 in	 this?	 If	 you	 are	honest,	 questions	will	 arise.
And	 if	 you	 believe,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 dishonest	 --	 you	 have	 to	 repress	 your
questions.
Man	can	be	natural	and	honest,	but	then	beliefs	have	to	be	dropped	--	all	kinds	of
beliefs	have	to	be	dropped.	And	dropping	the	beliefs,	your	energy	is	freed,	and
that	 same	 energy	 becomes	 enquiry,	 and	 that	 same	 energy	 can	 take	 you	 to	 the
ultimate	truth.
People	are	so	religious,	so	fanatically	religious,	that	I	have	heard:
"Is	your	grandfather	a	religious	man?"	asked	the	young	coed	of	her	date.
"He	 is	 so	 Orthodox,"	 replied	 the	 boy,	 "	 when	 he	 plays	 chess,	 he	 doesn't	 use
bishops	--	he	uses	rabbis."
The	last	question
Question	5
OSHO,	WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK	ABOUT	THE	STATEMENT	THAT	LIFE	IS
STRANGER	THAN	FICTION?
Nandan,
IT	CAN'T	BE	OTHERWISE,	because	fiction	is	only	a	reflection	of	life,	only	an
echo,	 a	 faraway	 echo.	How	 can	 fiction	 be	more	 strange	 than	 life?	 It	 is	 just	 a
shadow	of	life,	footprints	of	life.	Life	is	really	unbelievable,	incredible.	It	should
not	be,	and	it	is.	It	is	utterly	mysterious.
But	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 strangeness	 of	 a	 fictitious	 story	 and	 you	 never
become	 aware	 of	 the	 strangeness	 of	 life,	 because	 you	 take	 it	 for	 granted.	You
take	it	for	granted	as	the	fish	takes	the	ocean	for	granted	--	and	it	never	becomes
aware	of	it.	How	can	the	fish	be	aware	of	the	ocean?	It	was	born	in	the	ocean,	it
has	lived	in	the	ocean;	from	the	very	beginning	the	ocean	was	there.	Just	as	you
are	 not	 aware	 of	 the	 air	 and	 the	 weight	 of	 the	 air,	 you	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 the
gravitation	and	the	pull	of	the	gravitation,	in	the	same	way,	the	fish	is	not	aware
of	the	ocean,	and	in	the	same	way	you	are	not	aware	of	the	incredible	life	that
surrounds	 you	 within	 and	 without	 --	 you	 take	 it	 for	 granted,	 and	 that's	 what
makes	you	miserable.
Stop	 taking	 life	 for	 granted,	 and	 immediately	you	 are	 constantly	 in	 awe.	Each
moment	becomes	a	surprise,	each	moment	becomes	such	a	revelation	of	mystery,
and	life	takes	a	totally	different	colour	and	flavour.	You	grow	wings.	Then	you
are	 no	 more	 bored,	 then	 you	 are	 no	 more	 dull.	 Then	 life	 is	 excitement,
exhilaration,	ecstasy.
And	that's	what,	basically,	true	religion	is:	to	make	you	aware	of	the	life,	to	make
you	alert	to	all	that	is	happening	around	you	--	the	sun,	the	moon,	the	stars,	the
rivers,	 the	mountains,	 the	people...	 this	 silence	 this	moment...	your	being	here,
my	being	 here...	what	more	mystery	 can	 there	 be	 than	 this	 communion?	Your
hearts	beating	with	my	heart,	your	 life	energy	 in	 rhythm	with	my	life	energy...
for	 this	 single	 moment,	 three	 thousand	 people	 in	 harmony,	 in	 such	 an	 utter
silence,	 as	 if	 there	 exists	 nobody...	 this	 melting,	 this	 merging...	 what	 more
mystery	can	there	be?	What	more	miracles?
Just	to	be	is	a	miracle!	Just	to	be	able	to	breathe	is	a	miracle!	Just	to	be	able	to
see	the	light	and	the	rainbow	and	the	starry	night	--	what	more	can	you	ask	for?
What	more	can	you	imagine?
You	 ask	 me:	 OSHO,	WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 THINK	 ABOUT	 THE	 STATEMENT
THAT
LIFE	IS	STRANGER	THAN	FICTION?
I	don't	think!	--	it	is.	There	is	no	need	to	think	--	I	know	--	it	is,	it	is	so.	Thinking
is	a	 lower	activity,	seeing	is	a	higher	activity.	I	see	it	 is	so	--	 it	 is	not	a	 logical
conclusion	 for	me,	 it	 is	my	existential	 experience.	 I	 am	constantly	 surprised	 --
each	moment,	every	breath	is	a	surprise.	And	this	is	not	a	statement,	this	is	the
truth!	Just	become	a	little	more	alert,	a	little	more	aware,	a	little	more	observant.
Snap	your	fingers	and	slap	your	face	and	be	awake!	And	then	look	around...	and
the	silence,	and	the	beauty	and	the	benediction.
It	is	said	that	Hotei	became	enlightened	and	started	laughing,	and	then	he	never
stopped	laughing.	For	many	years	he	lived,	he	laughed.	He	laughed	all	the	way
to	God,	all	the	way	to	death.	And	people	would	ask,	"Hotei,	why	do	you	laugh?"
because	he	became	famous	in	Japan	as	the	laughing	Buddha.	And	he	would	say,
"Because	life	is	incredible,	so	ridiculous,	so	absurd."	It	should	not	be,	but	it	is!
For	no	reason	at	all	flowers	go	on	blooming	and	birds	go	on	singing,	and	every
morning	the	sun	is	back.	For	NO	reason!	If	it	doesn't	turn	up	one	day,	what	can
we	do?	For	no	reason	at	all!
And	all	exists	in	such	harmony,	accord,	in	such	rhythm,	that	if	you	touch	a	grass
leaf,	 you	 have	 touched	 the	 whole	 universe	 --	 because	 the	 small	 grass	 leaf
contains	the	whole	of	the	universe.	It	will	not	be	there	without	the	sun,	it	will	not
be	there	without	the	earth,	it	will	not	be	there	without	the	planets	and	the	stars.	It
will	not	be	there	if	this	universe	is	not	exactly	the	way	it	is.	And	if	that	grass	leaf
is	gone,	 the	universe	will	be	a	 little	 less,	a	 little	minus;	 it	will	miss	 it.	Such	an
infinity,	and	it	goes	on	with	such	rhythmic	flow,	with	such	organic	oneness,	with
such	orgasmic	joy.
Just	watch	life...	and	you	will	be	able	to	laugh.	It	IS	absurd,	it	IS	ridiculous,	it	IS
strange,	 it	 is	 miraculous.	 No	 dream	 can	 be	 more	 dreamlike	 than	 life,	 and	 no
poetry	can	be	more	poetic	than	life	--	and	no	joke	can	create	more	laughter	than
life.
A	 couple	 of	 hillbillies	 from	 the	 backwoods	 country	 came	 into	 town	 to	 get
married	 and	 brought	 their	 best	 man,	 Zeke,	 along.	 When	 they	 applied	 for	 a
license,	 the	clerk	 informed	them	that	state	 law	required	blood	tests	before	 they
could	 get	 a	 license,	 and	 told	 them	 there	 was	 a	 doctor	 around	 the	 corner	 who
would	make	the	tests.
As	 the	M.D.	 took	 blood	 samples	 from	 the	 prospective	 bride	 and	 groom,	Zeke
watched	with	great	interest.	"What	are	you	doing,	Doc?"	he	asked.
"We	check	for	venereal	disease,"	said	the	physician.	"If	we	find	any,	the	wedding
can't	take	place	until	it	is	cured."
"Well	then,"	said	the	best	man,	"ain't	you	gonna	test	my	blood?"
"What	for?"	asked	the	doctor.	"You	are	not	getting	married	are	you?"
"Oh,	 no,"	 said	Zeke,	 as	 he	 pointed	 to	 the	 couple,	 "but	 I	 am	gonna	board	with
them!"
...	You	missed	it...!	You	will	need	another.
Payne	 and	Butler	were	washing	 their	 hands	 in	 a	 Pittsburgh	men's	 room	when
three	burly	blacks	came	in	and	headed	for	the	urinals.
"Wow!"	whispered	Payne,	"those	mothers	are	laa-arge!"
"Yeah,"	 said	Butler,	 "and	 look	how	 they	are	built.	They	must	have	 the	 longest
dicks	in	the	state	of	Pennsylvania.	I	gotta	get	closer	and	see	their	size!"
He	came	back	in	a	minute.	"Wowee!	They	are	built	big,"	said	Payne,	"not	only
that,	the	cat	in	the	middle	has	one	that	is	white!"
"Oh,	man,	whoever	heard	of	a	black	man	with	a	white	wang!	I'm	gonna	go	look
myself."
He	 returned	 immediately.	 "Brother,	 those	 cats	 ain't	 black!"	 exclaimed	 Butler.
"They	are	Polish	coal	miners!	And	the	guy	in	the	middle	is	on	his	honeymoon!"
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Very	Few	Find	the	Path
23	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904230
ShortTitle:
FISH13
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
108
mins
FRIEND,	PLEASE	TELL	ME	WHAT	I	CAN	DO	ABOUT
THIS	WORLD
I	HOLD	TO	AND	KEEP	SPINNING	OUT!
I	GAVE	UP	SEWN	CLOTHES	AND	WORE	A	ROBE,
BUT	I	NOTICED	ONE	DAY	THE	CLOTH	WAS	WELL	WOVEN.
SO	I	BOUGHT	SOME	BURLAP,	BUT	I	STILL
THROW	IT	ELEGANTLY	OVER	MY	LEFT	SHOULDER.
I	PULLED	BACK	MY	SEXUAL	LONGINGS,
AND	NOW	I	DISCOVER	THAT	I'M	ANGRY	A	LOT.
I	GAVE	UP	RAGE	AND	NOW	I	NOTICE
THAT	I	AM	GREEDY	ALL	DAY.
I	WORKED	HARD	AT	DISSOLVING	THE	GREED,
AND	NOW	I	AM	PROUD	OF	MYSELF.
WHEN	THE	MIND	WANTS	TO	BREAK	ITS	LINK
WITH	THE	WORLD
IT	STILL	HOLDS	ON	TO	ONE	THING.
Kabir	says:	LISTEN	MY	FRIEND,
THERE	ARE	VERY	FEW	THAT	FIND	THE	PATH!
MAN	 IS	 A	 DILEMMA,	 BECAUSE	MAN	 IS	 A	 DUALITY.	 Man	 is	 not	 one
single	being:	man	is	the	past	and	the	future.	The	past	means	the	animal,	and	the
future	means	 the	divine.	And	between	the	 two	is	 the	present	moment,	between
the	two	is	man's	existence	--
divided,	torn	apart,	pulled	in	diametrically	opposite	directions.
If	man	looks	backwards	he	is	an	animal.	That's	why	science	cannot	believe	that
man	 is	 anything	more	 --	 just	 another	 animal	 --	 because	 science	 only	 searches
into	the	past.
Charles	Darwin	and	others,	 they	are	right	that	man	is	born	of	the	animals.	It	 is
true	about	the	past,	but	it	is	not	true	about	man's	totality.
Religion	 looks	 into	 the	 possible,	 into	 that	 which	 can	 happen	 and	 has	 not	 yet
happened.
Science	 dissects	 the	 seed	 and	 cannot	 find	 any	 flowers	 there.	 Religion	 is
visionary,	it	dreams	--	and	is	capable	of	seeing	that	which	has	not	happened	yet:
the	 flower.	 Of	 course,	 it	 cannot	 be	 found,	 that	 flower	 cannot	 be	 found,	 by
dissecting	 the	 seed.	 It	 needs	 great	 insight,	 not	 capacity	 to	 analyse,	 but	 some
intuitive	flight,	some	vision,	some	poetic	approach.	It	needs	a	real	dreamer	who
can	see	that	which	has	not	happened	yet.
Religion	looks	into	the	possible	and	finds	man	is	not	an	animal,	but	divine:	man
is	God	--
both	are	true.	The	conflict	is	baseless.	The	conflict	between	science	and	religion
is	futile.
Their	directions,	their	methods	of	work,	their	fields,	are	totally	different.
Science	 always	 reduces	 everything	 to	 the	 source,	 and	 religion	 always	 takes	 a
flight	to	the	goal.	Man	is	both,	hence	man	is	a	dilemma,	a	constant	anxiety:	to	be
or	not	to	be,	to	be	this	or	to	be	that?
Man	can	find	peace	only	in	two	ways:	either	he	becomes	an	animal	again	--	then
he	will	 be	 one,	 then	 there	will	 be	 no	 division,	 then	 again	 there	will	 be	 peace,
silence,	harmony....
And	that's	why	millions	of	people	try	to	be	animals	in	different	ways.
War	gives	a	chance	for	man	to	become	animal;	hence	war	has	great	attraction.	In
three	thousand	years'	history	man	has	fought	five	thousand	wars	--	continuously,
somewhere	or	other,	the	war	continues.	Not	even	a	single	day	passes	when	man
is	not	killing	other	men.
Why	such	tremendous	joy	in	destruction,	in	killing?	The	reason	is	deep	down	in
the	psychology	of	man.
The	moment	you	kill,	suddenly	you	are	one;	you	become	the	animal	again,	the
duality	disappears.	Hence,	in	murder,	in	suicide,	there	is	a	tremendous	magnetic
force.	Man	cannot	be	persuaded	yet	 to	be	non-violent.	Violence	erupts.	Names
change,	 slogans	 change,	 but	 the	 violence	 remains	 the	 same.	 It	 may	 be	 in	 the
name	 of	 religion,	 in	 the	 name	 of	 political	 ideology,	 or	 any	 absurd	 thing	 --	 a
football	match	is	enough	for	people	to	get	violent,	a	cricket	match	is	enough.
People	are	so	much	interested	in	violence	that	if	they	cannot	do	it	themselves	--
because	it	is	risky	and	they	think	of	the	consequences	--	they	find	vicarious	ways
to	 be	 violent.	 In	 a	movie,	 or	 on	 the	TV,	 violence	 is	 a	must;	without	 violence,
nobody	 is	 going	 to	 see	 the	 film.	Seeing	 violence	 and	 blood,	 suddenly	 you	 are
reminded	 of	 your	 animal	 past;	 you	 forget	 your	 present,	 you	 completely	 forget
your	future	--	you	become	your	past.	You	become	identified;	what	is	happening
on	the	screen	somehow	becomes	your	own	life.
You	are	no	more	a	spectator	--	in	those	moments	you	become	a	participant,	you
fall	en	rapport.
Violence	has	great	attraction.	Sexuality	has	great	attraction,	because	it	is	only	in
sexual	moments	 that	you	can	become	one;	otherwise	you	 remain	 two,	divided,
and	the	anxiety	and	the	anguish	persist.	Violence,	sex,	drugs,	they	all	help	you,
at	Least	for	the	time	being,	temporarily,	to	fall	back,	to	become	all	animal.	But
this	cannot	become	a	permanent	state	of	affairs.
One	 fundamental	 law	has	 to	be	understood:	nothing	can	go	backwards.	At	 the
most	 you	 can	 pretend,	 at	 the	 most	 you	 can	 deceive,	 but	 nothing	 can	 go
backwards	 because	 time	 docs	 not	 move	 backwards.	 Time	 always	 goes	 ahead.
You	cannot	reduce	a	young	man	to	a	child,	and	you	cannot	reduce	an	old	man	to
a	young	man	--	it	is	impossible.	The	tree	cannot	be	reduced	back	to	the	original
seed	--	it	is	impossible.
Evolution	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 and	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 prevent	 it	 or	 to	 force	 it
backwards.
Hence	all	efforts	of	men	to	become	animals	and	find	peace	are	doomed	to	fail.
You	can	be	drunk	through	alcohol	or	 through	other	drugs	--	marijuana,	LSD	--
you	can	be	completely	drowned.	For	 the	moment	all	 the	worries	disappear,	 for
the	moment	 you	 are	 no	more	 part	 of	 a	 problematic	 existence,	 for	 the	moment
you	move	in	a	totally	different	dimension	--	but	for	the	moment	only.
Tomorrow	morning	you	will	be	back,	and	when	you	are	back	the	world	is	going
to	 be	 more	 ugly	 than	 it	 ever	 was	 before,	 and	 life	 is	 going	 to	 be	 more	 of	 a
problem	 than	 it	 ever	 was	 before.	 Because	 while	 you	 were	 intoxicated,
unconscious,	asleep	in	the	drug,	the	problems	were	growing.	The	problems	were
becoming	more	and	more	complicated.
While	you	were	thinking	that	you	had	gone	beyond	the	problems,	the	problems
were	taking	root	more	in	your	being,	in	your	unconscious.
Tomorrow	again	you	will	be	back	 in	 the	 same	world	 --	 it	will	 look	more	ugly
compared	 to	 the	 peace	 that	 you	 had	 attained	 by	 reduction,	 by	 intoxication,	 by
forgetfulness.
Compared	 to	 that	 peace,	 the	 world	 will	 look	 even	 more	 dangerous,	 more
complex,	more	scary.	And	 then	 the	only	way	 is:	go	on	 increasing	 the	doses	of
your	drug.	But	that	too	does	not	help	for	long.	And	this	is	no	way	to	get	out	of
the	dilemma.	The	dilemma	remains,	persists.
The	only	way	is	to	grow	towards	the	divine,	the	only	way	is	forwards.	The	only
way	is	to	become	that	which	is	your	potential	--	the	only	way	is	to	transform	the
potential	into	the	actual.
MAN	 IS	 POTENTIAL	 GOD,	 and	 unless	 he	 becomes	 actual	 God	 there	 is	 no
possibility	of	contentment.	People	have	 tried	 that	 too:	How	 to	become	divine?
And	becoming	divine,	what	to	do	with	the	animal?	The	simplest	solution	that	has
appeared	 again	 and	 again	 down	 the	 ages	 is:	 repress	 the	 animal.	 It	 is	 the	 same
solution;	either	repress	the	divine	--
through	violence,	through	sex,	through	drugs	--	forget	about	the	divine.	That	is
one	 solution	 --	 which	 never	 succeeds,	 cannot	 succeed;	 in	 the	 very	 nature	 of
things	it	is	bound	to	fail.	Then	the	second	suggestion	that	comes	to	the	mind	is:
repress	the	animal,	forget	the	animal;	keep	the	animal	at	the	back,	don't	look	at
it.	Throw	it	deep	down	in	the	basement	of	your	unconscious	so	you	don't	come
across	it	in	your	daily	life,	so	you	don't	see	it.
Man	thinks	almost	in	the	same	way	as	the	ostrich.	The	ostrich	thinks	if	he	cannot
see	the	enemy,	the	enemy	does	not	exist.	Hence,	when	the	ostrich	encounters	the
enemy	he	simply	closes	his	eyes.	By	closing	his	eyes	he	thinks	now	there	is	no
enemy	because	he	cannot	see	him.
That's	 what	 has	 been	 done	 down	 the	 ages	 by	 ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 religious
people.	 In	 that	 one	 percent	 I	 leave	 Buddhas,	 Krishnas,	 Kabirs.	 Ninety-nine
percent	of	religious	people	have	just	been	doing	nothing	but	an	ostrich	exercise	-
-	an	exercise	of	utter	futility.
Repress	 the	animal!	But	you	cannot	 repress	 the	animal	because	 the	animal	has
great	energy.	It	has	been	your	whole	past;	it	is	millions	and	millions	of	years	old.
It	has	deep	roots	in	you;	you	cannot	so	easily	get	rid	of	it,	just	by	closing	your
eyes.	You	are	simply	being	stupid.
And	 the	 animal	 is	 your	 base,	 it	 is	 your	 very	 foundation.	 You	 are	 born	 as	 an
animal;	you	are	not	different	from	any	other	animal.	You	CAN	be	different	but
you	are	not	 --	 just	 by	being	born	you	don't	 become	different.	Yes,	 you	have	 a
different	kind	of	body,	but	not	very	much	different.	You	have	a	different	kind	of
intelligence,	but	not	very	much	different.	The	difference	is	only	of	quantity,	not
of	quality.
Now	modern	research	into	plants	says	that	even	plants	are	intelligent,	sensitive,
alert,	aware	--	what	to	say	about	animals?	A	few	researchers	say	that	even	metals
have	a	kind	of	intelligence	of	their	own.	So	the	difference	between	man	and	the
elephant.	between	man	and	the	dolphin,	between	man	and	the	monkeys,	is	not	of
quality,	 it	 is	 only	 of	 quantity,	 only	 of	 degrees.	 We	 have	 a	 little	 bit	 more
intelligence,	that's	all.
It	is	not	much	of	a	difference,	at	least	not	a	difference	that	makes	any	difference.
The	 qualitative	 change	 happens	 only	 when	 a	 man	 becomes	 fully	 awakened,
when	a	man	becomes	a	Buddha	--	then	the	real	difference	happens.	Then	he	is	no
more	an	animal.
Then	he	is	simply	divine	--	but	how	to	attain	it?
That	 ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 religious	 people	 has	 been	 doing	 something	 utterly
wrong	--
just	the	same	logic.	The	same	logic	that	is	being	followed	by	the	violent	people,
the	 sexual	 people,	 the	 alcoholics.	 The	 same	 kind	 of	 logic:	 forget	 the	 animal.
Many	 techniques	 have	 been	 developed	 to	 forget	 the	 animal:	 chant	mantras	 so
that	 you	 can	 forget	 the	 animal,	 become	occupied	 in	 chanting;	 go	 on	 repeating
"Rama,	Rama,	Rama,	Rama."
Repeat	 it	 so	 fast	 that	your	whole	mind	be-comes	 full	of	 the	vibe	of	 this	 single
word
'Rama'.	This	is	simply	a	way	to	avoid	the	animal	--	and	the	animal	is	there.
You	 can	 go	 on	 chanting	 Rama	 for	 centuries...	 the	 animal	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be
changed	by	such	a	 simple	 trick.	You	cannot	deceive	 the	animal.	 It	will	 remain
only	a	very	superficial	religiousness.	Scratch	any	religious	man	and	you	will	find
the	 animal	 inside;	 just	 scratch	 a	 little.	 It	 is	 not	 even	 skin-deep,	 the	 so-called
religiousness.	It	only	pretends,	it	is	only	a	formality,	a	social	ritual.
You	go	 to	 the	church,	you	 read	 the	Bible,	you	 read	 the	Gita,	you	do	chanting,
you	do	prayer,	but	it	is	all	formal.	Your	heart	is	not	in	it.	And	your	animal	inside
goes	on	laughing	at	you,	he	ridicules	you.	He	knows	you	perfectly	well,	who	you
are,	 where	 you	 are.	 And	 he	 knows	 how	 to	 manipulate	 you.	 You	 can	 go	 on
chanting	 for	 hours,	 and	 then	 a	 beautiful	 woman	 passes	 by	 and	 suddenly	 all
chanting	disappears	and	you	have	 forgotten	all	about	God.	Just	 the	smell	 from
the	bakery...	and	all	is	gone;	Hare	Krishna	Rama,	all	is	gone.
Just	any	small	thing	is	enough!	Somebody	insults	you	and	there	is	anger,	and	the
animal	 is	 ready	 to	 take	 revenge,	 you	 are	 in	 a	 rage.	 In	 fact,	 religious	 people
become	 more	 angry	 than	 anybody	 else	 --	 because	 others	 don't	 repress.	 And
religious	people	are	more	sexually	perverted	than	anybody	else,	because	others
don't	repress.	The	religious	person's	dreams	have	to	be	watched,	because	in	the
day	he	can	go	on	repressing,	but	what	about	the	night	when	he	is	asleep?
Mahatma	Gandhi	wrote	 that	 even	 at	 the	 age	 of	 seventy	 he	was	 having	 sexual
dreams.	At	the	age	of	seventy,	why	sexual	dreams?	He	said,	"In	the	day	I	have
become	disciplined	--
the	whole	day	not	even	a	single	thought	of	sex	comes	to	me.	But	in	the	night	I
am	incapable,	I	am	unconscious,	so	the	hole	discipline	and	control	disappears."
Sigmund	Freud's	insight	is	very	valuable,	that	to	know	about	a	man	you	have	to
know	his	 dreams,	 not	 his	waking	 life.	His	waking	 life	 is	 pseudo.	His	 real	 life
asserts	itself	in	his	dreams,	because	his	dreams	are	more	natural	--	no	repression,
no	discipline,	no	control.
Hence,	psychoanalysis	does	not	bother	about	your	waking	life.	Just	see	the	point:
your	waking	life	is	so	pseudo	that	psychoanalysis	docs	not	believe	in	it	at	all.	It
is	worthless.
Psychoanalysis	 penetrates	 into	 your	 dreams	 because	 dreams	 are	 far	 truer	 than
your	so-called	waking	life.
This	is	ironical	that	the	waking	life,	which	we	think	is	real	life	is	not	thought	by
psychoanalysis	to	be	real;	it	is	thought	to	be	more	unreal	than	your	dreams.	Your
dreams	are	far	more	real,	because	you	are	not	there	to	distort,	you	are	fast	asleep;
the	conscious	mind	is	asleep	and	the	unconscious	is	free	to	have	its	say.	And	the
unconscious	is	your	true	mind,	because	the	conscious	is	only	one	tenth	of	your
total	 mind.	 Nine	 tenths	 is	 the	 unconscious	 --	 nine	 times	 more	 powerful,	 nine
times	bigger	than	your	conscious	mind.
And	what	will	you	do	when	you	are	fighting	with	your	sexuality,	anger,	greed?
You	will	 go	 on	 throwing	 them	 into	 the	 unconscious,	 into	 the	 darkness	 of	 the
basement,	thinking	that	by	not	seeing	them	you	are	getting	rid	of	them.	You	are
not	 getting	 rid	 of	 them.	Not	 even	 a	man	 like	Mahatma	Gandhi...	 what	 to	 say
about	small	mahatmas	like	Morarji	Desai	etc.
A	 man	 like	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 continued	 to	 have	 sexual	 dreams.	 That	 simply
shows	that	his	whole	effort	in	the	waking	life	was	futile,	that	whatsoever	he	was
trying	to	do	in	the	waking	life	was	of	no	use.	And	he	recognized	it	--	at	the	very
end	of	his	life	he	recognized	the	whole	futility	of	his	discipline.	His	whole	life
had	been	a	wastage;	he	recognized	it.	And	in	the	end,	just	before	he	died,	for	two
years	he	was	experimenting	with	the	science	of	Tantra.	It	is	not	talked	about,	not
at	 least	by	 the	Gandhians	 --	 they	are	very	much	afraid	of	 those	 two	years.	He
was	advised	by	his	followers,	"Please,	don't	do	such	experiments."
You	 will	 be	 surprised:	 even	 Morarji	 Desai	 had	 advised	 him,	 "Don't	 do	 such
experiments!"
Why?	They	were	 afraid	 about	 the	 prestige	 of	 the	Mahatma.	 They	were	 afraid
about	themselves	too.	But	he	was	a	man	of	courage;	howsoever	wrong,	he	was	a
sincere	man.
He	 had	 the	 courage	 to	 accept	 that	 his	 effort	 of	 disciplining	 according	 to	 the
traditional	 way	 had	 failed.	 In	 the	 last	 two	 years	 he	 was	 sleeping	 with	 naked
women	--	just	for	the	first	time	not	repressing	but	expressing,	being	loving,	open,
for	the	first	time	not	on	guard.
My	own	understanding	 is	 that	 those	 two	years	of	his	 life	which	are	not	 talked
about	 are	 the	 most	 important	 --	 not	 only	 were	 they	 not	 talked	 about:	 the
followers	deny,	hide	those	facts.	And	those	two	years	are	the	most	important	in
his	life.	In	those	two	years,	for	the	first	time	he	became	aware	that	sexual	energy
need	not	be	repressed:	it	can	be	transformed.
His	 life	was	cut	 short	because	a	 fanatic	 from	 this	very	city,	Poona,	killed	him.
Otherwise	it	would	have	been	a	totally	different	story.	If	he	had	lived	ten	more
years,	then	all	these	so-called	Gandhians	would	have	left	him.	Many	had	already
left	when	he	started	experimenting	with	Tantra.	If	he	had	lived	ten	more	years	it
would	have	been	a	great	boon	to	humanity,	because	he	would	have	been	able	to
say,	"My	whole	life's	effort	of	repression	failed	while	Tantra	succeeded."
Ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 religious	 people	 go	 on	 repressing,	 and	 whenever	 you
repress	something	it	goes	deeper	in	you,	it	becomes	more	a	part	of	your	being.
And	it	starts	affecting	you	in	such	subtle	ways	that	you	may	not	even	be	aware
of	 it.	 It	 takes	 very	 devious	 routes:	 it	 cannot	 come	 in	 direct	ways	 because	 if	 it
comes	directly,	you	Repress	it.
Then	 it	 comes	 in	 such	 subtle	ways,	 such	 devious	ways,	 such	 deceptive	ways,
with	masks,	that	you	cannot	even	recognize	that	it	is	sexuality.
It	can	even	use	masks	of	prayer,	of	love,	of	religious	ritual.	But	if	you	go	deep
down,	 if	 you	 allow	yourself	 to	 be	 exposed	 to	 somebody	who	can	observe	 and
who	understands	the	inner	functioning	of	your	mind,	you	will	be	surprised	that	it
is	 the	 same	energy	moving	 through	different	 channels.	 It	 has	 to	move	 through
different	channels,	because	no	energy	can	ever	be	repressed.
Let	 it	be	understood	once	and	for	all:	no	energy	can	ever	be	repressed.	Energy
can	be	transformed,	but	never	repressed.	The	real	religion	consists	of	alchemy,	of
transforming	 techniques,	methods.	 The	 real	 religion	 consists	 not	 of	 repressing
the	animal	but	of	purifying	the	animal,	of	raising	the	animal	to	the	divine,	using
the	 animal,	 riding	 on	 the	 animal	 to	 go	 to	 the	 divine.	 It	 can	 become	 a
tremendously	powerful	vehicle,	because	it	is	power.
Sex	can	be	used	as	a	great	energy	--	you	call	ride	on	it	to	the	very	door	of	God.
But	if	you	repress	it	you	will	become	more	and	more	entangled.	This	is	a	very
modern	 approach,	 but	 the	 sutras	 of	 Kabir	 will	 say	 to	 you	 that	 what	 Sigmund
Freud	discovered	is	not	a	discovery
--	 it	 is	 only	 a	 discovery	 in	 the	West.	As	 far	 as	 the	East	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is	 an
ancient	truth.
The	sages	have	always	known	about	it.
These	 sutras	 are	 very	 beautiful,	 very	 scientific.	 Meditate	 over	 each	 sutra:
FRIEND	PLEASE	TELL	ME	WHAT	I	CAN	DO	ABOUT
THIS	WORLD
I	HOLD	TO	AND	KEEP	SPINNING	OUT!
The	original	is:
AVADHU,	MAYA	TAJI	NA	JAI.
AVADHU	LITERALLY	MEANS	A	FRIEND,	but	it	has	a	special	meaning,	not
just	a	friend.	In	English	there	is	no	word	to	give	the	real	meaning	of	AVADHU,
but	it	can	be	explained.	AVADHU	means	a	friend,	a	companion,	a	comrade,	on
the	way	towards	the	divine	--	a	special	kind	of	friendship.	The	friendship	of	two
seekers,	 the	 friendship	 of	 those	 who	 are	 in	 search	 of	 the	 unknown	 and	 the
unknowable,	the	friendship	of	those	who	are	ready	for	the	ultimate	venture,	who
are	ready	to	go	into	the	uncharted	sea.	AVADHU
means	friends	in	the	search	for	truth.	It	is	risky;	such	a	friendship	needs	guts.	It
is	no	ordinary	friendship	--	it	is	utterly	extraordinary,	it	is	not	of	this	world.
This	friendship	means	SATSANG:	when	many	seekers	gather	together	around	a
man	who	has	known,	because	such	a	 friendship	 is	possible	only	around	a	man
who	has	known,	such	a	gathering	is	possible	only	around	a	Buddha,	around	one
who	has	awakened	--
because	he	will	function	as	the	center	of	 the	commune.	Without	the	center,	 the
commune	will	not	have	any	significance;	it	will	be	an	ordinary	crowd.
Without	Christ,	Christians	are	just	a	crowd,	an	ordinary	crowd.	With	Christ,	it	is
a	 communion,	 it	 is	 satsang	 --	 it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 friendship.	 Christ	 can	 call	 his
disciples	AVADHU	--	friends,	comrades,	companions,	soulmates	--	that's	exactly
the	meaning	 of	 AVADHU.	 The	 friendship	 is	 not	 worldly,	 has	 no	motive.	 The
friendship	 is	 not	 that	 of	 dependence.	The	 friendship	has	no	 relationship	which
can	 be	 explained	 in	 any	worldly	way	 --	 but	 two	 souls	 in	 a	 deep	 rhythm,	 two
soulmates.
It	is	difficult	to	search	alone	--	the	path	is	arduous,	hazardous.	dangerous;	there
is	every	possibility	of	getting	lost.	It	 is	easier	it	people	move	with	friends.	It	 is
like	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say...	 when	 he	 was	 travelling	 in	 Sufi	 countries,	 a	 Sufi
Master	gave	him	a	technique.
The	 technique	 was	 that	 twenty	 friends	 of	 Gurdjieff	 had	 to	 go	 deep	 into	 the
desert,	but	at	 least	one	person	had	 to	 remain	awake.	 Including	Gurdjieff,	 there
were	 twenty-one	persons.	Twenty	persons	could	go	 to	sleep,	but	one	had	 to	be
awake	constantly,	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	When	he	WAS	tired	he	had	to	wake
somebody	else;	he	could	go	 to	 sleep,	 then	 the	other	had	 to	 remain	awake.	But
one	had	to	be	awake!
If	 you	 are	 alone	 you	 will	 have	 to	 fall	 asleep	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 but	 if	 you	 are
moving	with	friends	at	least	one	can	always	be	awake.	And	in	a	desert,	or	in	a
forest,	in	a	jungle,	it	is	needed	that	at	least	one	should	be	awake.
And	when	you	go	on	the	journey,	the	ultimate	pilgrimage	to	God,	it	 is	good	to
have	a	few	friends	with	you,	because	at	least	one	can	always	be	awake.	And	the
person	who	is	awake	will	become	your	protection,	and	the	person	who	is	awake
will	 help	 you	 not	 to	 go	 astray,	 and	 the	 person	 who	 is	 awake	 will	 keep	 you
together,	 and	 the	 person	who	 is	 awake	will	 become	 a	 kind	 of	 glue	which	will
integrate	your	energies.
But	 if	you	can	find	a	man	who	is	awake,	 twenty-four	hours	awake	--	 that's	 the
meaning	 of	 being	 a	 Buddha	 --	 then	 naturally	 a	 commune	 of	 friends	 gathers
around	him.	His	 light,	his	under-standing,	 slowly	slowly	permeates	 their	being
too.
Kabir	is	not	talking	to	the	public	--	he	is	talking	to	a	few	friends.	Hence	he	says:
AVADHU,	FRIENDS,	MAYA	TAJI	NA	JAI.
It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 drop	 this	 mind	 --	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 drop	 this	 mind
because	who	is	going	to	drop	it?	Even	the	idea	of	dropping	is	part	of	the	mind.	It
is	very	difficult	to	drop	the	mind,	because	even	if	you	drop	it	the	one	who	drops
it	will	remain	--	that	will	become	your	mind.	It	is	a	very	vicious	circle.	How	to
come	out	of	it?
This	 mind	 is	 illusory,	 hence	 he	 calls	 it	 'maya	 --	 all	 illusion.	 It	 is	 NOT	 really
there;	it	has	no	substance,	but	still	it	persists	continuously	--	day	in,	day	out,	your
mind	continues.
Thoughts,	dreams,	desires,	imagination,	memory...	the	traffic	goes	on	and	on.	All
is	non-substantial!	If	you	wake	up,	suddenly	you	will	find	all	the	dreams,	all	the
desires,	all	the	thoughts,	have	disappeared.	But	how	to	drop	this	mind?	Who	is
going	to	drop	it?	If	you	try	to	drop	it,	you	are	the	mind.
You	can	escape	to	the	Himalayan	caves	but	the	mind	will	go	with	you,	because
really	 the	 mind	 will	 be	 going	 to	 the	 Himalayan	 caves	 --	 who	 else?	 You	 can
renounce	the	family,	but	who	will	renounce?	You	can	stand	on	your	head,	but	it
will	be	the	same	mind	--	you	are	simply	being	stupid.	It	has	to	be	understood.
Nothing	has	to	be	done	on	your	part,	because	anything	done	is	done	always	by
the	mind.
Doing	is	the	very	function	of	the	mind.	So	nothing	can	be	done	with	the	mind	to
drop	it.
AVADHU,	MAYA	TAJI	NA	JAI.
So	Kabir	says:	It	is	very	difficult,	friends,	to	drop	this	mind	and	its	illusions.	In
the	first	place	they	are	so	non-substantial	--	if	they	had	been	substantial	it	would
have	been	easy.
You	can	Leave	the	house,	you	can	renounce	your	wife,	your	children,	you	can	go
away	from	the	world	--	it	is	very	substantial!	But	how	will	you	leave	your	mind?
It	will	be	with	you.
When	Bayazid,	a	Sufi	saint,	went	to	see	his	Master,	he	re-nounced	his	family,	his
friends,	and	he	went	to	the	Master.	The	Master	used	to	live	in	the	ruins	of	an	old
mosque.	When	Bayazid	entered	he	said,	"Now	I	have	come,	I	have	renounced	all
--	please	accept	me."
The	Master	looked	at	Bayazid	and	looked	around	and	said,	"And	why	have	you
brought	this	crowd	with	you?"
Bayazid	was	surprised.	He	looked	back	--	there	was	nobody	else.	Has	this	man
gone	mad?	He	said,	"What	crowd	are	you	talking	about?"
And	the	Master	said,	"Don't	look	back	--	look	in.	All	those	people	that	you	have
left	behind	are	there."
And	Bayazid	closed	his	eyes...	and	the	Master	was	right,	he	was	not	crazy.	The
wife	 was	 still	 crying,	 the	 children	 were	 telling	 him,	 "Daddy,	 don't	 go."	 The
friends	were	holding	his	hands	to	the	very	last.	When	he	said	goodbye	to	them,
they	 all	 followed	 him	 as	 far	 as	 possible;	 he	 had	 to	 persuade	 them	 again	 and
again,	"Please	go	back.	I	have	decided,	and	my	decision	is	absolute."	And	when
he	closed	his	eyes	they	were	all	there.
And	the	Master	said,	"Bayazid,	it	is	easy	to	renounce	the	world,	but	how	are	you
going	 to	 renounce	 the	mind?	Because	 the	mind	 is	 the	 real	world!	They	are	all
there.	You	will	 sit	meditating,	and	you	will	 remember	your	wife;	you	may	not
have	ever	remembered	her	when	you	were	with	her	--	that's	how	mind	functions.
That	which	is,	 it	 takes	it	for	granted;	that	which	is	not	it	hankers	for.	Now	you
will	be	more	and	more	involved	with	your	wife,	your	children.	More	and	more
memories	will	come:	'What	is	happening	to	my	children?	What	is	happening	to
my	wife?	Has	she	betrayed	me?	Has	she	gone	with	somebody	else?	Can	she	do
that?'	Jealousy,	possessiveness,	and	all	kinds	of	things	are	bound	to	arise."
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	Jaina	scriptures:
A	great	king,	Bimbisar,	went	to	see	Mahavira,	the	last	Jaina	teerthankara	--	the
last	Jaina	prophet.	On	the	way,	he	met	one	of	his	old	friends.	They	had	studied	in
the	same	school;	he	was	also	a	son	of	a	king,	but	he	had	renounced	and	he	had
become	a	Jaina	monk	--	he	was	standing	naked	underneath	a	tree.
Bimbisar	 was	 overwhelmed	with	 tremendous	 respect	 for	 this	man	 and	 started
feeling	 a	 little	 guilty	 also	 about	 himself:	 "I	 am	 still	 involved	 in	 the	 world	 --
money,	 power,	 prestige,	 war.	 And	 look	 at	 my	 friend:	 he	 was	 also	 a	 king,	 he
would	also	have	been	a	king	like	me,	but	he	has	renounced	--	a	man	of	courage."
He	 bowed	 down,	 he	 touched	 the	 feet	 of	 his	 old	 friend.	 Then	 he	 went	 to	 see
Mahavira.
Just	a	few	yards	further	away	was	Mahavira,	sitting	underneath	a	tree.	Bimbisar
asked	 him,	 "One	 question	 arose	 in	 my	 mind	 --	 when	 I	 saw	 my	 old	 friend
Prasannachandra,	who	has	become	a	monk,	a	disciple	of	yours,	a	question	arose
in	my	mind:	if	he	dies	right	now,	where	will	he	be	born?"
Jainas	say	there	are	seven	hells	and	seven	heavens	--	"Into	what	heaven	will	he
be	born?"
Bimbisar	asked.	"Of	course,	there	is	no	question	of	his	being	born	in	hell	--	he
has	renounced	such	a	great	kingdom	and	all	--	in	what	heaven?"
And	Mahavira	said,	"He	would	have	gone	to	the	seventh	hell	--	if	he	had	died	the
time	you	touched	his	feet."
Bimbisar	was	 shocked.	He	 said,	 "Into	 the	 seventh	 hell?	Then	what	 about	me?
There	are	no	other	hells	below	 the	 seventh.	My	 friend,	who	has	 renounced	all
and	 looks	so	pious	and	so	silent	and	so	serene,	he	 is	going	 to	be	born	 into	 the
seventh	hell?"
Mahavira	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried:	 if	 he	 dies	 now,	 he	 will	 be	 born	 into	 the
seventh	heaven."	And	just	a	few	minutes	had	passed.
Bimbisar	 said,	 "You	 puzzle	me	 very	much.	Now	 you	 have	 confused	me	 even
more.	What	has	happened	within	these	few	minutes	that	he	will	be	born	into	the
seventh	heaven?"
Mahavira	 said,	 "You	 don't	 know	 the	whole	 story.	 Just	 before	 you,	 your	 prime
minister	had	passed.	He	had	come	to	accompany	you	just	to	see	that	everything
is	safe.	Your	prime	minister,	your	generals	and	your	guards,	 they	passed	 just	a
few	minutes	before	you.
And	 your	 prime	 minister	 said,	 'Look	 at	 this	 fool,	 this	 Prasannachandra!	 He
would	have	been	a	great	king	and	he	has	become	hypnotized	by	this	Mahavira.
And	now	standing	naked	in	this	heat,	wasting	his	life....	He	used	to	be	a	beautiful
man	--	now	look	at	his	body.	And	he	is	an	utter	fool,	because	he	has	trusted	his
prime	 minister	 and	 has	 given	 the	 whole	 kingdom	 to	 him	 till	 his	 children	 are
grown	up	enough	to	take	possession	of	it	--
and	 the	prime	minister	 is	 a	 cheat.	And	by	 the	 time	 the	children	are	grown	up,
there	will	be	nothing	left	in	the	treasury.'
"Hearing	this,	Prasannachandra	forgot	completely	that	he	has	become	a	monk	--
completely!	He	was	 so	 shocked	 and	 be-came	 so	 angry,	 and	 he	 said	 inside	 his
heart,	 'I	am	still	alive.'	And	his	hand,	just	out	of	old	habit	went	to	his	sword	--
which	was	not	there.
He	 pulled	 the	 sword	 out	 of	 the	 sheath	 and	 said,	 'I	 will	 go	 and	 kill	 this	 man
immediately.'
And	in	his	imagination	he	cut	the	head	of	the	prime	minister.
"When	 you	 touched	 his	 feet,"	 Mahavira	 said,	 "he	 had	 just	 killed	 the	 prime
minister.
Hence,	I	told	you	that	in	that	moment	if	he	had	died	he	would	have	gone	to	the
seventh	hell	--	he	was	in	a	murderous	attitude.	Now,	things	have	changed.	When
he	put	his	sword	back	into	the	sheath,	he	recognized,	'What	am	I	doing?	Where
is	the	sword,	and	where	is	the	sheath?	And	what	have	I	done?	Killed	my	prime
minister	in	imagination!	It	is	as	much	a	crime	as	actually	killing	a	person.
"	 'Mahavira	 says,	 "Whether	 you	 think	 of	 killing	 or	 you	 kill,	 it	 makes	 no
difference	--	 it	 is	 the	same,	psychologically	it	 is	 the	same."	What	have	I	done?
When	 I	 have	 renounced,	 have	 renounced!	Who	 am	 I	 to	 interfere	 now?	 If	 he
cheats	that	is	HIS	business;	if	he	breaks	the	trust,	HE	will	suffer	for	it.	But	who
am	I	to	punish	him?	I	am	finished	with	all	 this.	And	who	are	my	children,	and
what	is	my	kingdom?'
"And	 a	 great	 understanding	 came	 to	 him.	 He	 became	 quiet,	 silent,	 serene,
detached.	Right	now	 if	 he	dies,	 he	 is	 in	 such	 a	beautiful	 space	 that	 he	will	 be
born	in	the	seventh	heaven."
The	 question	 is	 of	 the	mind,	 not	 of	 the	 world.	 You	 can	 go	 to	 the	 Himalayan
caves,	but	what	are	you	going	to	think	about?	You	will	think	of	the	world.	That's
why	Kabir	says:	AVADHU	MAYA	TAJI	NA	JAI.
It	is	very	difficult	to	drop	this	mind.
FRIEND,	PLEASE	TELL	ME	WHAT	I	CAN	DO	ABOUT
THIS	WORLD...
the	world	of	the	mind
...	I	HOLD	TO,	AND	KEEP	SPINNING	OUT!
I	GAVE	UP	SEWN	CLOTHES	AND	WORE	A	ROBE,
BUT	I	NOTICED	ONE	DAY	THE	CLOTH	WAS	WELL	WOVEN.
HE	SAYS:	I	RENOUNCED	BEAUTIFUL	CLOTHES	and	wore	a	robe,	but	then
one	day	I	saw,	"Even	this	robe	is	well	woven	--	my	mind	has	played	a	trick.	I	am
still	as	much	concerned	about	my	clothes	as	before.	I	still	want	to	look	beautiful,
I	still	want	to	look	special,	I	still	want	to	look	somebody.	The	mind	has	played	a
trick	with	me.	I	am	the	same	man.
I	have	dropped	those	beautiful	clothes	and	now	I	am	wearing	a	single	robe,	but	it
doesn't	matter	 --	 the	mind	can	project	 in	 the	 same	way."	The	screen	makes	no
difference:	the	film	continues	the	same.	You	can	use	the	wall	as	the	screen,	and
you	can	project	 the	same	film.	You	need	not	have	a	perfect	screen.	The	film	is
the	 same,	 even	 projected	 on	 the	wall;	 the	wall	may	 be	 rough,	may	 be	 a	 poor
man's	house	wall,	but	it	makes	no	difference
--	the	film	is	the	same.
Kabir	 says:	 I	 recognized	 it,	 "Mind	 is	 still	 functioning	 in	 the	 same	way.	 I	 still
walk	in	such	a	way	that	people	should	recognize	me,	that	I	am	no	ordinary	man.
I	used	to	walk	in	my	beautiful	clothes	--	why	do	people	use	beautiful	clothes?	So
that	they	look	special.	Now	I	am	wearing	a	robe,	but	still,	deep	down,	the	same
desire	persists."
The	original	is:
GIRAH	TAJ	KE	BASTAR	BANDHA,
BASTAR	TAJ	KE	FERI.
I	have	left	the	house,	I	have	moved	to	the	cave,	with	only	a	small	bag,	but	then
one	day	I	recognize	that	the	cave	has	become	the	home,	the	cave	has	become	the
house.	And	 the	small	possession	 that	 I	brought	with	me	can	 function	perfectly
well	 for	 my	 possessiveness.	 My	 possessiveness	 remains	 the	 same!	 Now	 if
somebody	enters	into	the	cave,	I	am	going	to	say,	"Get	out!	This	is	my	cave."
You	can	go	and	see	 this.	Go	 to	 the	Himalayas,	enter	 into	some	cave	and	some
yogi	will	be	sitting	 there,	and	he	will	say,	"Get	out!	What	are	you	doing	here?
This	is	my	cave.	I	have	lived	here	for	thirty	years.	If	you	want	to	live	in	a	cave,
find	your	own."
Now	what	is	the	difference?	--	 'my	house'	or	 'my	cave'.	The	question	is	of	 'my'
and	'mine'.
So	Kabir	says:	I	left	the	house	with	a	small	bag,	went	to	the	cave,	but	I	found	it
was	 the	same	--	because	I	am	the	same.	So	I	 left	 the	cave	and	I	 left	 that	small
possession	and	became	a	wanderer,	but	nothing	changes.	Now	I	feel	great	that	I
am	a	wanderer,	that	I	am	no	ordinary	monk	who	lives	in	the	shelter	and	safety	of
a	cave.	I	live	in	insecurity	--	look!
This	 is	how	one	should	live.	I	am	a	wanderer	with	no	security,	no	safety.	Now
this	wandering	has	become	a	prop	to	my	ego.
GIRAH	TAJ	KE	BASTAR	BANDHA,
BASTAR	TAJ	KE	FERI.
Now	I	have	become	a	vagabond,	but	great	pride	has	arisen	in	me.
SO	I	BOUGHT	SOME	BURLAP,	BUT	I	STILL
THROW	IT	ELEGANTLY	OVER	MY	LEFT	SHOULDER.
Seeing	 that	 the	 robe	 was	 well	 woven,	 I	 purchased	 coarse	 canvas	 and	made	 a
shawl	 out	 of	 it	 --	BUT	STILL	 I	 THROW	 IT	ELEGANTLY	OVER	my	LEFT
SHOULDER.	The	same	mind.
You	 can	 stand	 naked	 in	 the	 sun	 --	 it	 doesn't	matter:	 it	will	 be	 the	 same	mind.
How	is	one	going	 to	drop	 the	mind?	It	comes	from	the	backdoor;	 it	 finds	new
ways	to	enter	back	into	you.
I	PULLED	BACK	MY	SEXUAL	LONGINGS,
AND	NOW	I	DISCOVER	THAT	I'M	ANGRY	A	LOT.
THIS	 IS	OF	TREMENDOUS	 IMPORTANCE	TO	UNDERSTAND.	Kabir	 has
looked	deep	into	the	human	mind	and	its	workings,	its	subtle	cunning	ways.	And
he	has	found	exactly	the	whole	process	of	inner	alchemy.	If	you	repress,	this	is
how	things	happen.
I	PULLED	BACK	MY	SEXUAL	LONGINGS,
AND	NOW	I	DISCOVER	THAT	I'M	ANGRY	A	LOT.
If	you	repress	sex	you	will	become	angry;	the	whole	energy	that	was	becoming
sex	will	become	anger.	And	it	 is	better	 to	be	sexual	 than	to	be	angry.	In	sex	at
least	there	is	something	of	love;	in	anger	there	is	only	pure	violence	and	nothing
else.	If	sex	is	repressed,	the	person	becomes	violent	--	either	to	others	he	will	be
violent,	 or	 to	 himself	 These	 are	 the	 two	 possibilities:	 either	 he	will	 become	 a
sadist	 and	will	 torture	 others,	 or	 he	will	 become	 a	masochist	 and	will	 torture
himself.	But	torture	he	will.
Do	you	know,	down	the	ages,	the	soldiers	have	not	been	allowed	to	have	sexual
relationships?	Why?	Because	if	soldiers	are	allowed	to	have	sexual	relationships
they	 don't	 gather	 enough	 anger	 in	 them,	 enough	 violence	 in	 them.	 Their	 sex
becomes	a	release,	they	become	soft,	and	a	soft	person	cannot	fight.	Starve	the
soldier	 of	 sex	 and	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 fight	 better.	 In	 fact,	 his	 violence	 will	 be	 a
substitute	for	his	sexuality.
And	Sigmund	Freud	is	again	right	when	he	says	that	all	our	weapons	are	nothing
but	 phallic	 symbols:	 the	 sword,	 the	 knife,	 the	 bayonet	 --	 they	 are	 nothing	 but
phallic	symbols.
The	 soldier	 has	 not	 been	 allowed	 to	 enter	 into	 somebody's	 body.	 into	 some
woman's	body.	Now	he	is	going	crazy	to	enter;	now	he	can	do	anything.	A	great
perverted	desire	has	entered	into	his	being	now.	Repressed	sex	--	he	would	like
to	enter	into	somebody's	body	through	a	bayonet,	through	a	sword...
Down	the	ages,	the	soldier	was	forced	to	repress	his	sexual	desires.
In	 this	 century	 we	 have	 seen	 one	 thing	 happening.	 American	 soldiers	 are	 the
most	well-equipped	 soldiers	 in	 the	world	 --	 scientifically,	 technologically,	 they
are	 the	 most	 well-equipped	 soldiers,	 but	 they	 proved	 weaker	 than	 any	 other
soldier.	In	Vietnam,	a	poor	country,	for	years	on	end	they	tried	and	had	to	accept
defeat.	 Why?	 For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 history	 the	 American	 soldier	 is	 sexually
satisfied	 --	 that	 is	 the	 problem.	 The	 first	 soldier	 in	 history	 who	 is	 sexually
satisfied,	 who	 is	 not	 starved	 sexually.	 He	 cannot	 win.	 A	 poor	 country	 like
Vietnam,	a	small	country	like	Vietnam	--	it	is	a	miracle;	if	you	don't	understand
the	 psychology,	 it	 is	 a	 miracle.	 With	 all	 the	 technology,	 with	 all	 the	 modern
science,	with	all	the	power...	and	the	American	soldier	could	not	do	anything.
But	this	is	not	new;	this	is	an	ancient	truth.	The	whole	history	of	India	proves	it.
India	is	a	big	country,	one	of	the	biggest,	next	only	to	China,	the	second	biggest
country	 in	 the	 world,	 and	 it	 was	 conquered	 many	 times	 by	 small	 countries.
Turks,	Mongols,	Greeks	--
anybody	came	and	this	big	country	was	immediately	defeated,	conquered.	What
was	the	reason?	And	those	people	who	had	come	to	conquer	were	poor	people,
starving.
My	 own	 analysis	 of	 Indian	 history	 is	 that	 in	 the	 past	 India	w	 as	 not	 sexually
repressed.
Those	were	the	days	when	temples	like	Khajuraho,	Konarak,	Puri,	were	built	--
India	was	 not	 sexually	 repressed.	 In	 spite	 of	 the	 few	 so-called	mahatmas,	 the
greater	part	of	the	country	was	sexually	satisfied;	there	was	a	softness,	a	loving
quality,	 a	 grace.	 It	 was	 difficult	 for	 India	 to	 fight.	 For	 what?	 Just	 think	 of
yourself:	if	you	want	to	fight,	you	will	have	to	starve	yourself	sexually	for	a	few
days.	You	can	ask	Mohammed	Ali	and	other	boxers:	before	they	fight,	for	a	few
days	they	have	to	become	celibates.	That's	a	must!
You	 can	 ask	 the	 Olympic	 competitors:	 before	 they	 participate	 in	 Olympic
competitions,	for	a	few	days	they	have	to	starve	themselves	sexually.	It	gives	a
thrust,	it	gives	great	violence	--	it	makes	you	capable	of	fighting.	You	run	faster,
you	 attack	 faster,	 because	 the	 energy	 is	 boiling	 within.	 Hence	 the	 soldier	 has
been	repressed.
Just	allow	all	 the	armies	of	 the	world	to	be	sexually	satisfied	and	there	will	be
peace.	 Just	 allow	 people	 sexual	 satisfaction,	 and	 there	 will	 be	 less
Hindu/Mohammedan	riots,	less	Christian	and	Mohammedan	crusades	--	all	that
nonsense	will	disappear.	If	love	spreads,	war	will	disappear	--	both	cannot	exist
together.
Kabir	is	exactly	right.	He	says:
I	PULLED	BACK	MY	SEXUAL	LONGINGS,
AND	NOW	I	DISCOVER	THAT	I'M	ANGRY	A	LOT.
A	great	observer	he	is,	a	very	minute	observer.	This	is	what	awareness	is.	He	is
watching:	he	represses	his	sexual	desire	and	watches	--	"Now	what	is	happening
inside?"	Soon	he	finds	that	he	becomes	more	angry	--	for	no	reason	at	all,	 just
angry,	irritated,	ready	to	fight	with	anybody,	any	excuse	will	do.
And	remember,	sex	can	be	 transformed	because	 it	 is	a	natural	energy;	anger	 is
not	so	natural,	one	step	removed	from	nature.	Now	it	will	be	difficult	to	change
anger.	First	 anger	will	have	 to	be	changed	 into	 sex,	only	 then	can	anything	be
done	--	that's	what	my	work	here	is.	And	that's	what	I	am	being	condemned	for
all	over	the	world.
I	am	trying	to	change	your	anger	into	sex	--	first	that	has	to	be	done.	That	is	the
way	of	inner	change.	First	all	your	perversions	have	to	disappear,	and	you	have
to	become	a	natural	human	being.	You	have	 to	become	a	natural	animal,	 to	be
exact.	And	 then	 only	 can	 you	 become	 divine.	 The	 animal	 can	 be	 transformed
into	the	divine,	but	your	animal	is	also	very	perverted,	your	animal	is	not	sane	--
your	 animal	 has	 become	 insane.	 First	 the	 insanity	 has	 to	 be	 transformed,
changed.	Change	anger!
That's	why	I	send	people	first	to	encounter	groups	and	then	to	Tantra.	First	they
have	 to	 go	 into	 some	 encounter	 group	 type	phenomenon;	 some	process	where
their	 anger	 can	 be	 expressed,	 relaxed.	 Then	 only	 can	 they	 move	 into	 some
process	 of	 Tantra,	 into	 some	 inner	 alchemy	 that	 can	 use	 sexual	 energy	 as	 a
vehicle.
But	 people	 who	 are	 angry	 will	 not	 understand	 it.	 Anger	 does	 not	 allow
understanding.
Now	 if	 you	 want	 to	 become	 a	 politician,	 you	 have	 to	 repress	 your	 sex	 --
otherwise	you	will	not	be	able	 to	compete,	you	will	not	be	able	 to	 reach	New
Delhi	--	impossible.	It	is	not	an	accident	that	Morarji	Desai	has	reached	there	--
fifty	years	of	sexual	repression	is	bound	to	help	him	become	the	prime	minister
of	the	country.	So	much	rage!	It	is	difficult	to	compete	with	such	people;	they	go
madly	 into	competition.	They	don't	 look	sideways,	 they	simply	go	ahead;	 they
don't	care	what	happens.	By	fair	or	foul	means,	but	they	have	to	reach	the	top.
Politicians	can	succeed	only	if	 they	are	sexually	repressed	people.	Adolf	Hitler
was	sexually	repressed,	very	repressed.	Had	he	been	in	deep	love	with	a	single
woman	 there	 would	 have	 been	 no	 Second	World	War.	 Had	 he	 loved	 a	 single
human	being	deeply,	the	whole	history	of	humanity	would	have	been	different.
But	he	was	very	sexually	suppressed.
He	was	as	big	 a	mahatma	as	Morarji	Desai	 --	 in	 fact	 a	 little	bigger.	He	was	a
vegetarian,	you	will	 be	 surprised	 to	know.	To	 find	 a	vegetarian	 in	Germany	 is
difficult!	but	he	was	a	vegetarian.	He	was	not	a	smoker;	he	was	against	drinking
any	kind	of	intoxicating	beverages.	He	used	to	go	early	to	bed	and	would	get	up
early	in	the	morning.	He	avoided	all	kinds	of	loving	relationships	--	what	to	say
about	love?	--	he	had	not	even	a	single	friend.	There	was	not	a	single	man	vv-ho
could	 call	 him	 friend.	 He	 never	 allowed	 that	 much	 closeness.	 He	 was	 afraid,
continuously	afraid	of	his	sexuality.
This	man	became	the	cause	of	 the	greatest	war	 the	world	has	known.	My	own
feeling	is	that	had	he	smoked	a	little	bit,	had	he	become	drunk	once	in	a	while,
had	he	fallen	in	love	with	a	woman,	the	whole	history	of	humanity	would	have
been	different.	Then	he	would	 have	been	 soft,	 then	he	would	 have	been	more
human,	 more	 accepting	 of	 his	 own	 limitations,	 and	 hence	 more	 accepting	 of
others'	limitations.	He	would	have	been	more	humane.
Says	Kabir:
I	PULLED	BACK	MY	SEXUAL	LONGINGS,
AND	NOW	I	DISCOVER	THAT	I'M	ANGRY	A	LOT.
I	GAVE	UP	RAGE,	AND	NOW	I	NOTICE
THAT	I	AM	GREEDY	ALL	DAY.
SO	HE	REPRESSED	HIS	ANGER	--	hm?	--	that	s	what	one	will	logically	do.
You	repress	sex,	anger	bubbles	up;	you	repress	anger.	But	he	is	a	close	observer,
a	 very	minute	observer.	He	 says:	The	moment	 I	 repressed	my	anger	 I	 became
greedy.
This	too	is	proved:	if	you	watch	human	history	you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one
proofs	for	it.	For	example,	in	India	Mahavira	taught	non-violence,	and	the	result
has	been	that	all	the	followers	of	Mahavira	became	the	most	greedy	people	in	the
world	--	 they	are	 the	Jews	of	India.	The	Jainas	are	 the	Jews	of	India.	Why	did
they	become	so	greedy?
Mahavira	 taught	 them	 to	 be	 non-violent.	 Obviously,	 they	 started	 repressing
anger;	 that	 is	 the	 only	 way	 that	 seems	 possible	 to	 the	 stupid	 mind:	 Repress
anger!	Don't	be	violent.
And	 they	 tried	 really	 hard;	 in	 every	 possible	way	 they	 tried	 not	 to	 be	 violent.
They	even	stopped	agriculture	because	it	is	a	kind	of	violence:	you	will	have	to
pull	the	plants	and	cut	the	crop,	and	that	is	violence	because	plants	have	life.	So
Jainas	stopped	agriculture	completely.
Now,	they	cannot	go	to	the	army,	they	cannot	be	KSHATRIYAS	--	they	cannot
become	warriors	 --	because	of	 their	 ideology	of	non-violence,	and	 they	cannot
even	 be	 agriculturalists,	 gardeners;	 that	 is	 impossible.	 They	would	 not	 like	 to
become	SUDRAS	--
the	untouchables	--	who	clean	the	roads,	the	sweepers	and	the	cobblers,	because
that	is	too	humiliating.	And	brahmins	won't	allow	them	to	function	as	brahmins	-
-	brahmins	are	very	 jealous	about	 that.	They	have	been	 in	power	 for	 centuries
and	 they	don't	allow	anybody:	nobody	can	become	a	brahmin;	one	has	 to	be	a
brahmin	 only	 by	 birth.	 You	may	 become	 a	 great,	 learned	man	 --	 that	 doesn't
matter	 --	but	you	can't	be	a	brahmin.	There	 is	no	way	of	becoming	a	brahmin;
you	have	to	be	born	one	only.	You	have	to	be	very	careful	when	you	choose	your
parents;	that	is	the	only	opportunity	to	become	a	brahmin.
So	Jainas	could	not	be	brahmins,	would	not	like	to	become	SUDRAS	were	not
able	 to	become	warriors	 --	 then	what	was	 left	 for	 them?	Only	business	 --	 they
became	business	people.	And	all	their	repressed	anger	became	their	greed.	They
became	great	money-maniacs.	Their	number	is	very	small;	in	India	their	number
is	so	small,	not	more	than	thirty	LAKHS.	In	a	country	of	sixty	CRORES	thirty
LAKHS	IS	nothing.	But	they	possess	more	money	than	anybody	else.	You	will
not	find	a	Jaina	beggar	anywhere;	they	are	all	rich	people.
Mahavira	wanted	them	to	be	non-violent,	and	what	really	happened	was	totally
different:	they	became	greedy.	Repress	your	anger	and	you	will	be	greedy.
I	GAVE	UP	RAGE	AND	NOW	I	NOTICE
THAT	I	AM	GREEDY	ALL	DAY.
I	WORKED	HARD	AT	DISSOLVING	THE	GREED,
AND	NOW	I	AM	PROUD	OF	MYSELF.
So	 he	 repressed	 his	 greed	 and	 the	 ultimate	 result	 is:	 he	 has	 become	 a	 great
egoist;	he	finds	himself	being	very	proud.	"Look!	I	have	repressed	sex,	repressed
anger,	repressed	greed	-
-	I	have	done	this,	I	have	done	that.	I	have	done	impossible	things!"	Now	a	great
'I'	arises,	the	ego	becomes	strengthened.
That's	wh	you	will	 find	 the	most	 crystallized	egos	 in	 the	monks	and	 the	nuns.
You	 will	 not	 find	 such	 crystallized	 egos	 anywhere	 else.	 The	 more	 a	 person
renounces,	the	more	he	represses,	the	more	egoistic	he	becomes.	Indians	are	very
egoistic	 and	 the	 reason?	 --	 they	 have	 all	 tried	 in	 some	 way	 or	 other	 to	 be
religious.	And	the	only	way	seems	to	be	repression	--	and	repression	brings	ego.
A	non-repressed	person	becomes	a	non-egoist;	he	cannot	carry	the	ego.	There	is
no	 prop	 to	 support	 it.	 He	 becomes	 humble,	 he	 becomes	 simple,	 he	 becomes
ordinary,	 he	 has	 no	 claim	 --	 he	 knows	 he	 is	 nothing.	 This	whole	 process	 that
Kabir	is	describing	is	beautiful.
Repression	is	not	the	way:	transformation	is	the	way.	Don't	repress	anything.	If
sexuality	is	there,	don't	repress	it	otherwise	you	will	create	a	new	complexity	--
which	will	be	more	difficult	 to	 tackle.	And	 if	you	 repress	anger,	greed	 is	even
more	 difficult	 then,	 and	 if	 you	 repress	 greed,	 arises	 ego,	 pride,	 which	 is	 the
MOST	difficult	thing	to	drop.
Move	back:	from	pride	to	greed,	from	greed	to	anger,	from	anger	to	sex.	And	if
you	can	come	to	the	natural,	spontaneous	sexuality,	 things	will	be	very	simple.
Things	will	be	so	simple	 that	you	cannot	 imagine.	Then	you	energy	 is	natural,
and	natural	energy	creates	no	hindrance	in	transformation.	Hence	I	say:	from	sex
to	superconsciousness.	Not	from	anger,	not	from	greed,	not	from	ego,	but	from
sex	to	superconsciousness.
The	 transformation	 can	 happen	 only	 if	 first	 you	 accept	 your	 natural	 being.
Whatsoever	 is	 natural	 is	 good.	 Yes,	 more	 is	 possible,	 but	 the	 more	 will	 be
possible	only	if	you	accept	your	nature	with	totality	--	if	you	welcome	it,	if	you
have	no	guilt	about	it.	To	be	guilty,	to	feel	guilty,	is	to	be	irreligious.	In	the	past
you	have	been	told	just	the	opposite:	Feel	guilty	and	you	are	religious.	I	say	to
you:	Feel	guilty	and	you	will	never	be	religious.
Drop	all	guilt!
You	are	whatsoever	God	has	made	you.	You	are	whatso-ever	existence	has	made
you.
Sex	 is	 not	 your	 creation:	 it	 is	God's	 gift.	 Something	 tremendously	 valuable	 is
hidden	in	it
--	it	is	just	a	shell	of	your	samadhi.	If	the	seed	is	broken,	the	shell	is	broken,	the
flower	 will	 bloom	 --	 but	 not	 by	 repression.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 learn	 inner
gardening,	you	will	have	 to	become	a	gardener,	you	will	have	 to	 learn	how	 to
use	dirty	fertilizers,	manure,	and	transform	manure	into	roses.
Religion	is	the	most	delicate	art.
WHEN	THE	MIND	WANTS	TO	BREAK	ITS	LINK	WITH
THE	WORLD,	says	Kabir,
IT	STILL	HOLDS	ON	TO	ONE	THING.
AND	THE	ULTIMATE	PROBLEM	IS:	you	call	leave	one	thing,	but	you	cling	to
another.	You	leave	that	and	you	cling	to	another.	You	go	on	changing	things,	but
the	 clinging	 remains.	 The	 clinging	 has	 to	 disappear.	 How	 can	 the	 clinging
disappear?	Only	by	understanding,	awareness,	meditation;	not	by	doing	anything
about	it.	If	you	do,	you	will	create	a	new	clinging.
An	ancient	story:
A	man	was	very	much	afraid	of	ghosts,	and	the	problem	was	more	troublesome
because	he	had	to	pass	through	a	cemetery	every	day	while	going	to	work	and
coming	 back	 from	 work.	 And	 sometimes,	 if	 he	 had	 to	 come	 in	 the	 night	 --
overtime	work	or	something	and	he	was	delayed	--	then	it	was	really	a	problem
to	pass	 through	the	cemetery.	It	was	only	a	 three,	four	minute	walk,	but	 it	was
almost	a	death	to	him.
He	went	 to	a	 fakir	and	he	 said,	 "Do	something.	 I	have	heard	you	do	miracles.
And	 I	 don't	 ask	 much	 --	 I	 ask	 only	 a	 simple	 thing:	 give	 me	 somehow	 some
protection	so	that	I	can	pass	through	the	cemetery	without	fear."
He	said,	"This	is	so	simple,	there	is	no	problem	in	it.	Take	this	locket	and	keep	it
always	with	 you	 --	 it	will	 protect	 you	 from	ghosts.	No	ghost	 can	 ever	 trouble
you."
He	 tried	and,	 really,	no	ghost	 troubled	him.	 In	 fact,	 there	are	no	ghosts;	 it	was
only	his	fear.	With	the	locket	 in	hand,	he	went	through	the	cemetery,	from	this
side	to	that,	from	that	side	to	this.	He	tried	at	different	times,	even	in	the	middle
of	the	night	--	and	it	worked.	And	he	said,	"It	is	really	powerful.	this	locket!	This
man	is	a	miracle	man."
The	whole	miracle	 was	 this:	 that	 there	 were	 no	 ghosts	 --	 there	 are	 no	 ghosts
anywhere.
But	now	this	idea	that	he	had	a	protection	helped	him.
But	then	a	new	problem	arose:	he	started	becoming	afraid	that	somebody	might
steal	 it,	 or	 some	 day	 he	 might	 forget	 it	 somewhere,	 or	 he	 might	 have	 put	 it
outside	and	be	taking	a	bath	and	ghosts	might	come	there....	So	he	had	to	carry	it
everywhere	 --	 it	 became	 an	 obsession.	 The	 wife	 would	 say,	 "It	 looks
embarrassing.	People	ask	me,	'Why	does	your	husband	go	on	carrying	this	locket
in	his	hand,	this	stupid	locket?	What	is	the	matter	with	him?	He	never	leaves	it.'"
Even	in	the	night	when	he	went	to	sleep	he	would	keep	it	in	his	hand.	Even	once
or	twice	in	the	night	he	would	wake	up	to	see	whether	the	locket	was	in	his	hand
or	not,	because	it	might	have	fallen	in	his	sleep,	and	ghosts	might	 jump	on	his
chest:	"And	they	must	be	waiting	to	take	revenge!"
Now	 one	 problem	 is	 solved,	 another	 problem	 has	 arisen	 --	 and	 far	 more
complicated,	because	the	ghosts	used	to	torture	him	only	once	in	a	while	when
he	was	late	or	he	had	to	pass	through	the	cemetery.	In	twenty-four	hours,	just	for
one	 or	 two	 minutes	 the	 problem	 was	 there.	 Now	 it	 was	 a	 twenty-four-hour
problem	 --	 the	 locket:	 "If	 it	 is	 lost,	 if	 somebody	 takes	 it	 away,	 if	 I	 forget	 it
somewhere....	"	Even	in	sleep	it	was	difficult	to	sleep	totally.
He	had	to	keep	a	little	alert.	He	started	becoming	ill	because	the	sleep	was	not
good,	and	he	was	so	constantly	afraid.
He	went	to	another	fakir	who	said,	"I	will	give	you	another	thing.	Keep	this	box;
this	locket	is	creating	trouble	--	this	box	is	far	more	powerful.	You	can	even	keep
it	six	feet	away	from	you	and	its	power	works."
He	 said,	 "This	 is	 far	 better.	 At	 least	 I	 can	 go	 into	 my	 bathroom	 leaving	 it
outside."
But	now	the	new	problem	arose.	The	locket	he	was	always	keeping	in	his	hand;
now	he	was	taking	the	bath	inside	and	the	box	was	outside..."If	children,	just	in
playing,	take	it	away	or	something	happens?!"	Now	it	was	even	more	difficult:
that	six	foot	distance.
The	story	is	significant:	this	is	not	the	way	to	drop	the	ghosts!	You	will	have	to
cling	to	something	or	other.	The	ghosts	are	not	to	be	dropped;	your	eyes	have	to
be	 opened	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 that	 there	 are	 no	 ghosts	 at	 all.	 The	 problem
disappears.	The	problem	is	not	solved	but	dissolved.
WHEN	THE	MIND	WANTS	TO	BREAK	ITS	LINK
WITH	THE	WORLD
IT	STILL	HOLDS	ON	TO	ONE	THING.
And	unless	you	drop	ALL	clinging	--	ALL	clinging,	I	say	--	unless	you	are	ready
to	 be	 nothing,	 empty,	 nobody,	with	 no	 protection,	with	 no	 security,	 no	 safety,
unless	you	are	ready	to	be	in	that	kind	of	space...	which	will	look	like	death	in
the	beginning.	And	 it	 is	 a	kind	of	death:	 the	old	dies,	but	 then	 the	new	arises.
And	the	new	can	arise	only	when	the	old	is	gone.	The	old	has	to	cease	for	 the
new	to	be.	Only	when	all	clinging	disappears	--
you	are	not	clinging	even	to	the	name	of	God,	you	are	not	clinging	even	to	the
Master,	 you	 are	 not	 clinging	 to	 the	 scripture,	 you	 are	 simply	 in	 a	 state	 of
nonclinging	--	then	suddenly	from	your	own	inner	source	a	great	light	wells	up,
a	great	bliss	wells	up.	You	are	transformed.
Mind	is	not	dropped	--	it	is	a	ghost.	And	if	you	try	methods	to	drop	it,	you	will
cling	to	the	methods.	Then	those	methods	will	torture	you.	But	you	will	remain
always	in	bondage.
KABIR	SAYS:	LISTEN	MY	FRIEND,
THERE	ARE	VERY	FEW	THAT	FIND	THE	PATH!
A	FEW	PEOPLE	REMAIN	 INDULGENT,	 remain	 animals;	 a	 few	people	 start
repressing	 the	 animal,	 become	 obsessed	 with	 repressions,	 perversions.	 Only
rarely	 does	 it	 happen	 that	 a	 person	 is	 neither	 indulgent,	 nor	 repressive	 --	 only
when	a	person	is	neither	does	he	find	the	secret	key	to	the	door	of	the	divine.
The	original	is:
MAN	BAIRAGI	MAYA	TYAGI,
SHABD	MEN	SURAT	SAMAI.
Kabir	says:	I	have	become	a	sannyasin,	a	renunciate,	I	have	dropped	the	world,
but	that	doesn't	matter.	Now	I	cling	to	God,	now	God	has	become	my	world.
MAN	BAIRAGI	MAYA	TYAGI,
SHABD	MEN	SURAT	SAMAI.
Now	the	name	of	God	--	SHABD	--	has	become	my	treasure,	now	I	cling	to	it.
Now	the	idea	of	God	has	become	the	center	of	my	clinging.
KAHAIN	KABIR	SUNO	BHAI	SADHO,
YAH	GAM	BIRLE	PAI.
Very	 few	 people	 there	 are	who	 have	 found	 the	 secret	 path.	Out	 of	 a	 hundred,
ninety	remain	indulgent	in	the	animal;	they	never	move	beyond	the	animal.	Out
of	the	remaining	ten,	nine	become	repressive	and	pathological.	Only	one	out	of	a
hundred	finds	the	true	way.	What	is	the	true	way?
The	 true	way	 is	 that	 of	 understanding	your	mind,	 not	 of	 dropping	 it.	The	 true
way	 is:	 sitting	 silently	 and	watching	your	mind	 --	 all	 its	 cunning	ways,	 subtle
ways,	all	its	strategies	--	just	watch,	just	be	a	witness	to	your	mind.	And,	slowly
slowly,	by	witnessing	it	you	will	understand	what	games	it	has	been	playing	with
you.	You	stop	it	from	one	door,	it	comes	from	another	door;	you	stop	it	from	that
door,	it	makes	a	third	door	--	and	it	goes	on	and	on,	ad	nauseam.
Watch....	Don't	renounce	the	world,	and	don't	try	to	drop	the	mind.	Just	become
more	 alert.	 In	 that	 alertness,	 suddenly	 mind	 disappears,	 and	 with	 the	 mind
disappears	the	whole	world.	And	when	there	is	no	mind	and	no	world,	God	is.
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	Life	is	a	Lovesong
24	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904240
ShortTitle:
FISH14
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
102
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 I	 KEEP	 THINKING	 OF	 MY	 LIFE	 IN	 TERMS	 OF	 GOAL	 OR
DESTINATION,	WAITING	TO	WAKE	UP	SOME	DAY	AND	FIND	MYSELF
ENLIGHTENED,	AND	 I	WORRY	THAT	OTHERS	WILL	REACH	BEFORE
ME.	TODAY	IS	A	TENSION.
WHY	 IS	 ETERNITY	 SO	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 FEEL	 AND	 REMEMBER?	 YOU
KEEP
REMINDING	ME	BUT	I	KEEP	FORGETTING	AND	LOSE	PATIENCE.	WHY
AM	 I	 SUCH	 A	 FOOD?	 AND	 THEN	 I	 THINK	 'SO	WHAT?'	 AND	 THEN	 I
WANT	TO
SCREAM	'NO	MORE!'	BUT	GO	ON.
Tao	Sudas,
MAN	HAS	BEEN	CONDITIONED	DOWN	THE	CENTURIES	FOR	GOALS,
destinations,	purposes,	meanings	 --	 that's	how	man	has	 lived	hitherto,	with	 the
goal-oriented	 ideology.	Hindu,	Christian,	Mohammedan,	 communist,	 it	 doesn't
matter	--	all	ideologies	are	goal-oriented.	It	is	always	tomorrow	that	you	have	to
look	to,	or	the	next	life.	It	is	always	somewhere	else:	the	goal,	the	meaning,	the
bliss,	the	paradise	--	it	is	never	now	here.
Because	of	 these	 ideologies	you	cannot	allow	yourself	 to	 relax	 in	 the	moment.
They	 go	 on	 goading	 you...	 you	 have	 to	 attain	 something,	 you	 have	 to	 achieve
something.	 Your	 whole	 education	 system	 is	 a	 strategy	 of	 poisoning	 your
consciousness;	it	is	a	strategy	of	driving	you	crazy	after	goals,	it	is	a	strategy	of
creating	ambition	in	you.	And	ambition	is	neurosis.	But	this	has	been	done	for	so
long	that	it	has	become	part	and	parcel	of	the	human	mind.
That's	why	you	go	on	thinking	in	terms	of	goal	or	destination.	It	is	not	you:	it	is
the	society	that	goes	on	thinking	in	you,	through	you;	it	is	your	parents,	it	is	your
priests,	it	is	your	politicians,	it	is	your	pedagogues,	who	go	on	thinking	through
you,	and	you	are	identified	with	them.	You	don't	know	that	you	are	separate.
The	first	thing	that	you	will	have	to	learn	is	to	be	a	witness	to	all	that	goes	on	in
the	mind,	because	the	mind	is	a	social	phenomenon	--	it	is	not	a	God-given	gift.
It	is	social	exploitation;	it	is	society	that	makes	a	mind	in	you,	and	through	that
mind	controls	you,	keeps	you	imprisoned,	chained,	reduces	you	to	a	slave.	And
you	are	not	the	mind!	You	are	the	witness	who	can	see	the	mind	very	easily.	You
can	 see	 the	 thoughts	 moving	 in	 your	 consciousness	 --	 those	 thoughts	 are	 the
content	of	the	consciousness	but	they	are	not	consciousness	itself.
And	 this	 is	what	meditation	 is	 all	 about:	 creating	 a	 distance	 between	 you	 and
your	mind.
Once	the	distance	is	there,	you	will	be	surprised	that	the	whole	mind	structure	is
your	imprisonment	--	you	are	free	from	it	because	you	are	separate	from	it.	Once
you	 start	 enjoying	 the	 freedom	 from	 the	 mind	 all	 goals	 will	 disappear,	 all
destinations	will	disappear.
Mind	 can	 only	 live	 in	 goals,	 because	mind	 can	 only	 exist	 in	 the	 future.	Mind
cannot	exist	herenow	--	try	to	be	herenow	and	try	for	the	mind	to	continue.	You
will	find	it	impossible.	Either	the	mind	continues,	then	you	are	not	herenow;	or,
you	are	herenow	and	the	mind	is	no	more	there.	Mind	has	no	present	tense	at	all;
either	 it	 is	past	or	 it	 is	 future	 --	 it	 is	always	 in	 the	non-existential.	And	God	 is
that	which	exists.	God	is	not	a	goal,	nirvana	is	not	a	goal,	enlightenment	is	not	a
goal,	it	is	not	an	achievement	--	just	the	contrary.	When	you	have	forgotten	ALL
goals,	when	 you	 have	 dropped	 the	whole	 achieving	mind,	 enlightenment	 is	 --
enlightenment	is	a	state	of	no-mind.
And	 enlightenment	 is	 nothing	 special.	 It	 is	 the	 most	 ordinary,	 natural
phenomenon.	It	looks	special	because	you	make	a	goal	out	of	it.	Buddha	is	the
most	 ordinary	 human	 being	 --	 ordinary	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 he	 has	 no	 mind,	 he
exists	 in	 the	 sheer	 present.	He	 has	 no	 ego,	 how	 can	 he	 be	 special?	He	 cannot
compare	himself	with	anybody	else,	he	cannot	be	inferior	or	superior.
In	 the	 present	 moment,	 he	 is	 not	 --	 but	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 presence
happens,	which	does	not	belong	to	the	person;	it	is	only	a	presence,	not	a	person
at	all.	And	how	can	he	be	special?	--	because	in	the	present	moment	he	finds	that
there	is	no	purpose	in	life.	The	whole	purpose	is	mind-imposed.
The	trees	are	there	for	no	purpose	at	all,	and	the	stars	are	there	for	no	purpose	at
all.
Purpose	 is	a	man-created	concept.	Rivers	are	not	flowing	for	any	purpose,	and
the	oceans	 are	 there	not	 for	 any	purpose.	Except	 for	man	 there	 is	nothing	 like
purpose	anywhere	else.	Life	simply	is.	Existence	utterly	is	--	it	is	not	a	means	to
some	 end;	 it	 is	 an	 end	 unto	 itself	 That's	 what	 I	mean	when	 I	 say	 there	 is	 no
purpose.
I	 am	 not	 saying	 that	 it	 is	 purposeless,	 because	 to	 use	 the	 word	 'purposeless'
brings	 the	 purpose	 in.	 It	 is	 simply	 transcendental	 --	 neither	 purpose	 nor	 no
purpose,	neither	meaning	nor	no	meaning.	It	is	not	going	anywhere.	There	is	no
goal	to	life,	and	if	you	have	a	goal	then	you	are	going	against	life,	and	you	will
suffer	 --	because	you	will	be	 trying	 to	go	upstream.	You	will	have	 to	struggle,
and	 all	 struggle	 is	 dissipation	of	 energy,	 and	 all	 struggle	 is	 stupid,	 because	 all
struggle	is	destructive.	It	simply	destroys	you.	You	cannot	win	against	the	whole.
Relax...	there	is	no	goal	to	be	achieved.	Simply,	there	is	no	goal!
I	am	not	telling	you,	"Don't	try	to	achieve	goals"	--	I	am	telling	you	there	is	no
goal	whether	you	try	or	not.	If	you	try	you	will	be	simply	wasting	your	time	and
energy.	If	you	don't	try	you	will	start	feeling	ecstatic,	because	the	whole	energy
that	is	wasted	in	struggle	becomes	available	to	you.	And	energy	is	delight.	Just
to	have	it	is	enough	to	be	full	of	joy.	When	there	is	energy,	overflowing	energy,
you	are	a	dance,	you	are	a	celebration.
There	 is	 no	 meaning	 in	 life.	 Life	 is	 utterly	 beyond	 meaning.	 So	 don't	 bother
about	 the	 meaning.	 Don't	 ask	 the	 question,	 "What	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 a
roseflower?"	--	there	is	none.
"And	what	is	the	meaning	of	the	sunrise?"	--	there	is	none.	There	is	beauty,	but
no	meaning.	There	is	immense	beauty,	but	no	meaning	at	all.
Life	is	not	a	logical	process.	It	is	poetry,	it	is	a	lovesong	--	without	any	meaning,
yet	 it	 is	 utterly	 beautiful.	 In	 fact,	 when	 something	 has	 a	 meaning,	 it	 can't	 be
beautiful	--	it	is	utilitarian.	The	rose	is	beautiful	because	it	has	no	utility	at	all.	Its
sheer	being	 is	enough;	 it	need	not	have	any	other	significance.	But	a	hundred-
rupee	 note	 has	 no	 beauty;	 it	 has	 utility,	 it	 has	meaning,	 it	 has	 purpose,	 it	 is	 a
means	to	some	end.
Live	a	life	which	has	no	idea	of	purpose,	which	has	no	search	for	meaning.	Live
a	life	of	sheer	joy	and	ecstasy	--	that	is	the	only	way	to	live.	Every	other	way	is
only	to	commit	a	slow	suicide.
That's	what	happens	when	you	are	too	much	interested	in	goals:	today	goes	by
without	 being	 lived,	 and	 tomorrow	 remains	 important	 --	 and	 tomorrow	 never
comes.	Whenever	it	comes	it	is	today.	And	you	learn	a	wrong	habit	of	losing	that
which	 is	and	of	 thinking	of	 something	which	 is	not.	Every	day	 it	will	happen:
each	tomorrow	will	come	as	today,	and	you	will	not	be	interested	in	it	and	you
will	be	interested	in	the	tomorrow,	and	the	tomorrow	is	never	going	to	come.
This	 is	 how	 people	 are	 simply	 wasting	 away.	 Their	 lives	 could	 have	 become
great	oases,	but	they	remain	deserts.	And	the	basic	reason	for	people's	dryness	is
goal-orientation.
You	say,	Sudas:	I	KEEP	THINKING	OF	MY	LIFE	IN	TERMS	OF	A	GOAL	OR
DESTINATION,	WAITING	TO	WAKE	UP	SOME	DAY	AND	FIND	MYSELF
ENLIGHTENED.
WHY	 'SOME	DAY'?	Why	not	 now?	Why	postpone	 it?	 Is	 it	 not	 a	 trick	 of	 the
mind	 to	 avoid	 it?	 Postponing	 is	 a	 way	 of	 avoiding.	 Don't	 you	 want	 to	 be
enlightened	right	now,	Sudas?	If	you	look	deep	down,	if	you	watch,	you	will	see
the	point	--	you	don't	want	to	become	enlightened	right	now.
If	I	say	to	you	I	can	make	you	enlightened	right	now...	you	will	say,	"Just	give
me	a	little	time	to	think.	I	will	come	tomorrow,	because	I	have	to	do	many	more
things	before	 I	become	enlightened.	My	girl	may	be	waiting,	my	children,	my
shop	has	to	be	opened....
So	many	investments	--	let	me	finish	things	first!	Yes,	I	want	to	be	enlightened,
but	not	right	now."
In	 fact	 you	 don't	 want	 to	 become	 enlightened.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 diplomatic	 way	 of
avoiding,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 go	 on	 deceiving	 yourself	 that	 you	 are	 interested	 in
becoming	enlightened,	that	you	want	to	be	enlightened,	but	not	today.	It	is	only	a
question	of	 time.	Not	 that	you	are	not	 interested	 in	enlightenment...	 tomorrow,
when	all	other	things	have	been	finished,	completed,	when	nothing	else	is	left.
But	 do	 you	 think	 a	 day	 will	 come	 when	 all	 your	 invest-ments	 and	 all	 your
worries	and	all	your	acts	are	complete?	Will	there	ever	come	a	day	when	you	are
finished	with	 the	 activities	 of	 your	 so-called	 life,	 and	 you	 can	 come	 and	 say,
"Right	now	I	am	ready"?	It	will	never	come,	because	life	is	such	a	complexity.	It
never	begins,	it	never	ends.	You	are	always	in	the	middle.
It	is	like	reading	a	novel	from	the	middle.	The	beginning	part	is	missing	and	the
end	part	is	missing	--	you	know	only	the	middle.	That	is	the	mystery	of	life!	Try
some	 time	 reading	 a	 novel	 from	 the	 middle	 and	 you	 will	 find	 that	 even	 an
ordinary	novel	becomes	very	mysterious.	Intrigued	you	will	be,	and	many	times
you	will	be	tempted	to	look	back:
"What	is	the	beginning?"	But	resist	the	temptation,	go	on	reading	in	the	middle.
That's	how	it	is:	we	are	always	in	the	middle	of	life.	Life	has	been	there	before
you	ever	entered	into	the	stream,	and	life	will	be	there	when	you	are	gone.	You
will	know	only	a	few	glimpses	in	the	middle.	You	come	suddenly	into	the	film-
house,	 you	 see	 a	 few	 scenes	 on	 the	 screen;	 the	 film	was	 going	 on	 before	 you
entered,	you	will	be	gone	and	 the	 film	will	continue.	You	will	never	know	the
beginning	and	you	will	never	know	the	end	because	there	are	none.	There	is	no
beginning,	no	end.	Life	is	an	eternal	continuum.
Hence	you	cannot	ever	complete	things,	but	you	want	to	avoid.
You	 are	 afraid	 of	 enlightenment,	 Sudas,	 just	 as	 everybody	 else	 is	 afraid.	 But
nobody	wants	to	accept	that	"I	am	a	coward."	Nobody	wants	to	accept	the	fact
that	"I	would	like	to	sleep	a	little	longer	because	I	am	seeing	beautiful	dreams,
colourful	dreams."	Nobody	wants	to	accept	that	"I	am	so	stupid	that	I	don't	long
for	enlightenment."	So	everybody	goes	on	saying,	"Yes,	I	would	like	to	become
enlightened	--	but	tomorrow,	the	day	after	tomorrow,	in	my	old	age."
How	 to	 postpone?	The	 best	way	 is	 to	 become	 goal-oriented.	 That	 is	 the	most
beautiful	 deception	 that	 you	 can	give	 to	yourself	Hence	you	 say,	 "Some	day	 I
hope	 to	 find	myself	enlightened."	Why	 'some	day'?	The	river	 is	 flowing	now...
you	can	drink.
You	are	 thirsty	 and	you	 say,	 "Some	day	 I	will	 drink."	 If	 you	 are	 thirsty,	 drink
right	now.
Nothing	 else	 is	 more	 important.	 And	 because	 there	 is	 no	 goal,	 all	 goals	 are
private	dreams,	life	will	not	support	you	in	your	goal-orientation.	Life	will	try	in
every	way	to	destroy	all	your	goals.
You	will	have	to	learn	ways	of	relaxing	in	the	present.	Enlightenment	is	not	an
effort	 to	 achieve	 something.	 It	 is	 a	 state	 of	 effortlessness.	 It	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-
action.	 It	 is	 a	 state	 of	 tremendous	 passivity,	 receptivity.	 You	 are	 not	 doing
anything,	you	are	not	thinking	anything,	you	are	not	planning	for	anything,	you
are	not	doing	yoga	exercises,	and	you	are	not	doing	any	technique,	any	method	-
-	you	are	simply	existing,	 just	existing.	And	 in	 that	very	moment...	 the	sudden
realization	 that	 all	 is	 as	 it	 should	 be.	 That's	 what	 enlightenment	 is!
Enlightenment	 is	 not	 an	 experience	 in	 which	 you	 will	 see	 great	 light	 and
kundalini	rising	up	and	God	standing	in	front	of	you	telling	you,	"You	can	ask
any	three	wishes	and	I	will	fulfill	them."	Don't	be	foolish.
Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience	at	all.	It	is	not	that	you	will	be	able	to	walk
on	water,	that	you	will	be	able	to	raise	the	dead	back	to	life,	that	you	will	be	able
to	cure	the	blind	and	the	deaf	and	the	dumb,	that	you	will	be	able	to	do	miracles.
Enlightenment	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	such	thing.
Enlightenment	is	a	simple	realization	that	everything	is	as	 it	should	be.	That	 is
the	 definition	 of	 enlightenment:	 everything	 is	 as	 it	 should	 be,	 everything	 is
utterly	perfect	as	it	is.	That	feeling...	and	you	are	suddenly	at	home.	Nothing	is
being	missed.	You	are	part,	an	organic	part	of	this	tremendous,	beautiful	whole.
You	are	relaxed	in	it,	surrendered	in	it.	You	don't	exist	separately	--	all	separation
has	disappeared.
A	great	rejoicing	happens,	because	with	the	ego	disappearing	there	is	no	worry
left,	with	the	ego	disappearing	there	is	no	anguish	left,	with	the	ego	disappearing
there	is	no	possibility	of	death	any	more.	This	is	what	enlightenment	is.	It	is	the
understanding	 that	all	 is	good,	 that	all	 is	beautiful	 --	and	 t	 is	beautiful	as	 it	 is.
Everything	is	in	tremendous	harmony,	in	accord.
The	stars	are	in	accord	with	the	grass	leaves,	the	earth	is	in	accord	with	the	sky,
the	 rivers	 are	 in	 accord	with	 the	mountains.	Everything	 is	 in	 such	 accord	 that
existence	 is	 an	 orchestra.	 Everything	 is	 rhythmic,	 in	 tune.	 Existence	 is	music.
That	 experience	 is	 enlightenment.	 And	 you	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 it	 like	 an
observer,	 like	a	spectator.	The	observer	and	 the	observed	are	one,	 the	seer	and
the	seen	are	one	--	you	are	it!
It	 is	 a	 great	 participation.	 You	 have	 fallen	 into	 she	 whole	 and	 the	 whole	 has
fallen	into	you.	The	drop	has	dropped	into	the	ocean	and	the	ocean	has	dropped
into	the	drop.	It	is	impossible	to	say	anything	more	about	it.	It	is	impossible	to
say,	in	fact,	anything	about	it.	It	can	only	be	experienced.
But,	please,	Sudas,	don't	go	on	postponing	it,	because	it	is	available	now.	Now	or
never,	remember.
I	know	you	have	been	taught	continuously	--	this	is	a	kind	of	hypnosis	in	which
you	are	living;	you	have	been	hypnotized	by	the	society	--	you	have	been	made
goal-oriented,	you	have	been	forced	to	become	ambitious,	you	have	been	taught
to	be	competitive,	so	you	are	afraid.	You	are	afraid:
I	WORRY	THAT	OTHERS	WILL	REACH	BEFORE	ME.
You	are	not	much	concerned	with	your	own	enlightenment;	you	are	much	more
concerned	 that	 "Nobody	 else	 should	 reach	 before	 me."	 Now,	 in	 the	 world	 of
enlightenment	such	a	competitive	mind	cannot	even	enter,	will	remain	thousands
and	thousands	of	miles	away.	It	needs	a	non-competitive	spirit.	It	needs	that	you
drop	all	comparisons,	because	when	you	become	enlightened	you	will	be	totally
alone,	nobody	else	will	be	there	--	not	even	your	beloved,	not	even	your	friend.
Nobody	can	be	there;	you	will	be	utterly	alone.
And	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	who	 attains	 'before',	 because	 enlightenment	 has	 no
before	or	after.	Those	are	time	pheno-mena.	Enlightenment	is	always	now	--	why
think	of	before	and	after?	THIS	very	moment...	let	it	sink	in	you.	And	all	that	is
needed	on	your	part	is	total	receptivity.	Fling	all	doors	open,	let	the	sun	come	in,
aud	the	wind	and	the	rain.
Enlightenment	 is	 not	 like	 money,	 is	 not	 like	 political	 power.	 It	 is	 not	 like
anything	that	you	know	in	life	--	 it	 is	absolutely	unlike	anything	that	you	have
known	or	will	ever	know.	It	 is	unique	in	the	sense	that	nothing	like	it	exists	 in
existence.	 It	 is	 just	 itself;	 it	 cannot	 be	 compared	 with	 anything.	 It	 is	 its	 own
comparison.
But	 the	problem	is:	how	to	drop	 this	hypnosis?	how	to	drop	 this	conditioning?
Watch	it.
See	how	it	is	torturing	you,	how	it	is	making	you	more	and	more	miserable	every
day,	 and	how	 it	 is	 creating	barriers	between	you	and	 that	which	 is.	 Just	go	on
seeing	it!
No	other	positive	method	is	needed	--	just	an	insight	that	your	whole	mind	is	a
misery-creating	factory,	that	it	manufactures	misery	and	nothing	else.	Once	you
have	 seen	 it	 through	 and	 through,	 that	 very	 seeing	 becomes	 a	 transformation.
You	simply	turn	in.	You	drop	the	mind,	or	it	drops	of	its	own	accord	because	you
have	seen	the	futility	of	it.	And	even	if	for	a	single	moment	the	mind	is	not	there,
enlightenment	is	there.
In	 the	 beginning	 it	 will	 come	 only	 in	 moments,	 but	 those	 moments	 are	 of
eternity.	Then,	slowly	slowly,	more	and	more	moments	will	be	coming,	because
you	will	 become	more	 and	more	 a	 host.	 And	 one	 day	 the	 guest	 and	 the	 host
disappear	 into	 each	 other	 --	 then	 it	 never	 leaves	 you.	And	 on	 the	 outside	 you
remain	just	the	same	old	person:	doing	your	work,	chopping	wood	and	carrying
water	from	the	well....	You	remain	just	the	same,	and	yet	nothing	is	the	same	any
more.
I	teach	you	this	relaxation.	I	teach	you	the	way	of	non-action.	I	don't	teach	you
arduous	 efforts,	 because	 they	 are	 all	 ego-gratifying.	No	 effort	 can	 help	 you	 to
become	enlightened;	 it	will	be	a	distraction.	Only	an	effortless	silence	--	JUST
SITTING,	DOING
NOTHING,	 AND	 THE	 SPRING	 COMES,	 AND	 THE	 GRASS	 GROWS	 BY
ITSELF.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	PLEASE,	I	WANT	TO	COME	HOME.
Gyan	Bhakti,
YOU	HAVE	COME.	I	AM	YOUR	HOME.	Yes,	it	takes	time	to	recognize	it.	It
takes	years	sometimes	to	recognize	that	you	have	come	home.	First,	because	you
don't	know	what	your	home	is	--	so	how	to	recognize	it?	Second,	it	is	so	against
your	 ingrained	 habits	 of	 the	mind	 that	 the	mind	wants	 to	 ignore	 it	 rather	 than
take	note	 of	 it.	The	mind	wants	 to	 ignore	 it	 because	 if	 it	 takes	 note	 of	 it,	 that
taking	note	is	very	disturbing.	It	disturbs	its	whole	edifice.
To	 recognize	 that	 you	 have	 come	 home	means	 now	no	more	 effort	 is	 needed,
means	now	there	 is	nowhere	 to	go,	means	 that	your	old	kind	of	 life	and	all	 its
activities	are	finished!
Suddenly	you	will	feel	empty.	Suddenly	you	will	feel	nobody,	a	nothingness	--
that	frightens.	Hence	one	goes	on	repeating:
OSHO,	I	WANT	TO	COME	HOME.
You	HAVE	come,	Gyan	Bhakti!	To	be	here	with	me	is	TO	be	at	home,	because
my	 whole	 approach	 is	 not	 that	 of	 improving	 you	 but	 just	 of	 shaking	 you,
shocking	you	into	awareness	that	you	have	never	left	the	home	in	the	first	place.
The	biblical	story	says	Adam	and	Eve	were	expelled	from	the	Garden	of	Eden.	I
would	like	to	tell	you:	they	have	never	been	expelled.	You	have	heard	a	wrong
rumour.	 They	 have	 only	 fallen	 asleep	 --	 they	 ARE	 in	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden,
because	 there	 is	no	other	place	 to	be.	The	whole	existence	 is	God's,	 the	whole
existence	is	his	garden.	To	where	can	he	expel	anyone?
Once	a	Christian	missionary	was	talking	to	me	and	I	asked	him,	"Where	can	he
expel	Adam	and	Eve	to?	Where?"	And	he	was	at	a	loss	to	answer	--	because	this
whole	 kingdom	 is	 his.	 Yes,	 an	 ordinary	 king	 can	 expel	 his	 son,	 because	 his
kingdom	has	a	limitation.	There	are	other	kingdoms	too;	the	son	can	be	thrown
out	of	the	kingdom,	out	of	the	boundaries.
You	can	be	expelled	 from	India,	 from	Germany,	 from	Japan	 --	 that	 is	possible
because	 there	 are	 other	 places	 available.	 But	 to	 where	 is	 God	 going	 to	 expel
you?	There	 is	 no	 other	 place.	 The	Garden	 of	Eden	 has	 no	 limits	 --	 the	whole
existence	is	his	garden.
Then	 the	Christian	missionary	 asked	me,	 "Then	what	 happened?	How	 do	 you
interpret	the	story?"
I	 said,	 "They	 have	 fallen	 asleep.	 By	 eating	 the	 fruit	 of	 knowledge	 they	 have
fallen	asleep,	they	have	become	minds	--	and	when	one	becomes	the	mind,	one
falls	 asleep	 as	 far	 as	 consciousness	 is	 concerned.	 By	 eating	 the	 fruit	 of
knowledge,	by	becoming	knowledgeable,	they	have	become	minds!	The	story	is
so	 simple	 and	 so	 significant.	 God	 told	 them	 not	 to	 eat	 from	 the	 tree	 of
knowledge;	 that	 was	 the	 only	 order	 that	 was	 given	 to	 Adam	 and	 Eve:	 not	 to
become	minds,	to	remain	innocent,	not	to	become	knowledgeable.
But	they	could	not	resist	the	temptation.	They	became	knowledgeable.
"Once	you	become	knowledgeable,	your	consciousness	goes	 through	a	shift:	 it
moves	from	the	heart	 to	the	head.	The	heart	falls	asleep	and	the	head	becomes
awake.	 The	 head	 cannot	 know	 the	 mystery	 of	 God;	 the	 head	 is	 incapable	 of
understanding	that	you	are	already	in	God,	that	you	cannot	be	anywhere	else."
Just	 descend	 from	 the	 head,	 come	 back	 to	 the	 heart,	 and	 you	 are	 back	 in	 the
Garden	of	Eden.	Hence	my	insistence	on	renouncing	knowledge.	Don't	renounce
the	world	--	the	world	is	beautiful.	Don't	renounce	your	wife	--	she	is	your	life.
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	name	'Eve'.
The	story	is:
Adam	was	 alone	 and	 felt	 very	 lonely,	 and	God	 created	Eve	 --	 out	 of	 his	 ribs.
That	 too	 is	beautiful,	 that	man	and	woman	are	only	 separate	 from	 the	outside;
deep	down	they	are	one.	And	then	God	asked	Adam,	"What	are	you	going	to	call
this	woman?	This	new	creature?"
And	Adam	said,	"I	will	call	her	'Haavvah',	'Eva',	 'Eve'"	--	these	are	all	different
names	in	different	languages,	but	they	all	mean	life.
And	God	asked,	"Why?"
Adam	said	"Why?	Because	she	is	my	life.	Without	her	I	was	dead."
You	need	not	renounce	your	wife	--	she	is	your	life.	You	need	not	renounce	your
husband,	 you	 need	 not	 renounce	 your	 children.	 But	 one	 thing	 you	 need	 to
renounce	 --	 that	 is	knowedgeability.	One	 thing	you	need	 to	 renounce	 --	 that	 is
your	 mind.	 And	 see	 the	 irony:	 people	 renounce	 the	 world,	 but	 they	 don't
renounce	their	minds.
A	Jaina	renounces	the	world,	becomes	a	naked	monk,	but	still	remains	a	Jaina.	I
have	asked	many	Jaina	monks,	"This	is	ridiculous!	You	renounce	the	society,	but
you	have	not	renounced	the	knowledge	that	 the	society	has	given	to	you.	How
can	you	still	call	yourself	a	Jaina?"
The	 Christian	 Catholic	 renounces	 the	 world,	 moves	 to	 the	 monastery,	 but
remains	a	Christian	Catholic.	He	carries	the	society	with	him	in	his	mind	and	all
that	the	society	has	put	there.	What	kind	of	renunciation	is	this?
I	tell	you:	Renounce	being	a	Christian,	renounce	being	a	Hindu,	because	this	is
renunciation	of	the	mind.	And	don't	renounce	the	world	--	the	world	belongs	to
God.	The	world	 is	beautiful,	 and	 it	 is	 tremendously	beautiful	 if	 you	can	 see	 it
without	the	mind	interfering.
Gyan	Bhakti,	you	have	come	home,	but	you	are	still	not	able	to	wake	up,	you	are
still	 fast	 asleep	 --	 you	 are	 still	 in	 the	mind.	Descend	 into	 the	 heart.	You	 don't
know	how	fortunate	you	are.	You	don't	know	how	blessed	you	are.	It	is	rare	to
find	a	home,	because	it	is	rare	to	be	with	an	alive	Master.
Yarkoni	and	Danberg,	two	Israeli	soldiers,	were	bemoaning	the	years	of	hardship
and	fighting	against	the	Egyptians.
"What	 we	 should	 do,"	 suggested	 Yarkoni,	 "is	 declare	 war	 against	 the	 United
States.	 They	will	 beat	 us,	 and	 like	 they	 always	 do	with	 all	 the	 countries	 they
defeat,	 right	away	 they	will	give	us	billions	of	dollars,	plenty	of	 food,	houses,
cars	and	factories."
"That's	no	good,"	sighed	Danberg.	"With	our	luck,	we	would	win!"
You	don't	know	how	lucky	you	are.	You	have	already	won	--	but	it	takes	time	to
recognize	the	fact,	it	takes	time	for	the	news	to	reach	from	the	heart	to	the	head.
And	 the	 distance	 is	 vast.	 Physiologically	 it	 is	 not	 much,	 but	 spiritually	 the
distance	is	very	immense.	Maybe	these	two	points	are	at	the	greatest	distance	in
existence	 --	 the	 heart	 and	 the	 head.	 Spiritually,	 not	 physiologically.
Physiologically	 just	 one	 foot,	 two	 feet,	 but	 spiritually	 the	 distance	 is	 almost
infinite.	It	takes	time	for	the	news	to	travel.
Your	 heart	 knows,	 Gyan	 Bhakti,	 that	 it	 has	 happened,	 but	 your	 head	 has	 not
heard	about	it	yet.	And	you	live	in	the	head.	When	I	look	into	your	heart,	I	can
see	that	the	heart	has	recognized.
This	is	what	my	experience	is	every	day	when	I	touch	you,	when	you	come	close
to	 me,	 when	 you	 allow	 my	 energy	 to	 melt	 into	 your	 energy	 --	 this	 is	 my
experience!	that	I	see	your	heart	has	understood,	but	your	head	is	still	unaware.
Your	head	is	still	resisting,	your	head	is	still	fighting,	your	head	is	still	persisting
in	its	old	routine,	and	your	heart	has	already	been	transformed	--	the	flower	has
bloomed	there.
Gyan	Bhakti,	 start	 learning	 the	 language	of	 feeling	 and	 forget	 the	 language	of
thinking.
Start	being	more	and	more	silent,	because	the	chattering	mind	will	not	allow	you
to	know	that	you	have	come	home.	The	inner	talk	has	to	stop.	In	those	gaps,	in
those	intervals,	the	still	small	voice	of	the	heart	will	be	heard.
BUT	FROM	MY	SIDE,	I	KNOW,	I	know	absolutely:	you	have	come.	Whether
you	know	it	or	not	does	not	matter;	sooner	or	 later	you	will	know.	It	 is	only	a
question	of	 time.	And	there	are	many	people	 like	you,	Gyan	Bhakti,	who	have
arrived	and	are	not	 aware	 --	you	are	not	 alone,	 and	 they	are	 still	 struggling	 in
their	heads,	fighting,	trying	to	escape,	creating	all	kinds	of	barriers	between	me
and	 themselves	 --	 because	 the	 head	 will	 try	 in	 every	 possible	 way.	 It	 is	 very
cunning:	 the	head	 is	very	cunning.	 It	 cannot	allow	you	easily	 to	enter	 into	 the
heart	again;	it	cannot	leave	its	domination	over	you.
I	have	heard:
A	man	and	a	little	boy	entered	a	barbershop	together.	After	the	man	received	the
full	treatment	--	shave,	shampoo,	manicure,	haircut,	etc.	--	he	placed	the	boy	in
the	chair.
"I	am	going	to	buy	a	green	tie	to	wear	for	the	parade,"	he	said.	"I	will	be	back	in
a	few	minutes."
When	 the	 boy's	 haircut	was	 completed	 and	 the	man	 still	 had	not	 returned,	 the
barber	said,
"Looks	like	your	daddy	has	forgotten	all	about	you."
"That	was	not	my	daddy,"	said	the	boy.	"He	just	walked	up,	took	me	by	the	hand,
and	said,	'Come	on,	son,	we	are	gonna	get	a	free	haircut!'"
The	mind's	whole	function	is	to	be	cunning.	It	is	a	strategy	developed	by	you	to
compete	with	others,	to	deceive	others,	to	be	clever	with	others.	And	by	and	by,
you	become	so	skillful	in	deceiving	others	that	you	start	deceiving	yourself	too	-
-	and	that's	what	the	mind	goes	on	doing:	it	deceives	others,	it	deceives	you.
Now,	 Gyan	 Bhakti,	 your	mind	 is	 creating	 this	 problem.	 Your	mind	 is	 saying,
"Search	for	the	home,	seek	God.	Make	efforts	to	become	enlightened."	Now	the
mind	is	creating	new	goals	for	you.	Once	the	goal	grips	you,	you	are	in	the	hands
of	the	mind.	If	you	can	say	to	the	mind,	"I	have	arrived	--	get	lost!	Now	there	is
no	more	 to	 go,	 nowhere	 to	 go.	This	 is	 home.	This	 is	 enlightenment,"	 first	 the
mind	 will	 look	 a	 little	 confused,	 because	 this	 is	 not	 the	 way	 you	 have	 ever
behaved	with	it.	It	will	 look	a	little	shocked.	But	if	you	go	on	saying	the	same
thing	again	and	again	--	whenever	the	mind	wants	to	create	a	desire	to	achieve
something,	you	simply	 say,	 "Shut	up!"	 --	 slowly	 slowly	 it	will	understand	 that
now	you	are	beyond	its	power.	Only	then	does	it	start	stopping	It	will	make	all
kinds	of	efforts.	You	have	to	be	alert	not	to	be	caught	in	those	efforts.
And	that's	my	function	of	being	with	you,	and	the	function	of	this	Buddhafield,
to	 remind	 you	 continuously	 that	 you	 have	 arrived,	 that	 God	 is	 available	 right
now	to	you,	this	very	moment	showering	on	you.	God	is	in	the	air	and	in	the	sun
and	in	the	flowers	and	in	the	song	of	the	birds.	God	is	in	this	silence	between	me
and	you,	in	these	words	between	me	and	you,	in	this	communion.	This	silence,
this	presence,	this	love	that	goes	on	flowing	between	me	and	you,	is	God!	This
love	is	the	home.
But	 beware	 of	 the	 mind.	 In	 fact,	 in	 all	 the	 traditions,	 mind	 has	 been	 given
different	names.	One	tradition	calls	it	'the	Devil',	another	tradition	calls	it	'Satan',
but	it	is	in	fact	nothing	but	a	metaphor	for	the	mind.
Jesus	goes	 to	 the	mountains,	meditates,	and	then	encounters	 the	Devil.	Do	you
know,	 who	 that	 Devil	 is?	 It	 is	 not	 somebody	 outside	 you,	 with	 two	 horns
popping	out	of	his	head	and	with	a	long	tail	and	hooves	--	these	are	just	stories
written	for	children,	for	grown-up	children	of	course,	but	all	stories.	You	have	to
decode	them.
Who	is	this	Devil	who	tempts	Jesus	in	the	mountains?	It	is	the	mind.	The	Devil
is	 an	 ancient	 metaphor	 for	 the	 mind.	 It	 goes	 on	 watching	 you,	 what	 you	 are
doing.	If	you	are	nourishing	to	it,	then	it	is	okay;	if	you	are	going	away	from	it,	it
starts	 creating	 trouble	 for	 you.	 If	 one	 strategy	 does	 not	 work,	 it	 immediately
changes	its	strategy.	And	it	is	really	very	clever.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 you	 heard	 Kabir's	 sutras.	 He	 said:	 I	 repressed	 sex	 and	 it
became	anger;	I	repressed	anger,	 it	became	greed;	I	repressed	greed,	 it	became
pride.	 It	 is	 the	same	mind!	 If	you	start	 fighting	with	 it,	 it	goes	on	changing	 its
colours	--	just	to	deceive	you.
And,	yes,	it	deceives.
When	repressed	sex	becomes	anger,	you	are	at	a	 loss	 to	understand	 that	 this	 is
sex	and	nothing	else	--	now	pretending	as	anger.	Anger	looks	so	different	from
sex,	in	fact	it	looks	like	the	polar	opposite.	Sex	is	love:	anger	is	hate	--	how	can
they	be	the	same?	The	mind	has	taken	just	the	polar	opposite	to	hide	itself	You
will	 need	 great	 intelligence	 to	 decipher,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 deceived.	 And
then	anger	will	torture	you.
And	 if	you	repress	anger,	 it	becomes	greed.	Now	who	can	ever	 think	 logically
that	anger	can	become	greed?	They	don't	seem	to	be	connected	at	all.	Unless	you
are	 a	 real	 observer	 of	 your	 inner	 happenings	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the
connection.	Mind	jumps	to	such	new	faces,	takes	such	new	masks!	And	then	you
repress	greed	and	it	becomes	pride,	and	you	go	on	ad	infinitum....
Mrs.	 Fleishman	 and	Mrs.	 Rutkin	 were	 rocking	 on	 the	 porch	 of	 their	 Catskill
Mountain	Hotel.
"Oh,	my	God!	exclaimed	Mrs.	Fleishman.	"Look	at	 that	boy.	Did	you	ever	see
such	a	big	nose?	Such	a	crooked	mouth?	And	look	--	he	is	cockeyed	too!"
"That,"	said	Mrs.	Rutkin,	"happens	to	be	my	son."
"Well,"	said	Mrs.	Fleishman,	"on	him,	it	is	very	becoming!"
Mind	is	a	diplomat,	 it	 is	a	politician	--	 it	 is	a	devil.	Unless	you	are	really	alert
and	watchful,	 it	can	go	on	deceiving	you	for	 lives	--	 it	has	been	doing	that	for
lives;	 it	 can	 go	 on	 doing	 it	 for	 lives	 still.	 But	 a	 little	 intelligence,	 just	 a	 little
intelligence,	a	little	candle	of	light	inside	you	of	watching,	of	silently	watching
and	 seeing	 what	 the	 mind	 is	 doing,	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 your	 intelligence	 will
become	stronger.	And	mind	becomes	impotent	as	intelligence	grows.
Intelligence	 is	not	 intellect;	 intellect	 is	part	 of	mind,	 intelligence	 is	part	 of	 the
heart.
Intelligence	is	always	part	of	the	heart,	it	is	not	intellectuality.	I	don't	mean	by
'intelligence'	your	so-called	intelligentsia	--	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	intelligence.
Your	 intelligentsia	 is	 knowledgeable.	 They	 may	 have	 big	 university	 degrees,
much	knowledge,	but	 they	know	nothing.	All	 their	knowledge	 is	borrowed,	all
their	knowledge	is	parrotlike,	it	is	mechanical.	They	go	on	talking	about	it,	but	it
does	not	affect	their	life.	It	has	no	relationship	with	their	own	source	of	being;	it
does	not	well	up	within	their	own	heart.	When	I	talk	about	intelligence	I	always
mean	the	heart	--	something	happening	in	you,	not	coming	from	the	outside.	If	it
comes	 from	 the	 outside,	 it	 creates	 intellect;	 if	 it	 comes	 from	 within,	 it	 is
intelligence.	Help	your	intelligence	to	grow.
And	I	am	creating	this	context,	this	opportunity,	this	space,	and	I	am	giving	you
all	 kinds	 of	 challenges.	And	 as	 the	 commune	 grows	 the	 challenges	will	 grow.
Those	challenges	are	meant	for	a	certain	purpose,	they	are	deliberate	--	they	are
meant	to	provoke	your	intelligence	into	activity,	to	bring	your	intelligence	above
your	 intellect.	Only	new	situations	which	your	 intellect	cannot	cope	with,	only
such	spaces	which	your	knowledge	has	not	heard	about,	can	help	to	bring	your
intelligence	to	the	surface.
All	that	is	needed	is	intelligence,	understanding,	awareness	--	and,	Gyan	Bhakti,
you	 will	 know	 you	 have	 come	 home.	 And	 great	 gratitude	 will	 arise	 in	 your
being,	and	great	thankfulness.	That	gratitude,	that	thankfulness,	is	prayer.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	WHY	HAVE	I	ALWAYS	BEEN	IN	SUCH	A	HURRY?	TODAY	I	SAW
SO
CLEARLY	 THAT	 IT	 WAS	 MY	 WAY	 OF	 KEEPING	 THE	 DIVINE	 AT	 A
DISTANCE,	AND	I	FELT	INCREDIBLY	SAD,	AND	SAW	THE	ABSURDITY
OF	THIS
PATTERN.
Prem	Neera,
MAN	HAS	BEEN	TOLD	AGAIN	AND	AGAIN	to	be	in	a	hurry,	because	life	is
short	and	much	has	to	be	done,	many	desires	have	to	be	fulfilled,	many	pleasures
have	 to	 be	 attained,	many	goals	 achieved.	And	 life	 is	 certainly	 short,	 and	you
have	so	many	desires,	and	so	much	to	do,	and	in	fact	there	is	not	much	time	to
do	it.
If	 you	 live	 sixty	 years,	 twenty	 years	will	 be	 gone	 in	 sleep,	 one	 third,	 so	 only
forty	 years	 are	 left.	 Then	 another	 twenty	 years	 will	 be	 gone	 in	 earning	 your
bread	and	butter,	just	the	routine	of	going	to	the	office,	to	the	factory,	rushing	in
the	morning	towards	the	factory	or	the	office,	and	rushing	in	the	evening	back	to
the	home	--	twenty	years	will	be	gone	in	that.
Only	twenty	years	are	left.	And	in	these	twenty	years,	almost	fifteen	years	will
be	 lost	 in	 such	 stupid	 activities:	 watching	 the	 television,	 going	 to	 the	 movie,
playing	cards,	gossiping	with	the	neighbours	--	fifteen	years!	So	only	five	years
are	 left.	And	 in	 those	 five	years,	you	have	 to	manage	many	kinds	of	 illnesses,
and	you	have	to	go	to	friends'
marriages	 and	 social	 functions,	 and	you	have	 to	 talk	 to	 your	wife	 and	 to	 your
children	--
just	out	of	the	sense	of	duty	--	and	you	have	to	quarrel	with	your	wife,	and	you
have	 to	 throw	 pillows...	 and	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things.	 You	 can	 just	 go	 on
making	the	list.
Those	who	have	made	such	lists,	they	say	in	the	whole	sixty	years'	life	not	more
than	a	 few	months	are	 left	 for	you	 --	and	 in	 those	 few	months,	all	 the	desires,
millions	of	desires,	are	to	be	fulfilled.	Naturally,	great	hurry	arises	--	and	in	the
West	more	 so,	 because	 in	 the	 East	we	 have	 a	 beautiful	 concept	 that	 there	 are
many	lives,	so	there	is	no	hurry.	If	you	die	this	time,	nothing	to	be	worried	about
--	next	time	you	will	be	born	again,	and	again	and	again	and	again.
In	 the	West,	 all	 the	 three	 religions	 that	 are	 born	 outside	 of	 India	 --	 Judaism,
Christianity,	Islam	--	they	believe	in	one	life.	They	have	all	come	from	the	same
root,	 Judaism.	 In	 fact,	 there	 are	 only	 two	 religions	 in	 the	world:	 Judaism	 and
Hinduism.	 A	 few	 religions	 are	 offshoots	 of	 Judaism	 and	 a	 few	 religions	 --
Buddhism,	 Jainism,	 Sikhism	 --	 they	 are	 offshoots	 of	 Hinduism.	 Hinduism
believes	in	many	many	lives.	Hence	you	find	the	Indian	utterly	lazy.	His	problem
is	not	hurry:	his	problem	is	laziness.	His	problem	is	that	he	has	no	motive	to	do
anything.
That's	why	India	is	poor	-nobody	is	willing	to	do	anything,	everybody	goes	on
postponing:	 tomorrow	 or	 the	 next	 life,	 and	why	 be	worried?	 There	 is	 enough
time,	infinite	time	available.	This	idea	of	infinite	time	has	helped	in	one	way:	it
has	not	created	the	Western	hurry,	it	has	not	created	the	Western	speed	--	it	has
not	 created	 the	Western	 anxiety	 and	 tension,	 that	 constant	 state	 of	 remaining
tense.	It	has	created	another	problem,	just	the	opposite,	that	nobody	wants	to	do
anything,	that	everybody	is	lazy	and	lousy.
The	 reason,	 Neera,	 for	 your	 hurry,	 is	 that	 you	 come	 from	 the	West,	 from	 the
Judaic-Christian	tradition:	only	one	life	and	so	many	things	to	do.	Naturally,	one
has	to	be	in	a	hurry;	always	running.	People	are	not	even	resting	in	their	sleep;	in
their	 sleep	 also	 they	 are	 on	 the	 go,	 in	 their	 sleep	 also	 they	 are	 travelling,	 to
faraway	lands.	Even	in	their	sleep	they	are	not	in	their	rooms,	they	are	not	where
they	are	--	they	are	always	somewhere	else.
You	ask	me:	WHY	HAVE	I	ALWAYS	BEEN	IN	SUCH	A	HURRY?
You	are	brought	up	 in	 the	Judaic	 tradition:	Do!	Doing	 is	 respected	very	much.
Be	active!
And	do	it	quick	and	fast.
The	Devil	had	been	away	from	Hades	for	a	couple	of	months'	terrestrial	duty.	He
had	been	in	England	and	was	looking	forward	to	putting	his	feet	up	by	the	fire
and	 having	 a	 nice	 drop	 of	 brimstone,	 followed	 by	 a	 variety	 of	 unmentionable
after-dinner	pursuits.
At	 last	he	got	home.	You	can	 imagine	his	surprise	when	he	 flung	 the	Gates	of
Hell	open	 to	be	confronted	by	a	 landscape	dotted	with	cool	mango	groves	and
fields	of	nodding	corn.
"Those	goddammed	Jews	and	their	irrigation	schemes!"	he	howled.
Wherever	Jews	reach,	they	will	bring	their	planning	--	even	in	hell	they	will	not
leave	 the	Devil	 in	 rest.	 That	 is	 the	 Judaic	 tradition:	 one	 life,	 a	 short	 life,	 and
much	has	to	be	done,	all	has	to	be	done.
Neera,	you	have	to	drop	that	Judaic	tradition,	you	have	to	come	out	of	it.	And	I
am	not	saying	become	an	Indian	either,	because	that	is	moving	from	one	wrong
to	another	wrong.	Just	come	out	of	all	 traditions.	To	Hindus	I	say	come	out	of
your	 Hindu	 tradition	 of	 laziness	 and	 lousiness,	 and	 to	 Jews,	 Christians	 and
Mohammedans	I	say	come	out	of	your	tradition	of	remaining	in	a	constant	hurry
and	tension.
Enjoy	life.	Act,	but	act	in	a	relaxed	way.	The	greatest	art	in	life	is	to	learn	how	to
act	 in	a	 relaxed	way.	Action	 is	a	must	 --	you	cannot	 live	without	action	 --	but
action	 can	 be	 almost	 inaction.	 That's	 what	 Lao	 Tzu	 means	 when	 he	 uses	 the
word	 WU-WEI.	 That	 is	 very	 fundamental	 to	 Lao	 Tzu	 and	 that	 is	 very
fundamental	 to	me	 too:	 I	would	 like	 you	 to	 learn	WU-WEI.	WU-WEI	means
action	without	 action	 --	 doing	 a	 thing	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 you	 are	 not	 tense	 in
doing	it,	doing	a	thing	in	such	a	way	that	you	are	playful	about	it,	doing	a	thing
in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 you	 are	 not	 worried	 about	 it,	 doing	 it	 and	 yet	 remaining
detached,	doing	it	and	yet	remaining	a	witness.
Lao	Tzu	seems	to	be	the	way	out	for	Jews	and	Hindus.	And	this	is	strange	that
no	 tradition	 arose	 out	 of	 Lao	 Tzu,	 no	 religion.	 Jews	 have	 created	 three	 great
religions,	Hindus	have	created	three	great	religions	--	all	 the	six	great	religions
belong	to	these	two	peoples.	Lao	Tzu	remained	an	individual.	Yes,	a	few	people
followed	him;	down	the	centuries,	a	few	individuals	have	moved	into	the	world
of	Lao	Tzu,	but	only	individuals	-
-	 no	 religion	came	out	of	 it,	 because	 the	whole	Taoist	 approach	 is	 such	 that	 it
cannot	create	 fanatics.	And	unless	you	can	create	 fanatics,	you	cannot	create	a
religion.	 The	 whole	 of	 Lao	 Tzu's	 philosophy	 is	 such	 that	 it	 gives	 you	 such
balance,	 such	 tranquillity,	 such	 serenity,	 that	 you	 cannot	 become	 a	 fanatic	 --
Hindu,	Christian,	Mohammedan.	 It	 is	 impossible.	These	 things	happen	only	 to
neurotic	people.
Hindus	 create	 one	 kind	 of	 neurosis,	 and	 Jews	 create	 another	 kind	 of	 neurosis,
and	both	have	created	great	religions	in	the	world.	And	I	absolutely	agree	with
Sigmund	 Freud	 that	 these	 so-called	 religions	 are	 nothing	 but	 collective
obsessions.	A	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Zarathustra,	 they	are	not	religious
people	in	the	sense	Christians,	Mohammedans	and	Buddhists	are.	They	are	very
balanced,	 they	are	 so	whole,	 they	are	 so	 tranquil,	 they	cannot	become	parts	of
crowds,	they	cannot	fall	that	low.
People	 join	 together	 in	churches	 just	because	alone	 they	 feel	 so	afraid	of	 their
inner	neurosis	--	they	would	like	to	join	with	people	of	the	same	kind	so	they	can
feel	at	ease,	 that	 they	are	not	alone	 in	 the	difficulty.	And	when	there	are	many
people	just	like	you,	you	forget	all	about	your	neurosis.
Humanity	 lives	 such	 a	 neurotic	 life	 that	 either	 it	 moves	 to	 one	 extreme	 and
remains	stuck	there,	or	it	moves	to	the	other	extreme	and	remains	stuck	there.
The	 really	 healthy	 person	 is	 not	 stuck	 anywhere,	 he	 is	 not	 stagnant,	 he	 is
dynamic.	He	can	be	in	great	action	and	yet	he	can	remain	inactive	--	he	knows
the	way	 of	WU-WEI,	 he	 knows	 the	way	 of	 action	 through	 inaction.	You	will
have	to	learn	that.
Neera,	hurry	is	something	very	symbolic	of	the	Western	mind.	And	because	of
the	 hurry	 the	West	 has	 created	more	 and	more	 speedy	 vehicles.	 The	 East	 has
remained	contented	with	the	bullock	cart.	There	have	been	great	scientists	in	the
East,	but	they	never	worked.
They	 never	 worked	 hard	 enough	 to	 create	 better	 roads,	 better	 vehicles,
aeroplanes,	 spaceships	 --	 they	were	not	 interested	 in	 hurry.	What	 is	 the	point?
Why	rush?
The	West	 is	 continuously	 creating	more	 and	more	 speedy	vehicles.	They	have
broken	the	sound	barrier;	now	man	is	travelling	faster	than	sound.	And	the	whole
Western	technology	is	bent	upon	breaking	the	light	barrier	--	man	wants	to	travel
faster	than	light.
And	nobody	asks,	"Where	do	you	want	to	go?	And	even	if	you	reach	there,	what
are	you	going	 to	do	 there?"	You	can	 reach	 the	moon,	you	can	reach	some	day
some	star,	but	what	will	you	do?	You	will	do	the	same	thing	that	you	are	doing
in	 California,	 because	 you	will	 be	 the	 same	 person.	You	will	 create	 the	 same
kind	 of	 nonsense	 and	 nuisance	 there:	 you	 will	 pollute	 the	 poor	 star,	 you	 will
destroy	 its	 rivers,	 you	 will	 destroy	 its	 oceans,	 you	 will	 pile	 up	 your	 junk
everywhere.	 What	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do	 there?	 And	 you	 will	 create	 the	 same
ideological	 wars,	 both	 cold	 and	 hot.	 You	 cannot	 remain	 peaceful	 there	 either;
you	will	immediately	divide:	somebody	will	become	communist	and	somebody
will	 become	 democratic	 and	 the	 fight	 starts.	And	 you	will	 create	 atom	bombs
and	hydrogen	bombs,	or	you	will	carry	them	from	here.
The	West	is	too	much	interested	in	speed,	too	much	in	action.	And	the	action	is
futile,	because	it	is	simply	the	occupation	of	a	neurotic	mind.	And	the	East	is	not
interested	 in	 action	 at	 all;	 that	 is	 again	 another	 kind	 of	 neurosis,	 the	 opposite
kind	--	people	are	lazy.
They	philosophize	very	much	about	 their	 laziness.	They	 talk	about	 renouncing
the	world;	they	say,	"What	is	the	point	of	earning,	of	working?	one	day	one	has
to	go,	one	day	one	has	to	die,	so	why	bother?	rest	as	much	as	you	can	before	you
die."	But	then	what	will	you	do	when	you	die?	You	can	rest	when	you	die.
MAN	NEEDS	A	BALANCE,	and	that	balance	is	possible	only	if	you	learn	the
art	 of	 being	 active	 and	 yet	 remaining	 inactive	 inside.	 And	 that's	 what	 we	 are
trying	to	do	here,	and	in	the	bigger	commune	you	will	have	more	facilities	to	be
active	and	inactive	together.
People	who	come	to	the	ashram	are	a	little	puzzled.	Many	have	written	to	me,
"Everybody	 is	working	 but	 nobody	 seems	 to	 be	 tense."	 In	 the	 office	 so	many
people	are	working,	in	the	workshops,	in	the	press	office...	so	many	people	are
working.	Nearabout	 three	hundred	people	are	constantly	working,	 and	with	no
holiday	--	the	Sunday	never	comes.	But	nobody	is	tense.
Work	 is	 beautiful	 if	 it	 can	 be	 done	 without	 any	 tension,	 if	 it	 can	 be	 done
playfully,	 if	 it	 can	 be	 done	 without	 any	 hurry	 and	 yet	 without	 relapsing	 into
laziness.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 subtle	 and	 delicate	 art.	 Then	 you	 are	 neither	 Eastern	 nor
Western	--	that's	what	I	call	the	new	man.	He	will	not	be	Eastern,	he	will	not	be
Western,	or	he	will	be	both	together.	It	has	never	happened	before:	my	sannyasin
has	to	prove	it.	Lao	Tzu	talked	about	it	and	a	few	people	have	tried	it,	but	I	am
making	an	effort	to	create	such	a	big	space	that	millions	of	people	can	try	it.	It	is
such	a	blessing	to	know	how	to	act	without	acting	that	everybody	should	have	a
little	taste	of	it.
When	you	are	working,	remember	it;	if	you	have	gone	for	a	walk,	remember	it	--
there	is	no	need	to	be	in	a	hurry.	A	walk	has	to	be	enjoyed.	Go	slow.	There	is	no
goal!	Enjoy	the	trees	surrounding	the	way,	and	the	birds	and	the	sun	and	the	sky
and	the	clouds,	and	the	people	that	are	passing	and	the	smell	of	the	earth	--	enjoy
everything!	Be	alert.
A	lazy	person	becomes	unalert.	The	very	speedy	person	is	so	much	in	speed	that
he	cannot	be	watchful	of	what	is	happening	around	him;	he	is	rushing	with	such
force	that	he	cannot	see	anywhere	else,	he	is	focussed,	obsessed	with	some	goal.
And	 the	 lazy	person	 is	 so	 lazy,	 so	unalert,	 so	unconscious,	 that	he	 cannot	 see.
Both	are	blind.
You	have	to	find	a	synthesis.	Be	alert	as	the	active	person	is,	and	be	relaxed	as
the	lazy	person	is.	And	once	both	these	two	are	there	together,	you	are	balanced,
and	your	life	will	have	a	new	flavour,	a	new	joy,	a	new	ecstasy,	which	knows	no
bounds.
Silverstein,	 the	 inveterate	 joiner,	 came	 rushing	 home,	 proudly	 holding	 a
membership	card	to	his	newest	organization.
"Look,"	said	Silverstein	to	his	son,	"I	just	joined	the	Prostitute	Club!"
"What?"	said	the	boy.	"Let	me	see	that	card."
After	reading	it,	he	announced,	"Pa,	that's	the	Parachute	Club!"
"All	I	know	is,"	said	Silverstein,	"they	guaranteed	me	three	hundred	and	sixty-
five	jumps	a	year."
There	 are	 these	 people	who	 are	 constantly	 joining	 this	 club	 and	 that,	 and	 this
organization	and	that.	They	are	simply	afraid	of	being	themselves,	simply	afraid
of	being	left	alone.
There	are	people	who	are	constantly	rushing	--	don't	ask	where,	they	themselves
don't	 know.	But	 in	 the	 rush	 they	are	occupied,	 and	 the	occupation	keeps	 them
away	from	themselves,	away	from	looking	into	their	own	inner	hollowness.
This	constant	hurry	is	nothing	but	an	escape	from	your	inner	self.	And	there	is	a
truth	in	it	of	great	significance:	if	you	go	on	hurrying,	if	you	go	on	speeding,	if
you	go	on	running	away	from	yourself,	if	you	keep	yourself	occupied	constantly,
you	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more	 afraid	 of	 looking	 at	 yourself,	 because	 not
knowing	 what	 beauties	 emptiness	 contains	 you	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more
afraid.	You	would	not	like	to	come	across	your	inner	emptiness.
In	 fact,	 the	 inner	 emptiness	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience	 of	 life	 --	 that	 is
enlightenment:	knowing	that	there	is	nobody,	knowing	that	there	is	utter	silence,
not	 even	 a	 word,	 knowing	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 at	 all,	 no	 person,	 no	 ego,	 no
identity,	is	the	greatest	experience,	the	ultimate	joy.	But	if	you	don't	look	into	it
then	you	are	 simply	 suspicious	of	 a	 certain	hollowness,	of	 a	 certain	 emptiness
inside.	 And	 remaining	 suspicious,	 you	 go	 on	 occupying	 yourself	 People	 keep
themselves	 occupied	 the	 whole	 day,	 and	 then	 they	 fall	 asleep	 and	 become
occupied	in	their	dreams	--	twenty-four	hours	a	day	it	is	constant	occupation.
Meditation	means	giving	a	few	minutes	to	non-occupation.	Neera,	start	giving	at
least	one	hour	to	non-occupation.	Just	sit	doing	nothing.	In	the	beginning	it	will
be	very	difficult	--	the	MOST	difficult	thing	in	the	world	in	the	beginning,	in	the
end	the	most	easy.	It	is	so	easy,	that's	why	it	is	so	difficult.	If	you	tell	somebody
to	just	sit	and	not	to	do	anything,	he	becomes	fidgety;	he	starts	feeling	that	ants
are	crawling	on	the	leg	or	something	is	happening	in	the	body.	He	becomes	so
restless,	 because	 he	 has	 always	 remained	 occupied.	 He	 is	 like	 a	 car	 with	 the
ignition	on	and	the	engine	humming	although	the	car	is	not	going	anywhere,	but
the	engine	is	humming	and	becoming	hotter	and	hotter.	You	have	forgotten	how
to	put	the	ignition	off.	That's	what	meditation	is:	the	art	of	putting	the	ignition	of.
For	a	few	minutes,	a	few	hours,	as	much	time	as	is	possible,	just	sit	silently.	In
the	beginning	it	is	difficult.	It	will	take	at	least	three	months	to	six	months	to	be
able	to	sit	silently	doing	nothing	--	not	even	chanting	is	needed	because	that	is
again	an	occupation.
People	 sit,	 then	 they	 start	 chanting	 "Rama,	 Rama,	 Rama"	 --	 that	 is	 again
occupation,	another	kind	of	occupation,	a	religious	kind	of	occupation.	No,	not
even	chanting,	no	mantra	is	needed.
The	word	 'mind'	 and	 'mantra'	 both	 come	 from	 the	 same	 root.	They	both	 come
from	MAN
--	 MAN	 is	 Sanskrit	 for	 mind.	 And	 that	 which	 keeps	 mind	 running	 is	 called
'mantra',	 that	 which	 keeps	 nourishing	 mind	 is	 called	 'mantra'.	 So	 somebody's
mantra	is	money	--	he	thinks	of	money,	that	is	his	mantra.	Somebody's	mantra	is
politics	--	he	thinks	of	politics,	that	is	his	mantra.	And	somebody	simply	repeats
"Rama,	Rama,	Rama"	--	that	is	his	mantra.	But	every	mantra	feeds	the	mind,	and
mind	is	the	problem,	and	we	have	to	get	out	of	the	mind.
Sit	silently,	Neera,	for	three	to	six	months;	then	remind	me	again	--	if	you	are	left
by	that	time.	If	you	are	finished,	so	far,	so	good.	If	you	really	sit	silently	for	one
hour	 a	 day	 for	 six	months,	 you	will	 not	 remind	me	 --	 because	 you	will	 have
experienced	something	so	tremendous,	so	beautiful:	just	your	pure	being,	just	the
heart	 pulsating,	 the	 breath	 coming	 and	 going...	 and	 the	 music	 of	 your	 inner
existence	is	exhilarating.	It	becomes	overflowing.	It	is	not	only	that	you	will	be
con-tinuously	radiant,	bubbling	with	joy	--
whosoever	comes	 in	contact	with	you	will	also	be	 infected	by	 it,	your	 joy	will
become	 contagious.	 And	 there	 will	 be	 no	 hurry.	 There	 will	 be	 a	 grace,	 an
elegance	a	peace	will	surround	you.
When	joy	is	inside	the	heart,	when	silence	is	inside,	peace	surrounds	you,	grace
surrounds	you,	God	surrounds	you....
The	last	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 PLEASE,	 ONE	 DAY	 IN	 THIS	 SERIES	 CAN	 YOU	 FINISH	 THE
LECTURE
ON	A	SERIOUS	NOTE	SO	THAT	 I	CAN	SEE	YOU	LEAVE?	EVERY	DAY
WHEN
YOU	END	WITH	A	 JOKE,	 I	 LAUGH	SO	MUCH	THAT	TEARS	 FILL	MY
EYES
AND	YOU	BECOME	JUST	A	WHITE	BLOB	DRIFTING	THROUGH	A	SEA
OF
GREENERY.
Deva	Tulika,
IT	 IS	VERY	DIFFICULT	FOR	ME	because	 today	 I	have	chosen	 really	a	very
juicy	joke.
But	I	will	resist	the	temptation....
The	Fish	in	the	Sea	is	Not	Thirsty
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	Disappearing	you	will	feel	such	Freedom
25	April	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7904250
ShortTitle:
FISH15
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
101
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	I	AM	AFRAID	OF	DEATH,	YET	AT	THE	SAME	TIME	IT	HAS	AN
INCREDIBLE	ATTRACTION	FOR	ME.	WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN?
Prem	Shreyas,
DEATH	 IS	THE	GREATEST	MYSTERY	OF	LIFE.	Life	 has	many	mysteries,
but	there	is	nothing	comparable	to	death.	Death	is	the	climax,	the	crescendo.	One
is	afraid	of	it	because	one	will	be	lost,	one	will	dissolve	in	it.	One	is	afraid	of	it
because	of	the	ego	--
the	ego	cannot	survive	death.	It	will	be	left	on	this	shore	when	you	start	moving
towards	the	other;	it	cannot	go	with	you.
And	the	ego	is	all	that	you	know	about	yourself,	hence	the	fear,	great	fear:	"I	will
not	exist	in	death."	But	there	is	great	attraction	too.	The	ego	will	be	lost,	but	not
your	reality.
In	fact,	death	will	reveal	to	you	your	true	identity;	death	will	take	away	all	your
masks	and	will	reveal	your	original	face.
Death	 will	 for	 the	 first	 time	 make	 it	 possible	 for	 you	 to	 encounter	 your
innermost,	 interiormost	 subjectivity	 as	 it	 is,	 without	 any	 camouflage,	 without
any	pretense,	without	any	pseudo	personality.
Hence,	everybody	 is	afraid	of	death	and	everybody	 is	attracted.	This	attraction
was	misunderstood	by	Sigmund	Freud	and	he	thought	that	there	is	a	death-wish
in	man	--	he	called	 it	THANATOS.	He	said,	"Man	has	 two	basic,	 fundamental
instincts:	one	is	EROS
--	a	deep	desire	to	live,	 to	be	alive	for	ever,	a	desire	for	immortality	--	and	the
other	 is	 THANATOS,	 the	 desire	 to	 die,	 to	 be	 finished	 with	 it	 all."	 He
misunderstood	the	whole	point	because	he	was	not	a	mystic;	He	knew	only	one
face	of	death	--	that	it	ends	life	--
he	knew	only	one	thing:	that	death	is	an	end.	He	was	not	aware	that	death	is	also
a	beginning.	Each	end	is	always	a	beginning,	because	nothing	ever	ends	totally,
nothing	can	ever	end.	Everything	continues,	only	forms	change.
Your	form	will	die,	but	you	have	something	formless	in	you	too.	Your	body	will
not	be	there,	but	you	have	something	in	you,	within	your	body,	which	is	not	part
of	your	body.
Your	earthly	part	will	drop	into	the	earth,	dust	unto	dust,	but	you	have	something
of	 the	 sky	 in	 you,	 something	of	 the	 beyond,	which	will	 take	 a	 new	 journey,	 a
new	pilgrimage.
Death	creates	fear	if	you	think	of	the	ego,	and	death	appeals	to	you,	attracts	you,
if	you	think	of	your	true	self	So	vaguely	one	remains	attracted	towards	death;	if
you	become	clearly	aware	of	it,	 it	can	become	a	transforming	understanding,	it
can	become	a	mutant	force.
Shreyas,	try	to	understand	both	the	fear	and	the	attraction.	And	don't	think	that
they	are	opposites	--	they	don't	overlap,	they	are	not	opposites	either;	they	don't
interfere	with	each	other.	The	fear	is	directed	in	one	direction:	the	ego;	and	the
attraction	is	directed	into	a	totally	different	dimension:	the	egoless	self	And	the
attraction	is	far	more	important	than	the	fear.
The	meditator	has	to	overcome	fear.	The	meditator	has	to	fall	in	love	with	death,
the	meditator	has	to	invite	death	--	the	meditator	has	not	to	wait	for	it,	he	has	to
call	 it	because	death	is	a	friend	to	the	meditator.	And	the	meditator	dies	before
the	death	of	the	body.	And	that	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	experiences	of	life:
the	body	goes	on	living,	on	the	outside	you	go	on	moving	the	same	as	you	were
before,	but	inside	the	ego	is	no	more,	the	ego	has	died.
Now	you	are	alive	and	dead	together.	You	have	become	a	meeting-point	of	life
and	death;	you	contain	now	the	polar	opposites	and	 the	 richness	 is	great	when
polar	opposites	 are	 contained.	And	 these	 are	 the	greater	polar	opposites,	 death
and	 life.	 If	 you	 can	 contain	 both,	 you	will	 become	 capable	 of	 containing	God
because	God	is	both.	His	one	face	is	life,	his	other	face	is	death.
Shreyas,	this	is	something	beautiful	--	don't	make	a	problem	out	of	it.	Meditate
over	it,	make	it	a	meditation,	and	you	will	be	benefitted	immensely.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO	TODAY	IN	THE	SAMADHI	TANK	I	COULD	HAVE	SWORN	I	FELT
YOUR
PRESENCE	 FOR	 A	 FEW	MOMENTS.	 I	 BECAME	 QUITE	 FRIGHTENED.
OTHER
PEOPLE	HAVE	SPOKEN	OF	FEELING	YOUR	PRESENCE	EVEN	AS	FAR
AWAY
AS	ENGLAND.	WHAT	IS	THIS?	IS	IT	IMAGINATION?	OR	PROJECTION?
OR
SOMETHING	ELSE?
Frank,
IT	 CAN	 BE	 A	 PROJECTION,	 it	 can	 be	 imagination,	 but	 it	 can	 also	 be
something	else...
it	depends	on	you.	And	only	you	can	decide	what	it	 is.	For	example,	were	you
thinking	about	me	before	it	happened?	Were	you	desiring	that	it	should	happen?
Was	 there	 imagination	 functioning	 somewhere	 inside	 you?	 Were	 you
fantasizing?	Then	it	is	imagination,	then	it	is	projection.
But	 if	 it	was	out	of	nowhere,	you	were	not	 thinking	about	me	at	all,	you	were
taken	 by	 surprise,	 you	 were	 shocked,	 you	 could	 not	 believe	 it,	 then	 it	 is
something	else.	And	that's	what	has	happened	to	you.
You	say:	I	BECAME	QUITE	FRIGHTENED.
If	it	had	been	your	own	imagination,	you	would	not	have	become	frightened	at
all	 --	 you	 would	 have	 known	 that	 it	 was	 your	 imagination.	 If	 it	 was	 just	 a
projection	of	your	mind,	you	would	have	known.	You	became	 frightened	only
because	it	had	nothing	to	do	with	your	mind	at	all.
You	say:	I	COULD	HAVE	SWORN	I	FELT	YOUR	PRESENCE	FOR	A	FEW
MOMENTS.
Such	experiences	happen,	and	it	can	happen	more	easily	in	isolation.	It	happens
to	many	people	when	they	are	alone	in	the	mountains.	It	happens	to	many	people
when	they	are	in	a	certain	strange	space	in	which	they	have	never	been	before;
the	very	strangeness	of	 the	space	makes	 them	aware	of	certain	 things	to	which
they	have	remained	always	asleep.
It	 happens	 to	 runners.	 If	 you	 run	 for	 a	 few	 miles,	 a	 moment	 comes	 when
suddenly	 the	runner	disappears	and	only	running	remains.	At	 that	moment	you
become	aware	of	many	things	you	have	never	been	aware	of:	subtle	fragrances
in	the	air	--	your	senses	are	very	alert,	very	alive	--	certain	presences	around	you,
even	certain	presences	so	tangible	that	you	can	touch	or	you	can	be	touched	by
them.
It	 happens	 to	 people	 in	 many	 situations,	 but	 those	 situations	 have	 to	 be
something	 extraordinary	 --	 because	 we	 have	 become	 so	 accustomed	 to	 the
ordinary	 situation	 that	 things	 go	 on	 happening	 around	 us	 and	 we	 remain
unaware.	The	samadhi	tank	gives	you	a	very	special	space:	darkness,	 isolation,
no	sound,	and	you	are	floating	in	water.	You	are	back	in	the	mother's	womb;	the
samadhi	 tank	 is	 just	 a	 scientific	 way	 to	 have	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 mother's
womb	again.
The	foetus	in	the	mother's	womb	floats	in	liquid.	In	the	samadhi	tank	you	float	in
the	same	kind	of	liquid,	with	the	same	chemicals.	Hence,	you	cannot	drown	in	it.
And	the	darkness	of	the	womb,	and	it	 is	so	out	of	the	ordinary	--	no	sound,	no
light	 --	 you	 are	 thrown	 into	 such	 a	 new	 space	 that	 your	 sensitivity,	 your
awareness,	 your	 intuitiveness,	 all	 start	 functioning.	You	become	as	 intuitive	 as
the	small	child	 in	 the	womb,	you	become	as	 innocent	as	 the	small	child	 in	 the
womb.	and	in	that	innocence	something	can	happen	which	is	not	part	of	ordinary
time	and	space.
Space	and	time,	both	can	disappear.	Yes	it	is	possible	you	can	feel	my	presence	-
-	in	fact	I	am	surrounding	each	of	my	sannyasins.	You	may	feel	it,	you	may	not
feel	it.	In	a	certain	moment	of	attunement	you	will	feel	it.	Then	it	doesn't	matter
whether	 you	 are	 in	England	 or	 in	 Japan	 --	 it	 does	 not	matter:	 space,	 distance,
make	no	difference.
By	giving	you	sannyas	I	am	making	you	entitled	 to	feel	me	wherever	you	are.
Now	all	depends	on	you.	My	presence	will	be	with	you,	surrounding	you;	in	life,
in	death,	I	will	be	with	you	just	by	your	side.	But	you	may	see,	you	may	not	see.
You	may	remain	unconscious.
Frank,	 something	 beautiful	 has	 happened.	 Remain	 available	 to	 strange
experiences	 in	 life,	and	don't	 try	 to	deny	 the	strange	experience,	because	 that's
how	many	people	go	on	denying	tremendous	opportunities.
For	example,	one	day	in	the	night	you	are	suddenly	awake,	alone	in	your	room,
all	 is	 silent	 and	dark.	And	you	become	aware	of	 a	 certain	presence...	maybe	a
dead	 friend,	maybe	 one	 of	 your	 ancestors,	maybe	 your	 dead	mother.	 But	 you
become	so	frightened	--
in	 that	 fear	 you	 lose	 that	 perceptivity,	 that	 perception.	 The	 presence	 remains
there,	but	you	are	dis-connected.	You	put	the	light	on,	you	become	occupied	in
doing	 something,	 you	 start	 reading	 a	 book,	 or	 you	 turn	 the	 radio	 on,Just	 to
disconnect	yourself	from	the	strange	experience	that	was	happening.
Don't	be	afraid!	This	existence	is	yours.	This	existence	is	very	friendly	and	there
are	immense	mysteries	waiting	for	you	--	to	be	known,	to	be	experienced.
This	was	a	beautiful	moment	for	you.	Now	that	it	has	happened,	you	can	make	it
happen	again	and	again	--	and	there	is	no	necessity	to	go	into	the	samadhi	tank.
It	 can	 happen	 in	 your	 room	 in	 the	 night	 when	 you	 are	 alone.	 It	 can	 happen
anywhere	if	you	ALLOW	it	to	happen.
One	of	 the	greatest	 calamities	 that	has	befallen	 the	modern	man	 is	 that	he	has
become	very	very	mundane.	He	takes	only	that	which	is	explainable,	he	accepts
only	that	which	is	definable,	he	accepts	and	recognizes	only	that	which	can	be
scientifically	and	objectively	proved.	But	then	you	remain	on	the	lowest	rung	of
existence,	because	 the	higher	 the	 rung	 is,	 the	more	 indefinable	 it	becomes,	 the
more	unexplainable,	the	more	and	more	elusive	--
you	cannot	catch	hold	of	it,	you	cannot	have	it	in	your	fist,	and	you	cannot	show
it	 to	 somebody	else.	 It	 becomes	more	 and	more	 intimate,	 less	 and	 less	 public,
more	and	more	private.
Many	 people	 experience	 such	 things	 but	 they	 don't	 tell	 others,	 because	 others
will	think	they	are	crazy.	That's	my	own	observation:	many	people	have	told	me
their	 experiences	 and	 they	 have	 said	 that	 they	 have	 never	 told	 anybody	 else
before,	because	they	have	always	been	afraid	that	they	may	be	thought	crazy,	or
people	will	 think	 that	 they	hallucinated,	or	people	will	 think	 that	 something	 is
wrong	--	their	nuts	and	bolts	are	a	little	loose.	And	not	only	will	others	think	this
--	 they	 themselves	 think,	 "Something	 is	 wrong	 with	 me,	 because	 this	 is	 not
ordinarily	experienced	by	others,	then	why	me?
Some-thing	is	wrong	with	me	--	deny	this	experience,	forget	about	it!"
If	you	ask	people	sympathetically,	lovingly,	many	people	will	reveal	mysteries	to
you.
The	mystic	experience	is	not	as	rare	as	people	think,	and	the	mystic	experienCe
has	nothing	to	do	with	religion	as	such.	It	happens	in	many	spaces	which	are	not
thought	to	be	religious	at	all.
It	 happens	 to	 mountaineers,	 many	 times,	 because	 climbing	 in	 the	 mountains,
alone,	 in	 a	dangerous	 situation,	 suddenly	 the	mountaineer	becomes	aware	of	 a
presence	by	his	side	--
not	only	that	but	mountaineers	have	talked	and	the	presence	has	helped	and	the
presence	has	said,	"I	am	a	friend,	don't	be	worried.	I	am	protecting	you.	There	is
no	danger	--	go	on	climbing."
Sometimes	a	man	is	lost	in	the	jungle	and	after	one	or	two	days,	or	three	days	--
no	 food,	 no	 possibility	 seems	 to	 be	 available	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 jungle,	 tired,
exhausted	 --	 suddenly	 he	 becomes	 aware	 of	 a	 presence,	 a	 very	 protective
presence,	which	says,	"Don't	be	afraid!
You	are	on	the	right	track,	you	will	get	out	--	don't	be	worried."
But	 these	people	never	say	 these	 things	 to	others.	 In	sports	many	times	mystic
experiences	 happen;	 runners	 and	 joggers	 particularly	 have	 known	 many
experiences.	In	the	new	commune	there	are	going	to	be	facilities	for	runners	and
joggers.	I	would	like	hundreds	of	sannyasins	to	run	for	miles	every	morning	--
just	completely	abandoned	into	running.
After	half	an	hour	or	one	hour,	even	if	you	are	tired,	 tiredness	disappears.	It	 is
strange,	 very	 strange,	 very	 illogical.	 You	 wanted	 to	 go	 to	 sleep,	 you	 were	 so
tired,	but	you	went	for	a	six-mile	run.	After	the	second	or	third	mile,	suddenly	all
tiredness	 has	 disappeared	 and	 you	 are	 so	 full	 of	 energy	 --	 as	 you	 have	 never
been.	You	are	so	weightless,	air-borne.
And	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 it	 is	 not	 you	 who	 are	 running	 now	 --	 some	 other
energy	has	taken	possession	of	you.
And	the	experience	of	unity	with	existence,	and	the	experience	of	a	deep,	warm,
orgasmic	 energy	 surrounding	 you....	 It	 happens	 to	 surfers,	 it	 happens	 in	many
sports,	 even	 in	 wrestling.	 That's	 why	 in	 Japan	 particularly,	 many	 martial	 arts
were	developed	by	meditators.	It	looks	strange:	why	should	meditators	develop
martial	arts	--	judo,	aikido,	karate,	and	so	many	others?	They	were	developed	for
a	certain	reason.
If	 you	 really	 go	 deep	 into	 them,	 the	 ego	 disappears	 and	 you	 enter	 into	 a	 new
space	--
unknown	to	you,	unexplored	by	you.	And	suddenly	you	are	not	functioning	on
your	own	but	as	if	possessed	by	God.
One	thing	I	would	like	to	emphasize:	whenever	such	things	happen,	accept,	don't
deny	 them;	 don't	 start	 calling	 them	 imagination,	 projection,	 hallucination,
deception.	These	are	tricks	of	the	mind.	And	I	am	not	saying	that	there	are	not
hallucinations	--	there	are	--	and	I	am	not	saying	there	are	not	people	who	suffer
from	neurotic	illusions	--	there	are	--	but	just	because	of	them,	just	because	there
are	false	coins,	don't	deny	the	real	coins.	In	fact,	false	coins	only	prove	that	the
real	coins	exist.
Remain	available	to	the	dimension	of	the	strange,	 the	mysterious,	and	that	will
help	you	tremendously.	If	you	remain	available,	more	and	more	experiences	of
this	kind	will	start	happening.
A	man	went	into	a	bar	and	ordered	a	beer.	After	he	had	been	served,	he	reached
into	his	breast	pocket	and	 lifted	out	a	perfectly	 formed	 little	 figure	 four	 inches
tall.	 Then	 he	 produced	 a	 thimble.	 "A	 beer	 for	 my	 friend	 Paul,	 here,	 too,"	 he
requested,	"and	go	easy	on	the	head."
Is	he	for	real?"	asked	the	bartender.
"He	is,"	said	the	man.
"Can	he	talk?"	persisted	the	barkeep.
"He	can,"	replied	the	man.	"Paul,"	he	went	on,	"tell	this	guy	about	the	time	we
were	on	that	expedition	and	you	called	the	witch	doctor	a	black	son-of-a-bitch."
Don't	think	that	life	ends	with	arithmetic	--	there	is	magic	too.	And	by	'magic'	I
simply	mean	 that	 the	strange	also	happens.	 'Magic'	 is	now	a	condemned	word,
because	 we	 have	 forgotten	 the	 magical	 dimension	 of	 life.	 The	 word	 'magic'
comes	from	a	very	great	mystic;	his	name	was	Magi.	Before	Christianity,	Magi's
religion	 was	 the	 greatest	 religion	 spread	 all	 over	 Europe.	 That	 religion	 was
called	 'Magic'.	Christianity	 destroyed	much	 that	was	 valuable.	And	 one	 of	 the
most	valuable	things	that	Christianity	destroyed	was	the	tradition	of	the	Magians
--	the	tradition	of	Magic.
I	would	like	you	to	be	magicians	again.
Arithmetic	is	good	as	far	as	it	goes,	but	it	does	not	go	far	enough.	Logic	is	good
as	far	as	it	goes,	but	it	does	not	go	far	enough	--	and	there	is	much	more	to	life
than	 logic.	 Don't	 be	 satisfied	 with	 Aristotle.	 The	 modern	 mind	 is	 much	 too
satisfied	with	Aristotle,	and	because	of	it	there	is	so	much	boredom.	People	look
very	dull,	because	 the	sense	of	 the	mysterious	 is	no	more	 there	which	goes	on
keeping	you	fresh,	young,	which	goes	on	keeping	you	wondering.
And	 if	a	man	 is	capable	of	wonder	he	 is	capable	of	knowing	God;	 if	a	man	 is
capable	of	awe,	he	is	capable	of	knowing	God.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 I	HAVE	TRIED	TO	THINK	OF	A	QUESTION	I	COULD	ASK	YOU
THAT
WOULD	SHOW	SWAMI	PREM	CHINMAYA	THAT	I	UNDERSTAND	MORE
FULLY	THE	LOVE	HE	SHARES	HERE	AT	THE	ASHRAM.
SO	WHAT	ARE	YOU	DOING	TONIGHT	AFTER	DARSHAN?
The	question	is	from	Bea,	Chinmaya's	mother.
Bea,
FOR	 MANY	 MANY	 YEARS	 I	 HAVE	 NOT	 DONE	 A	 SINGLE	 THING	 --
before	darshan	or	after	darshan.	For	many	years	 I	have	ceased	 to	exist,	 I	have
died.	I	no	more	function	as	a	person.	Things	happen,	certainly,	but	they	are	not
doings	--	I	am	not	a	doer.
Hence	 I	 am	 not	 even	 concerned	 about	 the	 consequences	 --	 why	 should	 I	 be
concerned	about	the	consequences?	I	am	not	the	doer	in	the	first	place.	I	am	not
concerned	with	the	results.	I	am	simply	a	vehicle,	a	hollow	bamboo,	offered	to
God.	Now	he	can	sing	any	song	he	wants	to	sing.	And	if	he	does	not	want	to	sing
any	song,	it	is	for	him	to	decide.	I	am	perfectly	happy	with	song	or	without	song.
Sometimes	he	 sings,	 sometimes	he	 is	 silent,	 and	 I	 don't	 interfere.	 I	 am	 simply
relaxed	with	existence	as	it	is.
And	that's	my	teaching	here	--	that's	what	I	am	teaching	to	your	son,	Chinmaya.
And	 I	 am	 happy	 to	 tell	 you	 that	 he	 is	 progressing,	 and	 progressing	 in	 a	 very
different,	more	difficult	situation	than	others.	But	he	has	evolved	greatly.
He	is	suffering	from	cancer.	He	knows	death	can	come	any	day,	but	I	am	happy
to	say	to	you	that	it	makes	no	difference	any	more	to	him.	Life	or	death	--	he	will
remain	a	witness.	That	much	integrity	has	happened	to	him,	that	much	centering
has	happened	 to	him.	He	was	very	much	afraid	 in	 the	beginning	when	he	had
come	here	--	very	much	afraid	of	death.	Naturally	--	anybody	would	be.	It	was
expected.	 But,	 slowly	 slowly,	 being	 here	 with	 me,	 with	 my	 people,	 in	 this
Buddhafield,	 he	 has	 learnt	 one	 thing:	 that	 we	 are	 not	 doers.	 Sometimes	 life
happens,	sometimes	death	happens	--	we	have	to	be	witnesses	of	both.	And	we
have	to	be	thankful	for	both.
So	 I	 know	now:	whenever	he	has	 to	 leave	 life,	 he	will	 leave	with	 tremendous
gratefulness,	with	a	prayer	on	his	lips,	with	a	deep	thank	you	in	his	heart.	And
that	is	the	right	way	to	die,	and	that	is	the	right	way	to	live	too.	In	fact,	because
he	has	become	so	accepting	of	death	he	is	alive,	otherwise	he	would	have	been
dead	long	before.	Even	the	doctors	are	a	little	puzzled	about	him	--	they	can't	see
why	and	how	he	is	still	alive,	and	very	much	alive.
The	body	has	all	the	symptoms	that	he	should	be	here	no	more,	that	he	should	be
dead	by	now.	But	 something	deep	 in-side	him	has	become	so	 relaxed	 that	 that
relaxation	has	gone	deeper	than	the	cancer	itself,	and	that's	what	is	keeping	him
alive.	He	may	live	long	--
one	never	knows.	Miracles	happen.	If	he	remains	relaxed	he	may	live	long.
Doctors	 are	 ready	 to	 give	 him	 a	 death	 certificate	 any	 day,	 but	 if	 he	 remains
relaxed,	meditative,	happy,	contented...	and	he	is.	It	is	difficult	in	his	situation	to
be	 contented,	 but	 he	 is.	 Even	 breathing	 is	 difficult,	 but	 he	 has	 accepted
everything.
Bea,	 if	 your	 son	 lives	 he	 will	 be	 growing	 --	 growing	 towards	 more	 spiritual
maturity;	if	he	dies	he	will	be	growing	in	his	death	too.	He	has	found	the	path,
and	the	path	is	of	non-action,	or	action	through	non-action	--	WU-WEI.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO	 TODAY	 I	 OVERHEARD	 SOMEONE	 SAY	 THAT	 YOU	 HAD
PROBLEMS	--
DO	YOU?
Deva	Layo,
NOT	 ONE	 BUT	 MANY	 --	 you	 are	 my	 problems,	 one	 hundred	 thousand
problems!	And	as	sannyasins	will	be	coming	more	and	more,	the	problems	will
go	on	growing.	Each	sannyasin	brings	many	problems.	And	I	am	here:	you	can
surrender	your	problems	to	me.
I	can	take	all	of	your	problems	because	I	have	none	of	my	own.	And	because	I
have	none	of	my	own,	you	can	drop	your	problems	into	me	and	they	disappear.
They	have	no	place	to	cling	to.	They	simply	disappear	into	the	abyss	that	I	have
become.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
I	 COME	 FROM	 CALIFORNIA	 AND	 I	 DID	 NOT	 LIKE	 THE	 WAY	 YOU
USED	THE
WORD	CALIFORNIA	YESTERDAY.
Navino,
I	HAD	SIMPLY	SAID	THAT	EVEN	IF	YOU	ARE	ON	THE	MOON	or	on	some
star,	you	will	 start	doing	all	 the	 things	 that	you	are	doing	 in	California.	 I	have
used	 the	 most	 mild	 term	 possible.	Moksha	 has	 suggested	 a	 far	 more	 suitable
word	for	it;	his	suggestion	is:	"Rather	than	saying,	'You	will	be	doing	the	things
that	you	are	doing	in	California,'
you	should	say,	'Wherever	you	are	you	will	californicate"'	--	what	else	will	you
do?	 This	 is	 the	 right	 word.	 California	 simply	 means	 where	 people	 are
'californicating'.
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,	 SOMETHING	 IS	HAPPENING	 THAT	 I	 CANNOT	 EXPLAIN.	 IT	 IS
NOT
EVEN	SOMETHING	I	KNOW,	ONLY	SOMETHING	I	SENSE.
Yoga	Nirmal,
THAT'S	WHAT	I	AM	HERE	FOR	--	 to	help	you	 to	be	aware	of	 things	which
cannot	be	explained	but	yet	experienced,	which	cannot	be	expressed	but	yet	felt.
No	word	is	adequate	to	indicate	them,	but	they	can	be	sensed.
Man	can	know	much	more	than	he	can	say,	and	man	can	sense	much	more	than
he	can	know,	and	man	can	be	much	more	than	he	can	sense.	And	you	have	to	be
aware	of	all	these	layers.
That	which	can	be	said	is	the	most	superficial;	much	more	can	be	known.	That
which	is	known	and	cannot	be	said	i,	deeper,	but	much	more	can	be	sensed.	That
which	is	sensed	and	cannot	be	known	is	even	deeper,	but	one	can	be	much	more
than	one	can	sense	--	and	that	is	the	deepest	layer.
The	 effort	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 go	 into	 your	 interiormost	 core	 so	 that	 the	 gestalt
change,	from	knowing	to	the	knower,	from	the	seen	to	the	seer,	from	the	object
of	consciousness	to	consciousness	itself.
Man	can	live	a	life	either	of	doing	or	of	having	or	of	being.	Doing	is	 the	most
superficial;	 better	 than	 doing	 is	 having.	The	 poor	 person	 lives	 in	 the	world	 of
doing,	the	rich	person	lives	in	the	world	of	having.	But	the	best	is	the	world	of
being.	 The	 poor	 person	 can	 also	 reach	 the	 world	 of	 being	 without	 passing
through	having,	but	it	will	be	very	difficult	--
very	very	difficult,	because	you	can	renounce	only	that	which	you	have.	If	you
don't	have	it,	it	is	very	very	difficult	to	renounce	it.	Only	a	rare	man	like	Kabir
can	 do	 that	 miracle:	 he	 can	 renounce	 that	 which	 he	 does	 not	 have.	 He	 can
understand	even	that	which	he	does	not	possess.
Great	 intelligence	 is	 needed	 to	move	 from	 the	world	 of	 doing	 to	 the	world	 of
being.	 If	 somebody	 moves	 from	 poverty	 into	 spirituality,	 he	 has	 great
intelligence.	And	if	someone	remains	in	richness	and	still	does	not	move	towards
spirituality,	he	is	just	stupid	and	nothing	else.	Being	rich	and	not	being	aware	of
spirituality	 is	 stupidity.	 Being	 poor	 and	 not	 being	 aware	 of	 spirituality	 can	 be
forgiven,	but	the	rich	person	cannot	be	forgiven	--
because	he	HAS	--	can't	he	see	 that	he	has	everything	and	yet	he	has	nothing?
Death	will	be	coming	and	it	will	take	all	that	he	possesses.
Doing	 is	 a	means	 to	 having.	When	 doing	 succeeds,	 you	 have.	 But	 when	 you
have,	everything	starts	failing,	everything	starts	looking	futile,	everything	starts
looking	 childish.	 And	 to	 know	 that	 everything	 in	 this	 world	 is	 futile	 is	 the
beginning	of	turning	in,	of	conversion.
Yoga	Nirmal,	something	beautiful	is	very	close	by.
You	say:	SOMETHING	IS	HAPPENING	THAT	I	CANNOT	EXPLAIN.
You	 are	 fortunate.	 There	 are	 poor	 people	 who	 can	 explain	 whatsoever	 is
happening	to	them	--	that	means	nothing	special	is	happening	to	them.	All	that	is
happening	 is	 so	 superficial	 that	 language	 is	 adequate	 to	 express	 it.	The	deeper
the	happening,	the	more	dumb	you	will	feel.
Lao	 Tzu	 says:	 "People	 can	 say	 whatsoever	 they	 want	 to	 say	 --	 except	 me.
Compared	to	them	I	look	a	little	muddle-headed.	People	are	very	clear,	but	I	am
vague."	 People	 are	 clear	 because	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 experience	 of	 the
mysterious.
Lao	 Tzu	 is	 joking.	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 saying:	 "You	 are	 poor	 because	 you	 can	 say
everything	that	you	know	and	you	are	so	clear	about	your	life	--	how	can	you	be
so	 clear	 about	 the	mysterious?"	The	mysterious	 remains	 in	 the	mist.	One	only
feels	 it,	 but	 one	 cannot	 grab	 it.	 It	 is	 very	mercurial.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 grab	 it,	 you
distort	it;	it	falls	into	pieces,	it	disappears.
Nirmal,	you	say:	SOMETHING	IS	HAPPENING	THAT	I	CANNOT	EXPLAIN.
There	is	no	need,	and	don't	 try	to	explain	it	otherwise	it	will	stop	happening	--
because	explanation	is	done	by	the	head	and	the	happening	happens	in	the	heart.
And	 the	 head	 is	 very	 clever	 in	 interfering;	 don't	 allow	 the	 head	 to	 interfere.
Accept	the	unexplained	as	unexplained	--	there	is	no	need	to	explain	it.	Live	it!
Experience	it!	Taste	it!	Be	drowned	in	it!	There	is	no	need	to	express	it.
You	 say:	 IT	 IS	 NOT	 EVEN	 SOMETHING	 I	 KNOW	ONLY	 SOMETHING	 I
SENSE.
Yes,	that's	exactly	how	it	happens.	Knowing	means	clarity;	and	if	you	know,	you
can	explain.	Knowing	means	you	have	already	explained	it	to	yourself	--	if	you
can	 explain	 it	 to	 yourself,	why	 not	 to	 others?	 Sensing	means	 that	 you	 are	 not
even	able	to	explain	it	to	yourself;	it	is	just	a	feeling.	And	if	you	try	to	grab	it,	it
disappears.
The	greater	truths	have	to	be	approached	indirectly,	you	should	not	attack	them
directly;	you	should	be	very	delicate,	very	indirect.
Have	 you	 seen	 in	 the	 night?	 --	 if	 you	 look	 at	 the	 small	 stars	 directly,	 they
disappear.	 Try	 tonight:	 if	 you	 look	 directly,	 if	 you	 focus	 on	 the	 small	 star,	 it
disappears.	It	is	not	available	to	the	direct	gaze.	Then	what	is	the	way	to	see	the
small	star?	Look	sideways,	look	just	around	--	not	exactly	on	the	spot.	Look	at
other	stars	and	suddenly	the	small	star	starts	appearing.	It	is	available	only	to	an
indirect	gaze,	not	a	direct	gaze.
So	 is	 the	 situation	 with	 inner	 experiences:	 don't	 look	 directly	 --	 the	 inner
experiences	are	very	shy.	If	you	look	directly	they	start	hiding.	And	there	is	no
need	to	know;	sensing	is	enough.	Why	this	obsession	with	knowing?	And	when
you	are	obsessed	with	knowing,	you	will	also	be	obsessed	with	explaining.	You
don't	owe	explanations	to	anybody.
Buddha	used	to	declare	wherever	he	would	go...	his	disciples	would	precede	him
and	they	would	declare	to	the	town,	"These	eleven	questions	are	not	to	be	asked
of	the	Buddha	--	you	can	ask	everything	else	except	these	eleven	questions.
Those	 eleven	 questions	were	 known	 as	AVYAKHYA	 --	 unex-plainable.	But	 if
you	observe	 those	eleven	questions	minutely,	you	will	be	 surprised:	nothing	 is
left	 out	 of	 them.	 All	 that	 is	 important	 is	 included	 in	 them,	 all	 that	 is	 of	 any
significance.	Why	was	Buddha	 so	 insistent	 --	 "Don't	 ask"?	Because	 he	 cannot
explain,	and	your	very	asking	puts	you	on	the	wrong	track.
you	 can	 ask	 something,	 you	 start	 expecting	 an	 answer.	 Remember,	 just	 by
formulating	a	question,	there	is	no	necessity	that	the	answer	will	be	coming	from
existence.	Existence	has	no	obligation	to	fulfill	your	questions.
And	 absurd	 questions	 can	 be	 formulated	 --	 they	 look	 very	 good,	 very	 logical,
very	grammatical.	Language-wise	they	are	perfect,	but	in	existence	they	are	just
absurd.	For	 example,	 somebody	can	ask,	 "What	 is	 the	 colour	of	 sound?"	As	a
question	it	is	perfect,	nobody	can	find	any	fault	with	it	--	linguistically:	"What	is
the	colour	of	sound?"	But	sound	and	colour	are	not	related	at	all.
Somebody	can	ask,	"What	is	the	taste	of	the	colour	green?"	The	question	is	right
as	 A	 question,	 but	 no	 answer	 will	 be	 possible.	 And	 such	 are	 your	 questions.
When	 somebody	 asks,	 "Who	 created	 the	 world?"	 it	 looks	 very	 significant,	 it
looks	 very	 philosophical.	 It	 is	 simply	 absurd,	 because	 the	 world	 was	 never
created	--	so	the	whole	question	is	nonsense.
It	has	always	been	there.
God	is	not	the	creator:	God	is	the	world.	He	has	become	the	trees,	he	has	become
the	rocks,	he	has	become	the	river,	he	has	become	you	and	me.	There	is	no	other
God	except	 this	existence.	God	 is	not	 separate	 from	existence;	he	 is	not	 like	a
painter	who	paints	on	the	canvas,	and	then	there	is	a	picture	and	the	painter.	God
is	like	a	dancer	who	dances,	and	the	dancer	and	the	dance	are	always	the	same	--
they	cannot	be	separated.	You	cannot	have	the	dance	separate	from	the	dancer,
and	you	cannot	have	the	dancer	separate	from	the	dance,	because	when	he	is	not
dancing	he	is	no	more	a	dancer.
God	is	the	dancer,	and	the	world	is	his	dance	--	and	you	are	part	of	his	dancing
gestures.
But	 you	 can	 ask	 the	 question,	 "Who	 created	 the	 world?"	 And	 then	 there	 are
foolish	people	who	will	try	to	answer	you.
The	 question	 is	 absurd	 in	 the	 beginning,	 in	 the	 first	 place,	 and	 then	 there	 are
foolish	people	who	are	ready	to	answer.	Because	the	question	is	there,	it	has	to
be	answered	--	so
"God	created	the	world."	Just	ask	them,	"Who	created	God?"	and	then	you	are
falling	 into	an	 infinite	regress	and	 there	will	be	no	end	--	because	 the	question
will	 always	 remain	 the	 same.	A	created	B,	B	created	C,	C	created	D...	but	 the
question	remains	the	same,	"Then	who	created	D?"	And	the	question	will	never
be	answered.
There	are	people,	even	great	philosophers	have	asked,	"Who	is	first	--	the	egg	or
the	hen?"	The	question	looks	perfectly	right	--	one	must	be	first!	But	can't	you
think	 that	 things	 can	 be	 standing	 in	 a	 circle.	 If	 you	 think	 that	 everybody	 is
standing	in	a	queue,	in	a	line,	then	somebody	is	first	and	somebody	is	last.	But	if
people	are	standing	in	a	circle,	then	who	is	the	first	and	who	is	the	last?
The	mystics	say	the	world	moves	in	circles	and	they	really	seem	to	be	hinting	at
a	deep	truth.	Stars	move	in	a	circle,	the	earth	moves	in	a	circle,	the	sun	moves	in
a	circle,	the	seasons	move	in	a	circle,	life	moves	in	a	circle	--	everything	moves
in	 a	 circular	 way.	 The	 straight	 line	 is	 man's	 creation.	 In	 fact,	 Euclid's	 whole
geometry	is	wrong!
And	 now,	 in	 the	 world	 of	 higher	 mathematics,	 Euclid	 is	 no	 more	 valid.
Something	totally	different	has	come	into	force:	non-Euclidean	geometry.	Euclid
believes	in	a	straight	line,	but	non-Euclidean	geometry	says	you	cannot	draw	a
straight	line	--	how	can	you	draw	a	straight	line?	If	you	draw	a	straight	line	on
the	 floor,	 it	 is	 not	 straight	 because	 the	 earth	 is	 round.	 It	 only	 looks	 straight
because	it	is	part	of	such	a	big	circle	--	it	is	an	are,	not	a	straight	line.	If	the	earth
is	 round	 and	 you	 are	 sitting	 on	 the	 earth	 and	 drawing	 a	 straight	 line,	 go	 on
extending	it	from	both	ends...	one	day	it	will	become	a	circle.	So	it	was	part	of	a
circle.
Everything	 is	 part	 of	 a	 circle.	 Who	 is	 first	 --	 the	 hen	 or	 the	 egg?	 Now	 the
question	is	so	patently	foolish	that	only	philosophers	can	ask	it.	And	they	argue,
and	there	are	people	who	say	the	hen	is	the	first.
I	 used	 to	 know	 an	 Indian	 philosopher,	 a	 Buddhist	 philosopher,	 Rahul
Sankrityayana.	He	believed	that	the	egg	came	first.	He	has	written	many	articles
to	prove	that	the	egg	is	the	first.	But	how	can	the	egg	be	the	first?	Some	hen	will
be	needed;	and	how	can	 the	hen	be	 the	first?	Some	egg	will	be	needed.	Those
who	know,	 they	say	something	else.	They	say	the	hen	and	the	egg	are	not	 two
things	--	the	hen	is	the	egg's	way	of	producing	more	eggs;	or	vice	versa:	the	egg
is	the	hen's	way	of	producing	more	hens.	They	are	not	two	but	one	process:	the
egg	becomes	the	hen	--	so	how	can	one	be	first	and	the	other	second?	The	hen
becomes	the	egg....
But	 these	 questions	 have	 persisted	 down	 the	 ages,	 and	 people	 think	 they	 are
doing	great	work	when	 they	are	 thinking	about	 such	 stupid	questions.	Buddha
was	right:	"Don't	ask	such	questions.	Be	practical."
Each	Buddha	 is	 pragmatic.	 If	 you	 asked	 a	 question	 of	Buddha,	 he	would	 ask,
"First	answer	a	few	things:	if	I	say	yes	or	no,	is	it	going	to	change	your	life?	You
ask,	'Who	created	the	world?'	If	I	say,	'God,'	how	is	it	going	to	change	your	life?
If	I	say,	'No	one,'
then	is	it	going	to	change	your	life?"
In	fact,	if	you	look	at	the	atheist	and	the	theist	you	will	not	see	any	difference	in
their	lives.	Both	go	to	the	same	movie,	both	see	the	same	TV	programme,	both
eat	the	same	food,	both	are	members	of	the	Rotary	Club...	you	will	not	see	any
difference,	 atheist	 or	 theist.	 Can	 you	 tell	 about	 somebody,	 just	 by	 seeing	 his
behaviour,	whether	he	 is	 an	atheist	or	a	 theist?	You	cannot	 see	any	difference.
They	remain	the	same	person.
So	Buddha	used	 to	 say,	 "If	 it	 is	not	going	 to	make	any	 real	difference	 in	your
life,	forget	about	the	question	--	it	is	meaningless.	Ask	me	something	which	will
help	 you	 to	 go	 deeper	 into	 meditation;	 ask	 me	 something	 which	 will	 bring
enlightenment	 to	 you	 --	 ask	me	 something	which	will	make	 you	 free	 from	 all
imprisonments.	Ask	me	something	which	will	 take	you	beyond	all	misery	and
death.	Ask	me	 something	which	will	 take	you	beyond	 all	 time	 and	 space,	 and
will	make	you	part	of	eternity."
There	 is	 no	 need,	 Nirmal,	 to	 know	 what	 is	 happening	 --	 let	 it	 happen,	 don't
interfere.	And	there	is	no	need	to	explain	it	--	be	quiet.	Keep	it	inside	you	as	a
secret.	Remember,	great	things	need	secrecy.	Just	as	the	seed	goes	into	the	earth
and	remains	there,	then	the	great	tree	is	born;	just	as	the	child	has	to	grow	in	the
mother's	womb....	These	are	great	secrets.
When	they	start	happening	to	you,	keep	them	deep	down	in	your	heart,	let	them
grow	there.
Yes,	one	day	when	they	have	become	a	great	tree,	with	great	foliage,	and	flowers
and	 fruit,	 people	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 them,	 and	 many	 people	 will	 be
benefitted,	many	people	will	rest	in	your	shadow	and	many	people	will	quench
their	 thirst	 and	 their	 hunger,	 and	 many	 people	 will	 be	 made	 aflame	 by	 your
flowers,	and	many	people	will	start	moving	towards	God	--	just	by	seeing	you,
just	by	feeling	you,	just	by	being	close	to	you.
But	nothing	has	to	be	said,	nothing	has	to	be	explained.	And	even	if	you	try,	it	is
not	 possible.	And	 trying	 to	 explain	 and	 trying	 to	know	may	disturb	 the	whole
process	--
something	that	is	going	to	happen	may	be	stopped.
The	seventh	question
Question	7
OSHO,	ARE	THE	POLITICIANS	REALLY	AS	STUPID	AS	YOU	SAY	THEY
ARE?
Govind,	THEY	ARE	MORE	STUPID	THAN	I	SAY.	In	fact,	unless	a	person	is
stupid	he	cannot	be	a	politician.	It	is	not	that	the	politicians	are	stupid	--	in	fact,
only	stupid	people	are	attracted	towards	politics.
What	is	politics	basically?	The	desire	to	dominate	others	--	and	that	is	the	most
stupid	thing	in	life.	The	intelligent	person	tries	to	be	a	master	of	himself,	and	the
stupid	person	tries	to	be	master	of	others.	And	how	can	you	be	a	master	of	others
if	you	are	not	a	master	of	yourself?
If	you	are	not	a	master	of	yourself,	then	trying	to	be	a	master	of	others	is	just	a
substitute	 to	befool	yourself,	 to	deceive	yourself,	and	 that	 is	what	 the	stupidity
consists	of.
Two	politicians	were	sitting	on	a	park	bench	in	New	Delhi.	"I	will	 tell	you	the
truth,"	said	one.	"I	am	afraid	to	fly.	Those	airplanes	ain't	too	safe!"
"Don't	be	a	baby,"	said	the	other.	"Didn't	you	read	last	week	there	was	a	big	train
crash	and	three	hundred	people	were	killed?"
"Three	hundred	killed	on	a	train	--	what	happened?"
"An	airplane	fell	on	it!"
Overheard	 in	 the	 market	 by	 Deeksha:	 I	 am	 in	 favour	 of	 putting	 a	 statue	 of
Morarji	Desai	in	the	middle	of	the	square."
"For	what?"
"It	will	give	us	shade	in	the	summertime,	shelter	in	the	winter-time,	and	the	birds
a	chance	to	speak	for	us	all."
The	eighth	question
Question	8
OSHO,	A	FEW	DAYS	AGO	IN	LECTURE	I	REALIZED	THAT	WHEN	I	AM
RELAXED	THE	BODY	GOES	 INTO	A	MOST	COMFORTABLE	POSTURE
OF	ITS
OWN	ACCORD.	IT	MUST	BE	JUST	THE	SAME	WITH	LIFE.	IS	THIS	THE
BEGINNING	OF	TRUST?
YES,	MUKTI	GANDHA,	 this	 is	 the	beginning	of	 trust,	 the	 beginning	of	 yea-
saying,	the	beginning	of	a	great	understanding	that	all	that	is	going	to	happen	is
going	to	happen,	and	you	are	not	to	do	it.	You	have	to	be	alert	and	passive,	you
have	to	be	watchful	and	receptive.	This	is	the	whole	secret	of	life.
Small	things	need	to	be	done	--	if	you	want	more	money,	the	money	is	not	going
to	come	on	its	own;	you	will	have	to	run	after	it.	If	you	want	political	power,	it	is
not	going	to	come	to	you	on	its	own	--	you	will	have	to	fight	for	it,	you	will	have
to	struggle	for	it.
Small	things	are	those	which	never	HAPPEN,	which	never	come	from	God.	Man
has	 to	struggle	and	do	them.	And	great	 things	are	 those	which	if	you	try	 to	do
them	you	will	miss.	Great	things	happen	only	when	you	are	in	a	total	relaxation.
That's	what	must	be	happening.	This	is	happening	to	many	people	who	are	here.
You	are	not	here	just	 to	listen	to	me:	you	are	here	just	 to	BE	with	me.	Talking
and	listening	is	just	an	excuse	to	be	here.	It	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	sit	still,
silently	for	one	and	a	half	hours	if	I	am	not	talking	to	you.	If	I	am	talking	to	you,
your	mind	remains	engaged	and	your	whole	being	becomes	relaxed.
This	 is	 a	meditation!	 This	 is	 not	 a	 discourse.	 I	 am	 not	 preaching,	 I	 am	 not	 a
preacher;	and	I	am	not	teaching,	I	am	not	a	teacher	either.	I	have	no	philosophy
to	 impart,	 no	 knowledge	 to	 transfer.	 It	 is	 a	 device;	 talking	 to	 you	 is	 simply	 a
device.
This	is	another	kind	of	meditation.	I	go	on	talking,	your	mind	remains	occupied
with	my	words,	and	your	whole	being	 relaxes	with	me	 --	 the	 real	 thing	 is	 that
relaxation.
You	 say:	A	 FEW	DAYS	AGO	 IN	LECTURE,	 I	 REALIZED	THAT	WHEN	 I
AM
RELAXED	THE	BODY	GOES	 INTO	A	MOST	COMFORTABLE	POSTURE
OF	ITS
OWN	ACCORD.
The	body	has	great	wisdom	--	allow	it.	Allow	it	more	and	more	to	follow	its	own
wisdom.	And	whenever	you	have	time,	just	relax.	Let	the	breathing	go	on	on	its
own,	 don't	 interfere.	 Our	 habit	 to	 interfere	 has	 become	 so	 ingrained	 that	 you
cannot	 even	 breathe	 without	 interfering.	 If	 you	 watch	 breathing,	 you	 will
immediately	 see	you	have	 started	 interfering:	 you	 start	 taking	deep	breaths,	 or
you	start	exhaling	more.	No	need	to	interfere	at	all.	Just	let	the	breath	be	as	it	is;
the	body	knows	exactly	what	 it	 needs.	 If	 it	 needs	more	oxygen	 it	will	 breathe
more;	if	it	needs	less	oxygen	it	will	breathe	less.
Just	leave	it	to	the	body!	Become	absolutely	non-interfering.	And	wherever	you
feel	any	 tension,	 relax	 that	part.	And	slowly	slowly...	 first	begin	while	you	are
sitting,	resting	and	then	while	you	are	doing	things.	You	are	cleaning	the	floor	or
working	in	the	kitchen	or	in	the	once	--	keep	that	relaxedness.	Action	need	not
be	 an	 interference	 in	 your	 relaxed	 state.	 And	 then	 there	 is	 a	 beauty,	 a	 great
beauty,	to	your	activity.	Your	activity	will	have	the	flavour	of	meditativeness.
Yes,	Mukti	Gandha,	it	is	exactly	so	with	your	whole	life	--	this	is	the	secret.	But
people	 go	 on	 making	 unnecessary	 efforts.	 Sometimes	 their	 efforts	 are	 their
barriers;	their	efforts	are	the	problems	that	they	are	creating.
There	 was	 a	 lot	 of	 confusion	 downtown	 during	 the	 big	 snow-storm.	 Mulla
Nasruddin	went	 over	 to	 help	 a	 fat	 lady	 get	 into	 a	 taxi	 cab.	After	 rushing	 and
shoving	and	slipping	on	the	ice,	he	told	her	he	did	not	think	he	could	get	her	in.
She	said,	"In?	I	am	trying	to	get	out!"
Just	watch....	There	are	things	where	if	you	push,	you	will	miss.	Don't	push	the
river	at	all,	and	don't	try	to	go	upstream.	The	river	is	flowing	towards	the	ocean
of	its	own	accord
--	 just	 be	part	 of	 it,	 be	part	 of	 its	 journey.	 It	will	 take	you	 to	 the	ultimate.	Go
relaxed,	dancing,	singing,	to	God.
There	is	no	need	to	make	any	effort.	Why?	Because	God	is	our	intrinsic	nature.
We	ARE
Gods	already.	 If	we	 relax,	we	will	 know;	 if	we	don't	 relax,	we	will	 not	know.
Relaxation	becomes	the	door	to	that	great	knowing	--	enlightenment.
The	ninth	question
Question	9
WHY	DO	I	MISUNDERSTAND	YOU,	OSHO,	CONTINUOUSLY?
Dharma	Das,
THAT	 IS	NATURAL.	Understanding	will	 be	 a	 surprise	 --	misunderstanding	 is
not	a	surprise.	You	are	bound	to	misunderstand	me	because	you	ARE.	You	will
understand	 me	 only	 when	 you	 are	 not.	 That	 'I'	 is	 the	 cause	 of	 all
misunderstanding.	[t	remains	between	me	and	you.	It	do-	i	not	allow	me	to	say
what	 I	 am	saying	 --	 it	 interprets,	 it	 colours	 it,	 it	 distorts,	 it	 chooses,	 it	 adds,	 it
deletes	--	it	docs	a	thousand	and	one	things,	and	only	then	does	it	allow	it	to	go
in.	And	by	the	time	it	reaches	you	it	is	something	totally	different.	It	is	not	what
was	said	to	you:	it	is	something	that	your	mind	has	made	out	of	it.
You	will	have	 to	disappear	 if	you	want	 to	understand	me.	Less	 than	 that	won't
do.
Lorenzo	 was	 extolling	 the	 virtues	 of	 his	 newly	 adopted	 homeland.	 "This	 is-a
great-a	country."	he	declared.	"Look-a	at	Sinatra	--	where	else	could	a	piece	of
spaghetti	wind	up-a	with	a-so	much-a	gravy!
Everybody	 is	 carrying	 his	 idea,	 his	 conditioning,	 his	 knowledge,	 his	 past	with
himself.
That's	what	your	'I'	consists	of.
The	Ozark	farmer's	wife	had	a	baby	each	year	for	the	past	twelve	years	in	a	row.
He	finally	went	to	a	doctor	for	some	advice.	"Here's	a	gross	of	rubbers,'	said	the
doctor.	"Just	read	the	instructions	on	the	label."
A	year	later,	the	hillbilly	brought	his	wife	in,	pregnant	again.	"Did	you	follow	the
instructions	on	the	box?"
"Yep,	Doc!	Sure	I	did!	The	only	thing	was	I	didn't	have	no	organ	so	I	put	them
on	the	piano."
Your	 understanding	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 understanding.	 How	 can	 it	 be	 my
understanding?
If	you	disappear,	if	you	put	yourself	aside,	then	there	is	no	barrier,	then	there	is
no	censor	between	me	and	you,	then	the	communication	is	immediate.	Then	it	is
not	even	a	question	of	words:	it	is	a	question	of	energy.
If	your	mind	 is	put	aside,	my	vibe	will	 start	 stirring	your	heart,	my	being	will
touch	your	being,	will	trigger	something	that	is	fast	asleep	in	you	--	will	awaken
it.
And	 the	more	 I	 see	 that	my	 sannyasins	 are	 dropping	 their	 egos,	 the	more	 and
more	my	work	will	change	--	it	will	become	less	and	less	concerned	with	words
and	will	become	more	and	more	concentrated	on	energy.	That's	exactly	what	is
slowly	slowly	happening.
I	will	be	speaking	less	and	less	to	you.	If	you	are	not	there	then	I	can	just	enter	in
your	being,	can	just	call	you:	Friend,	wake	up!
One	night	Mrs.	Mantoni	got	into	a	taxi.	After	riding	a	while,	she	realized	she	had
forgotten	her	pocketbook	and	had	no	money	to	pay	the	fare.	The	meter	now	read
$7.50.
"Mista	driver,"	she	cried.	"You	betta	stop.	I	no	canna	pay	you!"
"Oh,	that's	all	right,"	said	the	cabbie.	"I'll	just	pull	down	a	dark	street,	get	in	the
back	seat	with	you,	take	off	your	panties...."
"Mista,	 you	 gonna	 get	 gypped,"	 said	 the	 Italian	 lady.	 "My	 panties	 only	 cost-a
forty-nine	cents!"
Please,	 Dharma	 Das,	 disappear,	 don't	 come	 in	 between	 me	 and	 you.	 Let	 the
contact	be	immediate,	direct,	heart-to-heart,	not	mind-to-mind.	Yes,	it	is	good	in
the	beginning	--	it	is	good	in	the	beginning	because	there	is	no	other	way.	I	have
to	talk	to	your	mind,	I	have	to	seduce	your	mind,	but	once	the	mind	is	seduced,
once	you	have	become	a	sannyasin,	then	the	second	step	is:	put	the	mind	aside	--
now	let	me	have	a	direct	contact	with	your	heart.
And	 finally	 even	 the	 heart	 has	 to	 be	 put	 aside.	 Then	 you	 will	 not	 find	 any
difference	 between	 me	 and	 you;	 then	 my	 understanding	 will	 simply	 be	 your
understanding,	without	 any	 transfer,	without	 any	communication,	because	 then
we	will	meet	at	the	center.	And	your	center	and	my	center	are	not	different.	Your
body	is	different	from	my	body;	your	mind	is	less	different	from	my	mind	than
my	body	and	your	body.	Your	heart	is	even	less	different	than	my	heart.	But	your
being	and	my	being	are	the	same;	they	are	not	different	at	all.
If	 the	 disciple	 is	 ready	 to	 drop	 mind,	 heart,	 everything.	 then	 immediately	 he
becomes	the	Master,	he	has	arrived.	Then	there	is	no	more	to	learn,	no	more	to
know,	no	more	to	experience.	And	life	continues	as	it	was	before,	but	now	there
is	nobody	inside	to	suffer,	to	dream,	to	be	anxious,	nobody	there	to	live	or	to	die.
Then	one	exists	in	God	and	God	exists	in	one.
The	last	question
Question	10
OSHO,	I	KNOW	THAT	SEX	REPRESSION	IS	THE	ROOT	CAUSE	OF	ALL
NEUROSIS,	BUT	THEN	WHY	DO	I	GO	ON	REPRESSING	IT?
Narayana,
YOU	HAVE	BEEN	TAUGHT	to	do	it	 from	the	very	beginning.	It	has	become
part	 of	 you,	 your	 conscience.	 Listening	 to	 me	 now	 you	 understand	 that	 sex
repression	 is	 the	root	cause	of	all	neurosis,	but	 this	understanding	 is	very	new.
And	'sex	is	dirty',	and	'sex	is	sin',	is	very	old,	it	may	be	fifty	years	old.	And	this
understanding	is	very	new.	The	weight	of	the	old	is	too	much.
So	 you	 understand	 intellectually	 that	 sex	 repression	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 all
neurosis,	but	deep	down,	even	in	your	body,	even	in	your	chemistry,	the	idea	has
penetrated,	from	the	very	moment	you	were	given	milk,	you	have	been	poisoned
about	sex,	that	it	is	sin.	It	is	such	a	long	long	hypnosis	that	it	will	take	time	for
you	to	be	awake.
It	 is	a	good	beginning	 that	an	 intellectual	understanding	 Is	happening,	but	 it	 is
only	intellectual	--	it	has	to	become	existential.
Mother	is	explaining	the	facts	of	life	to	Cynthia	the	day	before	the	wedding.
"Now,	my	dear,"	she	tells	her,	"I	am	afraid	Bertie	will	often	want	to	be	beastly	to
you	after	you	are	married."
Cynthia,	shocked,	is	quite	unable	to	believe	that	her	beloved	Bertie	would	ever
do	such	a	thing.
"Yes,	it	is	so,"	mother	insists,	"and	I	want	you	to	remember:	whenever	he	wants
to	be	beastly,	grit	your	teeth.	clench	your	fists,	and	think	of	England!"
These	things	have	been	given	to	everybody,	and	everybody	is	carrying	a	big	load
of	all	kinds	of	nonsense.	Sex	is	a	natural	phenomenon	--	 it	has	 to	be	accepted,
lovingly;	it	has	to	be	respected.	It	is	life's	source.	Not	to	respect	it	is	to	disrespect
Life;	not	to	respect	it	is	to	condemn	God.	Respect	it,	love	it,	be	prayerful	with	it,
and	one	day	you	will	transcend.
But	transcendence	is	not	against	sex:	transcendence	is	through	sex.	Sex	has	to	be
used	 as	 a	 stepping-stone.	 And	when	 you	 have	 used	 it	 as	 a	 stepping-stone,	 be
grateful	to	it.
If	you	really	want	to	understand	me,	or	Kabir,	this	has	to	be	the	very	foundation:
that	 life	has	 to	be	 loved	because	 it	 is	divine,	 life	has	 to	be	affirmed	with	your
total	 being	 because	God	 is	 hidden	 in	 it.	God	 is	 another	 name	 for	 life,	 another
name	 for	 love.	 Life	 is	 to	 become	 your	 God	 --	 then	 whatsoever	 LIFE	 implies
becomes	divine.
But	it	will	take	time.	Slowly	slowly,	chunks	of	your	old	conditioning	have	to	be
dropped.
If	you	can	remain	here.	Narayana,	for	a	few	months,	the	miracle	is	possible.	It	is
happening	to	others.	Thousands	of	my	sannyasins	have	started	accepting	life	--
not	accepting	out	of	any	helplessness	but	out	of	great	joy,	with	a	rejoicing	heart.
I	am	all	for	rejoicing.	am	I	am	all	against,	deadly	against	renouncing.	I	am	all	for
transformation	 and	 absolutely	 against	 repression.	 If	 you	 repress,	 remember
Kabir:	 repress	sex,	 it	becomes	anger;	 repress	anger,	 it	becomes	agreed;	 repress
greed,	it	becomes	pride...
and	so	on	and	so	 forth.	 It	goes	on	and	on.	And	 the	 farther	you	are	away	 from
nature,	 the	more	 complex	 is	 the	 journey,	 the	more	 difficult	 it	 is	 to	 come	back
home.
Come	closer.	Lose	your	pride,	let	it	become	greed;	lose	your	greed,	let	it	become
anger;	 lose	your	anger,	 let	 it	become	sex.	Sex	is	 the	original	energy.	And	from
sex	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 transformation,	 because	 sex	 gives	 you	 the	 first
glimpses	of	 samadhi.	Sex	 lived	 totally,	 sex	 loved	 totally,	will	make	you	aware
for	the	first	time	of	the	peak	moments,	of	the	climaxes.
And	on	those	sunlit	peaks,	great	silence	prevails;	 the	ego	has	been	dropped	far
behind	in	the	valleys,	time	has	disappeared	somewhere	on	the	way.	You	are	no
more	separate;	you	are	not	a	person	but	 just	a	pulsation,	a	presence.	Sex	gives
you	moments	of	that	experience	when	you	are	simply	pulsating	in	rhythm	with
the	whole.	That	pulsation	is	what	orgasm	is	all	about,	and	orgasm	is	the	window
to	samadhi.
Narayana,	what	is	happening	intellectually	now,	allow	it	to	happen	existentially
too.	 Only	 then	 the	 long	 long	 tradition	 of	 centuries	 can	 be	 dropped.	 It	 is	 an
arduous	effort,	it	is	difficult,	but	it	is	worth	it.
And	 once	 chunks	 of	 your	 conditioning	 start	 disappearing	 you	 will	 feel	 such
freedom,	such	buoyancy,	you	will	feel	so	weightless,	you	will	start	feeling	wings
are	growing	in	you.	You	will	start	feeling	that	you	can	do	anything;	you	will	start
feeling	that	you	are	entitled	to	do	miracles.
And,	yes,	that's	how	it	is:	man	is	entitled	to	do	miracles.	But	the	beginning	has	to
be	 a	 deep	 love	 for	 all	 that	 you	 are,	 a	 deep	 acceptance	 of	 what	 you	 are	 --	 no
denying,	no	rejection,	no	repression.	Transformation	has	to	be	the	key.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	But	Man	Is
Chapter	title:	An	Alive	Buddhafield
Chapter	title:	Untimely	Sannyasination
Chapter	title:	Life	is	a	Lovesong
