
Wings	of	Love	and	Random	Thought
Talks	given	from	1969
Original	in	Hindi
5	Chapters
Year	published:	1979
Wings	of	Love	and	Random	Thought
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Wings	of	Love,	pages	1	to	26
Date	Unknown
Archive
code:
6900000
ShortTitle:
RANDOM01
Audio:
No
Video:	No
REAL	TRUTH	IS	WHAT	IS	EXPERIENCED	AS	SUCH
Realization	of	Truth,	of	 the	Supreme	Soul,	 and	of	what	we	 really	are,	 is	not	 a
matter	of	intellectual	deliberation	or	mental	reflection.	Only	those	of	us	are	able
to	comprehend	Truth	who	nurture	their	worthiness	and	receptivity	by	ceaseless
practice.	Inasmuch	as	our	knowledge	of	things	is	restricted	by	the	extent	of	our
capacity	 to	know,	 it	 is	necessary	 to	 remember	 that	 the	bounds	of	Truth	are	not
limited	 to	 the	extent	of	our	knowledge.	The	frontiers	of	Truth	are	ever	beyond
our	ken,	because	the	more	we	know	the	more	remains	yet	to	be	known.	What	we
know	 need	 not	 necessarily	 be	 Truth	 since	 Truth	 is	 much	 too	 large	 for	 our
capacity	 to	 comprehend	 which	 is	 neither	 complete	 nor	 perfect.	 One	 who
identifies	 the	 limits	 of	 one's	 knowledge	with	 those	 of	Truth	 stops	 thereat,	 and
does	not	go	further.	Even	in	the	case	of	worldly	objects	we	find	our	knowledge
restricted	by	our	sense-organs.	To	a	person	bereft	of	eyesight	there	is,	indeed,	no
object	 like	 light	 in	 his	world	 of	 experience.	A	 true	 conception	 of	 light	 cannot
find	 a	 place	 in	 the	 community	 that	 consists	 entirely	 of	 blind	persons.	Nor	 can
darkness	 be	 truly	 comprehended	 by	 them,	 because	 an	 experience	 of	 light	 is
essential	 to	 a	 thorough	 understanding	 of	 darkness.	 If	 we	 are	 devoid	 of	 the
auditory	 faculty,	 sound	becomes	non-existent	 for	us.	Virtually,	 the	existence	of
only	those	things	is	revealed	to	us	which	are	intelligible	to	our	senses.	Our	world
of	 experience	 co-extends	with	our	 perceptive	 ability.	We	cannot,	 however,	 say
that	the	real	world	is	only	that	much.	The	frontiers	of	the	world	we	experience
and	the	real	world	are	not	identical.	Our	world	is	thus	restricted	by	us	ourselves.
Surely,	 there	 are	many	worlds	within	one	world.	There	 are	 as	many	worlds	 as
there	are	living	organisms.
Examining	still	more	minutely,	we	can	say	that	there	are	as	many	worlds	as	there
are	 individuals	 constituting	 the	 different	 species.	 Thus	 in	 the	 universe	 the
individual	 worlds	 are	 numberless,	 because	 those	 who	 know,	 perceive,	 and
experience	 are	 likewise	 numberless.	Hence,	 the	 universe	 is	 subdivided	 into	 as
many	imaginary	pieces	as	there	are	individual	cogs	in	the	wheel.	Far	behind	men
are	quite	a	large	number	of	animals	whose	sensory	faculty	is	far	inferior	to	that
of	man.	We	 know	 that	many	 of	 them	 do	 not	 possess	 the	 faculty	 of	 seeing	 or
hearing.	 Some	 are	 denied	 the	 gustatory	 faculty	 and	 some	 the	 olfactory.	 Those
beings	do	not,	really,	have	the	experience	of	light,	sound,	taste	or	smell.
The	world	of	experience	of	man	extends	as	far	as	his	sense-organs	allow	it	to	do,
and	it	will	be	sheer	ignorance	if	the	real	world	were	to	be	restricted	by	us	to	what
is	projected	by	our	limited	knowledge.	Were	we	blessed	with	more	sense-organs,
we	might	possibly	have	extended	our	world	of	experience	still	further.	Scientific
appliances	have	enabled	us	 to	do	so.	This	 is	mentioned	only	 to	emphasize	 that
our	knowledge	is	commensurate	with	our	capacity	to	know,	with	the	powers	of
our	senses	to	understand	and	grasp.	What	is	true	of	the	visible	world	is	also	true
of	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 invisible	 one.	 Whenever	 people	 ask	 me,	 "Does	 God
exist?",	 "Does	 the	 soul	 exist?",	 I	 put	 this	 counter-question	 to	 them,	 "Do	 you
possess	the	ability	to	experience	the	soul	and	God?"	The	real	question	is	that	of
ability	and	not	of	the	existence,	or	otherwise,	of	God.	If	you	have	the	ability	you
will	 surely	 experience	 those	 truths	 which	 are	 beyond	 your	 reach	 now;	 in	 the
absence	of	that	ability,	those	truths	will	necessarily	seem	untruths.	If	some	vague
fear	compels	us	to	accept	truths	they	cannot	be	real	truths,	for	real	Truth	is	what
is	experienced	as	such.
Twenty-five	centuries	ago	a	 seeker	after	Truth	 fell	at	 the	 feet	of	Lord	Buddha,
beseeching	 his	 guidance.	 "How	 do	 you	 visualize	 it?"	 he	 said.	 "What	 is	 your
conception?"	The	Enlightened	One	said,	"What	I	have	conceived	may	not	help
you	much	 since	 you	don't	 have	 the	 eyes	 competent	 enough	 to	 visualise	Truth.
Whatever	 I	 may	 say	 will	 be	 taken	 as	 untruth	 because	 you	 cannot	 realize	 the
reality	 of	 what	 you	 cannot	 experience."	 Narrating	 an	 anecdote	 the	 Buddha
continued,	 "I	 had	 been	 to	 a	 village	 where	 they	 brought	 me	 a	 blind	 man,
requesting	me	 to	convince	him	of	 the	existence	of	 light.	 I	 told	 them	 it	was	no
better	 than	madness	 since	he	hadn't	 the	 instrument	of	vision,	 namely	 the	 eyes.
They	should	rather	take	him	to	a	doctor	who	could	rectify	his	eyes.	Where	there
are	eyes	to	see	there	is	light."	I	say	the	same	to	you.	Your	concern	need	not	be
Truth.	It	should	rather	be	whether	you	do	have	the	eyes	competent	enough	to	see
beyond	 the	 object.	What	 is	 seen	 is	 nothing	 but	 matter	 and	 whatever	 there	 is,
besides	and	beyond	it,	falls	outside	the	range	of	our	experience.	Its	sympathetic
impulses,	its	waves	of	reaction	fail	to	have	any	impact	on	us.	When	you	meet	a
friend,	your	contact	with	him	is	confined	only	to	his	physical	being.
You	do	not	come	into	close	touch	with	his	soul.	When	you	see	a	tree	in	the	open
yard,	you	stop	at	 the	outer	 limits	of	 its	physical	presence,	but	you	do	not	have
any	 access	 to	 its	 inner	 soul.	Why?	That	 is	 because	 one	who	 has	 had	 no	 close
contact	with	one's	own	soul	and	one	who	has	had	no	experience	of	the	sentient
energy	 within,	 cannot	 hope	 to	 realize	 the	 all-pervasive	 Sentient	 Being.	 The
question,	 therefore,	 is	 not	 of	 God,	 Truth	 or	 light	 but	 of	 vision.	 In	 my	 view,
Dharma	is	more	a	remedy,	a	means	of	cure,	than	an	object	of	deliberation.	Fresh
vistas	 of	 experience	 will	 open	 out	 within	 us	 if	 the	 slumbering	 impulses	 are
goaded	 into	 activity,	 leaving	 at	 our	 disposal	 the	 knowledge	 of	 those	 things
without	 which	 there	 is	 no	 purpose,	 no	 aim,	 and	 no	 meaning	 in	 life.	 Matter
recedes	 into	 the	 background,	 leaving	 the	 impalpable	 behind,	 as	 our	 sensibility
grows	 finer	 and	 our	 receptivity	 keener.	 A	 point	 is	 reached	 when	 the	 entire
universe	ceases	to	appear	as	a	gross	object	of	perception,	and	the	pure	unclouded
vision	of	the	Supreme	Soul	alone	remains.
In	order	to	achieve	this	we	shall	have	to	prepare	ourselves.	The	farmer	prepares
the	 soil	 before	 sowing	 seeds.	 Persons	 seeking	 the	 realization	 of	 the	 supreme
must	keep	 the	ground	 in	 readiness	and	 tune	 themselves	within	 in	order	 to	hear
the	 all-pervasive	 divine	 music	 without.	 The	 sun	 is	 visible	 because	 our	 eyes
perceive	it.	The	sun	may	leave	its	impact	on	us,	because	we	have	both,	the	visual
organ	and	sufficient	receptive	capacity.	I	am	speaking	and	my	voice	enters	your
heart,	 producing	 a	 responsive	 echo,	 because	 you	 have	 a	 sense-organ	 which
enables	 the	sound	 to	come	up	 to	you.	The	Supreme	Soul	never	ceases	 to	exist
even	for	a	moment.	Our	vital	breaths	are	all	His;	every	limit	 is	His;	but	we	do
not	realize	it	because	our	own	hands	keep	the	passage	of	entrance	closed	to	Him.
THREE	VITAL	LINKS
There	are	three	stages	in	the	process	of	keeping	this	passage	ever	open	--	three
vital	 links	 that	 bring	 about	your	unison	with	 the	Supreme	Soul.	 I	 am	going	 to
discuss	them	here.	I	shall	tell	you	how	that	power	of	sympathetic	reaction	can	be
generated	 in	you	whereby	 the	gross	gets	dissolved	and	 the	subtle	comes	 to	 the
fore.	The	 empiric	 object	 vanishes	 and	 the	Supreme	Soul	becomes	visible.	The
links	I	am	going	to	enumerate	take	you	from	the	visible	to	the	invisible,	from	the
gross	to	the	subtle,	from	the	worldly	object	to	the	Supreme	Soul.
FIRST	LINK:	SELF-LOVE
The	 first	 link	 in	 the	 chain	 is	 self-love.	Let	 us	 love	 ourselves.	Let	 this	 love	 be
unhindered	 and	 unconditional.	 He	 who	 cannot	 love	 himself	 is	 incapable	 of
loving	others.	In	the	absence	of	love	it	is	impossible	to	go	beyond	the	mundane,
the	physical,	and	the	temporal.	The	power	of	love	is	the	only	power	in	man	that
is	spiritual	and	unearthly.	The
,steps	 leading	 up	 to	 the	 benign	 presence	 of	 the	 Supreme	 Soul	 can	 be	 climbed
only	 by	 holding	 on	 to	 the	 unearthly	 link	 of	 love.	 But	 let	me	 sound	 a	 note	 of
caution.	Surely	some	difficulty	will	be	experienced	on	hearing	this	advocacy	of
love	of	oneself,	because	the	so-called	scriptural	tradition	is	against	it.	Its	tenets
and	injunctions	lay	down,	directly	or	 indirectly,	what	 is	hostile	 to	the	self.	Is	 it
possible	to	suppress	the	self	without	being	hostile	or	inimical	to	it?	The	edifice
of	 righteousness	 and	 virtue	 has	 been	 built	 by	man	 on	 the	mutual	 struggle	 and
conflict	between	the	pair	of	opposites	into	which	the	self	had	been	split.	No	one
need	be	surprised	if	life	founded	on	illusion	turns	out	to	be	ugly	and	uninspiring.
The	beauty	of	life	can	never	fructify	through	the	process	of	self-conflict,	for	the
individual	coming	into	conflict	with	himself	 loses	his	power,	his	prop	and	stay
which	would	have	ensured	success	in	his	life.	Himself	at	the	back,	he	makes	his
hands	 fight	each	other.	 In	 that	 case,	who	can	conquer	whom?	Neither	 success,
nor	defeat	is	possible.
What	 is	possible	 is	only	a	mutual	conflict	 leading	 to	 the	birth	of	an	 individual
utterly	 depleted	 of	 strength,	 and	 finally	 to	 death.	 Since,	 in	 this	manner	 all	 the
faculties	of	 the	individual	conspire	 together	 to	bring	about	self-destruction,	 life
becomes	 ugly,	 uninspiring,	 and	 futile.	 Beauty,	 Truth	 and	 blessedness	 are
attainable	only	if	 life	were	to	be	engaged	in	the	creative	cultivation	of	the	self.
Sermons	 on	 the	 suppression	 of	 the	 self	 cannot,	 however,	 produce	 notes	 of
harmony	within.	On	the	other	hand,	 they	generate	discord	and	disharmony	and
lead	 to	 misery,	 anxiety	 and	 frustration.	 The	 person	 who	 is	 filled	 with	 mutual
conflicts,	he	who	begins	to	fight	with	himself,	he	who	splits	himself	into	a	friend
and	a	foe,	he	who	considers	some	of	his	faculties	to	be	his	adversaries	and	pits
some	others	against	them,	actually	creates	a	hell	for	himself.	The	pity	is	that	we
had	been	considering	such	a	life	of	conflict,	a	righteous	one,	a	virtuous	life!	In
my	view,	a	virtuous	life	is	entirely	different.	It	is	not	a	life	of	internal	conflict	but
that	of	 internal	peace,	harmony	and	music.	 It	 is	not	 a	 life	of	 'self-hostility'	but
that	of	unison	and	 integration.	Those	who	wish	 to	acquire	 this	harmony	of	 the
soul	have	to	lay	its	foundation	at	the	very	outset.	Those	who	start	with	a	conflict
cannot	dream	of	reaching	a	state	of	bliss	without	conflict,	for	the	end	is	already
present	in	the	beginning	itself.	Let	it	be	remembered	therefore	that	the	first	stage
is	far	more	valuable	than	the	final	one.	The	Supreme	Soul	is	perfect	harmony	--
is	 perfection	 itself.	 If	 I	 wish	 to	 be	 merged	 into	 that	 Divine	 Harmony,	 it	 is
essential	that	I	should	have	a	note	of	harmony	within	me.	How	can	this	note	of
harmony	 be	 produced?	Never	 by	 treating	 the	 self	with	 contempt,	 nor	 by	 self-
reproach	and	self-hostility.	It	can	be	produced	by	love	of	oneself.
SELF-LOVE	VERSUS	SELF-SUPPRESSION
The	very	first	foundations	of	a	life	of	spiritual	endeavour	are	love	of	oneself	and
spiritual	harmony.	Surely	you	will	be	confounded	to	hear	this,	because	you	have
been	 often	 advised	 to	 suppress	 something	 within	 you.	 But	 I	 say	 that	 there	 is
nothing	within	you	that	needs	suppression	or	extirpation.	There	are	certain	drives
within	 every	man	 that	 need	 to	be	harnessed,	 not	 extirpated;	 certain	 forces	 that
must	needs	be	awakened	and	loved,	not	suppressed.	They	should	be	controlled
and	directed	along	 the	proper	course.	But	 those	who	consider	 them	hostile	can
never	be	successful	in	transforming	them.	A	man	of	understanding	can	transform
even	poison	 into	nectar,	but	one	who	has	no	understanding	whatever	 is	sure	 to
turn	 his	 nectar	 into	 poison.	 I	 call	 understanding	 nectar	 and	 deficiency	 in	 it
poison.	We	 see	 that	 putrefying	 things,	 things	 that	 emit	 foul	 smell,	 are	 used	 as
fertilizers.	 Just	 now	 some	 one	 presented	 me	 with	 a	 bunch	 of	 flowers.	 How
fragrant	 they	 are!	 When	 their	 fragrance	 stirred	 my	 heart,	 I	 remembered	 the
source	of	this	fragrance.
The	foul	smell	of	the	muck	has	been	transformed	into	an	endearing	fragrance	in
its	course	through	the	seeds	and	stems.	If	you	simply	heap	up	the	manure	in	your
yard,	the	foul	smell	will	vitiate	the	whole	atmosphere,	but	if	you	spread	it	over
your	garden	 round	your	house,	 it	will	 be	 filled	with	pleasing	 smell.	What	 you
call	"foul	smell"	is	only	the	undeveloped	form	of	"fragrance,"	not	hostile	to	it.	A
discordant	 note	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 undeveloped	 and	 disarranged	 form	 of	 the
harmonious	notes	that	blend	so	well	in	perfect	music.
There	 is	nothing	 in	human	 life	which	deserves	 to	be	 shattered	 to	pieces,	 to	be
annihilated.
But	 there	 is	 much	 in	 human	 life,	 to	 be	 sure,	 which	 should	 be	 transformed,
sublimated	and	raised	up.	Man	possesses	certain	powers	which	are	intrinsically
neutral.	They	are	neither	auspicious	nor	inauspicious,	neither	good	nor	bad.	They
are	 neutral.	 They	 assume	 the	 form	 in	 which	 we	 utilize	 them.	What	 is	 called
sexual	potency,	the	power	of	passionate	lust	against	which	the	so-called	spiritual
leaders	have	waged	an	interminable	war	is	but	a	neutral	potentiality,	because	that
power,	when	transformed,	evolves	itself	into	a	divine	force.	It	is	the	primordial
creative	 power,	 and	what	 it	 is	 competent	 to	 do	 depends	 upon	 how	you	 use	 it.
What	it	can	be,	does	not	depend	on	it	alone	but	on	our	understanding	and	on	the
art	 of	 living	 our	 lives.	Does	 it	 not,	 on	 being	 transformed,	 attain	 the	 nature	 of
brahmacharya,	the	power	of	the	celibate?	This	brahmacharya	is	not	hostile	to	the
power	of	lust;	verily	it	is	its	sublimation.	similarly	the	power	that	manifests	itself
in	 fury	 becomes	 peace,	 calmness	 and	 quiescence.	 It	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of
transformation.	In	our	 life	 the	process	of	creation	possesses	greater	 importance
than	the	process	of	destruction.
If	 this	 fact	 is	 clearly	understood,	 the	question	of	 a	 struggle	with,	or	 a	hostility
towards	the	Self,	will	scarcely	arise,	for	the	creation	of	the	Self	is	possible	only
in	 an	 atmosphere	 of	 self-love.	 I	 would	 also	 like	 to	 add	 the	 the	 physical	 body
should	not	be	excluded	from	the	Self.
THE	BODY	NOT	TO	BE	SHUNNED
Give	 the	 body	 abundant	 love,	 on	 getting	 which	 it	 becomes	 vibrant,	 alive.	 Its
slumbering	potentialities	are	awakened.	But	remember	that	neither	the	so-called
debauchee	 nor	 the	 so-called	 abstainer	 loves	 the	 body	 in	 the	 real	 sense.	 The
contempt	of	the	libertine	for	his	own	body	is	manifest	in	the	lack	of	his	own	self-
restraint.	It	is	out	of	this	contempt	that	he	is	inclined	to	waste	away	his	body.	The
abstainer	 too,	 recoiling	 from	 the	 other	 extreme,	 is	 no	 less	 backward	 in	 his
hostility	 to	 the	 body.	 Of	 course,	 the	 directions	 they	 turn	 to	 are	 different.	 The
abstainer	 tortures	 and	 torments	 the	 body	 in	 the	 name	 of	 self-restraint,	 in	 the
name	of	 renunciation,	 and	 the	other	 in	 the	name	of	 licentiousness;	but	both	of
them	 are	 wanting	 in	 thankfulness	 to	 and	 ardent	 love	 for	 the	 body.	 The
characteristic	feature	of	a	person	of	healthy	mental	poise	is	a	favourable	attitude
towards	 the	 body	 with	 a	 loving	 vision.	 Torturing	 the	 body	 in	 any	 manner
whatsoever	 reveals	an	unhealthy	and	sick	mentality.	 It	amounts	 to	 the	fact	 that
we	 can	 be	 tormented	 by	 two	 kinds	 of	 mental	 infirmities,	 one	 of	 unrestrained
enjoyment	and	the	other	of	unthinking	renunciation.	Hence	the	libertine	makes	a
volte	face	and	comes	to	the	point	of	renunciation.	How	much	does	one	wish	that
he	 is	 able	 to	 stop	 in	 the	middle!	But,	 unfortunately,	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 proceed
from	 one	 sickness	 to	 another,	 such	 sick-minded	 persons	 have	 taught	 us	 a	 lot.
This	 is	what	 they	 teach:	 the	body	 is	our	enemy,	we	have	 to	 fight	with	 it.	As	a
result	of	these	baneful	teachings	religion	and	piety	have	become	body-obsessed.
Opposition	to	 the	body	must	perforce	be	body-centred.	Hence	I	say	that	 if	you
wish	 to	go	beyond	 the	body,	 if	 you	wish	 to	 rise	 above	 it,	 do	not	 fight	with	 it,
harbour	no	hostility	towards	it.	Love	it	and	seek	its	friendship.	The	body	is	not
our	 enemy.	 It	 is	 an	 instrument,	 a	wonderful	 instrument,	 ready	 to	be	used.	 It	 is
incumbent	upon	you	to	stretch	your	hand	of	friendship	towards	that	which	you
wish	 to	 use.	Prior	 to	 everything	 else,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 extend	 a	 friendly	hand
towards	your	own	body	which	is	a	fine	specimen	of	God's	adroitness	as	a	skilled
craftsman.	It	is	a	ladder	full	of	secrets	that	leads	you	up	to	the	Supreme	Soul.	He
is	certainly	mad	who	comes	into	conflict	with	the	ladder	instead	of	climbing	up
through	 its	 rungs.	 Unfortunately,	 we	 are	 surrounded	 by	 the	 fraternity	 of	 such
incorrigible	bedlamites.	Beware	of	them.	It	is	difficult	to	estimate	the	extent	of
havoc	 wrought	 by	 such	 madmen	 among	 us.	 You	 do	 not	 fully	 realize	 the
thousands	of	secrets	lying	hidden	in	this	body	naturally	bestowed	on	you.	Even
if	one	learns	all	the	secrets	of	one's	own	body,	one	can	easily	secure	the	key	to
the	 endless	 mysteries	 of	 the	 Supreme	 Soul.	 How	 small	 is	 this	 body	 but	 how
many	wonderful	mysteries	lie	embedded	in	it!	The	mind	is	hidden	in	the	body.
The	soul	is	hidden	in	the	mind.	The	Supreme	Soul	is	hidden	in	the	soul.
A	 sage	was	 about	 to	 die.	 He	 took	 leave	 of	 his	 disciples	 and	 devotees	 present
there.	He	thanked	them	all	and	stood	up	with	his	folded	hands,	and	said,	'Oh,	my
beloved	body!	 It	 is	you	who	 led	me	 to	God.	 I	 thank	you	 for	 it.	 I	 could	not	do
anything	for	you.	On	the	other	hand,	I	had	subjected	you	to	untold	sufferings	and
pain.	 I	had	extracted	work	out	of	you	without	paying	you	anything	 in	 return.	 I
am	indebted	to	you	very	much,	for	endless	has	been	the	help	you	rendered	me.
At	 this	 hour	 of	 farewell	 I	 seek	 your	 pardon.	 For	 all	my	 acts	 of	 omission	 and
commission,	 I	 request	 you	 to	 excuse	 me.	 But	 for	 you,	 it	 would	 have	 been
impossible	for	me	to	reach	God!"
You	have	to	see	the	body	in	this	way.	This	attitude	of	thankfulness,	 this	loving
fervour	is	essential.	The	sage	had	said,	"Oh,	my	beloved	body!"	These	words	stir
up	a	wonderful	bliss	in	me.	Cannot	a	similar	sympathetic	understanding	brighten
up	your	life	too?	May	I	ask	you	whether	you	have	at	any	time	looked	upon	the
body	with	an	overflow	of	such	loving	sympathy?	Have	you	ever	felt	yourselves
blessed	with	its	acts	of	service?	Have	you	ever	expressed	your	gratefulness	to	it?
If	not,	how	great	had	been	the	ingratitude!
What	an	unbecoming	discourtesy!	What	a	misdemeanour!
The	 attitude	 towards	 the	 body	 should	 be	 one	 of	 understanding	 and	 deep
sympathy.	 One	 should	 have	 knowledge	 enough	 to	 protect	 it	 and	 view	 it	 with
friendliness.	It	is	our	fellow-traveller	in	a	long	uphill	journey,	sharing	with	us	our
joys	and	sorrows.	It	 is	an	 instrument;	 it	 is	a	means	and	a	 ladder.	Hence,	 in	my
view,	no	man	with	an	iota	of	sense	in	him	can	come	into	conflict	with	it	or	be
wicked	towards	it.	But,	as	ill	 luck	would	have	it,	 there	have	been	in	the	world,
and	 there	 still	 are,	 many	 men	 of	 warped,	 distorted	 vision	 whose	 high-
handedness,	 violence,	 unrelenting	 suppression	 and	 cruel	 tactics	 towards	 their
own	 physical	 body	 provoke	 in	 our	 mind	 feelings	 of	 remorse	 and	 sorrow	 and
eventually	 a	 fervent	 prayer,	 "Oh	 God!	 save	 mankind	 from	 such	 stupid
spirituality!"	Activities	of	this	magnitude	and	seriousness	go	only	to	prove	a	total
loss	of	intelligence	in	them.	But	alas!
the	 evil	 influences	 of	 such	 people	 still	 linger	 and	 haunt	 us	 even	 today.	Let	 us
keep	 ourselves	 away	 from	 such	 sickening	 sermons.	 Such	 preachers	 do	 not
deserve	our	reverence;	they	deserve	to	be	cured	instead.	Certainly	I	hope	we	will
be	able	to	cure	them.
This	hostility	 to	 the	physical	body,	as	I	said,	 is	but	a	reaction	 to	 the	weakness,
failure	 and	 dissatisfaction	 resulting	 from	 unregulated	 sensual	 enjoyment.	 Thus
the	innocent	physical	body	has	been	blamed	for	the	sinfulness	of	the	Self	itself.	I
appeal	to	you	to	be	alert	in	regard	to	agonizing	self-denials	based	on	hostility	to
the	 physical	 body.	 In	 view	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 have	 been	 playing	 havoc	with
your	 body,	 you	 may	 feel	 tempted	 towards	 all	 forms	 of	 self-discipline.	 If	 on
seeing	the	enormous	wealth	possessed	by	some	one,	one	becomes	greedy	or	on
seeing	someone's	beauty,	one	is	charmed,	one	does	not	normally	puncture	one's
eyes;	 if	 one	were	 to	do	 so,	 I	would	definitely	 call	 him	a	madcap,	 for	 the	 eyes
never	ask	you	 to	be	greedy,	nor	do	 they	want	you	 to	be	passionate;	 they	don't
command	you	to	do	anything	of	the	sort.	They	are	ever	ready	to	carry	out	your
bidding	 in	 the	manner	 you	 deem	 fit	 to	make	 use	 of	 them.	As	 for	 the	 physical
body,	it	is	your	slave,	a	whole	time	follower.	Wherever	you	wish	to	take	it,	it	is
ever	ready	to	follow	you.	Should	you	say,	"Go	to	hell",	it	is	ready	to	go	to	hell;
should	 you	 say,	 "Go	 to	 heaven"	 you	 will	 find	 it	 ready	 to	 go	 to	 heaven.	 The
question,	 then,	 is	 not	 of	 the	 physical	 body,	 but	 of	 your	 volition.	 Let	 it	 not	 be
forgotten	 that	 the	 physical	 body	 reels	 along	 behind	 the	 will.	 We	 will	 be
committing	a	great	blunder	if,	instead	of	modifying	the	will,	we	were	to	torture
the	body,	victimize	it	or	even	destroy	it.	Subjecting	the	body	to	harassment	and
suffering	is	another	form	of	violence,	and	I	never	approve	of	violence	to	the	self
or	 to	 the	 physical	 body.	 I	 advocate	 self-love,	 and	 it	 appears	 to	 me	 that	 there
cannot	be	anything	more	foolish	than	self-violence.	But	what	I	call	self-love	has
nothing	 to	 do	with	 ego-centred	 individuality.	 An	 ego-centred	 individual	 never
loves	himself,	for	should	he	love	himself	he	would	have	been	free	from	egotism,
for	 there	 is	nothing	more	diabolical	and	dispiriting	 than	egotism.	 It	 is	 the	ego-
centred-individual	 who	 indulges	 in	 activities	 of	 self-violence	 in	 the	 garb	 of	 a
holy	man,	 for	 the	ego	does	not	 attain	as	much	 satisfaction	and	nourishment	 in
any	other	manner	as	in	this.	That	is	why	a	kind	of	haughtiness	is	visible	in	the
so-called	 abstainers,	 ascetics	 and	 semifledged	 sages.	 They	 are	 egotistical
because	they	are	saints;	and	they	are	saints	because	they	are	egotistical.
AVOID	HOSTILITY
In	 the	 vast	 universe	 created	 by	 God	 there	 cannot	 be	 anything	 unfriendly	 or
inimical	to	you.	It	is	a	different	matter,	however,	if	you	do	not	make	use	of	it	or
misuse	 it.	Men	of	wit	 and	understanding	 convert	 a	 stone	Lying	on	 the	 ground
into	a	stepping-stone,	while	men	devoid	of	common	sense,	turn	even	a	stepping
stone	 into	 a	 stumbling-block	 on	 their	way.	 In	 life,	 it	 is	 the	way	 of	 looking	 at
things	 that	matters.	 If	 the	 vision	 is	 distorted,	 it	makes	 a	 lot	 of	 difference.	We
need	 not	 be	 surprised	 if	 the	 physical	 body	 eventually	 becomes	 hostile	 to	 the
person	who	has	been	considering	it	so	from	the	outset.	Let	us	start	with	the	belief
that	 it	 is	 our	 friend.	 Then	 it	 remains	 our	 friend	 for	 ever.	 If	 the	 hostility,	 the
grudge,	vanishes,	a	load	is	taken	off	from	the	self;	we	are	relieved	of	a	tension;
we	 experience	 peace	 and	 restfulness.	 Let	 us	 experiment	 with	 it.	 Let	 it	 be
remembered	that	the	body	is	only	a	medium.	It	does	not	take	anyone	anywhere.
Let	 there	 be	 no	 ill-will	 towards	 it.	 If	we	 look	 at	 it	without	 any	 prejudice,	 our
heart	 is	 naturally	 filled	with	 thankful	 love	 for	 the	 silent	 service	 it	 renders	 us.
Again,	 we	 are	 not	 to	 stop	 with	 the	 body.	 We	 have	 to	 go	 further	 deep.	 The
physical	body	is	only	the	starting	point	of	our	journey	of	love	towards	the	Self.
LOVE	THE	MIND
When	we	go	deep	down,	we	see	 the	mind.	We	have	 to	 love	 it	 too	and	seek	 its
friendship.
Normally	we	are	aware	of	only	these	two	planes	of	the	individual	self,	namely,
the	body	and	the	mind.	If	we	wish	to	go	far	above	these	or	deeper	than	these,	we
have	to	make	use	of	them.	The	campaign	against	the	mind	has,	no	doubt,	been
carried	on	with	greater	intensity	than	against	the	body.	This	has	been	the	central
target	of	attack	from	the	spiritual	quarters.	It	is	necessary	to	free	ourselves	from
this	hostility.	The	mind	is	a	power,	and,	like	all	powers,	it	is	also	a	divine	power.
It	is	a	highly	developed	subtle	power.	Censuring	it,	being	hostile	to	it	or	abusing
it	 is	 sheer	 stupidity	 fraught	with	 fatal	 consequences.	 It	 is	 but	 proper	 for	 us	 to
realize	that	even	today	man	is	not	thoroughly	acquainted	with	all	 the	mysteries
of	the	mind;	nay,	he	does	not	know	how	to	use	his	mental	power.	The	mind,	now,
is	more	or	less	in	the	same	state	as	that	of	electricity.
Once	 there	was	 a	 time	when	electricity	was	only	 a	destructive	 agent.	But	 it	 is
being	employed	today	in	colossal	creative	projects.	Men's	understanding	of	his
own	mental	powers	 in	 their	entirety	will	usher	 in	one	of	 the	most	creative	and
blessed	 moments	 in	 human	 history.	 The	 mind	 is	 the	 receptacle	 of	 limitless
potentialities.	Those	who	are	hostile	to	it	clash	with	these	potentialities	and	seek
annihilation	at	their	own	hands.	They	say	that	they	censure	and	oppose	the	mind
for	its	fickleness	and	unsteadiness.	But	inconstancy	is	a	sign	of	life.	Those	who
are	afraid	of	 life	 and	eagerly	wait	 for	death,	welcome	sluggishness,	 since	 they
see	 peace	 and	 restfulness	 in	 it.	 But	 let	 me	 tell	 you	 that	 peace	 resulting	 from
sluggishness	 is	 unreal.	 The	 sluggishness	 of	 the	mind	 is	 self-destructive.	What
appears	as	peacefulness	there	is	but	the	quietness	and	desolation	of	the	cemetery.
The	 restlessness	of	 life	 is	 definitely	preferable	 to	 the	 stillness	 and	quiet	 of	 the
cemetery.	It	is	not	the	quietness	enforced	by	suppressing	the	mind,	but	the	peace
that	evolves	itself	by	a	thorough	understanding	of	the	mind,	that	is	worthwhile,
that	is	worth	having.	Only	such	a	peace	can	lead	us	on	to	greater	heights.	Dead
quietness	 leads	 to	 matter,	 to	 the	 earthly	 and	 the	 material,	 not	 to	 God.	 It	 is
essential	 to	have	a	 lively	placidity,	 an	active	 silence.	Only	 that	which	 is	 lively
can	 become	 the	 doorway	 leading	 to	 the	 sublime	 life.	 That	 is	 why	 I	 do	 not
advocate	 suppression	 of	 the	 mind	 or	 approve	 of	 the	 efforts	 to	 subdue	 its
restlessness	 to	 attain	 peace.	 Never	 sink	 into	 such	 a	 mire	 of	 stupidity	 and
stagnation.	 There	 is	 already	 enough	 sluggishness	 in	 the	 world	 and	 you	 can
graciously	 avoid	 augmenting	 it	 further.	 I	 want	 a	 mind	 that	 is	 lively	 and
peacefully	calm	as	well.	As	we	 saw	earlier,	only	 that	peacefulness	 can	be	 live
and	 quick	 which	 you	 acquire	 without	 losing	 the	 unsteadiness	 which	 I	 call
mobility.	Where	the	quietude	of	the	lake	is	futile,	that	of	the	flowing	river	--	of
the	river	that	is	conti-nuously	flowing	towards	the	multitudinous	seas	--	is	worth
striving	 for.	 If	 that	 is	 possible,	 man	 can	 reach	 the	 Supreme	 Soul.	 I	 assert
therefore	that	you	need	not	be	sorry	that	the	mind	is	unstable;	never	censure	it;
never	consider	it	your	enemy.	You	should	rather	be	thankful	to	it,	for,	but	for	it,
you	would	 have	 long	 since	 become	 a	 stagnant	 lake.	 If	 the	mind	 had	 not	 been
fickle	you	would	have	taken	up	a	seat	on	the	top	of	some	rubbish	heap	engrossed
in	concentration.	If	the	mind	had	not	been	fickle,	the	greedy	would	be	hovering
for	 ever	 over	 the	 object	 of	 their	 greed,	 the	 deluded	 over	 the	 object	 of	 their
delusion	and	 the	sensual	over	 the	object	of	 their	 senses.	Then	 the	 road	 to	God
would	 be	 closed	 for	 ever.	 Since	 the	 mind	 is	 restless	 all	 unreal	 gods	 are
eliminated,	and	it	goes	ahead.	Since	the	mind	is	unsteady,	it	does	not	allow	us	to
be	stationary;	it	goads	us	on	and	on.	I	wish	to	tell	you	a	great	mysterious	secret
underlying	this	fickleness	of	the	mind:
Unless	 and	 until	 it	 finds	 a	 final	 resting-place	 befitting	 it,	 the	mind	will	 never
allow	 you	 to	 take	 peaceful	 rest.	 That	 is	 why	 it	 is	 fickle.	 The	 mind	 finds	 its
heaven	 of	 refuge	 only	 in	God	where	 it	 sheds	 its	 fickleness,	 but	 never	 before.
Bear	this	in	mind	that	your	mind	is	kind	and	benevolent	to	you.	Otherwise	you
would	get	stuck-up	 in	some	worldliness	and	your	endeavour	 to	reach	God	will
be	shelved	for	ever.
Do	not,	therefore,	censure	and	abuse	your	mind	for	its	unsteadiness.	Accept	this
unsteadiness	as	a	favour	shown	to	you,	and	utilize	it.	Let	it	be	remembered	that
if	the	mind	fails	to	be	steady	and	firm,	that	is	because	of	some	error	on	your	part,
some	misdeed	 for	 which	 you	 are	 responsible.	 That	 is	 why	 the	mind	 does	 not
wish	to	stay	there.
You	 do	 your	 utmost	 to	 concentrate,	 but	 your	mind	 does	 not.	Certainly,	 that	 is
your	 mistake.	 By	 being	 inconstant	 the	 mind	 warns	 you,	 but	 unfortunately,
instead	of	taking	the	hint,	you	consider	the	mind	your	enemy!
I	 have	 heard	 a	 story.	 Once	 upon	 a	 time	 when	 Egypt	 was	 ruled	 by	 a	 great
emperor,	a	great	sage	highly	respected	by	the	emperor	lived	in	a	small	Egyptian
village.	One	day,	without	any	previous	intimation,	the	emperor	paid	a	visit	to	the
village.	He	wished	to	invite	the	sage	to	this	palace.	The	sage,	however,	had	gone
out	somewhere	when	the	emperor	reached	the	hut.	His	young	disciple	could	not
recognize	the	emperor	in	his	simple	clothes.
He	asked	the	visitor	to	sit	on	the	ridge	of	the	field	and	said	that	he	would	go	to
the	village	and	fetch	his	preceptor.	The	emperor	not	only	refused	to	sit,	but	also
began	to	pace	up	and	down	the	field.	On	seeing	this,	the	disciple	requested	the
visitor	to	go	and	sit	under	a	tree	where	there	was	ample	shade.	Still	unwilling	to
sit,	the	emperor	began	pacing	up	and	down	beneath	the	tree.	This	set	the	disciple
thinking,	and	he	requested	 the	emperor	 to	step	 into	 the	hut	and	sit	down	there.
Still	the	visitor	would	not	oblige	him.	He	continued	to	walk	up	and	down	inside
the	 hut.	 In	 this	 perplexed	 state	 of	 mind	 the	 disciple	 went	 out	 to	 fetch	 his
preceptor.	On	the	way	the	young	man	could	not	restrain	himself	from	recounting
this	 rather	 odd	 behaviour	 of	 the	 visitor	 from	 the	 city.	The	 aged	 sage	who	 had
understood	who	the	visitor	could	be,	said,	"Son,	he	is	our	emperor.	There	is	no
place	in	and	around	our	hut	befitting	his	status	where	he	can	sit.	That	is	why	he
has	been	walking	up	and	down."
I	wish	 to	 tell	you	 that	 the	mind	 too	 is	 restless	 for	 the	same	reason.	 It	does	not
find	a	worthy	place	where	 it	can	abide	for	ever.	 It	 is	our	duty	 to	seek	a	 throne
befitting	 its	dignity.	 Instead	of	doing	so,	you	are	getting	ready	 to	 fight	with	 its
restlessness.	Did	you	ever	think	what	those	places	are	which	you	have	assigned
to	 your	mind?	Can	 you	 really	 expect	 it	 to	 sit	 in	 one	 of	 those?	 Friends,	 it	 is	 a
favour	shown	to	you	that	the	mind	is	fickle.
You	 may	 continue	 to	 assign	 it	 different	 places	 with	 the	 entreaty,	 "Sit	 here,
please,"	 but	 it	 will	 not	 sit	 there.	 The	 mind	 cannot	 and	 will	 not	 sit	 anywhere
except	 in	 God,	 and	 that	 is	 its	 unlimited	 bounty.	 Remember	 that	 the	 so-called
restlessness	of	your	mind	helps	you	a	lot.
If	it	cannot	be	held	in	one	place,	know	it	to	be	a	place	unworthy	of	it.	I	would
also	add	that	your	success	in	pinning	it	down	to	a	place	unworthy	of	it	amounts
to	nothing,	for	no	sooner	does	one	succeed	in	forcing	it	 to	sit	somewhere	for	a
while	than	one	finds	it	getting	up	and	running	elsewhere.	This	excited	drift	and
flutter	will	continue	until	the	ultimate	point	of	rest	is	reached.	And	this	ultimate
point	of	rest	is	God.
People	 say	 that	 concentration	 of	 mind	 is	 essential	 to	 the	 realization	 of	 the
Supreme	Soul.
But	 I	 say	 that	 if	 the	Supreme	Soul	 is	 realized,	 the	mind	will	 at	 once	have	 the
desired	 concentration.	 People	 say,	 "Keep	 the	mind	 steady	 so	 that	 God	 can	 be
realized."	I	say,	"As	soon	as	God	is	realized,	the	mind	comes	to	rest."	The	mind
rushes	to	the	place	where	it	gets	pleasure,	not	to	anything	that	gives	it	pain,	and
the	moment	 the	prospects	of	pleasure	disappear,	 it	quits	 it	and	flees.	Hence	we
never	see	 it	pinned	down	to	one	object.	Gather	 together	a	sum	of	 ten	thousand
rupees.	At	 the	outset,	 the	mind	may	 say,	 "Perhaps	 there	 is	 pleasure	here."	But
alas!	 the	 very	 next	moment	 it	moves	 away.	Hardly	 does	 it	 begin	 to	 sit	 at	 rest
when	it	finds	itself	disillusioned.	Accumulate	ten	lakhs,	then	ten	millions.	Again
you	experience	the	same	disappointment.	Even	ten	crores	heaped	up	by	you	will
not	 make	 any	 difference.	We	 cannot	 prevent	 the	 rambling	 propensities	 of	 the
mind	which	rushes	on,	as	I	said,	to	the	place	where	it	gets	a	glimpse	of	pleasure.
It	flees	as	soon	as	the	glimpse,	too,	vanishes,	but	is	a	little	constant	so	long	as	the
image	 of	 possible	 happiness	 lingers.	 The	 day	 it	 gets	 the	 never-vanishing
glimpses	of	Eternity,	 of	 real	 pleasure,	 it	winds	up	 its	 inclination	 to	 flee	 and	 is
filled	with	plenitude	and	absolute	stillness.
I	will	not,	therefore,	advise	you	to	enforce	steadiness	of	mind.	Forced	steadiness
causes	sluggishness	and	leads	rather	 to	stagnation	than	to	 the	attainment	of	 the
ultimate	goal.
When	 the	 final	 goal	 is	 reached,	 the	 mind	 remains	 steadfast.	 This	 fact,	 when
misinterpreted,	gives	rise	to	the	wrong	notion	that,	once	the	mind	is	kept	steady
the	 final	 goal	 can	 be	 reached.	 This	 is	 as	 absurd	 as	 putting	 the	 cart	 before	 the
horse.	The	fact	that	eyes	remain	closed	when	we	are	asleep	does	not	justify	the
reasoning	 that	 the	 advent	 of	 sleep	 is	 assured	 in	merely	 shutting	 the	 eyes.	My
advice	to	you	is	that	you	should	make	your	mind	move	in	the	direction	in	which
the	fragrance	of	real	pleasure	spreads;	slowly	and	lovingly	should	you	lead	the
mind	to	the	abode	of	real	felicity.	Set	your	eyes	on	real	happiness	and	the	mind	is
sure	 to	 follow	 it	 up.	 But	 use	 no	 force,	 no	 compulsion	 even	 unconsciously.
Compulsion	 is	 sure	 to	 provoke	 resistance	 from	 the	 mind	 contrary	 to	 your
expectation.	 Your	 inhibitions	 become	 invitation	 and	 your	 taboos	 attraction.	 If
you	evince	a	desire	to	restrain	it	from	doing	anything,	the	mind	takes	to	it	with
added	 avidity.	 This	 is	 but	 natural.	 It	 is	 your	 ignorance	 of	 this	 simple	 fact	 that
involves	you	in	what	are,	normally,	not	unavoidable	sufferings.	The	fundamental
point	 is	 that	 your	mind	 is	 not	 your	 enemy.	You	 are	 not	 to	 suppress	 its	 natural
inclinations	and	 instincts	but	 to	 lead	 them	with	 love	and	 to	 comprehend	 them,
with	our	common	sense	to	awaken	them.	Only	that	which	is	auspicious	survives
in	the	light	of	reason,	in	the	light	of	common	sense.	An	unforgettable	rule	of	life
is	contained	in	the	phrase	amor	vincit	omnia	--	love	conquers	all.	We	can	never
dream	of	conquering	anyone	by	means	of	hatred.	No,	never.	It	 is	impossible	to
conquer	 those	whom	we	 hate,	 those	whom	we	 consider	 our	 enemies.	We	 can
conquer	only	those	whom	we	love.	Hence	those	who	wish	to	win	over	their	mind
must	love	it.	There	is	no	other	way	than	the	way	of	love	leading	to	victory.
So	 the	 first	 link,	 the	 first	 golden	 rule,	 is	 that	 let	 us	 love	 ourselves.	 Let	 us
transform	and	sublimate	ourselves,	and	not	suppress	ourselves.	Let	 there	be	no
split	 personalities	 within	 us.	 Let	 us	 marshal	 our	 faculties	 into	 one	 single,
integrated	unit:	all	unified	single	units	are	born	out	of	 love.	 If	 I	am	filled	with
abundant	love	for	what	I	am,	good	or	bad,	if	all	hate	and	slander	disappear	from
my	mind,	if	I	cease	to	oppose	myself	which	may	be	noble	or	contemptible	and
fall	 in	 love	 with	 all	 that	 I	 am	 in	 my	 totality,	 then	 a	 compact,	 indivisible
personality	will	emerge	within	me.	Such	is	the	formation	of	personality,	for	love,
a	cementing	force,	amalgamates	heterogeneous	elements,	and	when	my	different
faculties	 are	 amalgamated	 into	 one	 unified	 whole,	 a	 wonderful	 energy	 is
generated	 within	 me.	 The	 power	 that	 is	 severed	 and	 split	 flows	 in	 different
directions	and	is	wasted	away,	but	in	an	amalgamated	form	its	force	is	immense.
The	most	wonderful	achievement	of	this	energy,	the	outcome	of	this	fusion,	is	its
capacity	to	transform	those	insignificant	things	which	it	could	not	overcome	in
spite	 of	 constant	 struggle.	 This	 it	 could	 achieve	 the	 moment	 love	 for	 those
seemingly	insignificant	things	is	aroused.	This	unbrokenness	or	compactness	of
personality	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 this	 self-transformation.	 If	 one	 wishes	 to
improve	 oneself,	 to	 renovate	 oneself,	 one	 has	 necessarily	 to	 become	 a	 single
unified	whole.	 The	 individual,	 split	 into	 several	 wee	 pieces,	 wastes	 his	 entire
energy	 in	 pitting	 one	 piece	 against	 another,	 in	 controlling	 them	 and	 in
maintaining	 the	balance	of	power	among	 them.	There	 is	no	surplus	energy	 left
with	 him	 for	 the	 transformation	 of	 the	 self,	 for	 its	 sublimation.	 Only	 he	 who
loves	himself	and	retains	this	undivided	and	unsplit	unity	possesses	that	surplus
energy.
Wings	of	Love	and	Random	Thought
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Wings	of	Love,	pages	27	to	48
Date	Unknown
Archive
code:
6900000
ShortTitle:
RANDOM02
Audio:
No
Video:	No
SECOND	LINK	--	LOVE	OF	OTHERS
What	is	the	second	link	in	this	upward	flight	of	love?	The	first	link,	as	we	have
seen,	is	the	love	of	oneself.	The	second	one	is	loving	others.	You	will	never	be
successful	in	your	progress	towards	that	love	which	takes	you	to	God,	unless	you
have	 abundant	 good	 will,	 unlimited	 love,	 overflowing	 kindness	 and	 plenty	 of
grace	towards	all	living	beings.
"When	thou	goest	unto	the	church	for	thy	daily	prayer,"	said	Jesus	Christ,	"and
kneelest	down	and	raisest	 thy	hand	up	unto	 the	Lord,	 if	 thou	rememberest	 that
thy	neighbour	is	angry	unto	thee,	go	thou	first	unto	him	and	love	him.	Leave	the
Lord	here	and	go	thou	thither,	love	him	and	crave	his	pardon.	Make	peace	with
him.	 For,	 how	 can	 he	who	 has	 not	 succeeded	 yet	 in	making	 peace	with	men,
succeed	in	making	peace	with	himself	and	the	Lord?"	Certainly,	the	person	who
refuses	 to	 love	 on	 the	 human	 level,	 cannot	 be	 expected	 to	 extend	 his	 fervent
prayer	to	the	level	of	God.
A	 sage	 living	 in	 a	 certain	 village	 was	 once	 approached	 by	 a	 devotee	 who
expressed	 his	 desire	 to	 realize	 God.	 He	 asked	 the	 sage	 what	 he	 should	 do.
Surveying	him	from	head	 to	 foot	and	probably	understanding	his	 ins	and	outs,
the	sage	said,	"Well,	son,	shall	I	ask	you,	 to	tell	me	whether	you	love	anyone?
Then	 I	 may	 be	 able	 to	 say	 something."	 The	 devotee,	 assuming	 that	 love	 is	 a
disqualification	for	seekers	of	God,	said	that	he	did	not	love	anyone	and	that	his
sole	aim	was	the	realization	of	God.	Thereupon	the	sage	said,
"Son,	think	well;	search	your	heart.	Don't	you	love	your	wife,	children,	family	or
friends?"	The	devotee	was	 emphatic.	 "No,	 I	 don't	 love	 anyone.	 I	 only	want	 to
realize	God."	The	sage	kept	quiet	as	 tears	welled	up	in	his	eyes.	Surprised,	 the
devotee	 asked	 the	 sage:	 "Father,	why	 are	 you	 crying?	Why	 don't	 you	 speak?"
The	 sage	 said,	 "Oh	 son,	 if	 only	 you	 had	 loved	 some	 one,	 I	 could	 have
transformed	that	love	into	love	of	God.	But	love	which	leads	to	God	is	dead	in
you	--	love	which	is	the	direct	way	to	Heaven."
In	the	name	of	religion,	thousands	of	people	have	taught	you	not	to	love	anyone!
Their	 teachings	 are	 centred	 round	 your	 egotism,	 and	 they	 cannot	 take	 you	 to
God,	for	love	is	the	power	nearest	to	our	Lord	Himself.
LOVE	IS	NOT	A	FETTER
Why	 should	one	be	 afraid	of	 love?	Perhaps	because	 it	may	bind	us?	But	 love
binds	only	when	we	are	unable	to	radiate	more	and	more	love.	The	implication	is
that	it	is	only	the	inadequacy	of	love	that	binds	us	and	not	love	itself.	insufficient
love,	love	that	is	neither	full	nor	frank,	becomes	a	bondage.	Only	love	shrivelled
in	size	can	bind	the	lover.	Love	that	is	brimful	expanding	and	extensive	breaks
all	 barriers	 and	 begins	 to	 flow.	 It	 knows	 no	 frontiers	 when	 it	 develops,	 and
assumes	the	unlimited	immensity	of	the	sky.	Hence	I	say,	increase	and	multiply
your	love,	widen	the	sphere	of	its	activity,	place	no	restrictions	on	it,	stipulate	no
conditions	for	its	functioning.	Let	it	expand	steadily,	let	it	go	beyond	the	person
on	whom	 it	 has	 splashed	 itself.	Let	 it	 not	 stop	 anywhere.	Let	 it	 not	 halt	 in	 its
course.	The	fear	that	love	may	linger	on	its	way	makes	the	so-called	spiritualist
suspicious	of	love.	But	if	my	love	stops	in	the	middle,	it	is	my	own	fault,	not	that
of	love.
There	 is	 therefore	 no	 valid	 excuse	 for	my	 hostility	 towards	 it,	 Love's	 fault	 is
really	the	lover's	fault.	If	the	lover	is	coarse	and	narrow-minded,	love	cannot	but
be	 immobile.	 If	 one	 is	hostile	 to	 it	 for	 this	 reason	alone,	one	becomes	meaner
still	 and	more	 narrow-minded.	What	 little	width	 and	 amplitude	 it	 possesses	 is
lost	due	to	the	narrow-mindedness	of	our	so-called	religious	leaders.	In	my	view,
we	have	to	increase	our	love	and	let	ourselves	be	submerged	into	it.	On	the	other
hand,	he	who	loses	love	can	save	only	his	ego.	So	T	say,	stretch	and	spread	your
love.	 When	 we	 throw	 a	 pebble	 into	 the	 pond	 it	 sinks	 no	 doubt,	 but	 circular
wavelets	set	in	motion	by	it	extend	as	far	as	the	banks	all	round.	Similarly,	when
love	is	generated,	let	 it	produce	waves	of	throbbing	vibrations	like	those	in	the
ocean,	till	it	reaches	the	ultimate	shore	of	God's	benign	presence.	Such	a	love	is
nothing	less	than	a	fervent	prayer.
I	would	not	say	that	you	should	hate	your	parents,	hate	your	wife	and	children,
hate	anyone	at	all.	In	fact,	you	must	love	them	so	much	that	they	cannot	contain
it	within	themselves;	they	must	have	it	in	overflowing	abundance.	Let	your	love
spread	 everywhere,	 over-flooding	 everything,	 so	 that	 nothing	 can	 hold	 it
anywhere.	Let	it	be	your	aim	to	generate	so	much	love	within	that	none	except
God	is	able	to	put	up	with	it.
Only	 the	unlimited	can	sustain	 the	unlimited.	No	finite	 receptacle	can	hold	 the
infinite	overflow.	The	unlimited	love	will	flow	over	and	beyond	it.	No	doubt,	it
will	have	its	share	but	far	beyond	its	expectation,	far	more	than	it	can	hold.	As
far	as	you	are	concerned,	it	can	never	be	a	hindrance:	love	becomes	a	hindrance
when	 it	 stops	somewhere	on	 the	way.	Lingering	 love	 is	no	 true	 love;	 it	 is	 lust,
sensuous	attachment.
Expanding,	ever-widening	love,	on	the	other	hand,	is	fervent	prayer.	Let	it	not	be
forgotten	that	the	love	that	stops	midway	becomes	a	delusion,	lust,	and	bondage,
but	the	love	that	marches	ahead	like	the	waves	in	the	ocean	is	nothing	less	than	a
fervent	prayer,	nothing	less	than	God	Himself,	nothing	less	than	the	beatitude	of
absolute	salvation.	If	love	does	not	stop	but	marches	on,	it	sets	us	free.	Let	there
be	no	cessation	in	its	march	ahead	until	the	last	man	too	is	brought	into	its	fold
When	the	communion	with	the	Soul	Supreme	takes	place.	Let	me	repeat	for	the
sake	 of	 emphasis.	 I	 advocate	 love	 of	 self.	 I	 advocate	 love	 of	 others.	 Never
consider	 love	 unholy	 or	 evil.	Take	 care	 that	 it	 does	 not	 stop	 halfway.	 It	 is	 the
stoppage	that	is	unholy	and	not	love.	Those	who	consider	love	unholy	and	view
it	 In	 a	 narrow	 sense	 never	 try	 to	 understand	 that	 this	 restricted	 love	 is	 but
lingering	love.	The	more	it	is	restricted	the	shabbier	it	becomes.	The	person	who
withholds	 love	 from	others	becomes	centred	 round	egotism.	He	 stops	with	his
ego	--	the
"I-ness"	and	"My-ness"	of	life.	In	the	whole	universe	of	existence	the	two	points
that	are	poles	apart	are	those	of	the	ego	and	the	Supreme	Soul.
Cessation	of	progress	or	even	intermission	at	the	point	of	'I'	leads	to	hell.	There
is	no	end	to	the	egotist's	pain	and	misery	because	all	the	doors	of	bliss	are	closed
to	 him.	 Only	 love	 can	 open	 them.	 Similarly,	 the	 'I-centred'	 man	 finds	 all	 the
doors	 of	 beauty	 and	 harmony	 closed.	 Our	 love	 can	 open	 them.	 Love	 is	 the
mysterious	secret	key	to	the	abode	of	Truth,	Beauty	and	Goodness.	Whatever	is
excellent	and	perfect	in	life	can	be	opened	up	by	means	of	this	wonderful	key.	It
is	egotism	that	shuts	it	up.
Egotism,	however,	opens	up	another	door,	the	door	opening	on	to	hell,	the	only
door	 it	can	open.	Let	 it	be	remembered	that	 there	 is	no	other	Key	except	 these
two.	No	man	can	have	both	the	keys	simultaneously.	It	is	divinely	ordained	that
a	man	can	have	only	one	key	in	his	possession	at	a	 time.	He	who	is	willing	to
lose	one	gets	the	other.	The	key	of	love	opens	up	not	only	the	hearts	of	men	but
also	the	heart	of	every	object	under	the	sun,	whether	it	be	that	of	a	rock,	plant,
animal,	or	the	Supreme	Soul	Himself.	Luther	Burbank,	the	celebrated	botanist,	is
remembered	throughout	the	world	for	an	incident	wrought	by	his	profound	love
for	 the	vegetable	kingdom.	He	was	able	 to	make	plants	react	 favourably	 to	his
request,	he	who	had	spoken	thus	to	the	thorny	shrubs,	"Friends,	you	need	not	be
afraid	 of	 anyone.	 These	 thorns	 are	 not	 necessary	 for	 self-protection.	 Isn't	 my
abundant	 love	 enough	 to	 protect	 you?"	 In	 the	 end	 those	 thorny	 shrubs	 of	 the
desert	did	listen	to	him	and	as	a	token	of	their	love	yielded	to	him	a	new	variety
of	plants	entirely	devoid	of	thorns.	Whenever	anyone	asked	him,	"How	did	you
achieve	 this	 impossible	 task?"	 he	 would	 promptly	 say,	 "Out	 of	 love."	 I,	 too,
would	 tell	 you	 that	 even	 the	 impossible	 becomes	 possible	 through	 love.	 A
greater	impossibility	than	God	cannot	be	conceived	but	he	too	yields	to	love.
LOVE	--	NEVER	AN	IMPOSSIBILITY
And	love	is	never	an	impossibility:	it	is	very	simple:	it	is	present	in	everyone.	It
has	to	be	developed	and	widened,	Though	its	seeds	have	been	sown	in	every	one
it	 is	 the	fortunate	alone	who	live	to	enjoy	the	flowers	of	 love.	Why?	We	never
allow	the	seeds	of	love	to	germinate	and	grow.	We	seek	love	but	we	don't	show
it.	 Love	 grows	 when	 offered,	 not	 obtained,	 for	 remember	 that	 love	 is	 an
unconditional	 offer.	 He	 who	 is	 capable	 of	 offering	 such	 a	 love	 does	 get	 it	 in
plenty.	Moreover,	 love	 offered	 freely	 creates	 the	 capacity	 to	 receive	 it	 too.	 It
qualifies	the	receiver	to	receive	it.	The	measure	of	love	offered	is	commensurate
with	the	amount	of	love	received.	Only	in	this	manner	is	further	depth	achieved
and	gradually	 the	very	vital	breaths	are	 transformed	into	 love,	 into	nothing	but
love	wholesome	and	furl.	The	beginning	of	 the	perfection	of	 love	must	always
be	traced	to	 the	readiness	 to	offer,	not	 to	 the	eagerness	 to	demand.	Peremptory
demand	will	never	enable	them	to	make	a	beginning.	Love's	state	is	imperial,	not
that	of	a	beggar.	Those	who	demand	it	never	get	it,	and	this	failure,	so	dispiriting
to	 them,	 gradually	 renders	 them	 incapable	 of	 offering	 it	 too.	 As	 the	 failure
increases,	the	difficulty	to	secure	it	increases	as	well.	Please	remember	therefore
that	love	implies	offering	without	any	desire	to	obtain,	to	get	back	in	return,	to
demand.	 Let	 us	 free	 it	 from	 the	 expectation	 of	 obtaining	 something	 in	 return.
There	can	never	be	a	commercial	transaction	in	the	affairs	of	love.
Its	pleasure,	its	bliss,	its	fullness	lie	in	giving	away	and	not	in	securing	anything
in	return.
The	 giving	 up	 is	 so	 satisfying	 and	 blissful	 that	 even	 the	 question	 of	 gaining
anything	in	return	does	not	arise.	That	is	why	the	person	who	gives	love	is	ever
obliged	to	the	person	who	accepts	it.	Only	in	the	act	of	giving	love	abundantly	--
an	entire,	unbounded	gift,	do	the	vital	breaths	develop	the	wings	that	take	them
unto	God.	Friends,	 let	us	 spread	out	 the	wings	of	 love	and	soar	up	 in	 the	vast
firmament	 of	 the	 Supreme	 Soul.	 With	 our	 wings	 of	 love	 full-fledged,	 our
consciousness	of	things	belonging	to	us	and	of	those	belonging	to	others	--	our
awareness	of	what	is	mine	and	what	is	yours	--	disappears,	and	what	is	left	is	the
consciousness	--	nay,	the	very	being	of	God.	It	is	in	the	absence	of	love	that	man
has	 of	 necessity	 to	 be	 on	 the	 hard	 ground	 of	 egotism	 full	 of	 thorny	 shrubs	 of
hatred,	violence	and	anger.	Where	 is	 the	necessity	of	being	stuck	 in	 this	 rocky
ground,	 once	 the	 wings	 of	 love	 are	 grown?	 Then	 the	 flight	 to	 the	 wonderful
world	 of	 beauty	 --	 limitless,	 inexhaustible	 and	 immaculate	 beauty	 --	 becomes
easy.	So	let	us	be	filled	with	love	--
towards	 all	 love	 unconditional,	 love	 selfless.	 Standing	 or	 sitting,	 sleeping	 or
waking,	 let	 us	 be	 submerged	 in	 love,	 love	 which	 is	 the	 very	 breath	 of	 our
existence,	love	with	its	waves	ever	surging	in	our	hearts.	You	have	now	reached
the	precincts	of	the	sacred	temple	of	the	most	divine.	Visiting	ordinary	temples	is
not	 obligatory.	 Those	 temples	with	 idols	 of	 stone	 cannot	 claim	 perfection	 and
reality.	Would	 it	 be	 surprising	 if	 the	 hearts	 of	 those	who	 frequent	 these	 stone
temples	become	adamantine	and	hard?	No	doubt,	discussions	and	discourses	on
Divine	Love	do	take	place	in	these	temples,	but	what	is	disseminated	from	there
is	 nothing	 but	 hatred.	 Hatred	 and	 violence	 disguise	 themselves	 in	 the	 gaudy
clothes	of	false	love.	Verily	I	say	that	to	no	other	temple	should	recognition	be
accorded	than	to	the	temple	of	love,	the	only	temple	of	our	Lord.	I	am	afraid	that
these	 other	 temples	 have	 been	 designed	 and	 devised	 to	 prevent	 men	 from
reaching	the	temple	of	love.	Satan	is	definitely	engaged	in	this!
Love	 is	 itself	 a	 temple	 and	 a	 sacred	 scripture.	 "The	 man	 who	 has	 had	 a
smattering	 of	 love's	 language,"	 says	 Kabir,	 "is	 a	 scholar."	 Certainly	 nothing
remains	 to	 be	 learnt	 if	 one	 has	 learnt	 all	 about	 love.	Mastery	 of	 love	 implies
mastery	 of	 all	 learning.	 He	 who	 hasn't	 learnt	 the	 art	 of	 loving	 is	 ignorant	 of
everything.	 No	 knowledge,	 no	 sensation,	 no	 experience	 is	 superior	 to	 love.
Love's	eye	scans	what	 is	written	on	leaves,	carved	on	stones	or,	hidden	waves.
Friends,	the	Lord's	autograph	can	be	seen	everywhere.	Of	what	real	use	are	the
works	of	mortals?	What	can	we	gain	from	the	words	of	ordinary	mortals?
Where	will	they	lead	us?	Indeed	man's	words	cannot	take	us	above	and	beyond
man.	To	be	able	to	go	beyond	man	we	have	to	leave	him	behind.	In	fact,	man's
words,	scriptures	and	principles	are	obstacles	in	the	pathway	to	God.	We	have	to
read,	 learn	 and	 comprehend	what	 is	 God's	 to	 reach	God.	 That	 can	 be	 read	 in
love.	 We	 have	 to	 learn	 human	 languages	 to	 read	 what	 man	 has	 written,	 his
shastras.	Similarly,	 the	Lord's	 language	 is	 to	be	 learnt	 to	read	 the	Lord's	Book.
And	his	language	is	love.	Learn	the	art	of	love	which	is	so	necessary	if	you	wish
to	attain	the	Lord.	The	whole	creation	of	the	Lord	is	all	around	you.	Behold	it,
for	your	eyes	will	not	fail	you,	but	in	the	absence	of	love	it	can	neither	be	seen
nor	 known.	A	mysterious	miracle	 takes	 place	when	 love's	 eye	 begins	 to	 scan.
What	was	being	seen	vanishes	and	what	had	escaped	our	notice	comes	into	view.
Then	nothing	remains	save	the	divine	form.
I	affirm	that	where	the	scholar	loses,	the	lover	wins;	what	learning	misses,	love
lights	upon.	In	the	case	of	the	scholar	having	a	smattering	of	love's	language,	the
matter	is	different.	Entry	into	the	depths	of	life	is	impossible	without	love.	Mere
knowledge	loses	itself	in	its	peregrinations	round	the	border,	and	it	is	incorrect	to
say	 that	 knowledge	 annihilates	 distance.	 Only	 through	 love	 can	 distance
disappear.	Knowledge	does	not	go	deeper	than	the	physical	body,	but	love	does
not	stop	before	 it	 reaches	 the	soul.	Hence	all	knowledge	divorced	from	love	 is
unreal	and	incomplete:	Knowledge	contained	in	love	is	the	only	real	knowledge.
What	is	the	importance	of	love?	How	is	it	to	be	realized?	Shall	one	incessantly
repeat	 the	word	 'love'	 as	 some	 zealots	 repeat	 the	 names	 of	Ram	 and	Krishna.
Will	 such	 loud	 repetitions	of	 the	word	 'love'	help	us	 realize	 love.	Never.	Mere
repetitions	of	names	does	not	achieve	anything.	Love	should	be	lived;	it	should
be	part	and	parcel	of	our	very	being.	Life	will	be	purposeful,	meaningful,	when
there	is	liveliness	of	love	in	it.	Let	the	energy	of	love	be	vigilant	and	vibrant	and
awake	 in	 the	 self.	 Let	 no	 occasion	 for	 ardent,	 sincere	 love	 find	 it	 slumbering
there.	Let	no	challenge	offered	to	love	be	left	unanswered.
For	 every	 challenge,	 for	 every	 call,	 let	 your	 love	 give	 a	 befitting	 reply.	 Even
when	 there	 is	no	challenge	 from	any	quarter,	 let	 love	continue	 to	 flow	as	 light
flows	 from	 the	 lamp	 or	 as	 sweet	 fragrance	 flows	 from	 the	 flower.	 A	 calm
unbroken	 current	 of	 love	 should	 always	 be	 present.	 When	 the	 heat	 is
continuously	kept	moving	by	means	of	love-currents,	all	the	obstacles	on	its	way
are	kept	at	bay.	We	find	the	gentle	hill-stream	eroding	off	the	hardest	rock	from
its	path	by	means	of	 its	 constant	 flow.	Can	anyone	deny	 the	presence	of	huge
stumbling	blocks	 in	 the	path	of	 love?	There	 are,	no	doubt,	 hard	 rocks,	but	 the
power	of	love	is	equally	boundless.	Let	us	make	this	boundless	energy	function
effectively	and	be	ever	active.	Utterly	slow	and	silent	are	its	activities,	but	in	that
quiet	briskness,	huge	 rocks	are	worn	off	 into	 fine	particles	of	sand.	Much	fuss
and	ado	indicates	weakness.
Powerful	 forces	 function	 silently.	 How	 quiet,	 silent	 and	 free	 from	 fuss	 is	 the
creative	activity	of	God!
Friends,	 let	 us	 give	 love	 an	 opportunity	 to	 transform	 you	 from	 the	 very	 root.
Love's	potion	can	instil	a	new	life	in	you	a	life	which	will	never	perish.	For	that
reason	alone	is	 love	free	from	fear	even	in	the	presence	of	death,	because	love
knows	no	death.
LOVE	DEFIES	DEATH
In	1857,	when	Indians	revolted	against	their	rulers,	the	English	speared	to	death
a	silent	sage	who	had	not	spoken	a	word	for	years;	thinking	him	to	be	a	spy,	an
instigator	 of	 rebels.	 The	 sage	who	 had	 been	 silent	 for	 years	 laughed	 and	 said
TAT	TWAM	ASI	(Thou	art	that).	The	man	who	had	speared	him	was	also	that	--
the	Absolute	soul.	Even	at	the	moment	of	death	he	had	embraced	his	murderer
while	 love	 and	 fervent	 prayerfulness	 had	 shone	 in	 his	 eyes.	 No	 doubt	 he	 had
discarded	 verbosity	 and	 selfishness	 from	 his	 self	 but	 filled	 it	 with	 pure	 love.
Otherwise	 how	 could	 it	 have	 gushed	 out	 of	 him	when	 struck	with	 the	 spear?
During	all	these	years	when	his	heart	appeared	to	be	mute,	it	was	only	filling	it
up	 with	 love.	 It	 had	 become	 a	 veritable	 fountainhead	 of	 love,	 making	 him
incapable	of	seeing	an	enemy	in	his	murderer.	He	only	saw	his	beloved	in	him.
Love	had	transformed	an	enemy	into	a	loving	friend,	death	into	salvation.	Love
changes	darkness	into	brilliance,	poison	into	nectar.	Can	there	be	a	miracle	more
stupendous	than	love?	More	magical	than	the	magic	of	love?	Love	can	transform
everything	 because	 it	 transforms	 our	 very	 visions,	 and	 the	 vision	 is	 a	 creative
force.	What	we	see	is	our	world,	and	the	world	is	what	our	eyes	make	of	 it.	 If
there	is	love	in	the	vision,	there	is	also	the	lover	all	around	us.	If	there	is	no	love
there	is	no	God	and,	to	crown	all,	there	is	no	lover	either.	There	are	our	enemies
instead	wherever	we	see.
One	early	morning	a	traveller	entered	a	village.	Finding	an	old	man	sitting	at	the
threshold,	the	visitor	said,	"Sir,	what	sort	of	people	are	the	villagers	here?	I	have
left	 my	 village	 for	 good	 and	 wish	 to	 stay	 here."	 The	 old	 man	 surveyed	 the
stranger	from	head	to	foot,	and	said,	"May	I	too	ask	you	what	sort	of	people	live
in	 that	 village	 which,	 you	 say,	 you	 have	 left?"	 As	 soon	 as	 he	 heard	 this,	 the
stranger's	eyes	became	red	with	anger	and	he	said,	 "The	very	 thought	of	 these
people	fills	me	with	anger.	Please	make	no	mention	of	these	wretched	people.	It
is	because	of	them	that	I	had	to	leave	that	village.	Nowhere	else	in	the	world	can
you	see	such	wicked	persons	as	are	in	that	village."	The	old	man	said,	"Brother,	I
am	sorry.	The	villagers	here	are	no	better	 than	they.	You	will	find	only	wicked
people	here,	too.	You	had	better	go	and	live	in	some	other	village".
Hardly	had	he	 left	when	another	stranger	entered	 the	village	and	asked	 the	old
man	the	same	question,	"Sir,	what	sort	of	people	live	in	the	village	here?	I	wish
to	stay	here.	I	had	to	leave	my	village."	The	old	man	said,	"Before	I	answer	your
question,	may	I	ask	you	what	sort	of	people	live	in	the	village	that	you	left?"	The
second	stranger	said,	"Although	I	never	saw	such	nice	people	anywhere	else,	 I
had	to	leave	the	village	for	some	compelling	personal	reasons."	Having	said	this,
he	 shed	 tears	 of	 loving	 memory.	 The	 old	 man	 hastened	 to	 reply,	 "You	 are
welcome	to	this	village,	son.	You	will	find	the	people	here	even	better	than	your
former	 friends.	There	 are	many	good	people	here."	After	 a	 pause	 the	old	man
continued,	 "To	 whichever	 village	 you	 go,	 you	 will	 be	 welcomed	 heartily.	 In
every	village	you	will	find	good	and	nice	people.	The	world	is	what	your	eyes
make	of	it!"	The	world	is	nothing;	it	 is	nothing	other	than	what	you	see.	If	 the
vision	is	full	of	love,	only	hearts	throbbing	with	love	will	come	into	your	field	of
vision.	When	you	see	the	entire	world	thus	throbbing	with	love,	know	that	to	be
the	hour	of	realization
--	the	realization	of	your	Master,	of	the	Divine	Form.	Reaching	the	precincts	of
God	does	not	mean	that	Rama	will	be	waiting	there	for	you	in	his	cloud-coloured
splendour	and	armed	with	bow	and	arrows.	Reaching	 the	divine	presence	does
not	imply	that	some	Krishna	like	figure	will	be	awaiting	you	there	blowing	notes
of	melody	in	his	divine	flute.
Attaining	 the	supreme	soul	does	not	 indicate	 that	some	elderly	gentleman	with
flowing	white	 beard	 can	 be	 seen	 there	 controlling	 the	 universe.	Arriving	 near
God	means	 attaining	 that	 experience	wherein	 the	 entire	 universe	 ceases	 to	 be
mere	object	and	identifies	itself	with	that	supreme	soul;	the	object	vanishes,	the
power	 alone	 remains.	 It	 means	 the	 attainment	 of	 supreme	 bliss.	 It	 means	 the
attainment	of	Truth,	Beauty,	and	Eternity.	God	is	not	a	person	but	an	experience.
He	is	Bliss,	a	boundless	Ocean	of	Bliss.
Before	merging	 into	 that	ocean	a	preliminary	realization	of	 that	ocean	must	be
generated	within	ourselves.
THE	THIRD	LINK
I	have	already	discussed	the	first	two	links	that	lead	you	there	step	by	step.	The
first	 link	is	self-love.	The	second	link	is	love	of	others.	Let	us	now	discuss	the
third	link,	love	of	God,	which	enjoins	on	us	the	necessity	for	going	beyond	the
first	two.	The	second	link	is	a	step	beyond	the	first,	and	the	third	is	a	step	beyond
both.	The	first	link	involves	the	admission	that"I	am."	Although	it	is	not	reality,
it	 is	 nevertheless	 a	 fact.	 To	 the	 ignorant	 it	 is	 a	 fact	 more	 important	 than
everything	else.	It	may	be	a	means	to	your	awakening,	but	never	to	your	flight.
Those	who	flee	it	will	find	it	coming	close	upon	their	heels.	Can	you	really	run
away	from	your	own	shadow.	I'm	sure	you	can't.	The	more	you	try	to	escape	it
the	 speedier	 does	 its	 pursuit	 become.	 Therefore	 accept	 the	 fact	 of	 'I	 am'	 and
engage	 yourselves	 in	 seeking	 love.	When	 love	 grows,	 egotism	diminishes	 and
wears	off.	If	one	who	has	accepted	the	existence	of	the	shadow	seeks	light,	one
naturally	and	necessarily	becomes	free	from	all	sorts	of	shadows.	Egotism	and
love	 stand	 in	 the	 same	 relationship	with	 each	 other	 as	 shadow	 and	 light.	 The
impenetrable	darkness	of	egotism	disappears	with	the	advent	of	the	illuminating
light	of	love.	Acceptance	of	the	"I"	gives	rise	to	"He	the	other."	"Since	I	am	'I',
others	are	others'.	In	the	light	of	love,	however,	the	consciousness	of	"I"	as	well
as	that	of	"the	other"	vanishes.	In	the	end	love	alone	remains.
Neither	"I"	nor	"you"	nor	"the	other"	--	only	love.	Such	a	state	of	love	I	would
call	 love	 of	God.	Actually	 it	 is	 not	 directed	 towards	 anyone	 in	 particular,	 nor
from	or	on	behalf	of	anyone	in	particular.	It	simply	is.	This	pure	and	simple	love
I	call	love	of	God.
What	can	be	the	implication	of	this	love	of	God?	It	means	the	suspension	of	the
illusion	which	had	been	there	continually	that	I	am	something,	that	I	am	what	I
am.	 This	 is	 entirely	 untrue,	 unreal.	 You	 really	 are	 not!	 You	 have	 no	 personal
existence.	Consider	the	phenomenon	of	breathing.	Breath	is	drawn	into	my	body
and	sent	out.	If	I	think	I	am	breathing	I	am	wrong.	For,	if	the	air	that	has	gone
out	 does	 not	 return,	 how	 can	 I	 take	 breath.	 If	 I	 think	 I	 am	 living,	 I	 am	 in	 the
wrong	For,	the	day	life	goes	away	from	within	me,	it	would	not	be	possible	for
me	to	stay	behind	even	a	moment.	If	I	 think	I	am	born,	I	am	in	 the	wrong	If	I
think	 I	will	 die,	 I	 am	 still	 in	 the	wrong.	 I	 have	 not	 had	 a	 birth	 nor	will	 I	 die.
Neither	the	breath	is	mine	nor	do	I	have	any	control	over	the	breath.	Neither	life
nor	 death	 is	mine.	 Some	mysterious	 drama	 is	 being	 enacted	within	me.	 Some
one	 is	 sporting	 inside.	 Some	 one	 is	 speaking	within	me.	 Some	 one	 is	 passing
through	me.	Some	one	is	born	within	me	Some	one	dies	within	me.	I	am	a	mere
play-ground,	 a	 field,	where	 figures	 come	 and	 go.	 I	 am	 a	mere	 flute	 on	which
someone	 plays.	 "I	 am	 no	 better	 than	 a	 hollow	 piece	 of	 bamboo,"	 says	 Kabir.
"Songs	 of	 Love	 directed	 towards	 God	 are	 thine."	 The	 man	 who	 realizes	 this
understands	well.	The	person	who	has	crossed	the	first	two	stages	with	the	help
of	 the	 two	 rungs	 of	 the	 ladder	 mentioned	 above,	 can	 without	 any	 difficulty
comprehend	this	easily	and	know	that	 there	is	nothing	like	individuality	in	this
world.
Whatever	exists,	exists	together,	collectively,	jointly.	Nothing	exists	in	isolation.
This	breath	which	I	consider	mine	had	already	been	 the	breath	of	millions	and
millions.	 This	 air	 that	 I	 exhale	 now	will	 constitute	 the	 breath	 of	millions	 and
millions	yet	to	be	born.
The	millions	and	millions	of	cells	that	form	and	rear	my	physical	body	had	once
been	part	and	parcel	of	millions	and	millions	of	other	.physical	bodies.	How	can
they	 be	 called	mine?	When	 I	 cast	 off	 this	 body	 these	 cells	may	 constitute	 the
physical	bodies	of	millions	and	millions.	Even	when	I	have	not	sloughed	off	this
body,	every	minute	it	is	undergoing	change	and	old	cells	are	being	discarded	and
new	cells	are	being	formed.	The	new	cells	that	enter	your	body	are	verily	the	old
ones	that	have	come	away	from	others.	This	body	which	I	call	mine	has	already
belonged	 to	 thousands	of	men,	millions	of	animals	and	billions	of	other	 living
organisms	and	will	henceforth	constitute	countless	similar	bodies.
How	can	it	be	mine?
Nor	is	the	mind	alone.	For	the	constituent	parts	of	the	mind	too	come	and	go	like
those	 of	 the	 physical	 body.	 There	 is	 nothing	 that	 is	mine.	 This	 attitude	 is	 the
primary	stage	in	the	love	of	God.	When	we	actually	realize	that	there	is	nothing
that	is	ours,	when	this	attitude	further	deepens,	we	feel	that	we	ourselves	do	not
exist	since	there	is	nothing	that	is	ours.
As	long	as	the	idea	"	I	have	something"	persists	in	us,	we	have	the	delusion	that
we	are	and	we	begin	to	desire	acquisition	measure	my	greatness	 in	accordance
with	the	largeness	of	my	house.	I	measure	my	greatness	in	accordance	with	the
height	of	the	position	I	occupy.	I	measure	my	greatness	in	accordance	with	the
extent	of	my	property.	I	measure	my	greatness	in	accordance	with	the	influence
of	the	position	I	hold.	Why?	Because	my
"I-ness"	 increases	 in	 proportion	 to	 the	 increase	 of	 my	 possessions.	 "I-ness"
develops	 with	 acquisition.	 "I-ness"	 grows	 in	 the	 company	 of	 "my-ness".	 The
frontiers	of	"I-ness	'	and
"my-ness"	are	coterminous.	Hence,	if	the	delusion	of	"my-ness"	is	exterminated,
the	basis	for	"I-ness	'	disappears.	If	there	is	nothing	that	is	mine	where	can	I	be?
If	"my-ness"
sinks,	"I-ness"	becomes	feeble,	void.
A	question	often	asked	of	me	 is	 this,	 "Are	we	 to	 leave	off	 everything	and	 run
away	in	order	to	efface	this	wrong	notion	of	'I-ness'?"	My	usual	reply	is	that	this
is	not	a	problem	of	abnegating	or	not	abnegating	what	you	possess.	The	crux	lies
in	the	attitude	of	"my-ness"{	towards	those	things.	Even	if	you	lay	aside	things,
the	attitude	of	"my-ness"	can	linger.	That	is	why	the	so-called	renouncers	keep
an	account	of	what	they	have	renounced	and	measure	the	greatness	or	smallness
of	 their	 renunciation	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 value	 and	 quantity	 of	 the	 things
renounced.	Once	 a	 saintly	man	 told	me,	 "I	 have	 kicked	 of	 lakhs	 of	 rupees".	 I
said,	 "Pray,	when	did	you	kick	 it	off?"	He	said,	 "About	 thirty	years	back."	On
hearing	this	I	was	not	at	all	impressed.	I	submitted,	"Sir,	the	kick	does	not	seem
to	have	achieved	much;	otherwise	these	lakhs	would	have	been	entirely	forgotten
in	thirty	years."
Hence	 the	question	 is	 not	 that	 of	 renunciation	but	 is	 that	 of	 realization.	 In	 the
absence	of	realization	even	renunciation	may	feed	your	egotism	and	cause	it	to
swell.	 The	 assumption	 that	 things	 are	mine	 is	 wrong,	 not	 the	 assumption	 that
things	 exist.	 There	 are	 two	 phases	 of	 misguided	 attitude.	 One	 is	 that	 of	 the
hedonist	who	says,	"These	are	mine	I	will	enjoy	them."	The	other	is	that	of	the
renouncer	 who	 says,	 "These	 are	 mine.	 I	 will	 leave	 them	 off."	 But	 both	 say,
"These	are	mine."	Real	knowledge	reveals	a	third	fact.	It	says,	"Whatever	is,	is
God's.	 Neither	 mine	 nor	 thine.	 We	 ourselves	 are	 not	 ours.	 I	 really	 am	 not.
Egotism	is	 thus	a	delusion.	Everything	is	 taking	place.	I	am	only	a	part	of	 that
process."	 If	 this	 attitude	 is	 maintained,	 life	 becomes	 as	 natural	 and	 easily
accessible	as	water	and	air.	Such	a	life	is	a	life	of	sacrifice.	Such	a	life	is	a	life	of
love.	Love	of	God	means	forsaking	egotism.
Malukadasa	has	said:	birds	do	not	work,	the	python	does	not	seek	a	job,	and	that
Rama	gives	 them	plenty.	People	have	misunderstood	these	 lines.	They	say	 that
Malukadasa	 wants	 us	 not	 to	 do	 anything.	 This,	 however,	 is	 not	 the	 correct
interpretation.	Birds	do	work	 from	sunrise	 to	 sunset.	They	build	nests,	peck	at
grains.	What	Maluka	means	is	that	birds	are	not	self-conscious.	If	the	idea	of	"I
am"	must	disappear,	desire	to	acquire	--
possessiveness	--	must	go.	The	attitude	that	these	are	mine	should	vanish.	If	this
attitude	develops,	love	of	God	too	develops.	When	the	development	is	complete
and	 the	 feeling	 "I	 really	 am	 not"	 is	 generated,	 the	 revolution	 of	which	 I	 have
been	talking	takes	place.	There	is	a	Sufi	song.	A	lover	knocks	at	the	door	of	the
beloved.	He	hears	a	question	coming	from	within,	"Who	are	you?"	He	says,	"I
am	 your	 lover."	 Silence	 prevails	 within.	 Again	 he	 knocks	 and	 says,	 "Please
answer."	After	 a	 long	 pause	 a	 reply	 is	 heard,	 "You	may	 go	 back.	 There	 is	 no
space	 in	 this	 house	 sufficient	 for	 two."	 The	 lover	 goes	 back.	 Years	 pass	 off.
Rains	 set	 in.	 Summer	 and	winter	 come	 and	 go.	The	moon	 rises	 and	 sets.	 The
lover	 returns	 again	 and	 knocks	 at	 the	 door.	 The	 same	 question	 is	 heard	 once
again,	"Who	are	you?"	He	says,	"You	yourself".	The	song	narrates	that	the	door
then	opens.	If	I	were	to	compose	this	song,	I	would	have	thought	that	 the	time
had	not	come	for	the	door	to	open.
The	 awareness	 of	 "you	 are"	 indicates	 the	 existence	 of	 "I	 am".	 I	 would	 have
compelled	the	lover	to	go	back	once	again,	and	the	story	would	progress	a	little
further	 thus:	when	 the	 lover	 says	 "you	 yourself",	 silence	 prevails	 again.	After
waiting	for	a	long	time	the	lover	says,	"Let	the	door	be	opened	now.	It	is	not	me;
you	alone	are."	To	this	she	replies,	"He	who	is	conscious	of	oneness	is	conscious
of	both.	He	who	remembers	 'you'	does	remember	 'I'.	In	this	room	only	one	can
stay.	"The	lover	retires.	Days	glide	into	years	but	he	does	not	come	back,	for	he
has	no	idea	that	he	has	to	go	anywhere,	to	return	to	his	beloved,	then	the	beloved
herself	goes	to	him	and	says,	"My	love!	come	on.	The	door	is	open."	Just	as	"I"
vanishes,	 '	 you"	 too	 vanishes.	What	 remains	 alone	 is	 present	 --	 that	 which	 is
sought.	After	the	elimination	of	"I"	and	"you"	what	remains	is	"God".	Where	"I"
and"you'	disappear,	the	resultant	is	the	Eternal	Being,	the	Beginningless	and	the
endless	Existence.	It	is	an	ocean	of	consciousness,	the	Supreme	Being	who	can
be	known	and	lived.	We	are	in	it,	we	stand	in	it	and	we	live	in	it.	But	we	do	not
realize	 it.	We	do	not	 feel	 it	within.	We	do	not	 recognize	 it.	We	are	 full	of	 this
"we"	or	"I"	in	us.	We	are	not	relieved	of	it.	He	who	is	void	of	"I-ness"	is	indeed
full.	Eliminate	this	"I-ness".It	is	for	this	that	I	have	mentioned	the	three	links.	He
who	merges	himself	 into	 love	steps	 into	 the	void	of	 fullness.	Move	on	step	by
step.	Get	lost	in	love	drop	by	drop.	In	the	end	lose	yourself	into	it	even	as	a	drop
of	water	loses	itself	into	the	ocean.	Are	you	not	aware	that	the	tiny	drop	becomes
the	vast	ocean	once	it	loses	itself?
Wings	of	Love	and	Random	Thought
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Random	Thoughts,	pages	49	to	76
Date	Unknown
Archive
code:
6900000
ShortTitle:
RANDOM03
Audio:
No
Video:	No
1.	To	which	religion	do	I	belong?	To	none.	Dharma	in	the	sense	of	virtue,	piety,
justice,	 equity,	 decorum	etc.	 has	 a	 real	 existence.	But	 in	 the	 sense	of	 religious
cults	 and	 sects	 it	 has	no	existence	whatsoever.	The	unreal	 existence	of	 the	 so-
called	 cults	 and	 sects	 has	 obstructed	 the	manifestation	 of	 the	 real	 dharma.	 To
foster	 the	 true	 religious	 spirit	what	 is	 necessary	 is	 the	 dissolution	 of	 all	 cults.
That	 is	 why	 I	 do	 not	 belong	 to	 any	 particular	 religion,	 sect,	 or	 cult.	 He	 who
aspires	to	belong	to	real	virtue	need	not	belong	to	religions.
Establishment	 of	 organized	 religions	 is	 verily	 to	 encourage	 evil	 that	 lives	 and
flourishes	in	the	name	of	religion.	Evil	is	possibly	worried	on	account	of	virtue:
but	it	is	jubilant	over	religions.	I	do	not	belong	to	any	religion	because	I	would
not	be	of	the	Devil's	party.
I	 have	 been	 told	 that	 one	 fine	morning	 Satan	 and	 his	 disciples	were	 pursuing
some	one	 engaged	 in	 the	 quest	 of	Truth.	Hence	 it	was	 natural	 for	Satan	 to	 be
worried	over	 him.	His	 disciples	 informed	him	 that	Truth	had	been	 attained	by
that	devout	seeker.	Seeing	his	disciples	bewildered,	Satan	consoled	them	saying.
"Oh,	don't	worry	yet.	Let	this	fact	be	known	in	every	city.	Let	the	people	flock	to
him	 and	make	 strenuous	 efforts	 to	 see	 that	 they	 frame	 codes	 and	 canons	 and
organize	themselves	into	a	sect.	You	need	no	longer	worry	about	anything."
2.	What	connection	do	"I"	and	"mine"	have	with	"Truth"?	With	dharma?	How
can	Truth	be	my	Truth?	How	can	dharma	be	my	dharma?	Truth	cannot	be	my
Truth	and	my	truth	cannot	be	Truth.
3.	Thought	 cannot	 transcend	 the	 known.	Howsoever	 high	 it	may	 soar	 up,	 it	 is
impossible	for	it	to	go	beyond	the	frontiers	of	the	known.	Thought	is	the	source
of	all	 that	is	known,	and	the	extent	of	the	known	is	its	 life.	It	 is	 the	essence	of
our	 past	 experiences,	 and	 recollection	 is	 its	 dwelling-place.	 But	 while
recollection	 is	 dead	 and	 defunct	 and	 thought	 too	 is	 lifeless,	 Truth,	 though
unknown,	is	life.	That	is	precisely	why	thought	is	incompetent	to	lead	anyone	to
Truth.	 Its	 entry	 into	 the	 living	and	 the	unknown	 is	 forbidden.	Well	may	 fishes
live	for	a	few	moments	out	of	water	but	it	is	impossible	for	thought	to	take	even
a	step	beyond	the	ambit	of	the	dead	recollections	and	of	the	'known'.
4.	 In	 order	 to	 realize	 'existence'	 one	 has	 necessarily	 to	 face	 'non-existence'.
Encompassed	 by	 it,	 one	 realizes	 that	 existence	 can	 be	 known,	 recognized	 and
lived.	Surrounded	by	the	vast	ocean	of	non-existence,	one	can	have	the	intense
experience	of	existence.	For	the	same	reason	those	who	thirst	for	the	realization
of	 Truth	 have,	 of	 necessity,	 to	 enter	 the	 orbit	 of	 the	 void	 and	 those	 who	 are
desirous	 of	 living	 their	 lives	 in	 their	 perfection	 and	 completeness	 must
necessarily	woo	death.	I	am	reminded	of	an	event	that	took	place	one	evening.	I
was	 then	 in	an	out-of-the-way	village.	The	earthen	 lamps	had	been	 lit	 towards
the	 evening.	As	darkness	had	not	yet	 set	 in,	 it	 appeared	as	 if	 the	 lamp	had	no
flicker	at	all.
Had	the	lamp	been	sentient	enough	it	could	have	realized	at	once	that	it	did	not
have	any	light	of	its	own.	In	the	presence	of	the	blazing	midday	sun	it	would	not
possibly	have	 the	 faintest	 idea	 that	 it	was	 itself	 luminous.	But	 as	 the	darkness
advanced	 the	 lamps	 began	 gradually	 to	 shed	 their	 brilliance.	 The	 nocturnal
darkness	was	steadily	thickening,	making	this	brilliance	more	and	more	lustrous.
As	 the	 new-moon	 night	 gathered	 intensity,	 I	 continued	 to	 engage	 myself	 in
observing	livelines	and	vitality	developing	in	the	flame	of	the	lamp.	Now,	if	the
lamp	had	known	itself,	 it	would	have	realized	 that	 it	was	no	 less	 than	 the	sun.
This	event	kindled	a	thought	in	me.	Both	the	lamp	and	the	flame	were	the	same,
there	being	no	change	int	he	lamp.	The	change	had	been	in	the	darkness.	But	in
the	 background	 of	 the	 developing	 gloom	 the	 brilliance	 of	 the	 lamp	 clearly
manifested	itself.
The	darkness	had	helped	the	lamp	to	manifest	and	assert	itself	completely.	This
is	 true	 of	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 self.	 If	 it	 is	 encompassed	by	 existence,	 it	 is	 not
clearly	 realized;	 when	 the	 mind	 becomes	 a	 void	 in	 every	 respect,	 the	 full
refulgence	of	the	soul	becomes	manifest.	Only	through	the	door	of	non-existence
can	one	gain	access	to	existence.
5.	Where	 does	 this	 mad	 race	 after	 wealth,	 fame,	 renunciation	 and	 knowledge
lead	man?
Where	does	the	ambitious	mind	that	rushes	headlong	take	man?	When	I	reflect
on	this,	I	am	reminded	of	a	dream	which	I	have	never	been	able	to	forget.	In	this
dream	 which	 I	 had	 seen	 quite	 a	 number	 of	 times,	 a	 long	 ladder	 made	 its
appearance	with	its	upper	end	invariably	lost	in	the	clouds.	It	seemed	as	though
the	ladder	was	one	that	led	to	the	sky.
Urged	 by	 an	 irrepressible	 desire	 to	 reach	 the	 sky,	 I	 began	 to	 climb	 the	 rungs.
Each	rung	was	climbed	with	great	difficulty.	Breathing	was	hard,	and	beads	of
sweat	flowed	from	my	forehead.	Filled	as	I	was	with	the	desire	to	reach	the	sky,
I	went	on	climbing	the	ladder,	but	suffocation	soon	set	in,	and	the	desperate	heart
was	 about	 to	 give	 up	 the	 attempt.	 But	 at	 the	 psychological	 moment	 it	 was
realized	 that	 I	 was	 not	 the	 sole	 climber,	 nor	was	mine	 the	 only	 ladder.	 There
were	 infinite	 numbers	 of	 such	 ladders	 and	 endless	was	 the	 number	 of	 persons
climbing	 them.	An	 intense	sense	of	 rivalry	surges	up	on	seeing	 them	climbing
on,	 and	 I	 too	 climb	with	 accelerated	 rapidity.	This	mad	 race	 of	 ascending	 and
employing	 all	 our	 might	 in	 the	 endeavour	 continues	 till	 it	 culminates	 in	 the
fading	away	of	the	dream	which	was	always	the	same.	The	ultimate	rung	was	at
last	 reached.	 There	 was	 no	 rung	 beyond!	 Turning	 round,	 it	 was	 realized	 that
there	 was	 no	 ladder	 at	 all.	 The	 descent,	 the	 fall	 from	 that	 great	 height,	 more
arduous	and	painful	than	the	ascent,	set	in.	It	appeared	that	death	was	inevitable,
and,	 to	 be	 sure,	 death	 it	was.	 The	 shock	 of	 that	 death	 invariably	wrecked	my
sleep,	but	the	dream	pointed	to	a	great	truth.
Thenceforward	our	so-called	life	in	its	entirety	began	to	appear	as	an	extension
and	continuation	of	that	dream.	Is	there	not	in	dreams	something	reminiscent	of
every	mad	rush	in	which	mankind	is	involved?	Do	not	all	mad	rushes	terminate
in	death?	Again,	what	does	death	mean?	Does	it	not	mean	that	there	is	no	higher
rung	in	the	ladder?	Death	is	 the	end	of	the	rush	of	life.	It	concludes	futurity.	It
means	the	impossibility	of	further	possibilities.	The	racing,	rushing	mind	leads	a
person	 to	 great	 heights.	 What	 more	 can	 death	 be	 than	 a	 downfall	 from	 that
height?	 Death	 inevitably	 steps	 in	 wherever	 there	 is	 a	 mad	 rush.	 No	 matter
whether	 the	 rush	 is	 after	 wealth,	 or	 religion,	 after	 enjoyment	 or	 renunciation.
Moreover,	where	there	is	rush	there	is	dream;	where	there	is	no	rush,	or	racing
mind	there	is	truth.	Life	too	is	only	there,	such	a	life	as	has	no	death.
6.	Words,	scriptures,	cults	and	 tenets	are	meant	 to	keep	 the	soul	 fettered	 to	 the
shore	 which	 is	 no	 other	 than	 slavery.	 He	who	 gets	 tied	 up	 in	 the	 shackles	 of
slavery	is	denied	the	freedom	of	limitless	ocean.	To	enjoy	the	voyage	in	the	sea
one	has	 to	get	 released	from	the	shores.	Bonds	have	 to	be	broken	for	attaining
freedom.	Anglers	fix	a	lump	of	dough	to	the	hook	for	catching	the	fish.	Tempted
by	 the	 dough,	 the	 fish	 is	 caught	 in	 the	 hook.	 Similar	 are	 the	 hooks	 of	mental
slavery	which	are	 invariably	coated	with	 the	dough	of	apparent	security.	In	 the
name	 of	 security	 people	 are	 always	 divested	 of	 freedom.	 This	 is	 an	 old
conspiracy.	And	he	who	 is	not	vigilant	 and	alert	 in	 the	 face	of	 this	 conspiracy
will	 never	 attain	 that	 life	 and	 bliss	 which	 lie	 embedded	 in	 the	 freedom	 of
consciousness.
There	is	no	greater	value,	experience,	or	acquisition	than	freedom,	because	Truth
can	be	realized	only	through	it.	Whoever	is	opposed	to	the	freedom	of	man's	soul
is	his	enemy.
Temptation	of	security	is	the	principal	enemy.	Excessive	desire	for	security	turns
out	to	be	a	prison	for	the	soul.	This	craving	for	security	leads	to	superstitions	and
blind	traditions	which	grip	the	mind.	On	eschewing	these,	we	are	seized	with	a
vague	 fear	 because	 the	 well-known	 ground	 shifts	 and	 treading	 on	 strange
grounds	 becomes	 inevitable.	 That	 is	 why,	 vampires,	 whether	 they	 be	 political
leaders	 or	 religious	 priests,	 never	 wish	 to	 see	 us	 free	 from	 fear,	 because	 fear
alone	is	the	mainstay	for	their	activities	of	extortion.	For	fear	alone	people	cling
to	what	is	well-known	and	most	popular	even	if	it	happens	to	be	untrue.	With	an
eye	on	his	own	safety	no	such	man	dares	stray	even	an	inch	from	the	accepted
traditions	 and	 recognized	 values	 of	 the	 rabble	 and	 the	 organized	 society,	 even
though	 those	 traditions	 and	 values	 may	 be	 founded	 on	 blind	 belief	 and
ignorance.	 Ultimately	 this	 fear	 deadens	 and	 blunts	 his	 capacity	 to	 think.	 for
thought	 leads	 him	 to	 the	 realm	of	 revolt.	 Thought	 is	 not	 faced	with	 any	more
important	activity	than	that	of	saving	the	freedom	of	the	individual	as	long	as	the
dragnet	 of	 extortion	 is	 spread	 around	 him	 and	 a	 well-planned	 and	 neatly
executed	 conspiracy	 to	 destroy	 his	 individuality	 is	 going	 on.	 Political	 and
economic	 slavery	 is	 nothing	 in	 comparison	 to	 the	 slavery	 that	 fetters	 the
conscience	of	the	individual	to	words	and	scriptures	in	the	name	of	Truth.	Being
subtle,	this	slavery	cannot	be	seen	or	felt.	It	is	so	deep	that	the	individual	accepts
it	 to	 be	 as	 thick	 as	 his	 blood	 or	 bones.	 I	 oppose	 this	 slavery,	 because	 of	 it
millions	of	souls	have	been	deprived	of	the	solar	brilliance	of	Truth.	Their	hearts
have	 not	 realized	 that	 liberation	 the	 absence	 of	 which	 deprives	 a	 man	 of
experiencing	 the	 bliss	 and	 harmony	 of	 his	 own	 existence.	A	 subservient	mind
and	 the	 supreme	 soul	 can	 never	 meet	 together	 since	 the	 supreme	 soul	 is
brilliance	and	the	subservient	mind	is	the	dense	darkness.
7.	Once	I	stayed	in	a	building	that	had	no	window.	it	was	a	pretty	old	building.	I
said	to	the	landlord,	"Your	building	is	like	the	mind	of	man.	There	is	no	window
in	it.	You	have	not	made	arrangements	for	 the	convenient	entry	of	 light,	of	 the
open	sky,	and	of	fresh	air."	He	said,	"The	building	is	very	old."	I	said,	"The	mind
of	man	too	is	very	old."	In	fact,	being	old	is	itself	an	evidence	of	its	incapacity	to
grapple	with	the	problems	of	life.
Closure	is	death.	It	is	a	preparation	for	being	entombed	for	ever.	Yet,	if	you	will,
you	can	be	in	contact	with	the	open	sky	by	demolishing	the	wall	that	hides	it.	Is
it	not	proper	for	what	is	within	the	walls	to	be	in	touch	with	what	is	without?	Are
the	walls	so	precious	that	to	reach	the	sky	by	pulling	them	down	will	be	costlier?
Verily	the	person	encircled	by	walls	cannot	realize	the	real	horizon	of	life.	How
fatal	is	it	to	be	isolated	from	the	sky	owing	to	these	old	walls!	How	self-ruinous
it	is	to	be	isolated	from	soul	owing	to	the	old	mind!
8.	That	 individual	 is	not	alive	at	all	who	at	 the	 time	of	crisis	does	not	 feel	 the
existence	of	the	self.	Somehow	he	goes	on	living,	or,	rather,	dying.	In	regard	to
the	existence	of	the	self	ke	is	not	yet	infused	with	deliberation.	Deliberation	on
life,	 at	 the	 very	 outset,	 makes	 a	 man	 wake	 up	 to	 the	 truth	 of	 death.	 The
possibility	of	death	deepens	into	a	crisis.	And	the	crisis	ushers	in	the	auspicious
beginning	of	a	search	after	the	self.	The	beginning	of	the	quest	in	the	direction	of
Truth	is	marked	by	a	crisis.	A	crisis	also	marks	the	moment	of	transit	from	death
to	immortality.	That	is	exactly	why	I	say,	"Has	a	crisis	in	your	life	set	in?"	If	not,
how	 can	 the	 search	 after	 Truth	 be	 inaugurated?	Man's	 consciousness	 must	 of
necessity	meet	with	a	crisis.	Crisis	means	meeting	face	to	face	the	possibility	of
the	cessation	of	the	self.	It	is	from	this	that	the	desire	to	attain	supreme	existence
is	generated	and	a	campaign	for	its	acquisition	is	inaugurated.	Never	has	anyone
set	forth	on	a	quest	after	life	without	peeping	into	the	eyes	of	death,	nor	can	he
do	 so.	Life	 is	 a	quest;	but	until	death	 is	 faced,	 this	quest	does	not	become	 the
quest	of	life.	Until	then	man	goes	on	searching	for	insignificant	trifles	and	goes
on	dying	in	vain.	While	he	is	still	involved	in	trifles,	death	comes	to	gather	him.
But	the	moment	his	eyes	face	death,	an	unprecedented	crisis	is	experienced.	This
shock	 is	 an	 impediment	 in	 his	 dreamy	 drowsiness.	 It	 becomes	 impossible	 to
sleep	any	longer.	This	hour	--	this	hour	of	crisis	--	wakens	him	to	the	possibilities
of	life.	Then	his	consciousness	becomes	engaged	in	surmounting	death.	That	is
precisely	why	I	say,	go	ahead	and	ferret	out	death.	Better	that	you	go	in	quest	of
it	before	it	comes	in	quest	of	you.	There	is	no	other	matter	of	everlasting	import
than	this.
9.	A	sage	had	come.	He	used	to	say,	"I	am	thinking	about	 immortality."	T	told
him,	 "it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 think	 about	 immortality	 because	 whatever	 comes
within	the	ambit	of	thinking	cannot	be	immortal.	Thought	is	mortal.	How	can	it
have	 any	 contact	 with	 the	 immortal?	 It	 would	 be	 better	 if	 you	 think	 about
mortality.	Search	for	death	and	recognize	it.	Facing	death	squarely	takes	the	soul
to	 immortality.	 But	 we	 are	 frightened	 of	 death	 and	 begin	 to	 deliberate	 on
immortality.	 Is	 not	 our	 deliberation	 on	 immortality	 evolved	 out	 of	 the	 fear	 of
death?	Can	that	mind	succeed	in	the	acquisition	of	immortality,	the	mind	that	is
scared	 of	 death?	 Friend,	 there	 is	 no	 fear	 in	 death;	 death	 is	 in	 fear.	 Death	 is
unknown,	unfamiliar.	How	then,	can	you	fear	it?	How	can	you	fear	that	of	which
you	 have	 no	 idea	 at	 all?	 One	 is	 afraid	 of	 missing	 and	 losing	 the	 known,	 the
familiar.	"Fear	of	death"	is	actually	not	"of	death"	but	of	losing	what	we	know
and	recognize	as	life.	This	fear	when	solidified	is	transformed	into	death.	That	is
why	I	say,	"Search	for	death."	This	quest	is	fruitful,	because	at	the	end	of	that	it
is	not	death	that	is	obtained.	What	is	obtained	is	immortality	itself.
10.	 I	am	opposed	 to	blind	belief	and	superstition.	 In	fact,	every	belief	 is	blind.
The	 power	 of	 discrimination	 cannot	 become	 keen	 and	 fiery,	 should	 there	 be
beliefs.	If	a	healthy	child	is	made	to	walk	on	crutches	rather	than	on	his	legs,	his
legs	would	not	function	properly	when	he	grows	old.	They	would	become	lame.
Similarly	habitual	dependence	on	beliefs	makes	the	intellect	lame.	Can	there	be
a	 greater	 adversity	 in	 man's	 life	 than	 the	 crippled	 intellect?	 But	 this	 is	 what
beliefs	bring	about.	In	reality	neither	the	society	nor	the	nation	ever	wishes	that
the	 individuals	 should	 develop	 their	 faculty	 of	 thinking.	All	 active	 tyrants	 and
oppressors	holding	the	reins	of	administration	feel	their	existence	endangered	if
men	develop	their	faculty	of	thinking.	There	is	a	possibility	of	revolution	in	all
successful	 quests	 after	 Truth.	 The	 so-called	 organized	 societies,	 religions,	 and
kingdoms	 have	 their	 edifices	 founded	 on	 untruths.	Hence?.	 collective	 effort	 is
made	 the	 moment	 a	 baby	 is	 born	 to	 fetter	 him	 in	 bondage	 and	 make	 him
dependent	on	beliefs.	All	 types	of	 educational	 systems	 so	 far	have	been	doing
only	this.	The	avowed	aim	of	education	is	to	liberate	man.	But	actually	what	is
achieved	is	this.	In	the	mind	of	the	individual,	restraints	of	subtle	mental	slavery
are	 shrewdly	 infused.	 The	 system	 does	 not	 impart	 thinking	 but	 it	 inculcates
beliefs.	Since	 it	does	not	encourage	doubts	and	 revolts,	 the	products	of	 such	a
system	of	education	are	usually	incompetent	to	think	independently.	The	active,
lively	 quest	 for	 Truth	 springs	 from	 doubts,	 and	 not	 from	 beliefs.	 There	 is	 no
healthier	motive	 power	 than	 healthy	 doubts	 that	 help	 in	 quest	 for	 truth.	 Faith
does	 not	 encourage	 quest;	 it	 is	 the	 outcome	 at	 the	 end.	 A	 well-planned
investigation	 begins	 with	 doubts	 and	 concludes	with	 faith	 and	 belief.	 The	 ill-
organized	investigation	sets	out	with	faith	but	lives	and	concludes	in	doubts.	The
faith	in	this	instance	cannot	be	founded	on	reality.	How	can	the	faith	founded	on
belief	 be	 true?	 Perfect	 knowledge	 gives	 birth	 to	 true	 faith.	 Perfect	 knowledge
and	 true	 faith	 go	 together.	 Belief	 is	 ignorance	 and	 True	 faith	 is	 perfect
knowledge.	 Faith	 that	 is	 bought	 is	 only	 belief.	 Faith	 that	 is	 thrust	 and
superimposed	upon	you	is	only	belief.	Faith	that	is	practised	is	only	belief.	But
faith	that	spontaneously	wakes	up	within	us,	faith	that	voluntarily	and	naturally
comes	to	us	illuminated	by	perfect	knowledge,	can	alone	be	the	true	faith.	Such	a
faith	need	not	be	 fetched	from	outside	nor	need	 it	be	 learnt.	 It	comes	of	 itself.
What	has	to	be	learned	is	doubt,	the	right	kind	of	doubt.	Right	doubt	marks	the
mode	and	process	of	attaining	true	faith.	Doubt	does	not	mean	disbelief	because
disbelief	is	merely	the	negative	aspect	of	belief.	If	doubt	were	to	be	disbelief	it
becomes	 unhealthy	 and	 incomplete.	Doubt	 is	 neither	 belief	 nor	 disbelief.	 It	 is
unfettered	 inquisitiveness.	 It	 is	 the	 irrepressible	predilection	 for	quest.	 It	 is	 the
desire	to	attain	knowledge.	It	is	incessant	investigation.	It	is	the	firm	resolve	not
to	stop	anywhere	before	reaching	Truth,	 the	 truth	 that	 falls	within	 the	ambit	of
one's	 own	 experience.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 can	 see,	 both	 belief	 and	 disbelief,	 are
impediments.	 Doubt	 is	 the	 means	 of	 achievement.	 Only	 doubt	 can	 lead	 one
ultimately	 to	 Truth.	 There	 was	 a	 person	 in	 quest	 after	 Truth.	 After	 years	 of
search	he	came	to	a	sage.	The	cave	of	the	sage	was	filled	with	tomes	and	tomes
of	sacred	scriptures.	The	topics	were	infinite	in	number.	Scriptures	and	scriptures
alone	were	seen	as	far	as	the	eyes	could	reach.	The	sage	said	to	him,	"The	entire
knowledge	 of	 the	 universe	 is	 preserved	 in	 these	 scriptures.	 The	 texts	 full	 of
mysterious	secrets	have	been	collected	and	preserved	here,	only	 for	 those	who
come	here	 in	 their	search	for	Truth.	Every	one	of	 these	searchers	can	 take	any
single	 scripture	 of	 his	 choice.	 What	 is	 the	 scripture	 you	 wish	 to	 have?"	 The
aspirant	young	man	saw	the	endless	chain	of	tomes,	pondered	over	it	for	a	while
and	 said	 --	 "Please	 give	me	 that	 Text	which	 supplies	 everything	 that	 all	 other
texts	profess	 to	contain".	The	old	sage	 laughed	on	hearing	 this	and	said	 --	"Of
course	have	such	a	text	but	rarely	does	anyone	come	in	search	for	it."	Then	the
sage	handed	over	to	him	a	scriptural	text	whereon	it	was	written
"Scripture	 of	 the	 greatest	 doubt!"	 I	 too	 wish	 to	 give	 everyone	 the	 self-same
scripture	because	it	is	only	this	scripture	that	can	liberate	the	searcher	after	truth
from	the	tangled	mass	of	other	scriptures	and	lead	him	to	Eternal	Truth.
11.	I	was	standing	on	the	bank	of	a	river.	It	was	a	small	stream.	In	the	gathering
gloom	 of	 the	 dusk,	 the	 village	 belles	 were	 hastening	 homeward	 with	 their
earthen	pitchers	filled	with	water.	I	observed	that	one	has	to	stoop	down	before
one	can	draw	water	 from	 the	 river.	One	has	 to	know	 the	art	of	 stooping	 to	 fill
oneself	with	water	from	the	fountain	of	life.	But	man	is	gradually	forgetting	the
art	of	bending	down.	His	powerful	 ego	does	not	 let	him	stoop.	Hence	all	 love
and	fervent	prayer	are	vanishing	slowly.	In	fact,	whatever	is	of	any	significance
has	 begun	 to	 be	 evanescent.	 Life	 has	 become	 a	 sheer	 struggle	 instead	 of	 the
sweet	harmony	and	exquisite	beauty	 that	 it	ought	 to	be.	Only	struggle	 remains
where	 the	 mysterious	 secret	 of	 bending	 and	 yielding	 is	 unknown.	 It	 is	 not
surprising	 at	 all	 if	 unrelenting	 and	 unlimited	 egotism	 becomes	 the	 source	 of
unbearable	 pain	where	 the	hearty	 sympathy	of	 bending	down	 is	 unrecognized.
Yielding	 and	 relenting	 links	up	 the	 individual	 and	 the	group.	Eagerness	not	 to
yield	 and	 relent	 separates	 him	 from	 the	 universal	 existence.	 Of	 course	 this
bending	down	must	be	spontaneous	and	natural.
Otherwise	it	too	becomes	an	affectation,	an	effusion	of	rank	egotism.	Relenting,
which	 is	 the	 outcome	 of	 deliberate	 thinking,	 is	 not	 real	 and	 complete	 because
behind	 it,	 in	 some	 hidden	 corner,	 there	 is	 an	 element	 of	 resistance	 as	 well.
Inasmuch	as	it	springs	from	the	intellectual	level,	it	is	unreal,	for	the	full	force	of
the	heart,	of	all	the	vital	parts	is	not	a	witness	to	it.	Further,	this	type	of	yielding
brings	in	a	subsequent	remorse,	because,	the	ego	feels	hurt.	(When	one	bends	in
opposition	 to	 the	ego,	 the	 latter	 takes	 revenge	on	one	 in	 the	 form	of	 remorse.)
Only	 when	 the	 human	 heart	 is	 devoid	 of	 egotism	 does	 it	 bend	 naturally	 and
perfectly.	This	stooping	should	be	as	natural	and	complete	in	every	detail	as	the
bending	 down	 of	 tiny	 blades	 of	 grass	 in	 a	 violent	 storm.	 They	 identify
themselves	 with	 the	 stormy	 gusts	 of	 wind,	 as	 it	 were.	 They	 have	 no	 hostility
towards	 the	 raging	 storm	 nor	 are	 they	 conscious	 of	 any	 egotism	 within
themselves.	The	day	when	man	assimilates	this	type	of	spontaneous	bending	and
yielding,	the	mysterious	secrets	of	the	supreme	soul	lie	bare	in	front	of	him.	A
certain	young	man	once	said	to	a	Fakir,	"Formerly	there	had	been	such	persons
as	had	seen	the	supreme	Godhead	with	their	own	eyes.	How	is	it	that	we	do	not
have	such	persons	now?"	The	venerable	gentleman	had	replied,	"Because	nowa-
days	 no	 one	 is	 ready	 to	 bow	 down	 so	 low!"	 Certainly,	 stooping	 down	 is
necessary	to	have	one's	fill	at	 the	fountain	of	 the	Supreme	Soul.	How	can	they
who	 stand	 near	 the	 bank	with	 nose	 haughtily	 lifted	 up	 fill	 their	 pitchers	 with
water?
12.	There	is	nothing	more	essential	and	inevitable	than	a	humble	and	free	brain
for	 the	 acquisition	 of	 perfect	 knowledge.	 But,	 as	 a	 rule,	 the	 brain	 is	 neither
humble	nor	 free.	 It	 is	 stricken	with	egotistical	pride	and	 imprisoned	 rigorously
by	obsessions	and	prejudices.
Egotism	 fetters	 it	 from	 within	 and	 bias	 and	 obsession	 from	 without.	 Thus
imprisoned,	the	human	intellect	gradually	loses	its	entire	capacity	to	rip	open	the
seal	covering	Truth.
Someone	 said	 to	 Albert	 Einstein,	 "What	 is	 that	 paramount	 principle	 without
which	scientific	investigation	is	impossible?"	Do	you	know	what	Einstein	said	in
reply?	The	questioner	could	not	have	imagined	even	in	his	dream	the	ready	reply
that	was	offered.
We	said,	"Absence	of	egotism".
Certainly	 the	 key	 to	 perfect	 knowledge	 is	 absence	 of	 egotism.	 Egotism	 is
ignorance.	The	mind	which	is	filled	with	the	notion	of	"I"	is	so	occupied	that	it
has	barely	ally	space	left	 in	it	worthy	of	receiving	the	guest,	Truth.	If	 it	 is	free
from	 "I-ness",	 Truth	 could	 reside	 there.	 The	 house	 of	 the	 heart	 is	 too	 narrow.
Two	 entities	 cannot	 get	 adequate	 accommodation	 in	 it.	 Friend,	 Kabir	 was	 not
wrong	 in	what	 he	 had	 said.	That	 street,	 that	 pathway	 is	 certainly	 narrow.	 It	 is
egotism	that	collects	together	obsessions	and	complexes.	What	an	easier	way	can
there	be	to	appear	wise	though	living	in	ignorance?	It	is	for	further	growth	and
development	that	egotism	gathers	knowledge.	Armed	with	it,	it	assumes	that	it	is
well-protected.	 Holding	 steadfastly	 to	 pet	 ideas	 and	 notions	 is	 the	 means	 to
guard	 egotism.	 Hence	 disputes	 on	 thoughts	 very	 soon	 turn	 out	 to	 be	 fights
amongst	 egotisms.	 Thereafter,	 the	 entire	 force	 rests	 round	 the	 centre	 of	 "My
Truth",	"My	Religion",	"My	Scripture",	"My	God"	and	not	on	Truth,	Religion,
Scripture	and	God.	Is	it	not	"I"	that	rests	on	these,	centres	round	these?	How	can
there	be	Truth	where	"I"	asserts	itself?	How	can	there	be	"Religion?"	How	can
there	 be	 perfect	 knowledge?	 Truth	 removes	 itself	 to	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 "I"
asserts	 itself.	 In	 this	 situation	 the	 ego	 accepts	 the	 tenets	 and	 the	words	 of	 the
scripture	 as	 Truth	 and	 remains	 content.	 There	 is	 an	 element	 of	 fear	 in	 this
contentment.	There	is	the	possibility	of	what	has	been	accepted	as	Truth	turning
out	to	be	untruth	and	suspicion.	For	the	same	reason,	the	ego	begins	to	proclaim
the	accepted	Truth	in	order	to	stabilize	its	own	belief.	It	is	prepared	even	to	die
for	its	sake.	It	is	afraid	of	even	listening	to	anything	controverting	the	accepted
Truth	 because	 of	 the	 possibility	 at	 any	 time	 of	 such	 facts	 emerging	 as	 would
make	the	accepted	Truth	an	untruth.	In	these	circumstances	he	does	not	wish	to
hear	 nor	 even	 to	 think.	He	wishes	 to	 remain	 complacent	 in	 the	 blind	 belief	 in
what	he	has	already	accepted.	But	this	attitude	is	fatal	to	his	search	for	Truth.	In
accepting	cheap	contentment	he	cannot	find	real	Truth.
For	the	sake	of	reaching	Truth	he	has	to	eschew	complacency.	The	aim	is	Truth
and	not	this	satisfaction.	When	Truth	is	acquired,	satisfaction	too	follows	in	its
wake	like	a	shadow.	He	who	girds	up	his	loins	to	seek	Truth	at	any	cost	certainly
attains	satisfaction	too	but	he	who	begins	to	seek	satisfaction	is	denied	access	to
Truth	and	eventually	to	satisfaction	as	well.
13.	Love	is	liberation.	Love's	bondage	itself	is	liberation.	He	who	binds	himself
with	the	infinite	bonds	of	love	attains	liberation.	I	say,	seek	not	liberation;	seek
love.	Because	 the	search	for	 liberation	often	 leads	 to	 the	fetters	of	egotism;	on
the	 other	 hand,	 the	 search	 for	 love	 cannot	 even	 start	 before	 the	 destruction	 of
egotism.	 Search	 for	 love	 means	 getting	 ready	 to	 destroy	 egotism.	 And	 the
destruction	 of	 egotism	 is	 itself	 liberation.	 The	 egotist	 dreams	 of	 acquiring	 the
world.	 Afraid	 of	 death,	 it	 dreams	 of	 attaining	 salvation.	 He	 who	 does	 not
understand	it,	 falls	 into	self-deception.	This	world,	 its	slavery	and	bondage	co-
exist	 with	 egotism.	 Isn't	 egotism	 itself	 a	 bondage?	 Isn't	 that	 the	 source	 of	 all
bondages?
How	can	 the	 seeds	of	 salvation	spread	on	 that	 land?	What	can	be	more	 stupid
and	absurd	than	the	desire	of	egotism	to	get	liberated?	For	salvation,	it	is	not	the
ego	that	has	to	be	liberated	but	we	have	to	be	liberated	from	the	ego.	That	is	why
egotism	is	not	afraid	of	renunciation,	self-sacrifice,	religion,	perfect	knowledge
or	 even	 salvation.	 It	 is	 afraid	 of	 love.	 It	 can	 escape	 from	 renunciation,	 self-
sacrifice	 or	 aspiration	 for	 salvation.	 But	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 it	 to	 escape	 from
love.	Love	is	its	death.	Love	is	not	its	salvation,	it	is	liberation	from	it.
14.	I	do	not	live	in	a	different	world.	I	live,	in	that	world	alone	where	everyone
lives.	 But,	 certainly,	 my	 way	 of	 seeing	 life	 is	 altogether	 changed.	 And	 this
change	is,	as	it	were,	the	change	of	the	world	itself,	because	in	our	vision	we	see
what	we	are.	Our	vision	alone	is	our	world	and	our	life.	As	is	the	vision,	so	is	the
creation.	If	life	seems	to	be	miserable,	know	that	the	creation	is	miserable.	Then
try	to	alter	the	vision	and	not	the	life.
Transformation	of	vision	means	 transformation	of	 the	self.	Everything	depends
on	our	own	self.	Hell	and	heaven	live	in	our	own	self.	The	worldly	existence	and
salvation	too	abide	in	our	own	self.	What	is	there	remains	the	same	for	ever,	but
while	one	vision	makes	it	a	bondage,	another	makes	it	a	salvation.	Seen	from	the
point	of	egotism,	life	becomes	hell,	for	that	vision	is	all-opposing.	I	can	remain
"I"	 only	 by	 being	 different	 from	 and	 opposed	 to	 universal	 existence.	 The
endeavour	to	become	"l"	is	an	attempt	at	opposing	and	struggle	with	the	"All".
The	endeavour	 results	 in	worry	 and	distress.	 It	 leads	 to	 the	 fear	of	destruction
and	death.	There	is	no	wonder	if	misery	steps	in	as	the	result	of	attaining	what	is
untrue	and	impossible.	But	we	can	view	the	world	from	the	point	of	egolessness
too.	The	 "I"	 is	 in	 opposition	 to	 the	 "All".	The	 "not	 I"	 is	 a	 combination	 of	 the
"All".	Know	that	existence	is	unsevered	and	indivisible.	All	severed	pieces	and
divisions	are	the	products	of	human	fancy,	of	the	intellect.	If	"I	am",	I	am	only	a
piece,	 a	 part.	 If	 "I	 am	 not",	 I	 am	 in	 the	 undivided	 whole.	 Being	 in	 a	 part	 is
bondage,	being	in	a	whole	is	liberation.	If	"I	am",	I	am	in	misery,	because	that
existence	 is	 an	 eternal	 conflict,	 an	 endless	 war.	 If	 "I	 am	 not",	 I	 am	 in	 bliss
because	 not-being	 is	 infinite	 peace.	 Liberated	 from	 "I",	 our	 consciousness	 is
released	 from	 tradition.	 The	 separation	 from	 the	 "I"	 is	 the	 merger	 into	 the
Supreme	Soul.
15.	It	is	sheer	foolishness	to	oppose	nature.	We	cannot	attain	the	Supreme	Soul
by	opposing	nature	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 the	Supreme	Soul	 lies	hidden	 in
nature.	 For	 the	 same	 reason,	 we	 shall	 have	 to	 co-operate	 with	 it.	 Nature	 is	 a
curtain	to	be	raised	up.	It	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	godhead,	his	manifestation.	He
sits	there,	deeply	embedded	in	it.
By	 quarrelling	 with	 nature	 we	 can	 never	 hope	 to	 approach	 Him,	 to	 attain
enlightenment.
But	God	is	always	pitted	against	Nature.	We	are	pitted	against	life	itself,	against
all	 that	 sustains	us.	Man's	 spiritual	poverty	 is	 the	 result	of	 this	quarrel.	He	has
been	told	to	seek	God	by	fighting	Nature,	while	God	is	in	Nature	and	Nature	is
in	God.	There	 is	 no	God	 apart	 from	Nature.	God	 is	 co-extensive	with	Nature.
Educational	systems	antagonistic	to	nature	have	snatched	away	from	man's	life
the	ladder	that	takes	him	to	God.	Nature	is	the	bridge.	We	are	not	to	stop	on	it.
We	have	certainly	to	pass	over	it,	not	to	quarrel	with	it.	It	assists	us.	It	is	the	road
that	leads	us	to	our	destination.	There	is	no	other	way	apart	from	it.	We	have	to
love	Nature,	with	 all	 our	 heart.	 Love	 alone	 can	 throw	 open	 its	 gates,	 through
which	we	can	see	Him	who	 is	known	as	 the	Supreme	Soul.	But	we	have	been
told	 that	 Nature	 is	 a	 bondage,	 a	 prison,	 a	 sin.	 These	 wrong	 teachings	 have
poisoned	man's	mind,	spoiling	his	 love	of	nature	and	preventing	the	possibility
of	perfect	knowledge.
This	has	resulted	in	widening	the	gulf	between	him	and	God.	It	is	incumbent	to
bring	back	Nature	to	man's	 life	before	attempting	to	bring	God	to	his	 life.	It	 is
impossible	to	instal	God	in	the	heart	of	man	before	installing	Nature	in	it.	Love
of	Nature	eventually	 transforms	itself	 into	a	prayer	unto	God.	Liberation	is	not
from	Nature	but	in	Nature.
16.	We	were	 seated	 near	 a	mountain	 stream.	 Just	 below	 it	 there	was	 a	water-
logged	 pool	 with	 varieties	 of	 fish	 swimming	 about.	 On	 the	 nearby	 sand-bank
there	were	many	shells	and	conches.	I	took	some	of	these	and	said	to	those	near
by,	"See,	there	are	many	unborn	creatures	in	these	shells.	When	they	are	strong
enough	to	break	open	the	shells,	they	will	be	born."	Are	there	not	similar	unborn
creatures	within	us?	Is	there	no	hard	coating	like	this	shell	encompassing	us?	Is
not	our	egotistic	self	like	the	shell?	Can't	we	too	give	birth	to	that	unborn	life	by
breaking	this	ego?	The	"I"	stands	opposed	to	the	birth	of	that	life.	It	knows	very
well	how	to	protect	 itself.	Of	course,	 it	protects	 itself	by	worldly	assets,	status,
position,	 and	 fame.	 But	 in	 a	 more	 subtle	 form,	 it	 protects	 itself	 by	 religion,
polity,	merit,	ideal,	salvation	etc.	It	wishes	to	survive,	flourish	and	prosper.	But
let	us	 remember	 that	 the	stronger	 it	grows,	 the	dimmer	becomes	 the	chance	of
that	 life	 of	which	 it	 is	 but	 the	 sheath	The	 ruthless	 hardness	 of	 egotism	 brings
about	the	death	of	the	unborn	soul	in	the	womb	itself.	It	is	necessary	that	egotism
should	die	for	bringing	about	the	birth	of	the	soul.
17.	What	 is	 it	 that	 I	 say?	Words?	 No.	 No.	 Those	 who	 hear	 my	 words	 alone
cannot	 understand	 what	 I	 talk	 about.	 Are	 we	 engaged	 in	 intellectual
deliberations?	No.	No.	We	are	not	doing	anything	of	the	sort.	In	fact,	we	are	not
deliberating	 at	 all.	 Instead,	 we	 are	 seeking	 a	 situation	 in	 life,	 an	 aspect	 of
existence.	 We	 are	 seeking	 entry	 into	 pure	 existence....	 But	 then	 certainly
understanding	means	an	entry,	a	penetration,	besides	understanding.	Life	can	be
understood	 only	 after	 penetrating	 into	 it.	 Love	 can	 be	 felt	 only	 by	 passing
through	 love,	 not	 through	 deliberation.	 We	 have	 to	 live	 life.	 Do	 I	 make	 you
understand	 my	 word?	 Do	 not	 worry	 to	 understand	 it.	Worry	 will	 not	 let	 you
understand.
Just	think	and	see.	Flowers	blossom	on	the	trees.	Just	look	out.	What	wonderful
flowers	adorn	 the	Gulmohur	 trees.	Do	we	ponder	over	 them	or	 see	 them?	The
cuckoo	is	cooing.
Do	we	 ponder	 over	 it	 or	 hear	 it?	 Similarly	 listen	 and	 see	what	 I	 say.	 It	 is	 not
deliberation	 but	 sharp	 and	 penetrating	 vision	 that	 can	 take	 you	 as	 far	 as	 its
meaning.	 Deliberation	 shudders	 at	 words.	 But	 vision	 pierces	 through	 silence.
Deliberation	goes	on	pondering	in	vain.	But	vision	unfolds	the	meaning.	Vision
becomes	deeper	to	the	extent	that	it	is	free	from	deliberation.	Deliberation	entails
time.	It	is	an	action.	On	the	other	hand,	there	is	no	element	of	time	in	realization,
in	inner	vision.	It	is	the	stage	of	understanding	excessively	developed.	Has	it	not
been	 realized	 in	 the	moments	of	 experiences	of	beauty,	 love	or	bliss?	 Is	 it	 not
profound	consciousness	alone	that	remains	at	the	moment?	Do	not	thoughts	bid
good-bye	 then?	Truth,	beauty,	happiness,	whatever	 is	 there	 in	 life,	can	only	be
known	in	 the	quietude	and	waveless	stillness	of	 thoughtlessness	and	not	 in	 the
restless	billows	of	thoughts.
18.	I	consider	the	so-called	renunciation	no	better	than	ignorance.	As	far	as	I	can
see,	 how	 can	 there	 be	 renunciation	 where	 there	 is	 knowledge?	 In	 ignorance,
there	is	detachment	because	there	is	attachment	too;	there	is	merit	because	there
is	sin	also.	But	he	who	knows	it	becomes	free	from	the	tangle	of	attachments	and
detachments.	 In	 that	 state	 of	 realization	 there	 is	 no	 clash	 between	 attachments
and	detachments.	That	is	the	state	of	non-dual	realization	of	truth	where	there	are
no	worldly	pleasures,	no	renunciation.	That	is	the	state	of	absolute	truth	and	pure
existence.	 Ignorance	 thrives	 on	 duality,	 letting	 the	 mind	 wander	 from	 one
extreme	to	another.	When	enjoyments	leave	us,	renunciation	steps	in.	And	what
is	this	renunciation?	Is	it	not	the	opposite	of	enjoyment?
What	 is	 detachment?	 Is	 it	 not	 the	 opposite	 of	 attachment	 or	 escape	 from	 the
world	in	the	opposite	direction?	But	let	us	remember	that	it	gets	entangled	with
whatever	it	is	inimical	to.	For	the	same	reason,	enmity	can	become	a	new	form
of	slavery.	But	it	is	not	independence.	Independence	is	not	attained	by	opposing
untruth	or	running	away	from	it.
Independence	 lies	 in	 the	 knowledge	 of	 Truth.	 Truth	 and	 truth	 alone	makes	 us
liberated.
19.	What	is	Truth?	Any	tenet?	Any	cult?	Any	association?	Any	scripture?	Any
word?	 No,	 because	 tenet	 is	 death	 and	 Truth	 is	 life	 itself.	 Truth	 is	 not	 a	 cult,
because	there	is	no	path	leading	to	it.	How	can	a	known	or	unknown	path	lead	to
the	 unknown?	 Truth	 is	 not	 an	 association	 too;	 because	 it	 is	 an	 experience
transcending	time...	extremely	individualistic	and	personal....	How	can	it	be	put
in	 a	 limited	 circle	 in	 the	 current	 of	Time?	Truth	 is	 not	 a	 scripture	 because	 all
scriptures	 are	 man-made	 whereas	 Truth	 is	 unformulated,	 uncreated,
beginningless	 and	endless.	Truth	 is	not	 a	word	or	 sound.	Sounds	 are	born	 and
they	disappear	whereas	Truth	exists	for	ever.	It	is	eternal	and	permanent.	Then,
what	is	it?	In	fact,	there	is	no	truth	in	the	language	of	"what?"	It	exists	and	what
exists,	 that	alone	is	that.	It	cannot	be	thought	of	or	pondered	about,	although	it
can	be	lived	in.	Thoughts	and	ponderings	alone	are	obstacles	to	being	in	it.	In	the
cadence	of	music,	in	the	fullness	of	love,	in	the	beauty	of	nature,	the	individual
practically	ceases	 to	exist.	What	exists	 then	 is	Truth.	The	 individual	himself	 is
untruth.	The	non-individual	is	truth.	The	"I"	is	untruth.
The	Brahman	is	Truth.
20.	The	individual	is	enmeshed.	So,	too,	is	society.	The	problem	of	the	world	is
the	 same	as	 the	problem	of	 the	 individual.	How	 is	 the	 individual	 faced	with	 a
problem?	The	 individual	 is	 not	 in	 the	 problem,	 he	 himself	 is	 the	 problem	His
individualistic	 consciousness	 itself	 is	 the	 problem.	His	 egotistic	 consciousness
itself	 is	 the	problem.	 If	 from	"I	am"	 the	 "I"	ceases	 to	exist	 and	 the	experience
"am"	 alone	 persists,	 the	 problem	 vanishes;	 the	 solution	 knocks	 at	 the	 door.
Really	 life	 is	a	 sheer	existence.	 It	 is	a	natural	 flow	of	 the	current.	The	"I"	 is	a
superimposition	 on	 that	 flow.	 The	 "I"	 is	 a	 unnatural	 attempt	 to	 dam	 up	 that
natural	flow.	Seek	the	"I"	in	yourself.	It	is	nowhere	to	be	found.
There	is	life,	there	is	being,	but	there	is	no	"I"?	We	build	up	our	entire	life	on	this
"I".
What	 wonder	 is	 there	 if	 we	 are	 unable	 to	 experience	 peace	 in	 this	 life?	 Our
religion,	our	 civilization,	 everything	 stands	on	 this	 "I".	 Is	 it	not	 then	natural	 if
worry,	 tension,	madness	and	bewilderment	are	generated	by	 them.	Whatever	 is
built	up	on	the	site	of	"I"	is	unsound	and	unsafe.	It	is	only	the	life	built	up	round
the	 "I"	 that	 undergoes	 transmigration.	 It	 is	 the	 "I"	 that	 is	 born	 and	 dies.	Only
dreams	are	born	and	disappear.
What	exists	cannot	have	birth	or	death.	It	merely	exists	--	exists	--	exists.	Forget
the	"I".
Leave	it	off.	Wake	up	in	the	existence.	Live	in	it.	The	"I"	does	not	let	you	wake
up	in	the	existence.	It	does	not	let	you	live	in	it.	It	lingers	either	in	the	past	or	in
its	echo,	the	future,	whereas	life	is	the	eternal	present...	always	here	and	now.	He
who	wakes	up	in	the	present	shaking	off	 the	"I"	realizes	 that	 the	nectar	of	 life,
truth,	beauty	and	music	have	encompassed	him	from	all	sides,	from	all	quarters,
from	within	and	without,	just	as	the	fish	is	encompassed	by	the	sea.
21.	I	know	only	two	types	of	men	--	those	who	have	turned	their	backs	on	Truth
and	 those	who	have	opened	 their	 eyes	 to	 it.	There	 is	no	other	 type	apart	 from
these	two.
22.	The	power	of	thinking	is	exactly	like	the	power	of	electricity	or	gravitation.
We	are	familiar	with	the	utility	of	electricity	but	all	of	us	are	not	equally	aware
of	the	power	of	 thinking.	And	those	of	us	who	have	known	it	cannot	utilize	it,
because	for	utilizing	it,	it	becomes	necessary	to	transform	the	individuality	of	the
self	from	its	very	root.
23.	Between	Truth	and	the	Self	there	is	no	gulf	which	we	cannot	bridge	except
that	of	cowardice.
24.	How	wonderful	is	man!	Within	him	there	abides	the	dirt	of	filthy	rubbish	as
well	as	the	precious	store	of	gold.	What	we	receive	is	entirely	in	our	hands.
25.	 The	moment	we	 realize	 the	 Lord	within,	 visions	 of	Him	 begin	 to	 emerge
everywhere.
We	have	the	external	experience	of	only	that	which	is	within	us.	If	 the	Lord	is
invisible,	understand	that	you	have	not	sought	Him	yet,	within.
26.	Truth	is	not	to	be	created.	If	the	creation	of	anything	is	possible,	know	that	it
is	untruth.	Vision	of	truth	is	possible	but	not	its	creation.	Truth	is	always	present
if	only	the	self	has	eyes	to	see	it.
27.	 It	 is	 necessary	 to	 transform	 the	 self	 into	 a	mirror	 and	 to	 know	 that	which
exists.	 The	 shadows	 of	 thoughts	 cause	 the	mind	 to	 be	 deformed.	As	 thoughts
subside	and	the	mind	becomes	void,	that	mirror	is	acquired	which	is	capable	of
reflecting	Truth.
28.	What	has	become	existent	can	also	become	non-existent.	What	is	done	can
also	be	undone.	If	man	is	capable	of	being	entangled	in	action,	he	is	also	capable
of	being	liberated.	In	his	dependence	lies	his	freedom.
29.	 Freedom	 is	 the	 form	 of	 the	 soul.	 If	 there	 is	 the	will,	 one	 can	 rid	 of	 one's
dependence	in	a	moment.	Freedom	is	in	proportion	to	the	will.
30.	I	die	every	day....	In	fact,	I	die	every	moment.	I	have	known	this	as	the	secret
of	 life,	of	 long	 life.	He	who	bears	 the	burden	of	 the	past	becomes	dead	as	 the
result	of	bearing	the	burden	of	the	dead.
31.	Even	 for	 the	 longest	 journey	of	 life,	 it	 is	enough	 if	one	has	 the	courage	 to
take	 one	 step,	 because	 no	one	 can	walk	more	 than	one	 step	 at	 a	 time.	Even	 a
journey	of	thousands	of	miles	begins	and	ends	with	but	one	step.
32.	What	is	this	search	for	the	Lord?	It	the	search	for	the	lost	home.	In	this	world
man	but	a	homeless	stranger.
33.	Do	you	ask	me	how	Truth	is	defined?	I	say	there	is	no	definition	of	Truth,	for
how	can	there	be	the	definition	of	the	Self	through	the	self?
Pilate	 had	 asked	 Christ,	 "What	 is	 Truth?"	 Christ	 just	 looked	 at	 him	 and	 kept
quiet.	Truth	is	no	tenet,	no	sound.	It	is	an	experience	of	the	extreme	depth	of	the
self.	It	is	the	identification	with	"what	exists".
Wings	of	Love	and	Random	Thought
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Random	Thoughts,	pages	77	to	105
Date	Unknown
Archive
code:
6900000
ShortTitle:
RANDOM04
Audio:
No
Video:	No
34.	We	live	life	only	when	we	touch	our	ultimate	depth....	Otherwise	we	simply
exist.
The	 difference	 between	 simple	 existence	 and	 living	 life	 is	 as	 much	 as	 the
difference	between	dying	and	living.
35.	What	is	the	meaning	of	dharma?	It	means	the	movement	from	the	mud	to	the
lotus.
Where	there	is	mud	there	is	lotus	too.	But	what	a	lot	of	difference!
36.	Dharma	is	not	a	formless	conception.	It	is	a	perceptible	function.	It	is	not	a
thought;	it	is	an	experience.	The	cultivation	of	the	attitude	that	those	things	that
cause	misery	to	us	should	not	torment	others,	is	dharma.
37.	 Do	 not	 keep	 dharma	 in	 the	 mouth.	 Allow	 it	 to	 go	 into	 the	 belly	 and	 be
absorbed	in	the	blood.	The	belly	cannot	be	filled	if	 the	morsel	of	bread	is	kept
only	in	the	mouth.
38.	Dharma	means	 death	 --	 death	 of	 the	 self.	How	 can	 he	whose	 self	 is	 dead
attain	 the	universal?	Shake	off	 the	 ego.	Give	up	 self-worship.	Eschewing	 self-
worship	is	the	worship	of	the	Supreme	Soul.
39.	I	urge	you	to	light	 the	lamp	of	free	thinking.	Do	not	behave	like	a	slave	to
anybody	 by	 accepting	 his	 thoughts.	 Truth	 belongs	 to	 those	who	 are	 their	 own
masters.
40.	 Life	 is	 like	 a	 flute,	 hollow	 and	 void	 within	 but	 possessing	 infinite	 latent
possibilities	of	music.	The	extent	of	music	produced	 therefrom	depends	on	 the
extent	to	which	one	plays	on	it.
41.	I	do	not	ask	you	to	believe	in	others,	for	that	is	the	result	of	the	want	of	belief
in	your	own	self.
42.	There	 is	 an	 invisible	 fire	 that	 scorches	 the	 self	 incessantly.	 It	 is	 the	 fire	of
avarice,	which	burns	like	a	torch	when	one	holds	it	aloft	against	the	gust	of	wind
and	allows	oneself	to	be	burnt	and	then	begins	to	blame	the	gust	of	wind.
43.	 A	 very	 small	 lamp	 dispels	 the	 mass	 of	 darkness	 accumulated	 over	 years.
Similarly	 the	 tiniest	 ray	 of	 self-understanding	 removes	 the	 ignorance
accumulated	through	hundreds	of	births.
44.	 Do	 you	wish	 to	 serve?	 But	 remember	 that	 a	 person	 drowning	 in	 the	 vast
ocean	cannot	rescue	another	person	drowning	similarly.
45.	 If	you	wish	 to	know	God,	 the	path	 is	 silence.	Whatever	 is	 said	about	God
becomes	untruth	exactly	for	the	reason	that	it	is	said	after	all.
46.	Man	is	a	journey,	journey	to	the	infinite,	the	eternal.	Neitzsche	has	said,	"The
greatness	of	man	lies	 in	 this	 that	he	 is	 the	bridge,	not	 the	goal."	 I,	 too,	say	 the
same.
47.	Friend,	do	not	bind	yourself	to	disciplinary	measure.	Real	discipline	sets	in
when	discrimination	wakes	up	and	one	is	liberated	--	not	by	binding	oneself.
48.	Education	aims	at	bringing	out	what	lies	hidden	in	the	individual.	It	is	not	an
external	ideal	or	behest	but	a	revelation	of	the	inner	being.
49.	I	am	against	that	education	which	moulds	and	shapes	individuals	according
to	predetermined	ideals.	Such	educational	methods	do	not	develop	individuality,
they	just	blunt	it.	I	do	not	favour	that	education	too	which	is	based	on	fear,	fear
of	punishment	or	of	 failure.	What	else	can	be	more	poisonous	 than	 fear?	 I	am
averse	 to	 a	 superimposed	 discipline	 too	 because	 what	 more	 is	 it	 than	 a	 mere
preparation	for	slavery?
50.	There	is	nothing	simpler	than	greatness.	In	fact,	simplicity	itself	is	greatness.
51.	Remember	one	truth	for	ever.	Deception	practised	on	others	is	eventually	the
deception	practised	by	one	on	oneself,	because	what	we	do	to	others	eventually
returns	to	us.
52.	Do	you	know	that	no	man	has	ever	been	deceived	by	others	so	much	as	he
has	been	deceived	by	himself.
53.	Light	travels	in	a	straight	line.	Truth	and	dharma	too	travel	in	straight	lines.
If	 the	 line	 of	 your	 life's	 travel	 is	 not	 straight,	 know	 that	 your	 life	 is	 moving
towards	darkness,	evil,	and	untruth.
54.	Dharma	is	a	path.	No	path	can	be	traversed	by	merely	knowing	it,	but	it	can
be	traversed	by	realizing	what	it	is	--	by	actually	treading	on	it.
55.	 Truth	 is	 not	 opposed	 to	 untruth.	 That	which	 is	 opposed	 to	 untruth	 is	 only
untruth.	 In	 fact,	 all	 extremes	 are	 untruths.	 Truth	 is	 the	 mean	 between	 the
extremes,	that	is,	it	transcends	the	extremes.
56.	When	I	peep	into	myself,	what	do	I	realize?	I	realize	that	salvation	is	nearer
than	the	earth.
57.	 The	 time	 and	 labour	 spent	 in	 seeking	 Truth,	 the	 Self,	 never	 goes	 in	 vain.
Eventually	it	turns	out	to	be	the	time	saved	and	labour	rendered	meaningful.
58.	I	have	realized	untruth	as	a	heap	of	straw.	It	has	no	strength	at	all.	The	tiniest
spark	of	truth	can	reduce	it	to	ashes.
59.	The	greatest	respect	that	we	can	show	to	dharma	is	that	we	should	utilize	it
and	live	it.
He	who	only	 discusses	 it	 but	 does	 not	 live	 it,	 betrays	 his	 disbelief	 in	 his	 own
discussion	and	deliberation.
60.	 What	 is	 the	 aim	 of	 dharma?	 It	 is	 the	 rousing	 and	 awakening	 of	 the
slumbering	superman	in	man.	Well,	this	and	this	alone	is	the	aim	of	dharma.
61.	Life	is	not	a	problem	with	solutions	lying	outside.	Life's	solution	is	found	in
life	itself,	in	living	it.
62.	The	greatest	liberation	is	the	liberation	of	the	self	from	the	self.	Usually	we
remain	oblivious	of	the	fact	that	we	ourselves	are	the	toughest	bondage	and	the
heaviest	burden	on	ourselves.
63.	 Man	 does	 not	 receive	 gentlemanliness	 readymade.	 He	 has	 to	 build	 it	 up
himself.	This	is	both	a	blessing	and	a	bane.	It	is	a	blessing	because	he	is	free	to
assume	whatever	 form	he	chooses;	 it	 is	a	bane	because	he,	by	nature	 indolent,
may	 not	 do	 anything	 at	 all.	 There	 is	 a	 possibility	 that	 he	 may	 die	 without
building	up	himself.
64.	Know	precisely	that	you	have	to	get	rid	of	your	ego.	Egotism	is	the	source	of
darkness.	It	disappears	as	soon	as	the	lustre	of	self	realization	creeps	in.
65.	Man	does	not	become	God	by	developing	himself.	If	only	he	opens	himself
fully,	he	is	God	here	and	now	itself.	In	my	view,	the	complete	realization	of	the
self	is	the	only	realization	worth	having.
66.	Man	has	to	struggle	and	fight	against	his	ego,	against	the	"I"	of	the	self.	He
has	to	start	a	revolution	against	the	ego,	the	self.	To	remain	encompassed	by	the
ego	is	to	live	in	the	world.	To	get	out	of	the	ego	is	to	live	in	the	Supreme	Soul.
Virtually,	man	is	in	a	sense	the	Supreme	Soul	Itself.
67.	Do	 not	 try	 to	 run	 away	 from	 the	 "I".	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 run	 away	 from	 it
because	even	if	you	run	away,	it	is	there	with	you.	Rather	than	run	away	from	it,
catch	hold	of	it	with	full	force.	He	who	dives	deep	into	the	self	realizes,	to	the
extent	to	which	he	penetrates,	that	it	has	no	real	existence	whatever.
68.	 Do	 you	 want	 proofs	 for	 the	 existence	 of	 God?	 Is	 not	 the	 existence	 of
consciousness	a	sufficient	proof?	Does	not	a	drop	of	water	prove	the	existence	of
all	the	oceans?
69.	Do	no	say	that	you	were	'in	prayer'	because	it	would	mean	that	you	can	get
out	of	prayer	as	well.	He	who	is	out	of	prayer	cannot	be	in	prayer.	Prayer	is	not
an	activity.	It	is	the	perfection	and	fullness	of	love.
70.	In	the	search	for	life,	there	is	nothing	more	fatal	than	self-satisfaction.	Those
who	 are	 satisfied	 with	 the	 self	 are,	 in	 a	 sense,	 not	 alive	 at	 all.	 He	 who	 is
dissatisfied	with	the	self	moves	ahead	in	the	direction	of	Truth.	Remember	that
being	 determinedly	 rebellious	 and	 aware	 of	 one's	 own	 limitations	 is	 being
virtuous.
71.	Haven't	you	invented	God	on	being	haunted	by	the	fear	of	death?	There	is	no
other	untruth	than	the	concept	of	God	based	on	fear.
72.	That	which	ever	exists	in	the	present	is	Truth.	That	which	is	nearest	to	us	is
the	ultimate	Truth.	Understand	 the	nearer	one,	not	 the	distant	one	How	can	he
who	 is	 ignorant	 of	 the	 one	 nearby	 know	 the	 distant	 one?	 For	 him	 who
understands	the	one	nearby,	nothing	distant	remains.
73.	 "Who	 am	 I,"	 you	 asked.	Ask	 yourself,	 "Where	 am	 I?"	 Search...	 seek	 it	 in
yourself.
When	you	do	not	find	yourself	anywhere,	you	will	realize	who	you	are.	It	is	in
the	oblivion	of	the	"I"	that	the	secret	of	the	"I"	lies	hidden.
74.	If	Truth	remains	known,	the	knowledge	of	the	scriptures	is	useless.
75.	You	are	trying	to	know	Truth	and	yet	you	allow	dust	to	accumulate	on	your
mind?
Know	that	the	mind	is	like	a	mirror.	Wipe	it	clean.	You	will	see	that	Truth	stands
in	front	of	you	and	that	it	has	always	been	there	before	you.
76	In	order	to	get	rid	of	one	illusion,	do	not	create	another	It	is	improper	to	slip
into	another	dream	 to	get	 rid	of	an	earlier	dream.	Do	not	presume	 to	scan	and
define	 God	 Abandon	 all	 conceptual	 images	 of	 God	 and	 look.	 What	 you	 see
before	you	is	God.
77.	When	I	enter	a	 river	for	my	bath,	 I	 leave	my	clothes	on	 the	bank.	He	who
wishes	to	have	his	ablution	in	the	Supreme	Soul	has	to	leave	his	entire	clothings
on	 the	 bank.	 All	 the	 garments,	 all	 the	 raiments	 of	 individuality.	 To	 that	 great
ocean	only	those	who	are	stark	naked,	can	have	access...	only	those	with	whom
nothing	 is	 left.	But	blessed	are	 those	who	can	 renounce	everything	because	by
doing	so	they	can	receive	that	which	is	more	than	the	sum-total	of	all.
78.	Scriptures	 and	 tenets	 are	 like	dry	 leaves.	The	verdure	of	 self-experience	 is
neither	present	in	them	nor	can	it	enliven	them.	Only	the	tree	of	self-experience
can	put	forth	green	leaves	and	lively	blossoms.
79.	 Although	 I	 have	 been	 searching,	 I	 could	 not	 find	 a	 greater	 scripture	 than
silence.
When	 I	 searched	 through	 the	 scriptures,	 I	 realized	 that	while	 they	were	 futile,
silence	alone	was	purposeful.
80.	Where	are	you	going?	That	which	you	seek	is	not	far	off	from	you.	If	you
walk	on	to	find	what	is	nearby,	you	will	be	going	astray.	Stop	and	see.	To	realize
what	is	near	by,	it	is	enough	to	stop	and	see.
81.	Salvation	is	achieved	neither	by	prayer,	nor	by	worship,	nor	even	by	faith	in
religious	precepts.	Salvation	 is	 achieved	by	 leading	 a	peaceful	 life.	 I	 therefore
say	 that	 to	 remain	 peaceful	 in	 thought	 and	 action	 is	 prayer,	worship,	 and	 true
religious	austerity.
82.	Think	of	 that	of	which	you	cannot	 think	at	all,	and	you	will	be	outside	 the
sphere	of	thinking.	Once	out,	you	will	come	within	the	self.
83.	 Do	 not	 seek	 Nirvana	 (salvation)	 in	 place	 of	 life.	 Let	 your	 life	 itself	 be
Nirvana.	They	who	know	it,	do	 this.	Work	not	 for	salvation,	but	 let	all	actions
yield	salvation.	This	is	possible.	What	I	say	iS	based	on	experience.	And	the	day
this	 becomes	 possible,	 life	 becomes	 beautiful	 like	 a	 full-blown	 flower,	 and	 is
filled	with	fragrance.
84.	 Do	 you	 wish	 to	 meditate?	 Then	 bear	 in	 mind	 that	 while	 you	 meditate,
nothing	 is	 before	 you	 and	 nothing	 is	 behind	 you.	 Let	 the	 past	 perish.	 Let	 the
future	too	die.	Let	memory	and	imagination	become	void.	There	will	be	no	time,
no	vacuum.	You	will	know	that	during	this	void,	this	moment	of	emptiness	you
are	in	real	meditation.	The	moment	of	great	death	is	the	moment	of	eternal	life	as
well.
85.	You	ask	me	what	you	have	 to	do	for	meditation.	 I	say	do	not	do	anything.
Just	be	mindful	of	your	breath.	Look	at	the	passage	of	your	breath.	near	witness
to	your	inhalations	and	exhalations.	Let	it	not	be	a	strenuous	activity	but	a	quiet,
languid,	restful	consciousness.	Then,	without	your	knowledge	of	it,	in	a	natural,
unrestricted	manner,	 you	will	 have	 access	 to	 an	 excessively	pleasant	 situation.
You	will	 not	 be	 conscious	 of	 your	 entry	 into	 it.	 Suddenly	 you	will	 experience
that	you	are	where	you	had	never	been	before.
And	this	is	the	place	where,	in	fact,	the	consciousness	has	been	for	ever.
86.	I	forgot	what	I	had	learnt.	I	could	realize	that	which	alone	was	worth	learning
but	 could	 not	 be	 taught.	 In	 order	 to	 realize	 Truth,	 are	 you	 ready	 to	 forget
whatever	you	have	learnt	about	Truth?	If	you	say.	"yes,	come	on,	the	portals	of
Truth	lie	open	before	you.
87.	Truth	can	very	well	be	realized,	but	it	cannot	be	understood	or	explained.
88.	Truth	is	like	the	firmament	--	beginningless,	endless,	and	boundless,	Is	there
any	 doorway	 and	 passage	 leading	 to	 the	 sky?	 Then,	 how	 can	 there	 be	 one	 in
Truth?	But,	if	our	eyes	are	closed,	there	is	no	sky.	The	same	is	true	of	Truth.	The
opening	of	the	eyes	is	the	entrance	and	the	closing	of	eyes	is	the	closing	of	the
door.
89.	What	 is	 it	 that	 is	experienced	in	 the	course	of	 the	ecstatic	 trance?	Nothing.
There	is	no	trance	at	all	so	long	as	something	remains	to	be	known.	Trance	is	the
state	 of	 union	 with	 existence.	 There	 is	 no	 distance	 as	 whatever	 between	 the
aspirant	and	the	reality	around	him.
90.	Staying	in	the	world	but	not	belonging	to	it	is	renunciation.	It	has	often	been
interpreted	 in	 terms	a	 fable,	 the	 fable	of	 three	monkeys	who	have	closed	 their
eyes	 to	 escape	 evil	 scenes,	 the	 ears	 to	 escape	 evil	 sounds,	 and	 the	 mouth	 to
escape	evil	speech.
This	may	be	pardonable	in	the	case	of	monkeys	but	ridiculous	in	human	beings.
Running	 away	 from	 the	world	 for	 fear	 is	 not	 liberation;	 but	 a	 very	 subtle	 and
deep	 bondage.	 Don't	 run	 away	 from	 the	 world	 but	 be	 mindful	 of	 the	 self.	 In
running	 away	 there	 is	 fear;	 in	 being	 alert	 there	 is	 safety.	 Nothing	 other	 than
fearlessness	acquired	through	knowledge	can	bring	us	liberty.
91.	Can	nirvana	or	moksha	be	wished	for?	There	is	no	greater	impossibility	than
a	desire	for	Nirvana,	for	Nirvana	is	there	where	there	is	no	desire.	If	desire	itself
is	 the	 absence	 of	 liberation,	 how	 can	 moksha	 be	 wished	 for?	 But	 there	 are
persons	desirous	of	liberation.
Then	 it	 is	 but	 natural	 that	 their	 so-called	 renunciation	 assumes	 the	 form	 of	 a
bondage	 and	 becomes	 a	 part	 of	 the	 world.	 Moksha	 is	 attained	 naturally,
unsolicitedly	and	undesiredly	at	the	time	when	the	futility	of	desire	is	known	and
it	 is	 recognized	 that	 it	 leads	 to	misery,	 and	when	 the	bondages	are	known	and
recognized	in	their	subtlest	of	subtle	forms.	Thus	when	it	is	recognized	that	the
race	 has	 been	 futile,	 it	 comes	 to	 all	 end.	 In	 fact,	 the	 awareness	 of	 the	 desires
racing	 along	 in	 the	mind	 is	 liberation	 from	 them.	And	 that	 liberation	 alone	 is
moksha.
92.	We	are	suffering.	The	whole	age	is	suffering.	What	is	the	reason?	The	reason
is	not	far	to	seek.	We	know	much	more	than	is	needed,	but	have	no	experience.
The	 brain	 is	 intact,	 while	 the	 heart	 has	 dwindled	 into	 nothing.	 True	 self
realization	 comes	 not	 from	 knowledge	 but	 from	 experience.	 The	 eyes	 that
illumine	the	path	of	life	are	not	of	the	brain	but	of	the	heart.	If	the	heart	is	blind,
nothing	can	dispel	the	darkness	of	life.
93.	The	intellect	can	think,	but	it	cannot	experience.	Experience	originates	in	the
heart,	the	most	vital	of	the	vital	parts.	Thinking	devoid	of	experience	is	no	more
than	dead.
Such	dead	words	and	meanings	reverberate	in	our	brains,	and	we	are	afflicted	by
their	 burden.	 They	 do	 not	 liberate	 us.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 they	 are	 our	 bonds.
Experience	in	the	heart	is	essential	for	liberation	and	for	freedom	from	burden.
Therefore	I	say,	"Don't	seek	the	meaning	of	Truth,	an	exposition	of	Truth.	Seek
the	experience	of	Truth.	Seek	life.
Dive	 deep	 into	 Truth	 and	 remember	 that	 only	 they	who	 become	 immersed	 in
Truth	with	full	consciousness	are	liberated	from	untruth."	The	intellect	makes	us
float	 on	 the	 surface	 but	 the	 heart	 takes	 us	 to	 the	 bottom.	 The	 heart,	 not	 the
intellect,	is	the	way	to	liberation.
94.	 There	 is	 a	 lot	 of	 difference	 between	 the	 experience	 of	 Truth	 and	 the
exposition	of	Truth.	In	expositions	we	stand	outside	Truth	but	in	experience	we
stand	inside	and	commune	with	it.	It	is,	therefore,	impossible	for	those	who	have
experience	to	define	Truth.	The	readiness	to	indulge	in	exposition	is	an	index	of
the	want	of	experience.
People	ask	me,	"What	is	Truth?"	All	I	do	to	answer	them	is	to	keep	silent.
95.	Knowledge	is	 the	understanding	of	mystery,	 the	acceptance	of	mystery,	 the
communion	 with	 mystery.	 When	 all	 egotism	 is	 destroyed	 and	 only	 mystery
remains,	know	 that	 the	 entry	 into	 the	holy	 land	of	 the	Supreme	Soul	has	been
achieved.	And	let	us	know	that	there	is	no	greater	mystery	than	the	quelling	of
the	'self'	because	when	the	self	is	annihilated,	the	existence	of	the	Pure	Self,	the
Supreme	Self,	becomes	manifest	in	its	complete	grandeur.
96.	It	 is	true	that	man	is	not	an	animal,	but	is	it	also	true	that	man	has	become
man?	His	being	an	animal	has	become	an	event	of	the	past	but	his	becoming	a
man	is	yet	a	possibility	of	the	future.	Perhaps	we	are	in	the	middle.	This	alone	is
our	 affliction,	 this	 alone	 our	 tension	 and	 this	 alone	 our	 distress.	 Those	 who
endeavour	and	are	dissatisfied	with	 their	existence	 in	misery	and	affliction	can
become	men.	Gentlemanliness	is	not	acquired,	we	have	to	cultivate	it	ourselves
in	our	own	selves.	But	to	become	man	it	is	essential	to	know	that	not	being	an
animal	is	not	 identical	with	being	a	man.	Moreover,	we	should	not	be	satisfied
with	 being	what	we	 are.	A	deep	 and	 fierce	 dissatisfaction	with	 the	 self	would
help	us	in	our	evolution.
97.	I	can't	tell	you	how	distressed	I	am	to	see	the	state	of	present-day	education?
Knowledge	that	is	being	imparted	destroys	the	power	of	thinking.	In	the	crowd
of	 thoughts,	 this	 power	 gets	 crushed.	Memory	 gets	 trained,	 but	 the	 springs	 of
knowledge	 remain	 unrecognized.	 This	 trained	 memory	 begins	 to	 give	 the
illusion	 of	 knowledge.	 The	 individual	 who	 is	 educated	 under	 this	 so-called
system	of	education	is	obliged	to	learn	to	think	and	has	to	unlearn	what	he	has
learnt	before.	I	too	was	obliged	to	do	this.	But	this	was	a	tedious	job.	It	was	as
difficult	as	stripping	the	skin	off	one's	body,	and	not	like	taking	off	one's	clothes.
Except	this	there	was	no	other	way.	In	order	to	look	at	life	in	my	own	fashion,	it
was	 necessary	 for	me	 to	 forget	what	 I	 had	 learnt	 and	what	 I	 had	 been	 taught
before.	In	order	to	secure	my	own	vision,	it	was	necessary	to	forget	the	borrowed
views.	 In	 order	 to	 realize	 my	 own	 thought,	 it	 was	 necessary	 to	 be	 free	 from
borrowed	ideas.	He	who	has	to	learn	to	walk	on	his	own	legs	has	to	abandon	the
support	 of	 another	man's	 shoulder.	Only	when	we	cease	 to	 see	 through	others'
eyes	do	our	own	eyes	open.
And	 let	 us	 remember	 that	 the	 person	 who	 sees	 through	 the	 eyes	 of	 others	 is
blinder	than	the	person	born	blind.
98.	Moral	evolution,	personal	development,	touch	of	eminence,	whatever	there	is
of	some	moment	 in	 life,	all	 result	 from	precipitate	and	reckless	daring.	What	 I
mean	by
'precipitate	 and	 reckless	 daring'	 is	 'an	 invitation	 to	 insecurity',	 'a	 love	 for	 the
strange	and	the	unknown',	'joy	in	peril',	etc.	He	who	is	not	prepared	to	face	peril
and	 embrace	 it,	 may	 exist	 but	 does	 not	 live.	 (1)	What	 is	 the	 greatest	 of	 this
precipitate	and	reckless	daring?	It	is	to	seek	the	Supreme	Soul.	No	way	is	more
insecure	than	the	way	to	the	Supreme	Soul.
There	 is	 nothing	 stranger,	 more	 unfamiliar	 and	 more	 unknowable	 than	 the
Supreme	Soul.
Is	there	a	greater	risk,	a	more	calamitous	gamble	and	a	more	dreadful	peril	than
seeking	 the	Supreme	Soul?	No.	That	 is	why	I	say	 that	precipitate	daring	 is	 the
greatest	 of	 all	 virtues.	 He	who	 is	 deficient	 in	 it	 is	 not	meant	 for	 religion	 and
religion	is	not	meant	for	him.
[Footnote:	 (1)	 Both	 Krishnamurti	 and	 Rajneesh	 agree	 that	 life	 is	 really	 very
beautiful	to	those	who	have	learnt	to	discover,	to	revolt,	and	not	to	conform	and
imitate.	See	R.	C.
Prasad,	THE	MYSTIC	OF	FEELING	(Delhi,	1978),	p.	50.l
99.	The	experience	of	Truth	is	neither	a	thought	nor	a	feeling.	It	is	an	agitation
and	throbbing	of	all	the	vital	constituents	of	your	entire	existence.	It	is	not	in	you
but	you	are	in	it.	It	is	your	form,	not	a	mere	experience.	It	is	also	larger	than	you
because	the	universal	existence	too	is	embedded	in	it.
100.	 Are	 you	 so	 poor	 that	 you	 are	 completely	 devoid	 of	 dharma?	 Economic
poverty	 is	 not	 a	 major	 consideration.	 True	 poverty	 is	 the	 spiritual	 poverty	 of
dharma.	In	spite	of	wealth	man	remains	poor,	but	if	he	possesses	the	wealth	of
dharma	he	can	no	longer	remain	poor.	The	greatest	event	in	the	life	of	a	man	is
not	his	mundane	success,	the	building	of	an	empire,	and	so	on,	but	the	search	for
that	 wealth	 which	 lies	 hidden	 in	 him.	 I	 call	 that	 wealth	 dharma.	 All	 material
wealth	is	filthy	lucre,	all	internal,	spiritual	wealth	is	divine.
They	who	seek	worldly	wealth	seek	poverty	and	they	who	seek	virtue	seek	real
wealth.
101.	 I	had	been	 to	a	house	where	 I	 saw	a	 lute.	 I	was	 struck	with	 the	 idea	 that
human	mind	too	is	like	a	lute.	Mind	is	an	instrument,	producing	rhythmical	and
discordant	notes.	We	are	responsible	for	it	whatever	note	is	produced.	So	make
your	mind	 an	 instrument	 of	 harmonious	melody	 and	Truth.	Keep	 it	 ready	 and
rhythmical.	Keep	it	free	from	egotism.
There	is	no	element	other	than	the	ego	which	produces	a	more	discordant	note.
He	alone	who	 is	 full	of	melody	within	can	approach	Truth.	 It	 is	not	he	who	 is
merely	 intellectual	 but	 he	 whose	 self	 is	 fully	 melodious,	 who	 can	 approach
Truth.
102.	I	see	you	repeating	and	chanting	mantras	uttering	words	learnt	by	rote	from
scriptural	texts.	My	heart	is	filled	with	pity	and	sympathy.	What	is	it	that	you	are
doing?
Do	 you	 take	 this	 doping,	 this	 self-forgetfulness,	 this	 slumber	 of	 the	 soul	 for
religion	 and	 austerity?	Certainly	 the	 chanting	 of	 the	mantras,	 the	 repetition	 of
words	 etc.	 can	 drown	 the	 mind	 in	 a	 pleasant	 slumber	 But	 do	 not	 take	 this
slumber	for	some	spiritual	trance.
Friends,	 there	 is	a	wide	gulf	between	slumber	and	trance.	In	slumber	produced
by	what	 I	 call	 'soul-fascination'	 there	 is	 an	 element	of	 experience	 as	well.	But
this	experience	is	no	more	than	a	dream.	It	is	our	mind	that	diffuses	such	dreams.
Even	 if	 these	 be	 highly	 pleasing	 and	 satisfying,	 they	 do	 not	 become	 truths
merely	because	they	yield	pleasure	and	satisfaction.	But	generally	it	is	not	Truth
that	we	seek.	We	seek	only	satisfaction.	Hence	it	is	easy	for	us	to	get	entangled
in	all	sorts	of	illusions.	The	mind	that	seeks	satisfaction	is	likely	to	be	satisfied
with	 intoxication	 of	 any	 sort.	 Any	 kind	 of	 self-forgetfulness	 can	 yield
satisfaction	 to	 it.	 Self-forgetfulness	 can	 be	 achieved	 through	 the	 so-called
mantras,	chanting	of	the	Lord's	Name,	and	concentration.	Any	sort	of	incessant
repetition	 can	 subdue	 consciousness.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 dharma	 is	 not	 at	 all
concerned	 with	 stupefaction	 or	 self-forgetfulness.	 It	 is	 the	 state	 of	 non-
stupefaction,	complete	soul-memory,	and	wakefulness.
103.	There	is	no	hell	other	than	egotism.	Egotism	is	synonymous	with	hell.	Get
rid	of	egotism.	There	is	no	hell.
104.	I	cannot	undertake	the	voyage	to	Truth	for	your	sake.	Nor	can	anyone	else
do	 the	 same	 for	 me.	 You	 yourself	 have	 to	 undertake	 that	 journey.	 Know	 this
precisely,	otherwise	the	precious	time	of	your	life	is	spent	in	vain.	The	highway
of	life	is	full	of	darkness.	No	other	light	than	the	luminous	understanding	of	the
self	can	 illumine	 the	path.	You	are	 the	darkness	 in	 regard	 to	yourself	and	only
you	can	be	your	own	light.
105.	Learn	the	technique	of	surrendering	yourself	to	Truth.	Unless	you	surrender
yourself,	Truth	cannot	be	realized.	The	seed	crumbles	and	disintegrates	before	it
germinates	into	a	lovely	shoot.	Learn	to	die	if	you	seek	to	live.
106.	 Are	 you	 in	 search	 of	 bliss?	 Get	 ready	 to	 purvey	 it	 unto	 everyone.	 The
universe	is	but	an	echo;	whatever	we	do	comes	back	to	us	echoing	and	rumbling.
He	who	showers	blessings	on	others	 finds	himself	delightfully	drenched	 in	 the
blessings	 poured	 from	 every	 quarter.	Words	 of	 abuse	 are	 paid	 back	 with	 still
viler	words	of	abuse.	Never	expect	love	in	return	for	the	stones	you	pelt	others
with.	Those	who	sow	thorns	for	others	must	be	ready	 to	 reap	a	 rich	harvest	of
thorns.	It	is	an	eternal	law	that	hatred	provokes	hatred	just	as	love	provokes	love.
107.	 Since	 rudeness	 can	 never	 let	 knowledge	 bloom,	 knowledge	 bereft	 of
humility	is	but	delusion.	Vain-glorious	exhibition	of	knowledge	proclaims	that	it
is	borrowed.
108.	What	 is	 sin?	A	negation	of	 the	divinity	 in	yourself.	 (1)	There	 is	no	other
virtue	greater	than	the	perpetual	consciousness	of	your	own	divinity.
109.	It	is	needless	to	go	out	in	search	of	God.	Live	a	life	of	godliness;	prove	it	in
every	action.	Nay,	godliness	must	be	the	very	breath	of	your	life,	for	then	alone
will	you	realize	God.
110.	 It	 is	essential	 to	wade	 through	death	 to	conquer	death.	He	who	 is	dead	 to
vulgarity	defeats	death	and	wins	immortality.
111.	 It	 is	 insanely	 ridiculous	 to	 delve	 into	 the	 shastras	 for	 the	 realization	 of
Truth.	(1)	The	shastras	may	well	be	the	outcome	of	Truth	but	are	never	known	to
generate	 Truth.	 How	 funny	 is	 the	 behaviour	 of	 people	 who	 shelter	 stark
ignorance	in	the	living	heart	and	grope	among	dead	words	to	cull	out	Truth!
112.	If	darkness	is	within,	no	external	light	can	serve	our	purpose.
113.	Life	is	but	one	unit.	The	realization	of	this	singleness	in	its	entirety	is	love.
114.	 Where	 is	 ignorance?	 Undoubtedly	 in	 egotism	 where	 lustful	 inclinations
have	struck	their	roots	deep.
115.	Lustful	propensities	are	endlessly	painful	because	they	are	insatiable.
116.	It	 is	vain	 to	expect	peace	from	what	one	had	been	longing	to	possess	and
had	been	 yearning	 to	 secure;	 for,	 even	 if	 it	 comes	within	 reach	 in	 this	way,	 it
cannot	but	be	evanescent.	When	the	mind	that	yearns	is	itself	transitory	how	can
the	cherished	object	be	everlasting?
117.	The	entrance	door	to	Truth,	Perpetuity	and	Eternity	is	neither	a	pining	love,
nor	an	unquenchable	thirst,	nor	an	insatiable	lust.	In	fact,	 the	mind	itself	 is	not
the	pathway	leading	to	it.	Truth	is	there	where	the	mind	is	not.
118.	Do	you	wish	to	hear	the	sweet	eloquence	of	the	Lord?	Turn	a	deaf	ear	to	the
worldly	verbiage.	Those	deaf	 to	 the	external	world	hear	Him	well;	 those	blind
and	lame	and	crippled	see	Him	distinct	and	hear	Him	and	keep	pace	with	Him.
119.	Running	after	lecherous	fancies	is	a	wild	goose	chase,	a	mirage,	a	journey
from	a	frigid	life	to	a	frozen	death.	Overwhelmed	by	such	misconceptions,	man
dies	many	such	deaths,	but	those	who	are	ready	to	court	death	in	a	fight	against
such	fancies	shall	find	Death	itself	on	its	death-bed.
120.	Life	is	only	for	those	who	know	how	to	die	in	the	fight	against	life.	Where
there	is	fear	there	is	neither	freedom	nor	intelligence.
121.	There	was	a	day	when	death	was	awaiting	me.	Since	I	was	frightened,	it	lay
in	ambush	for	me,	but	when	I	advanced	to	embrace	it,	it	was	not	there:	for	death
is	 in	 the	 fear	 of	 death,	 and	 its	 acceptance	 is	 salvation.	 Fear	 is	 death	 and
fearlessness	is	liberation.
Death	 pursues	 those	who	 flee	 it,	 like	 their	 shadow.	 If	 you	 turn	 and	 face	 it,	 it
vanishes.	To	accept	death	before	its	advent	is	to	escape	from	it.
122.	As	I	stood	by	the	sea,	I	asked	myself,	"Why	do	all	the	rivers	fall	eventually
into	 the	 sea?"	 Even	 a	 child	 will	 say,	 "Because	 it	 is	 far	 below	 --	 lower	 than
anything	 else."	 The	 thought	 filled	 my	 mind	 with	 scintillating	 rays	 of	 light.
Blessed	is	he	who	is	humble	since	the	Lord	crowns	him	with	the	plenitude	of	His
riches.
123.	 It	 is	essential	 to	 forgo	both	 the	good	and	 the	bad	 to	be	able	 to	 realize	 the
Lord.	Only	 then	does	human	consciousness	 rise	above	difference	and	establish
itself	in	identity.
124.	Friend,	you	have	forsaken	 the	 impure.	That's	all	 right.	Now,	renounce	 the
pure	as	well.	For	vanity	stays	as	long	as	there	is	a	hold	on	either.
125.	 Open	 thy	 eyes	 and	 observe	 carefully.	 Don't	 you	 see	 a	 perpetual	 change
everywhere?
Whatever	your	eyes	behold	is	caught	in	a	perennial	flow,	in	endless	flux,	and	he
who	wishes	to	build	up	his	house	in	the	running	river	is	not	in	his	senses.
126.	This	Physical	body	is	a	sacred	temple.	Instead	of	putting	up	a	fight	with	it,
delve	into	it,	for	the	path	to	the	Lord	lies	through	it.	The	body	is	a	place	of	holy
pilgrimage	inasmuch	as	God	has	chosen	it	as	His	habitation.	It	is	not	surprising
that	 the	 aspirant	 for	 spiritual	 perfection	 acknowledges	 its	 co-operation	 with
gratitude	and	diverts	its	powers	towards	the	Soul	Supreme?
127.	I	was	watching	the	flowers	at	dawn	when	the	sparkling	drops	of	dew	were
peacefully	 and	 lovingly	 descending	 deep	 in,	 to	 them.	 There	was	 not	 even	 the
faintest	sound	of	footsteps	nearby.	When	the	heart	is	ready,	the	Soul	Supreme	too
descends	 like	 this.	 No	 one	 gets	 an	 inkling	 of	 His	 advent	 till	 He	 manifests
Himself.
128.	 I	was	 atop	 the	 hills.	What	 they	wanted	 to	 convey	was	 transmitted	 to	me
through	 silence.	The	 trees,	 the	 fountains,	 the	 rivers	 and	 the	 rivulets,	 the	moon
and	 the	 stars	 were	 all	 communicating	 in	 the	 language	 of	 silence	 that	 I
understood.	The	gestures	of	the	Lord	were	clear.	I	could	hear	Him	only	when	I
became	silent,	not	before.
129.	What	 shall	 I	 say?	Listen	 to	 the	 stars	 in	 the	 sky.	 I	wish	 to	 say	what	 their
quiescent	 diffused	 light	 has	 communicated	 to	 me.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 say	 that
whatever	is,	is	beyond	the	reach	of	speech	and	hearing.
130.	 I	 am	 the	poorest	of	 the	poor,	 for	 there	 is	nothing	 I	 can	call	mine.	Even	 I
myself	am	not	mine.	Whatever	there	is,	belongs	to	the	Soul	Supreme.	The	Soul
Supreme	 is	 Itself	 All.	 But	 the	 moment	 I	 realized	 this	 indigence,	 it	 at	 once
vanished.	 I	 am	now	 the	 Imperial	Majesty,	 for	 I	 am	no	 longer	 there.	The	Lord
alone	exists.
131.	 Friends,	 there	 are	 who	 hurl	 abuses	 at	 me	 and	 go	 away.	 My	 heart	 is
genuinely	thankful	to	them,	for	I	feel	my	love	flowing	towards	them	through	the
abuses,	spreading	an	unearthly	peace	over	me.
132.	 This	 world	 itself	 is	 a	 wonder	 of	 wonders,	 for	 I	 see	 that	 those	 who
apparently	seem	to	live	do	not	live	at	all.	A	life	enmeshed	in	lustful	fancies	is	no
life	at	all.	I	also	realize	that	those	who	are	said	to	be	dead	are	not	dead,	for	the
soul	knows	no	death.
133.	 Religious	 leaders	 make	 much	 of	 their	 teaching	 --	 "Know	 thyself".	 But
where	does	this	"self"	exist?	Is	not	the	existence	of	this	"self"	the	shadow	of	the
"other	 self"?	 Which	 is	 why	 I	 say,	 "Know	 thyself"?	 I	 merely	 repeat	 --	 know,
know,	know!	Know	that	which	is!
134.	The	physical	body	naturally	grows	old.	But	take	care	that	the	mind	does	not
become	old	along	with	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 sure	 sign	of	 the	 successful	 completion	of	 the
pilgrimage	of	life,	if	the	mind	retains	the	perfect	simplicity	of	the	new-born	child
when	the	body	reaches	the	threshold	of	Death.
135.	If	you	nurse	the	poison	of	hatred	within,	you	can	never	expect	the	blossoms
of	bliss	to	spread	their	fragrance	without.	A	latent	perennial	undercurrent	of	love
is	 a	 necessity	 for	 their	 efflorescence.	 Where	 love's	 nectar	 is	 sprinkled,	 bliss
blossoms	in	profusion.
136.	 The	 portals	 of	 beatitude	 are	 close	 at	 hand;	 but	 if	 one	 turns	 about	 and
proceeds	 ahead	 nurturing	 willful	 violence	 and	 seething	 hatred,	 one	 naturally
comes	to	the	domain	of	hell	though	one	may	be	in	quest	of	heaven.	The	path	one
takes	is	the	criterion;	ambition	alone	leads	nowhere.
137.	 There	 is	 no	 greater	 affliction	 than	 trying	 to	 become	 an	 entirely	 different
being,	other	 than	what	you	are.	Although	the	desire	 to	become	has	no	end	and
therefore	no	fulfilment,	the	majority	of	people,	do	turn	to	be	different.	Recognize
and	realize	your	own	nature.
Living	in	one's	own	nature	is	the	bliss	of	heaven.
138.	 Don't	 you	 know	 that	 often	 we	 search	 for	 things	 close	 at	 hand	 in	 far-off
places?	In	the	case	of	beatitude,	it	 is	wholly	true.	Understand	where	it	 is.	Only
there	can	you	secure	it,	not	where	you	seek	it.
139.	Virtue	is	happiness.
140.	There	was	a	happy	man.	I	found	out	the	secret	of	his	happiness.	He	did	not
worry	about	securing	a	task	according	to	his	taste,	but	he	knew	how	to	love	the
task	that	fell	to	his	lot.
141.	Two	wayfarers	 took	shelter	 in	a	 squalid	 rest-house.	One	of	 them	went	on
grumbling	 and	 brooding	 over	 its	 squalor	 throughout	 his	 stay	 there.	 The	 other
one,	who	 set	 about	 cleaning	 the	 place	 thoroughly,	 found	 immense	 pleasure	 in
this	 labour	of	 love.	The	same	resthouse	made	one	extremely	miserable	and	 the
other	immensely	glad.	Is	there	a	greater	pleasure	in	life	than	a	constructive	job
lovingly	 undertaken?	 No.	 Is	 there	 a	 pleasure	 more	 thrilling	 than	 service	 to
others?	No.	 If	 you	 seek	 lasting	 pleasure,	 endeavour	 to	 leave	 the	 rest-house	 of
mundane	 existence	 cleaner	 and	more	 beautiful	 than	 ever	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 your
successors.	You	will	certainly	find	happiness	in	the	creation	of	beauty.
142.	Brother	dear,	if	the	task	you	are	engaged	in	does	not	thrill	you,	nor	pleases
others,	 would	 you	 like	 to	 know	why?	 Evidently	 because	 you	 feel	 that	 it	 is	 a
burden	imposed	on	you.	The	fact	is	that	pleasure	is	obtained	only	from	that	task
which	is	delightfully	undertaken	and	pursued.
143.	Can	I	you	this	question,	"Wherefore	do	you	live?	Is	there	a	goal,	an	ideal,
for	 which	 you	 are	 prepared	 to	 lay	 down	 your	 life?"	 If	 the	 answer	 is	 in	 the
negative,	know	for	certain	that	you	are	already	dead.	The	powerful	energy	of	a
purposeful	life	is	awakened	and	kept	only	by	an	ideal	for	which	one	is	prepared
to	court	death	with	smile	on	one's	lips.
Remember	that	you	can	win	life	only	at	the	stake.
144.	 Once	 when	 I	 said	 somewhere	 that	 I	 am	 an	 emperor,	 someone	 put	 the
question,
"Where	is	your	crown?"	I	replied,	"It	is	not	on	my	head	but	in	my	heart.	It	is	not
made	of	precious	metals	but	of	virtuous	 thoughts	and	actions;	 it	 is	not	studded
with	stones	usually	called	diamonds	and	emeralds	but	with	rays	of	 tranquillity,
knowledge	 and	 love.	 In	 order	 to	 get	 this	 crown	 Emperors	 have	 to	 become
beggars."
145.	The	pleasures	of	the	body	and	the	sense-organs	are	like	tender	flowers:	they
fade	on	being	handled	or	plucked.	In	your	search	for	the	imperishable	pleasures,
you	have	to	rise	far	above	the	physical	body	and	the	sense-organs.
146.	What	shall	I	present	you	with?	Some	valuable	precious	stone?	No,	after	all
it	is	only	a	stone.	Some	beautiful	flower?	No,	I	will	not	give	you	a	flower	which
will	fade	away.	I	shall	give	you	abundant	love	out	of	my	heart,	love	that	is	not
hard	 as	 a	 stone	 or	 transient	 like	 a	 flower.	 Love	 in	 man's	 heart	 is	 the	 divine
fragrance,	the	divine	music	that	thrills	the	very	depths	of	the	listener's	heart.
147.	To	live	in	Truth	is	to	live	in	God;	to	live	in	God	is	to	live	in	love.	But	I	see
that	 while	 God	 is	 remembered,	 Truth	 is	 forgotten;	 the	 story	 of	 Truth	 is
remembered	but	the	life	of	love	is	forgotten.	It	would	have	been	better	if	we	had
forgotten	God	but	 remembered	Truth,	and	 it	would	have	been	better	 if	we	had
forgotten	the	story	of	Truth	but	cared	to	live	a	life	of	love.	If	there	is	love,	Truth
steps	in,	and	where	Truth	abides,	God	too	exists.
148.	Would	that	we	all	lived	as	though	the	world	sat	observing	us!	Whether	we
know	it	or	not,	deep	at	the	bottom	nothing	lies	hidden.	Man	can	never	be	aloof
from	the	collective	whole.	The	echo	of	all	that	rises	within	him	reaches	everyone
else;	(1)	even	as	he	lives	he	forms	part	and	parcel	of	 the	life	about	him,	of	the
life	flowing	around	him.
[Footnote	(1)	Cf:	"Our	echoes	roll	from	soul	to	soul,	and	grow	for	ever	and	for
ever..."	--
Tennysonl
149.	Man	lives	in	his	deeds,	not	in	his	years.	Thoughts	which	bring	along	actions
with	 them,	are	deeper	 than	breaths	which	drag	on	 the	years	 in	 their	wake.	The
feelings,	 the	sensations,	are	deeper	 than	 thoughts,	but	 there	 is	an	unfathomable
bottom	deeper	than	the	sensations	themselves.	That	is	the	human	soul.	He	who
goes	deeper	and	deeper	into	himself	rises	higher	and	higher	in	life	 in	the	same
proportion.	The	trees	that	would	like	to	rise	high	up	in	the	air	must	of	necessity
fix	their	roots	deep	into	the	soil.
150.	I	love	beauty,	the	beauty	that	lies	embedded	far	below	the	body.	The	body	is
only	 its	 border,	 the	 frontier	 of	 protection	 with	 its	 beauty	 of	 thoughts	 and	 the
beauty	of	sensations.
But	there	is	the	perfect	beauty	of	that	nullified	existence,	free	of	thought,	free	of
sensation.	Do	not,	therefore,	stop	at	the	body.	It	would	be	death.	Wade	through
the	deep	waters.	You	can	get	only	pebbles	and	shells	on	the	shore.	You	have	to
go	far	into	the	sea	for	fishing	the	pearls.
151.	There	are	mirrors	and	mirrors	in	every	house;	but	have	you	observed	that	a
small	 thought	 soaked	 in	 truth	or	a	wee	wave	of	 love's	ebullition	or	even	small
task	 of	 service	 gives	 a	 fresh	 beauty	 to	 the	 eyes,	 to	 the	 face,	 to	 the	 entire
individual?	 If	 not,	 you	 are	 as	 blind	 as	 a	 bat.	 In	 vain	 do	 you	waste	 your	 time
facing	 the	mirror.	 It	would	 have	 been	better	 if	 you	had	 smashed	 the	mirror	 to
smithereens	since	you	do	not	know	the	proper	use	of	a	mirror.
152.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 if	 I	 am	 not	 recognized	 in	 the	 impenetrable	 darkness
enveloping	the	path	of	life;	but	think	of	the	dire	consequences	if	I	fail	to	know
myself.	Many	of	us	are,	alas!	not	as	eager	to	know	ourselves	as	we	are	eager	to
make	others	know	us.	That	is	why	life	is	more	and	more	enveloped	in	darkness;
for	how	can	one	shed	light	all	around	if	one	does	not	know	oneself.	Men	of	real
understanding	 pray	 thus,	 "I	 shall	 readily	 accept	 death,	 unknown	 to	 the	world,
unrecognized	everywhere	and	uncrowned	with	renown,	but	let	me	understand	at
least	myself."	In	fact,	that	modicum	of	light	is	adequate	enough	to	take	us	to	the
Soul	Supreme.	Friend,	 the	humble	 lamp	 illumined	by	 the	knowledge	of	 self	 is
more	valuable	than	a	million	suns.
153.	I	say:	"Give,	give,	give.	Distribute	sympathy.	Render	service.	Give	love	in
abundance,	for	he	who	gives	shall	get	it	back."
154.	I	had	a	bath	in	the	holy	Ganges	and	my	body	was	washed	of	its	dirt.	I	told
my	companions,	 "There	 is	 another	Ganges.	 If	we	have	our	bath	 in	 it,	 our	 soul
will	 be	 cleansed."	 They	 asked	 me,	 "Which	 is	 that	 Ganges?"	 I	 said,	 "That	 of
Love."
155.	A	friend	of	mine	was	unhappy.	When	I	saw	him	crying	I	took	him	out	of	the
house	and	said,	"Behold	the	stars!"	And	drops	of	tears	welled	up	in	his	eyes	and
sparkled	 like	stars.	His	misery	gradually	subsiding,	he	said,	 "How	 is	 it	 that	on
looking	 at	 the	 stars	 my	 heart	 became	 freed	 of	 its	 burden?	 How	 is	 it	 that	 my
misery	vanished	when	I	 looked	at	 the	sky?"	I	 replied,	"It	 is	misery	 to	be	away
from	the	Lord.	It	is	sorrow	to	be	alienated	from	Nature.	It	is	woe	to	be	separated
from	the	Soul's	being."
"What	is	the	greatest	pleasure	in	the	world?"	someone	was	saying.	I	replied,	"To
be	and	not	to	be	in	the	world.	The	only	maxim	that	can	ensure	happiness	is	this:
'The	feet	in	the	world,	the	heart	in	the	Lord.'"
156.	Accept	life,	the	benign	gift	of	the	Lord.	Never	fight,	never	flee.	Love	it,	for
there	is	no	greater	conquest	than	that	of	Love.
157.	A	man	seen	from	outside	is	definitely	what	he	is	inside.	Everything	without
is	painted	with	the	colours	within.	If	there	is	bliss	within,	everything	without	is
beautiful;	if	there	is	misery	within,	everything	without	is	ugly.	In	fact,	man	sees
himself	everywhere.
If	you	are	in	hell,	know	that	you	are	the	cause	thereof.	It	is	within	your	powers	to
be	in	Heaven	as	well.
158.	You	seek	my	message?	Indeed,	 it	 is	a	short	one:	"Those	who	were	awake
lived;	those	who	slept,	missed	everything."
Wings	of	Love	and	Random	Thought
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Random	Thoughts,	pages	106	to	143
Date	Unknown
Archive
code:
6900000
ShortTitle:
RANDOM05
Audio:
No
Video:	No
159.	Wherever	 I	 cast	 my	 eyes	 I	 see	 the	 thrill	 and	 throb	 of	 life.	 Every	 bit	 is
vibrating	 with	 life.	 And	 the	 minutest	 atom	 is	 excited	 with	 the	 love	 to	 live.
Behold	the	dance	of	life	and	hear	the	music	of	being.	Even	if	you	neither	see	nor
hear,	there	is	the	titillating,	pulsating,	experience	of	life.	Is	not,	then,	the	life	we
see	around	us	the	Lord	Himself?	The	Lord,	apart	and	aloof	from	life,	is	dead	and
unreal.	Life	is	Truth.	The	Lord	does	not	indulge	Himself	in	creation,	sitting	afar.
Life	is	the	perpetual	evolution	of	creation.	This	process	of	life-creation	is	verily
the	Lord!
160.	 I	 see	 you	 visiting	 the	 temple	 every	 day.	 You	 pore	 over	 the	 pages	 of	 the
scriptural	text	every	day.	But	I	am	worried	because	I	have	never	seen	you	filled
with	compassion	for	Nature.	If	one	does	not	see	the	Lord	in	Nature,	how	can	one
see	Him	elsewhere?
Open	your	self	to	Nature	and	let	its	beauty	shine	through	your	eyes.	Let	its	sweet
music	be	resonant	in	your	heart.	Welcome	that	guest	and	seat	him	in	your	heart
of	hearts.	You	will	see	ere	long	that	the	guest,	hitherto	unrecognized,	is	the	Lord
Himself.
161.	When	I	roamed	over	the	lofty	mountains,	I	felt	my	soul	raised	aloft	covered
with	never-melting	blocks	of	ice	even	as	their	peaks;	when	I	came	down	to	the
deep	ravines	I	felt	as	though	I	too	have	become	deep	and	low	like	them	with	my
heart	enveloped	in	mysterious	shadows.	The	same	thing	took	place	on	the	shores
of	 the	 sea.	 I	 was	 merged	 in	 their	 surging	 waves	 because	 those	 waves	 were
beating	within	me.	When	 I	gaze	upon	 the	 sky,	 I	 expand	unlimitedly,	when	 the
countless	 stars	 are	 viewed,	 endless	 silence	 permeates	 my	 mind,	 the	 myriad
flowers	 fill	 me	 with	 ecstasies	 of	 aesthetic	 pleasure;	 the	 chirping	 songs	 of	 the
birds	re-echo	my	own	inner	voice;	when	I	peer	into	the	eyes	of	the	animals	I	see
no	difference	in	them	from	my	own	eyes.	Thus	gradually	my	separate	existence
is	wiped	off	and	only	the	Lord	remains.	Where	shall	I	now	seek	God?	How	shall
I	seek?
Only	He	is,	I	am	not.
162.	Am	I	 to	proclaim	 the	Lord?	 Is	He	not	being	proclaimed	all	 round?	Is	not
Nature	herself	a	loud	proclamation	of	the	Lord?
163.	How	can	I	speak	when	the	mountains	are	silent?	How	can	I	speak	when	the
sky	is	silent.	How	can	I	speak	when	the	Lord	Himself	is	silent?	Still	I	speak	so
that	their	silence	may	be	heard	by	you.	I	speak	so	that	you	may	understand	when
I	 sink	 into	 silence.	 Artists	make	 use	 of	 the	 black	 background	 to	 heighten	 the
effects	of	a	brighter	hue.	I	too	use	the	same	device.	I	am	speaking	to	enable	you
to	understand	 the	 language	of	silence.	Words	are	meaningful	 inasmuch	as	 they
represent	 the	 gestures	 of	 silence.	 Speech	 is	 meaningful	 when	 it	 leads	 on	 to
quiescence.	Life	is	fruitful	if	it	prepares	the	individual	to	face	Death.
164.	For	Victory	it	is	essential	to	wage	a	war;	but	the	majority	of	people	wish	for
victory	even	before	the	battle.	As	far	as	I	can	see,	none	but	these	gets	defeated	in
the	end.
165.	 Friend,	 be	 not	 afraid.	 Your	 contact	 with	 him	 of	 whom	 you	 are	 afraid	 is
bound	 to	be	perpetual.	Only	he	of	whom	you	are	afraid	will	 follow	you.	Your
defeat	will	be	in	proportion	to	the	extent	of	your	fear.
166.	I	was	a	guest	in	a	household.	The	children	there	were	about	to	take	part	in	a
race.
They	said,	"Baba,	what	is	the	secret	of	winning	the	race."	I	answered,	"Courage,
dear	children."	I	hastened	then	to	add,	"Be	sure	to	remember	this	even	in	the	race
of	life.	There	is	no	greater	power	of	success	than	courage	in	the	race	of	life."
167.	One	 day,	 as	we	were	walking	 along	 a	 field,	 we	 saw	 the	 farmers	 sowing
seeds	 and	 singing	 merrily.	 While	 I	 was	 delighted	 by	 their	 songs,	 my	 friend
accompanying	me	was	gloomy.	He	wished	to	become	a	sannyasin.
"Come	 on,"	 said	 I,	 'let	 us	 see	 the	 farmers	 sowing	 seeds	 and	 singing	 songs."
Verily	I	say	unto	you	that	our	worldly	existence	is	a	vast	field.	Those	who	wish
to	 sow	 seeds	of	Truth,	 love	 and	 sacrifice	 have	 to	 remember	 that	 seeds	 are	 not
sown	with	tears	in	the	eyes	of	the	sower.	It	is	not	Truth	or	Love	but	sorrow	and
misery	 that	 is	sown	with	 tears.	The	harvest,	 too,	cannot	be	 that	of	bliss;	but	of
tears	 alone.	 The	 technique	 of	 sowing	 seeds	 is	 the	 accompaniment	 of	 gleeful
songs.	 The	 attitude	 with	 which	 we	 sow	 permeates	 the	 seeds	 sown.	 Taking	 to
sannyasa,	renunciation,	and	asceticism	with	a	dispirited	gloomy	heart	ends	only
in	sorrow.	The	real	sannyasa	is	born	of	bliss	and	hope.
168.	Life	is	now	here	itself,	and	today.	Tomorrow	is	far	off.	Tomorrow	is	at	an
infinite	distance.	That	 is	exactly	why	it	never	comes.	Will	 it	not	be	proper	that
we	live	today	itself?	He	who	really	lives,	always	lives	today.	Life	is	today,	and
tomorrow	is	death.	If	you	have	to	live,	live	today.	Well,	if	you	have	only	to	die,
tomorrow	also	can	be	found	useful.
169.	 Certainly	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 conquer	 the	 self.	 But	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
conquer	anything	beyond	the	self.	Moreover,	let	this	also	be	remembered	that	he
who	conquers	his	own	self,	can	easily	win	over	all	the	rest	too.	I	therefore	assert
that	in	life	there	is	only	one	conquest	and	only	one	defeat.	The	defeat	is	of	the
self	at	the	hands	of	the	self.	The	conquest	too,	is	of	the	self	by	the	self.
170.	A	friend	told	me,	"Will	it	not	be	good	if	we	transform	the	world?"	I	replied,
"It	will	be	very	good.	But	where	 is	 this	world?	I	seek	 it	very	much	but	do	not
find	it.	I	seek	the	world	but	I	find	myself.	Hence	I	say:	let	the	world	alone.	Let	us
transform	ourselves.
When	we	do	 the	 same,	 the	world	will	 be	 transformed.	Because	what	 else	 is	 it
except	our	mutual	inner	contact.
171.	 I	 had	 a	 dream.	The	Day	 of	 Judgment	 had	 come.	 Every	 dead	 person	was
from	his	grave	and	questioned	about	his	part.	God	himself	was	conducting	 the
inquiry.	 A	 Pandit	 whom	 I	 knew	 well	 was	 standing	 beside	 me.	 He	 was	 quite
carefree.	 He	 knew	 the	Vedas,	 the	 Puranas,	 the	Agamas,	 the	Nigamas,	 etc.	 He
hoped	 he	 would	 pass	 any	 test	 in	 Religion	 and	 Philosophy.	 But	 as	 God
approached	nearer	and	nearer	his	calm	was	disturbed.	In	the	end	he	was	excited
and	 said	 to	me	 crying,	 "How	 unjust	 is	 this!	Nothing	 is	 being	 asked	 about	 the
scriptural	 texts.	All	 inquiry	 is	being	made	about	 life.	You	know	what	answer	 I
shall	make.	 I	 know	 nothing	more	 than	 the	 scriptures.	 I	 have	 spent	my	 life	 in
trying	to	know	them."
172.	Don't	we	certainly	get	 tired	of	 those	pleasures	which	we	enjoy?	Does	not
the	pleasure	of	which	we	are	 tired	 turn	 itself	 into	pain?	But	has	any	man	ever
been	seen	getting	tired	of	 those	pleasures	which	he	gives	 to	others?	No.	Never
has	such	a	thing	happened.	And	so	I	tell	you	a	secret.	Only	that	pleasure	which
we	give	to	others	and	of	which	we	are	never	tired	becomes	bliss,	and	there	is	no
end	to	Bliss.	Bliss	is	a	nectar,	endless	and	eternal.
173.	 A	 son	 had	 said	 to	 his	 father,	 "When	 shall	 I	 be	 big	 enough	 to	 do	what	 I
wish?"
The	father	replied,	"My	dear	son,	I	do	not	know.	In	fact	no	one	has	been	seen	till
to-day	 growing	 so	 I	 too	 was	 present	 there.	 I	 said,	 "I	 know	 a	 secret.	 It	 is	 not
possible	to	grow	so	big	that	you	will	be	able	to	do	always	what	you	wish.	And
that	is	not	possible	because	your	desire	is	the	outcome	of	your	being	small.	But
this	 is	 possible	 that	 you	 can	 like	 whatever	 you	 do.	 And	 that	 is	 maturity	 or
growing	big."
174.	Why	is	there	so	much	misery	in	man's	life?
It	 is	 because	 there	 is	 a	medley	 of	 notes	 in	man's	 life	 but	 there	 is	 no	 noteless
melody	at	all.
It	 is	because	 there	 is	 a	veritable	pandemonium	of	 thoughts,	but	no	 thoughtless
silence	at	all.
It	is	because	there	is	plenty	of	turbulent,	conflicting	emotions	in	his	life,	but	no
affection	free	from	fancy.
It	is	because	there	is	plenty	of	breakneck	races	in	different	directions	in	his	life,
but	no	stable	pause,	no	stir	in	any	direction.
It	is	because	there	is	an	open	exchange	of	activities	in	his	life	but	no	isolation	at
all,	the	isolation	of	inactivity.
And	lastly	because	in	his	life	his	self	is	most	prominent,	but	the	Supreme	Soul	is
altogether	suppressed.
175.	A	 friend	had	departed	 from	 this	bank	and	 shoal	of	 life,	 and	 that	 too	very
early	in	age.
He	was	young	but	his	life	was	pure,	beautiful,	quiet	and	melodious.	Somebody
remarked,
"What	a	tragic	calamity!	Death	at	this	young	age?"	I	said,	"No.	Do	not	say	so.	It
is	 possible	 that	 a	 long	 life	 may	 not	 be	 auspicious,	 but	 life	 that	 is	 pure	 and
auspicious,	is	profound,	extensive	and	immense.	Well,	it	may	not	be	possible	to
measure	 it	 in	 terms	 of	 minutes	 and	 hours.	 But	 it	 proves	 limitation	 and
inefficiency	of	our	measuring-devices.
176.	There	was	this	epitaph	on	a	tombstone:	"Here	lies	a	man	who	did	nothing
between	great	deeds	which	he	dreamt	to	undertake	and	small	odd	jobs	which	he
hated	to	perform."
Of	course,	all	this	is	engraved	on	a	single	tombstone,	but	it	ought	to	have	been
engraved	on	many	tombstones.	Isn't	this	the	sum-total	of	the	life-story	of	many
men?	And	I	wish	to	ask	you	a	pointed	personal	question,	"Don't	you	also	wish	to
place	such	a	stone	on	your	grave?"
177.	I	knew	a	man	who	had	never	done	an	error	in	his	life.	I	asked	him	what	the
secret	was.	He	replied	very	gravely,	"Fearing	lest	I	should	make	a	mistake,	I	did
nothing	 and	 thus	 I	 escaped	 the	 risk	 of	making	 any	mistake."	On	 hearing	 this,
when	I	began	to	laugh	he	had	said,	"Sir,	why	are	you	laughing?"	I	had	replied,
"What	greater	mistake	can	there	be	if	a	man	desists	from	action	only	because	he
fears	that	mistakes	may	happen?"	To	dread	mistakes	is	to	dread	life.	One	should
be	ready	to	make	mistakes.	It	is	sufficient	if	a	mistake	is	not	repeated.	He	alone
who	avoids	old	mistakes	but	is	not	frightened	of	committing	new	ones,	lives	and
learns.	And	it	is	only	he	who	wins	too.
178.	Life	takes	us	to	deep	oceans,	not	to	drown	us,	but	to	sanctify	us.	But	those
who	are	frightened	at	the	very	thought	of	being	drowned	sink	in	it	in	vain:	whom
have	 the	 depths	 of	 life's	 ocean	 drowned	 so	 far?	 I	 see	 none.	 Those	 alone	 are
drowned	who	keep	on	sitting	on	the	shore	of	fear.
179.	 Knowledge	 says:	 "What	 am	 I?	 I	 am	 a	 void."	 And	 in	 this	 void	 itself	 it
becomes	Brahman.
Ignorance	 says,	 "I	 am	 everything.	 I	 am	Brahman,"	 and	 in	 this	 fancy	 of	 being
Brahman,	it	remains	void.
What	 knowledge	 realizes,	 ignorance	 deludes	 itself	 into	 thinking	 that	 it	 has
realized.
What	knowledge	knows,	ignorance	admits	and	accepts.
What	ignorance	proclaims	it	never	becomes.
180.	 It	 is	 from	 love	 that	 creation	 has	 sprung	 up.	 It	 is	 nourished	 by	 love.	 It
continues	to	progress	towards	love,	and	eventually	it	merges	into	love.	And	you
ask	me	why	I	say	that	love	is	God?	I	say	this	is	the	reason.	This	is	why	I	say	so.
181.	You	 ask	me,	 "What	 is	 the	 biggest	merit	 in	 life?"	 I	 say	 that	 is	 daring,	 for
without	daring	there	is	no	freedom.	Without	freedom	there	is	no	Truth.	Without
Truth	there	is	no	right	conduct.	In	fact	daring	does	to	the	edifice	of	life	what	the
foundation-stone	does	to	a	building.
182.	Have	you	ever	seen	good	men	dying	or	bad	men	 living?	Just	as	bad	men
never	live,	so	also	good	men	never	die.
183.	My	friend,	it	is	possible	that	you	cannot	become	a	rose-flower.	But,	on	that
score,	it	is	not	necessary	that	you	should	become	a	thorn.	And	it	is	possible	that
you	cannot	become	the	twinkling	star	in	the	sky.	But	on	that	score,	is	it	necessary
that	 you	 should	 become	 the	 dark	 cloud	 that	 covers	 up	 the	 stars?	 In	 the	 end	 I
disclose	a	secret	to	you.	He	who	does	not	become	a	thorn	becomes	a	flower	and
he	who	does	not	become	a	cloud	becomes	the	twinkling	star.
184.	It	does	not	lie	in	my	hands	how	to	die.	It	is	not	left	to	my	choice.	But	how	I
should	 live	 is	 certainly	 dependent	 on	 my	 decision.	 Moreover,	 death	 is	 the
completion	of	life.
Precisely	 for	 that	 reason,	 by	 choosing	 how	 to	 live,	 I	 choose	 how	 to	 die	 also.
Hence	death	becomes	the	index	of	life.	What	is	sown	in	life	grows	into	flowers
in	their	fullness	during	death.
185.	A	friend	had	been	 ill.	Somebody	had	brought	a	bunch	of	 flowers	 for	him
fresh	from	the	garden.	After	handing	over	the	flowers,	he	returned.	I	realized	that
the	fragrance	of	the	flowers	still	lingered	in	his	hands.	The	experience	repeated
itself	many	times	and	became	the	very	life	itself.	Whatever	we	give,	its	fragrance
or	 its	 foul	 smell	 always	 lingers	 behind.	 Those	 who	wish	 to	 live	 in	 fragrance,
always	give	out	only	fragrance.
186.	1	had	a	dream	in	which	I	saw	some	of	my	dead	acquaintances.	They	were
clad	in	the	same	garments	as	at	the	time	of	death.	They	were	obsessed	with	the
same	 thoughts,	 prejudices,	 and	 ideas	 as	 they	 had	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death.	 In	 life
everything	had	changed	but	they	had	not	changed	at	all.	I	made	a	mention	of	this
to	 them.	 But	 they	 began	 to	 laugh	 and	 said,	 "We	 the	 dead	 never	 change.	 We
remain	staunch	in	our	beliefs.	There	is	no	change	in	the	world	of	the	dead.	Our
principles	are	eternal.	It	is	only	life	that	is	affected	and	afflicted	by	the	sickness
of	transformation."	I	said,"But	in	life	as	well	there	are	people	who	never	change
at	all.	Their	principles	too	are	eternal	and	they	too	keep	their	eyes	shut	against
any	change	lest	they	too	should	be	afflicted	by	the	sickness	of	change.
But	aren't	here	too	a	few	who	do	change?"	The	dead	replied	in	a	body,	"	No.	No.
No.
How	can	that	happen	here?	None	of	us	is	alive	here."	Well	 in	life	such	a	thing
can	happen	because	many	people	are	dead	before	their	actual	death.
187.	 Do	 not	 build	 up	 life	 round	 the	 centre	 of	 futurity	 because	 life	 is	 present
existence.	It	is	in	the	present	that	all	futurities	are	hidden	and	he	who	loses	today
loses	all	tomorrows.
Do	not	all	the	flowers	of	all	tomorrows	lie	asleep	in	the	seed	of	today?
188.	Did	 you	 say	 that	 life	 is	miserable?	No	 friend,	 life	 is	 only	 that	which	we
make	of	it.
As	long	as	you	do	not	make	it	a	bliss,	life	will	not	become	a	bliss	unto	you.	Life
is	but	an	opportunity.	It	is	a	blank,	an	empty	something,	a	possibility.	By	living	it
we	fill	it	up	and	make	it	full.	It	is	not	offered	to	man.	He	lives	day	after	day	and
builds	it	up.	Life	is	self-creation.	And	so	man	is	not	responsible	for	anyone	but
for	himself.
189.	 I	saw	you	worshipping	God	and	heard	you	praying	 to	Him.	Now	you	 tell
me	I	must	say	something.	What	shall	I	say?	Well,	I	shall	say	this	much.	If	there
is	heart	in	prayer,	but	no	sound	or	word,	it	is	better	than	if	there	be	only	sound	or
words	but	no	heart.	But	it	is	the	reverse	that	happens.	Precisely	for	this	reason	do
prayers	 fail	 to	 become	 love,	 and	 worship	 remains	 lifeless.	 How	 can	 God	 be
attained	 through	 these	 lifeless	 worships?	 And	 how	 can	 his	 portals	 be	 opened
through	 these	 loveless	prayers?	 If	God	had	been	a	 stone,	 these	 lifeless	prayers
and	worships	would	have	reached	up	to	Him.	But	granted	that	God	is	present	in
stones,	 He	 is	 not	 a	 stone.	 Hence	 only	 they	who	 approach	Him	with	 love	 and
vitality	are	able	to	attain	His	very	presence.
190.	Do	you	wish	that	your	life	should	be	a	hell?	Then	there	is	a	very	easy	and
infallible	 way.	 I	 shall	 tell	 you	 that.	 This	 specific	 method	 has	 been	 tried	 by
thousands	of	people	over	thousands	of	years.	There	is	no	possibility	for	mistakes
or	inefficacy	in	this.	It	has	always	proved	hundred	per	cent	correct.	What	is	this
method?	It	 is	 the	building	up	of	 life	round	the	sense	of	"I",	of	self-importance.
Egotism	is	the	simplest	and	continuously	straight	path	leading	to	misery.	He	who
gives	up	this	path	will	not	attain	sorrow	even	if	he	wishes	to	do	so.	Without	it,	no
one	can	suffer	or	be	miserable,	for	this	is	misery	itself.	Without	being	led	by	it,
no	one	can	go	even	to	hell,	for	it	is	hell	itself.
191.	Realization	of	 truth	 is	 a	 difficult	 process	 because	 it	 has	 to	 be	 sought	 and
lived.	But	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 accept	 the	 scriptural	 texts	 because	 they	have	 just	 to	 be
accepted.	For	the	former,	discrimination	with	wide	open	eyes	is	essential.	For	the
latter,	a	blind	belief	is	sufficient.
It	 is	 for	 this	 reason	 that	 the	 scriptural	 texts	 become	 obstacles	 in	 the	 path	 of
realizing	Truth.	For,	discrimination	never	takes	place	where	there	is	blind	belief.
Let	this	also	be	remembered	that	all	beliefs	are	invariably	blind.	How	can	blind
eyes	 see	Truth?	Blind	 eyes	 represent	 the	 closed	 doors	 of	 consciousness.	Truth
visits	only	that	door	where	an	impartial	and	un-prejudiced	mind	stands	ready	to
welcome	it.	Are	you	ready	to	become	impartial?	Have	you	the	daring	to	become
free	from	beliefs?	Are	the	doors	of	your	heart	open	to	welcome	Truth?	If	yes,	I
affirm	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 simpler	 than	 the	 realization	 of	 Truth.	 In	 fact,
difficulties	are	the	creations	of	our	mind.	Truth	is	simple,	but	we	are	not.
Our	 belief,	 our	 recognized	 values	 and	 our	 convictions	 have	 complicated
everything.	 He	 who	 breaks	 the	 web	 of	 these	 complications	 finds	 that	 Truth
stands	before	him,	It	had	been	before	him	for	ever.	Only	the	eyes	were	not	free
to	see	it.
192.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 die,	 but	 very	 difficult	 to	 live,	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 religion.
Actually,	it	is	always	easy	to	die	for	any	cause.	What	is	required	for	dying	is	just
a	sort	of	madness.
And	 then	 dying	 takes	 place	 in	 a	 moment.	 Madness	 of	 this	 single	 moment	 is
enough	for	it.
But	 for	 living,	 alertness	 and	wakefulness	 are	 essential.	Hence	 I	 say	only	 those
who	live	for	religion	are	able	to	know	religion,	not	those	who	die	for	it.
193.	What	is	religion?	If	you	wish	to	know	this	you	will	have	to	forget	religions
at	the	very	outset.	Without	abandoning	all	sects	and	religions,	Dharma	can	never
be	known.
194.	If	truth	does	not	appear	worthy	of	being	lived,	it	is	not	proper	to	consider	it
worthy	of	being	honoured.
195.	Who	can	deceive	us	so	much	as	we	deceive	ourselves?	Thus	we	alone	are
enemies	to	ourselves.	But	from	this	it	becomes	evident	that,	if	we	wish,	we	can
be	our	own	friends.	Religion	begins	only	from	where	friendship	makes	a	start.
196.	 Belief	 and	 non-belief	 belong	 to	 the	 same	 family.	 There	 is	 no	 difference
between	 the	 two.	 Their	 bodies	 are	 different,	 but	 not	 their	 soul.	 ke	who	 has	 to
seek	Truth	must,	therefore,	be	aware	of	both.	If	one	is	a	well	the	other	is	a	ditch.
Both	 are	 all	 right	 for	 falling	 into,	 but	 he	who	 has	 to	move	 on,	must	 take	 the
middle	path,	for	the	mind	becomes	liberated	only	after	being	freed	from	both.	He
and	only	he	who	is	neither	a	theist	nor	an	atheist,	neither	a	believer	nor	a	non-
believer,	can	undertake	a	journey	to	Truth.
197.	What	do	you	live	for?	If	you	let	me	know	this,	I	will	tell	you	what	you	are.
Your	life	is	fixed	by	the	direction	you	are	going.	It	is	an	incessant	creation	of	the
self.	We	ourselves	build	up	our	lives.	What	is	thus	built	up	is	also	ourselves.	We
constitute	 the	 sculptor,	 the	 stone,	 and	 the	 implement	 that	 make	 an	 image.
Exactly,	therefore,	there	is	no	art	bigger	and	more	complicated	than	life.	It	is	to
escape	 from	 the	 trouble	 of	 this	 tedious	 labour	 and	 aspirational	 austerity	 that
some	people	deny	even	life.	Their	life	becomes	akin	to	the	stones	which	shape
themselves	according	to	the	force	of	the	current	of	the	environs	and	their	shocks
and	jerks.	Their	life,	therefore,	does	not	become	sentient	idols.	This	is	the	misery
of	life,	the	affliction	and	the	distress.	This	alone,	I	say,	is	living	death.
198.	There	is	a	friend	whom	I	have	known	for	years.	Formerly	he	ran	the	race
for	money;	now	he	is	in	the	race	for	religion.	The	race	is	the	same,	but	whereas
formerly	 he	 was	 a	 householder,	 now	 he	 is	 an	 ascetic	 who	 has	 renounced
everything.	When	I	hear	this,	I	am	surprised	Is	not	his	desire	to	realize	God	the
same	 in	 its	depths	as	his	desire	 to	acquire	 riches?	The	paths	of	greed	are	very
subtle.	Is	not	the	idea,	the	desire,	of	realizing	God	the	ultimate	development	of
greed?	Man's	greed	is	boundless.	He	desires	to	attain	even	salvation,	though	the
fact	is	that	he	can	never	become	liberated	as	long	as	his	mind	desires	to	acquire
anything	because	the	desire	to	acquire,	itself,	is	the	fundamental	non-liberation.
How	can	he	who	is	not	liberated	know	God?	That	alone	which	is	known	in	the
liberated	state	of	mind,	is	God.
199.	 I	 know	 that	 you	 are	 in	 search	 of	 bliss.	 But	 can	 one	 search	 for	 bliss	 and
attain	it?
Bliss	is	obtained	by	those	who	distribute	bliss,	those	who	give	bliss.	If	you	wish
for	bliss,	distribute	bliss,	give	bliss.	Do	not	desire,	but	give,	because	by	giving
alone	does	it	come	to	you.	By	distributing	alone	can	it	be	had.	Only	by	spending
it	lavishly	does	it	shower	back	on	you.	Strange	are	the	ways	of	God.	Do	not	go
to	the	threshold	of	bliss	like	a	beggar.	Go	there	like	an	emperor.	Is	it	not	known
to	you	that	all	doors	are	closed	upon	beggars?	Who	is	a	beggar?	He	who	begs,
pleads	 and	 supplicates.	And	who	 is	 an	 emperor?	He	who	 gives.	Hence	 I	 say;
give,	 give,	 give.	Give	without	 any	 string,	 any	 condition.	You	will	 then	 realize
that	what	you	had	given	has	returned	to	you	manifold.
Friend,	everything	comes	back.	Your	entire	asset	is	the	echo	of	your	own	liberal
gift.	Do	you	remember	ever	having	acquired	any	such	thing	as	you	had	not	given
prior	to	getting	it?
200.	Man	cannot	live	on	bread	alone.	Christ	has	truly	said,	"Bread	alone	is	not
enough."
It	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 he	 can	 live	 without	 bread.	 Man	 cannot	 of	 course	 live
without	 bread,	 but	 he	 cannot	 live	 solely	 on	 bread.	What	 the	 roots	 are	 to	 the
plants,	bread	is	to	a	man.	The	roots	are	not	for	themselves,	they	are	for	flowers
and	 fruit.	 If	 flowers	 and	 fruit	 do	 not	 grow	 on	 them,	 their	 existence	 becomes
futile.	Although	flowers	and	fruit	are	not	produced	where	there	are	no	roots,	yet
flowers	 and	 fruit	 are	 not	 for	 the	 roots.	They	 are	 for	 satisfying	 our	 hunger,	 for
giving	us	the	vital	energy	we	all	need,	for	keeping	us	alive.
Man	needs	bread	so	that	he	may	live	and	also	satisfy	his	hunger	for	the	truth	and
beauty	of	 life.	But	bread	becomes	useless	 if	 there	 is	no	great	hunger.	 It	has	no
intrinsic	value	of	its	own.	Its	purpose	lies	in	transcending	itself.
201.	Somebody	had	asked	an	old	sage,	 "Is	 there	such	an	advice	as	no	one	has
ever	given?
Is	there	such	an	instruction	as	no	good	teacher	has	as	yet	imparted?"
The	sage	said,	"Yes,	certainly	there	is.	Indeed,	there	is	an	instruction	which	has
never	been	imparted	and	an	advice	which	has	never	been	given	before."	The	man
began	to	ask,
"Sir,	can	you	tell	me	what	it	is?"	The	sage	simply	laughed	and	said,	"It	is	not	an
object.
Nor	is	it	any	thought."
Truth	 cannot	 be	 taught	 through	 any	 word.	 Know	 that	 which	 can	 be	 taught
through	the	medium	of	words	is	not	Truth.
Truth	can	be	known	but	cannot	be	communicated.	In	order	to	know	it	we	have	to
become	worldless,	silent	and	void.	How	can	that	which	can	be	known	in	void,	be
uttered	through	words?
202.	Truth	 liberates.	But	 it	 is	 that	Truth	which	 is	 not	 borrowed.	Acquired	 and
second-hand	truths	become	more	binding	because	 there	 is	nothing	more	untrue
than	these	truths.
203.	 Oh,	 look	 at	 the	Ganges!	 It	 rushes	 to	 the	 ocean	 from	 the	 summits	 of	 the
mountain.	It	is	the	symbol	of	righteous	living.	It	is	driven	by	a	single	purpose	in
its	entire	journey,	namely,	to	unite	with	the	ocean.	It	wishes	to	lose	itself	in	the
cosmic	existence	and	cease	to	be	an	individual.	Its	bliss	lies	in	the	union	with	the
ocean;	there	is	no	isolation,	no	loneliness,	no	pettiness	of	confinement,	because
it	is	in	its	fullness	there.	So	long	as	it	does	not	exist	(as	apart	from	the	ocean	and
distinct),	it	is	in	fullness.	As	long	as	it	exists	separately,	it	is	incomplete.	Friends,
be	like	the	Ganges.	Seek	an	ocean.	Let	there	be	a	single	aim	--	 the	vast	ocean.
Let	 there	be	a	passionate	zeal	 --	 the	ocean.	Let	 there	be	a	single	melody	--	 the
ocean.	And	then	flow	on.	If	the	vital	breaths	are	impatient	for	the	ocean,	the	feet
will	seek	and	find	out	the	path	thereto.	Know	then	that	the	search	of	the	river	for
the	ocean	is	the	search	for	losing	itself	into	it;	there	is	no	other	way	of	realizing
itself.	 Into	 this	 single	 maxim	 is	 compressed	 all	 the	 essence	 of	 spirituality,
religion	and	yoga.	And	this	alone	is	the	Truth	and	Bliss	that	man	can	attain.
204.	 Are	 we	 not	 like	 those	 fishes	 that	 have	 been	 caught	 in	 the	 net	 of	 the
fisherman	and	are	writhing	and	languishing?	It	appears	so	to	me.	Yet	that	is	no
reason	why	we	 should	be	desperate.	Another	 truth	 too	dawns	on	me,	 the	 truth
that	we	 are	 not	 only	 the	 fishes	 that	 have	 been	 caught	 but	 also	 the	 net	 and	 the
fisherman	as	well.	And	 therein	 lies	 the	door	opening	on	our	 liberation.	We	are
the	creators	of	all	our	bondages	and	miseries.	All	these	are	the	creations	of	our
own	 mind.	 And	 then	 don't	 we	 really	 have	 the	 vision	 of	 the	 possibility	 of
salvation	in	this	truth?
205.	 Does	 the	 intellect	 know	 anything?	 No,	 certainly	 not.	 The	 intellect	 just
explains.	 It	 is	a	commentator.	 In	regard	 to	 the	external	world,	 the	sense-organs
perceive	 and	 the	 intellect	 elucidates.	 In	 regard	 to	 the	 inner	 world,	 the	 heart
perceives	and	the	intellect	explains.	The	intellectuals	who	accept	the	intellect	as
the	knower	are	therefore	mistaken.
Nothing	 has	 ever	 been	 known	 through	 the	 intellect.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 path	 of
knowledge.	But	due	to	the	illusion	that	it	is	the	path,	it	necessarily	becomes	an
obstacle,	a	hindrance.
What	in	reality	is	intellectuality?	It	lies	in	falsely	assuming	that	the	intellect	can
never	become	a	hindrance.	 If	 the	 intellect	 does	not	 stand	between	 life	 and	 the
self	a	sympathetic	attitude	is	created	which	becomes	the	eye	of	Truth.
206.	Life	is	a	frustration	because	we	ourselves	have	locked	it	up	in	the	self!	If	it
is	liberated	from	the	four	walls	of	the	self,	it	transforms	itself	into	bliss.	Life	is
neither	in	"I"
nor	 in	 "you".	 It	 is	 a	 current	 that	 flows	 incessantly	 between	 the	 two.	 It	 is	 a
commerce	with	the	universal.	But	we	have	converted	it	into	a	debate,	a	conflict.
This	accounts	for	our	misery,	affliction,	worry,	death!	All	this	is	the	result	of	our
imprisoning	 the	consciousness	 in	 the	 islets	of	 the	ego.	On	account	of	 this,	 life
has	become	impeded,	insentient	and,	indeed,	waveless.	It	has	become	one	long
bondage,	our	prison.	We	are	as	much	afflicted	as	the	sprouting	grain	imprisoned
within	the	hard	shell	of	the	seed.	When	the	outer	shell	gives	way,	the	seed	comes
to	life,	and	begins	to	sprout	and	rise	up.	It	emerges	out	of	the	dark	pit	under	the
ground	and	seeks	the	sun.	Then	begins	the	journey	for	which	it	exists.
Man	 --	 man,	 imprisoned	 within	 and	 surrounded	 by	 the	 self	 is	 the	 seed
imprisoned	in	the	shell	of	his	ego.	This	shell	is	very	hard	because	it	affords	the
appearance	 of	 security.	 And	 therefore,	 instead	 of	 breaking	 it	 open,	 we	 go	 on
nourishing	it	and	making	it	harder	and	stronger.	The	stronger	it	grows	the	more
crippled	and	lifeless	the	young	sprout	becomes.
Thus	in	the	illusion	of	making	our	life	securer	we	lose	our	life	itself.
I	have	heard	a	story.	In	his	desire	to	protect	himself,	an	Emperor	built	a	mansion
that	 had	no	doors.	The	passage	 through	which	he	 entered	was	 later	 on	 closed.
Hidden	 thus,	 he	 could	 not	 be	 harassed	 or	 harmed	 by	 an	 enemy.	He	was	well
protected	in	his	doorless	mansion.	But	the	moment	it	was	wholly	closed	he	knew
that	 it	 provided	 little	 security,	 for	 it	was	 as	 good	 as	 death	 itself.	 The	mansion
itself	became	his	grave.	Similarly	our	concern	for	security	gives	rise	to	doorless
egotism	 and	 eventually	 it	 becomes	 our	 death.	 Life	 consists	 not	 in	 remaining
aloof	 from	but	 in	merging	with	 the	universe.	Hence	 I	 say,	 that,	 if	 you	wish	 to
realize	life	and	the	bliss	of	liberation,	give	up	this	madness	after	security	because
that	 alone	 is	 the	 base	 of	 that	 vicious	 circle	which	 eventually	 snatches	 off	 life
itself	 in	 the	 name	 of	 protecting	 it.	 Life	 is	 insecurity.	 There	 is	 life	 only	 in
insecurity.
Security	is	sluggishness.	What	can	security	mean	if	not	death?	He	who	is	ready
to	remain	insecure,	can	break	open	the	shell	of	egotism.	The	young	sprout	of	life
within	him	can	shoot	forth	towards	the	unknown,	towards	the	Supreme	Soul.
207.	A	religious,	virtuous	 life	 is	not	an	 impossibility.	But	 the	Truth	of	 religion
can	be	known	only	to	the	extent	that	it	is	lived.	Without	being	lived,	it	cannot	be
known.	 Living	 it	 is	 knowing	 it.	 A	 religious	 life	 will	 appear	 to	 be	 wholly
impractical	to	those	who	imagine	that	they	can	know	it	without	living	it.	In	the
pitch	darkness	of	the	night	if	anyone	walks	about	with	a	small	lamp,	only	a	thin
stream	of	light	illumines	the	path	ahead.	The	path	of	religion,	too,	is	of	the	same
kind.	But,	if	the	man	with	the	lamp	stops	and	begins	to	think,	"Oh,	this	is	but	a
small	 lamp;	 its	 light	 is	but	 faint,	while	 the	way	 is	 long	and	 the	night	so	dark",
what	wonder	 if	 it	 appears	 to	be	wholly	 impractical	 to	him	 to	 traverse	 the	path
during	that	night	with	the	help	of	that	lamp!
208.	Sometime	back	I	had	had	a	dream.	On	a	mountainous	track	somebody	has
slipped	and	fallen.	A	crowd	has	gathered	around	him.	The	people	are	rebuking
him	 for	 his	 weakness	 and	 are	 laughing	 at	 him	 in	 derision.	 A	 preacher	 is
instructing	him	to	shake	off	the	weakness	due	to	which	he	has	fallen.	A	reformer
is	talking	of	punishing	him,	for	if	the	people	who	fall	are	not	punished.	they	will
encourage	other	people	too	to	fall.	I	see	all	this	and	am	worried	because	nobody
is	 trying	 to	 straighten	 him	 up.	 I	 squeeze	myself	 through	 the	 crowd	 somehow.
When	I	try	to	lift	him	up,	I	see	that	he	is	already	dead.	The	crowd	then	disperses.
Perhaps	 they	 will	 be	 gathering	 round	 somebody	 else	 who	 has	 fallen.	 The
preacher	too	goes	off.	Perhaps	on	some	other	path	somebody	else	has	fallen	and
is	awaiting	his	instruction.	The	social	reformer	too	goes	away.	He	does	not	wish
to	 deny	 himself	 the	 opportunity	 of	 seeing	 other	 fallen	 creatures	 punished	 and
reformed.
Then	 I	 am	 the	only	person	 left	 near	 that	 dead	man.	His	 hands	 and	 feet	 are	 so
weak	that	I	cannot	believe	that	he	had	walked	at	any	time.	It	is	not	his	slipping
down	 but	 his	 ability	 to	 move	 about	 that	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 wonder,	 something
incredible.	In	this	dismay	I	wake	up	from	sleep	and	I	now	realize	that	it	had	not
been	a	mere	dream.	The	true	state	of	human	society,	of	all	of	us,	is	not	different.
209.	It	is	not	an	exaggeration	to	say	that	we	have	forgotten	ourselves.	Is	not	our
very	birth	a	forgetfulness?	Then	what	can	life	resting	on	the	foundation	of	self-
forgetfulness	 be?	 Is	 it	 not	 a	 mere	 dream?	 What,	 if	 at	 all,	 is	 the	 difference
between	dream	and	wakefulness?	In	dream	the	dreamer	is	completely	forgotten.
The	dream	is	on	him	--	the	dream	is	just	before	him,	but	he	is	not	present	in	the
dream.	 In	 fact,	 his	 absence	 itself	 is	 the	 slumber	 because	 the	 moment	 he	 is
present,	 there	 is	 neither	 slumber	 nor	 dream.	What,	 then,	 shall	 we	 call	 the	 so-
called	 life	of	ours?	This	 is	not	wakefulness	because	we	haven't	 the	memory	of
the	self.	 Is	 this	also	a	dream?	Yes	 friend,	 this	 too	 is	a	mere	dream.	As	 long	as
there	is	insensibility	towards	the	self,	life	is	but	an	empty	dream.
210.	What	 is	 this	 life	of	 consciousness?	The	 life	of	 the	mind	 is	not	 the	 life	of
consciousness.	 When	 the	 movement	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 quietened,	 then	 alone	 is
another	 stir	 inaugurated	 in	 the	mind.	This	 I	 call	 consciousness.	Only	when	 the
mind	becomes	void	does	consciousness	become	full	and	receptive.	The	mind	is
an	instrument,	a	medium.
When	it	gets	involved	in	the	movement	of	the	self,	it	ceases	to	be	an	instrument
as	 well	 as	 the	 medium	 of	 consciousness,	 for	 it	 is	 engaged	 otherwise.	 To	 get
acquainted	with	 the	 life	of	consciousness	 it	 is	necessary	 to	bid	goodbye	 to	 the
life	 of	 the	 mind.	 The	 life	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 analogous	 to	 the	 usurpation	 of	 the
master's	place	by	the	servant	in	his	absence.
How	will	 such	a	 servant	wish	 for	 the	master's	 return?	His	mind	cannot	accord
sincere	welcome	to	the	returning	master.	He	will	set	up	every	possible	hindrance
against	him.
The	most	 basic	 of	 the	 hindrances	will	 be	 his	 contention	 that	 he	 himself	 is	 the
master,	 none	 else.	 He	 will	 simply	 deny	 the	 existence	 of	 any	 other	 master.
Generally	 the	 mind	 does	 the	 very	 same	 thing.	 It	 becomes	 an	 obstruction	 and
prevents	 the	 advent	 of	 consciousness.	 If	 you	 wish	 to	 proceed	 towards
consciousness,	let	the	mind	be	given	rest.
Let	it	remain	devoid	of	activity.	Let	it	be	void	and	empty.	That	is	to	say,	let	it	be
disengaged,	 for	 the	 cessation	 of	 activity	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 stir	 of
consciousness.	The	death	of	the	mind	heralds	the	life	consciousness.
211.	Why	is	life	so	purposeless,	alienated,	mechanical,	and	lonely?	Why	is	it	so
insipid	 and	 boring?	 Because	 we	 have	 lost	 all	 sense	 of	 wonder;	 the	 power	 to
marvel	at	things.
Man	has	murdered	all	wonder.	His	so-called	knowledge	has	sounded	the	death-
knell	 of	 the	marvellous	 and	 the	wonderful.	We	 are	 under	 the	 illusion	 that	 we
know	everything.
We	think	we	have	the	key	to	every	secret	and	miracle.	Naturally,	what	can	be	a
miracle	 to	 him	who	 has	 a	 ready	 explanation	 for	 each	 and	 every	 phenomenon
under	 the	 sun?	 Nothing	 remains	 unknown	 to	 a	 mind	 that	 is	 thus	 filled	 with
knowledge.	There	is	no	wonder	where	nothing	is	unknown.	There	is	no	miracle
where	there	is	no	wonder.	There	is	no	charm	or	joy	where	there	is	no	miracle,	no
challenge.	Hence	I	urge	you	to	eschew	knowledge.
What	 has	 been	 known	 has	 become	 dead	 for	 this	 very	 reason.	Knowledge	 is	 a
thing	of	the	past.	It	is	a	hindrance	to	the	unknown.	Let	it	go	so	that	the	unknown
may	be	ushered	in.
Alertness	 to	 the	 unknown	 is	wonder,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 threshold	 of	God	who	 is
always	unknown.	What	is	known	is	the	world;	what	is	unknown	is	God.
212.	F.	Dostoevsky	makes	a	character	say	somewhere:	"I	wish	to	assure	you	that
my	 love	 of	mankind	 is	 increasing	 every	 day,	 but	 that	with	my	 associates	 it	 is
decreasing	in	the	same	proportion."	Oh!	how	easy	is	it	to	love	humanity	but	how
difficult	 to	 love	men!	And	perhaps	 the	 less	a	person	 loves	his	 fellow-men,	 the
more	he	 loves	mankind!	This	attitude	 is	an	apology	 for	 the	absence	of	 love	 in
ourselves.	And	thus	we	try	to	escape	from	the	duty	of	love	and	the	reproach	of
self-deception.	 That	 is	 why	 the	 people	 who	 profess	 to	 love	 humanity	 are
hardhearted,	 ruthless	 and	 cruel.	 Genocide	 is	 resorted	 to	 without	 the	 slightest
compunction	in	the	name	of	love	of	humanity!	Therefore,	friends,	I	do	not	wish
to	 use	 tall,	 hollow	 and	worthless	words	 urging	 you	 to	 love	 humanity.	The	 so-
called	religions	have	often	repeated	such	words.	I	have	come	here	to	tell	you	to
love	 real	men,	 your	 fellow-beings	 --	 not	mankind,	 but	 those	men	who	 are	 all
round	 you.	 'Humanity'	 is	 a	mere	word,	 a	mere	 name.	Hence	 loving	 it	 is	 very
easy,	because	nothing	has	to	be	done	except	uttering	words,	 in	order	to	love	it.
But	the	problem	centres	around	real	men	--	men	who,	like	you,	tread	the	ground
around	you.	To	 love	 them	is	nothing	short	of	penance.	To	 love	 them	is	a	great
austerity,	a	noble	task.	To	love	them	is	passing	through	revolution	from	the	very
root.	I	invite	you	all	to	participate	in	such	a	love.	Such	participation	alone	is	real
religion.
213.	Do	we	use	 two	different	 standards	 in	measuring	 ourselves	 and	others?	A
Christian	holy	father	was	announcing	the	good	news	of	some	Hindus	embracing
Christianity.	He	 said	 to	 his	 sons,	 "It	 is	 the	mercy	 of	God	 that	 good	 sense	 has
dawned	on	so	many	Hindus."
One	of	his	sons	reminded	him,	"But,	father,	you	did	not	speak	of	any	good	sense
when	a	Christian	became	a	Hindu."	The	furious	father	burst	out	in	anger,	"Don't
mention	even	the	name	of	that	rebel	to	me!"	Certainly	he	who	leaves	one's	fold
is	 a	 rebel	 and	 he	 who	 comes	 to	 one's	 fold	 is	 a	 person	 endowed	 with	 sense!
Because	 of	 such	 diverse	measuring	 rods	 even	 the	 tiny	mole	 in	 the	 eye	 of	 our
neighbour	 becomes	 visible	 to	 us	 while	 the	 mountain	 in	 our	 eyes	 escapes	 our
notice.	But	 is	 it	proper?	Is	 it	beneficial	 to	us?	It	 is	not	my	function	 to	ask	you
about	all	this.	It	is	for	you	to	put	the	question	to	yourself.	In	the	path	of	religion
he	who	uses	these	diverse	measuring	rods	fails	to	transform	himself.	He	cannot
see	the	truths	of	his	own	life.	He	remains	unacquainted	with	them.	And	this	lack
of	 familiarity	 with	 life	 and	 its	 basic	 truths	 leads	 to	 his	 escape	 from
transformation.
Adoption	 of	 two	 different	measuring	 rods	 are	 the	 characteristic	 features	 of	 an
unrighteous,	 irreligious	 mind.	 Even	 while	 measuring	 ourselves,	 we	 have	 to
measure	 in	 the	 same	 way	 as	 when	 measuring	 others.	 Without	 this	 much	 of
impartiality	no	person	can	pass	through	soul-revolution.
214.	In	the	name	of	Truth	word's	are	being	worshipped.	Taking	milestones	on	the
wayside	 to	be	 their	goal,	people	have	begun	 to	stay	permanently	near	 them.	 Is
not	man's	laziness	the	root	cause	for	this	self-deception?	Otherwise,	who	could
have	accepted	words	as	Truth	and	the	idols	as	the	Supreme	Soul?
215.	I	do	not	consider	thoughtful	meditation	true	meditation.	True	meditation	is
free	 from	 thought,	 because	 freedom	 from	 thought	 itself	 is	 meditation.	Where
there	 is	 no	 thought,	 no	 deliberation,	 there	 is	 meditation.	 In	 deep	 slumber	 too
there	 is	 no	 thought-process.	Hence	 to	 say	 that	 the	 absence	of	 thought	 alone	 is
meditation	 is	 not	 enough.	 That	 would	 imply	 negation	while	meditation	 is	 not
merely	 the	negation	of	 anything.	 It	 is	 also	 the	positive	presence	of	 something.
That	positive	something	is	sentience,	awareness,	understanding.
Hence	 wakefulness,	 full	 consciousness	 is	 meditation.	 Full	 consciousness	 is
possible	only	when	it	is	free	from	thought.
216.	What	is	the	method	of	realizing	the	self?	At	the	outset,	know	the	non-self	in
the	self	and	recognize	it.	In	doing	so,	when	eventually	nothing	like	the	non-self
remains,	that	is	the	self.	That	void	is	the	self,	because	that	which	is	void	is	full.
217.	What	 is	good	conduct?	The	conduct	behind	which	 there	 is	evil	 longing,	a
preconceived	 opinion,	 an	 ardent	 desire	 for	 some	 fruit,	 for	 the	 outcome,	 is
certainly	 not	 a	 good	 conduct.	 Such	 an	 activity	 is	 impure	 and	 incomplete.	 It	 is
impure	 because	 it	 is	 mixed	 with	 something	 other	 than	 itself.	 It	 is	 incomplete
because	 it	 has	 to	be	 filled	up	 from	outside,	whereas	good	conduct	 is	 pure	 and
complete.	Good	conduct	is	such	an	action	as	is	complete	in	itself	No	future	thing
is	necessary	to	complete	it.	Good	conduct	is	bliss	in	itself.	Its	mere	coming	into
being	 is	 its	 bliss.	Bliss	 is	 inherent	 in	 its	 very	 existence	 and	not	 in	 any	outside
fruit	or	achievement.	I	had	seen	a	man	playing	on	his	flute	in	a	desolate	forest.
There	was	none	to	listen	to	that	music.	I	had	lost	my	way	in	the	forest	and	had
reached	the	spot	on	hearing	of	the	flute.	I	said,	"Brother,	why	are	you	playing	on
the	flute	in	this	secluded	spot?"	He	replied,	"Only	to	play	on	the	flute.	That	is	my
bliss."	Good	 conduct	 is	 a	 self-inspired	 action.	Good	 conduct	 is	 not	 a	 reaction
prompted	by	the	external	world.	Reaction	means	a	'return	action',	a	requital.	We
make	 the	 mistake	 of	 considering	 requitals	 as	 our	 own	 activities,	 whereas
between	the	two	there	is	a	gulf	as	between	heaven	and	earth.	This	mistake	is	due
to	the	fact	that	there	is	an	element	of	activity	in	both.	The	unfolding	of	these	tWo
is	not	only	different	but	even	opposed	to	each	other.	The	action	that	takes	place
within	an	 individual	as	a	 result	of	a	 stroke	or	blow	from	 the	external	world	or
from	the	environment,	is	called	a	reaction.	That	which	is	inspired	by	the	self,	the
inner	 self,	 is	 the	 real	 activity.	 Reactions	 bind	 us	 because	 the	 inspiration
underlying	 them	 is	 external.	Action	 liberates	because	 it	 is	 the	manifestation	of
the	 self.	 Reaction	 is	 dependence.	 Action	 is	 independence.	 Reaction	 is
helplessness,	 a	 constraint.	 Action	 is	 the	manifestation	 of	 the	 soul.	 Reaction	 is
always	a	redundance.	Action	is	always	fresh	and	lively.	Living	only	in	reaction	is
not	 salutary.	 To	 be	 established	 in	 action	 --	 in	 pure	 and	 complete	 activity	 --	 is
good	 conduct.	 In	 reaction	man	 has	 a	 downfall,	 for	 reaction	 is	 mechanical.	 In
action	there	is	an	upward	development	because	it	is	sentient	and	conscious.
218.	Ethics	cannot	be	religion,	but	 religion	 is	certainly	ethics.	Moral	codes	are
something	extrinsic,	a	set	of	rules	for	emulation	and	practice.	It	is	a	disciplinary
measure	imposed	upon	us	from	without.	Hence	a	moralist	is	seldom	liberated;	he
becomes	 more	 and	 more	 mechanical	 and	 dependent.	 In	 this	 manner,	 his
consciousness	 does	 not	 wake	 up	 but	 continues	 to	 slumber.	 Eventually	 he
degenerates	into	a	mass	of	sluggish	human	being.
The	 immoral	 person	 as	 well	 as	 the	 moralist	 is	 only	 a	 mass	 of	 habits.	 The
immoralist	 follows	 the	 dictates	 of	 nature	 and	 the	 moralist	 follows	 those	 of
society.	Both	 of	 them	 live	 externally	 and	obey	 rules	 imposed	upon	 them	 from
outside	and	are,	therefore,	dependent.
Action	 is	 the	search	 for	 the	Self.	Only	 the	person	who	realizes	 the	Self	attains
freedom.
Freedom	can	originate	only	when	 there	 is	 the	experience	of	 the	Self.	How	can
freedom	be	possible	when	the	existence	of	the	Self	is	not	known?	And	a	kind	of
discipline	 definitely	 comes	 from	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 Self	 also.	 It	 is	 not
externally	 imposed.	 It	 is	 natural	 and	 self-inspired.	 It	 rises	 from	 within.	 The
morality	 that	 springs	 up	 then	 is	 a	 different	 thing	 altogether.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 the
laboured	imitation	of	any	prescribed	code	but	the	unexerted	manifestation	of	the
inner	 self.	 The	 moral	 life	 thereafter	 is	 not	 for	 acquiring	 anything	 but	 for
distributing	what	has	been	acquired.
219.	Even	the	smallest	piece	of	straw	that	falls	into	the	eye	hides	the	biggest	of
mountains.	If	the	small	eyelid	comes	in	between	the	eye	and	the	world,	the	world
is	 hidden.	 For	 a	 clear,	 unobstructed	 vision,	 there	must	 not	 be	 any	 obstruction
between	the	seer	and	the	seen.	The	obstruction	becomes	bigger	in	proportion	to
its	nearness	to	the	eye.
In	the	spiritual	life,	too,	a	similar	event	takes	place.	It	is	only	that	object	which	is
very	near	the	seer	that	deprives	him	of	the	opportunity	of	seeing	Truth.	And	what
is	the	nearest	thing	to	the	seer?	"I",	the	feeling	of	"1",	is	the	nearest	thing	to	me.
What	wonder	is	there	if	it	becomes	an	obstruction	between	truth	and	me?
220.	If	God	is	to	be	known,	it	 is	necessary	to	identify	ourselves	with	God.	But
this	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 paradox,	 for	 how	 can	we	 identify	 ourselves	with	 that	 God
whom	we	do	not	know	at	all?	And	where	is	the	question	of	knowing	Him	when
we	become	one	with	Him?
Certainly	a	paradox	appears	in	this	statement.	But	to	understand	this	paradox	is
to	understand	the	secret	of	spiritual	practices.	An	artist	was	painting	the	sunset
scene.	 I	 asked	him,	 "What	 is	 it	 that	you	do	at	 the	outset?"	He	 replied,	 "At	 the
outset	 I	 become	one	with	 the	 scene	 that	 has	 to	 be	 painted."	 I	 said,	 "How	 is	 it
possible?	For	example,	how	 is	 it	possible	 to	become	one	with	 the	sunset?"	He
said,	"The	moment	an	individual	forgets	himself	he	becomes	one	with	all."	Ah!
what	 he	 had	 said	was	 so	 revealing,	 so	 true!	The	Supreme	Soul	means	 all	 that
which	exists.	Of	course,	the	entirety	of	existence	is	God.
And	in	becoming	one	with	it,	what	other	obstruction	is	there	than	my	"I"?	He	is
only	there	where	"I"	 is	not	present.	But	how	can	we	know	that	which	we	have
not	lived?	The	Supreme	Soul	can	be	known	only	from	within,	not	from	without.
And	for	this,	it	is	essential	to	identify	oneself	with	it.	When	we	look	at	this	from
without,	it	is	the	world	that	is	seen	but	which	is	no	other	than	the	Supreme	Soul.
But	when	we	see	the	world	from	within,	that	which	appears	is	the	Supreme	Soul.
The	vision	of	truth	from	without	is	the	world;	that	from	within	is	the	lord.
221.	 For	 the	 creation	 of	 beauty	 it	 becomes	 necessary	 to	 be	 one	 with	 beauty,
because	only	then	can	beauty	be	known.	We	will	call	that	artist	mad	who	says,	"I
do	 not	 know	 beauty	 but	 I	 create	 beauty."	 But	 does	 this	 not	 apply	 to	 good
conduct?	How	can	Truth	be	practised	without	knowing	Truth,	without	being	one
with	Truth?	in	our	normal,	routine	activities	we	talk	about	that	which	is	known,
of	 which	 we	 are	 conscious,	 don't	 we?	 If	 without	 knowing	 beauty,	 the	 artist
dreams	of	painting	the	beautiful	he	is	considered	mad.
That	person	is	equally	mad	who	without	knowing	it,	tries	to	employ	Truth	in	the
practical	affairs	of	 life.	Creation	of	beauty	 is	 the	outcome	of	 the	experience	of
beauty.	Truthful	 life	 is	 the	outcome	of	 the	experience	of	Truth.	Truthful	 life	 is
not	the	staircase	to	the	experience	of	Truth.	Truthful	life	is	the	manifestation	of
the	 experience	 of	Truth.	The	 professed	 truthful	 life	 practised	without	 realizing
Truth	 is	 only	 the	 life	 of	 untruth,	 or,	 rather	 more	 fatal	 than	 untruth	 because	 it
creates	a	false	suggestion	and	fantasy	of	Truth.
222.	Does	God	exist?	A	question	like	this	is	not	proper,	for	what	after	all	is	the
meaning	of	the	word	God?	It	means	'Entirety'.	The	entire	existence	is	pervaded
by	God,	is	God.
God	 is	 not	 a	 separate	 entity,	 individual	 or	 power.	 What	 exists	 is	 God.	 "God
exists"	--	this	is	not	the	proper	way	of	putting	it.	Existence	itself	is	God.	In	"God
exists"	 there	 is	 tautology,	 circumlocution.	Questioning	 the	 existence	 of	God	 is
questioning	the	existence	of	existence	itself.	All	other	things	have	their	apparent
existence	but	not	so	God,	because	He	is	existence	Himself.	All	the	rest	possess
power	but	not	so	God	because	He	is	power	Himself.	Moreover,	how	can	the	"full
one"	be	known	like	other	things?	He	cannot	be
'knowable'	 to	me,	 because	 I	 too	 am	 in	Him	 and	 identical	with	Him.	Yet,	 it	 is
possible	 to	 be	one	with	Him,	 to	 sink	 into	Him.	 In	 fact,	we	 are	 one	with	Him,
drowned	 in	 Him.	 This	 can	 be	 known	 after	 losing	 the,	 "I".	 Knowing	 this	 is
knowing	Him.	That	is	why	I	say	love	itself	is	knowing	Him.	He	can	be	known
only	in	love	because	the	ego	disappears	in	love.
It	is	not	found	where	the	self	exists.	There	is	the	parable	of	the	salt	that	went	to
visit	the	sea.	It	saw	the	sea	and	knew	it	but	it	did	not	return	because	in	knowing
it,	 it	 became	one	with	 it.	How	would	 it	 know	 the	 sea	 except	by	becoming	 the
sea?	Man	too	has	no	means	of	knowing	God	except	by	becoming	God.
223.	 What	 is	 the	 real	 proof	 of	 the	 existence	 of	 God?	 In	 regard	 to	 God	 the
language	 of	 proofs	 is	 inapplicable.	 Thoughts,	 arguments	 and	 proofs	 do	 not
extend	 to	God.	 In	 thought,	 in	 argument,	 the	 ego	 is	 predominant	 and	 not	God,
who	resides	where	there	is	no	"I"-
sense,	no	pride,	no	ego.	What	Kabir	has	said	is	true:	"The	street	leading	to	Him
is	so	narrow	that	two	cannot	pass	through	it	at	once.	The	name	of	that	street	is
Love".	Love	is	a	state	in	which	I	am	but	my	"I"	is	not.	Only	in	such	a	state	all
obstructions	 from	 the	 consciousness	 is	 removed	 and	 His	 vision	 becomes
possible.	That	vision	itself	is	the	proof.
What	 other	 evidence	 of	 love	 than	 being	 in	 it	 can	 there	 be?	 There	 is	 no	 other
evidence	of	God	except	being	in	God.	But	other	proofs	have	also	been	advanced,
and	may	be	advanced,	 in	 future	as	well;	because	 they	who	are	unable	 to	be	 in
love	 deliberate	 on	 love	 and	 those	 who	 have	 no	 eyes	 deliberate	 on	 light.
Deliberation	and	discussion	with	regard	to	God	are	resorted	to	only	where	there
are	 no	 eyes	 to	 see	 and	where	 there	 is	 no	 heart	 to	 experience.	 It	 matters	 little
whether	the	discussion	is	for	or	against	 the	problem.	The	pros	and	cons	do	not
bring	in	any	material	difference.	The	theist	and	the	atheist	are	but	the	two	sides
of	the	same	coin.	Both	are	bereft	of	eyes.	And	this	want	of	eyes	turns	out	to	be	a
subject	 of	 controversy	 in	 regard	 to	 light.	 For	 the	 blind	 the	 acceptance	 or	 non-
acceptance	 of	 light	 has	 no	meaning	 at	 all.	 For	 him	 only	 the	 realization	 of	 his
blindness	 has	 some	 significance,	 for	 only	 through	 that	 understanding	 does	 a
search	for	the	eyes	start.	Light	has	not	to	be	searched	for.	It	is	the	eyes	that	have
to	be	searched	for.	And	where	the	eyes	are,	the	light	too	is.	If	there	are	no	eyes,
what	proof	of	light	will	convince	the	blind?	If	there	are	no	spiritual	eyes,	there
can	be	no	proof	of	God	as	well.	Hence	do	not	ask	for	the	proofs	of	light.	Know
that	you	have	no	eyes.	Similarly	do	not	ask	for	proofs	of	God.
Know	 that	 'whatever	 exists'	 is	 unknown	 and	 you	 are	 ignorant.	 The	 light	 is
unkown	but	the	blindness	of	one's	own	self	is	known.	God	is	unknown	but	the
ignorance	of	one's	self	is	known.	Now,	what	can	be	gained	by	thinking	about	the
unknown?	Any	thought	or	deliberation	cannot	be	carried	beyond	the	limits	of	the
known.	 It	 proceeds	 only	 on	 the	 track	 of	 the	 known.	 The	 unknown	 cannot	 be
known	through	it.	The	unknown	comes	only	when	the	known	removes	itself	and
gives	way	to	it.	The	advent	of	the	unknown	is	in	the	rejection	and	removal	of	the
known.	 It	 is	 only	 when	 we	 bid	 good-bye	 to	 the	 known	 that	 the	 guest,	 the
unkown,	comes	to	the	threshold	of	consciousness.	He	appears	when	discussions
and	analyses	end.	To	remain	busy	in	thought	and	discussion	betokens	our	state	of
unconsciousness.	 Hence	 where	 discussion	 and	 deliberation	 are	 wholly	 absent
while	our	consciousness	is	alert,	one	obtains	those	eyes	which	catch	a	glimpse	of
light	called	God.	Hence	I	would	call	the	ardent	yearning	for	Truth	the	treatment
of	the	blindness	of	the	self	but	not	a	deliberation	about	light.	Religion	cures	the
blindness	of	the	Self.	What	is	the	most	irrefutable	evidence	of	light?	Eyes.	What
is	 the	most	 irrefutable	evidence	of	 the	existence	of	God?	Eyes.	What	 I	myself
see	after	gaining	 the	eyes	 is	 that	only	God	exists,	nothing	else.	What	I	used	 to
know	in	blindness	was	that	while	God	did	not	exist,	everything	else	did.
224.	Truth	is	one.	Hence	splitting	existence	into	two	is	the	most	deep-rooted	of
all	 blind	 beliefs.	What	 exists	 is	 solitary	 and	without	 a	 second.	Nature	 --	God,
body	 --	 soul,	 insentient	 --	 sentient	 --	 such	 differentiation	 has	 no	 place	 in
existence.	Existence	is	but	one,	not	manifold.	Its	manifestations	are	many.	But	in
this	diversity	 too,	 it	 is	one.	Among	 the	different	pieces	 it	 is	 the	unsplit	whole.
But	discussion	and	deliberation	give	rise	to	differentiation,	for	discussion	views
the	upper	 surface	and	does	not	penetrate	 to	 the	depths.	Discussion	views	 from
the	outside	and	does	not	enter	within.	From	discussion	the	author	of	discussion
emanates.	 This	 author	 knows	 himself	 distinct	 from	 the	 rest.	 This	 feeling	 of
separateness	and	difference	prevents	him	from	entering	 into	existence,	because
for	 entry,	 non-separateness	 is	 essential;	 for	 deep	 penetration	 non-difference	 is
essential.
He	cannot	attain	non-separateness	and	non-difference	without	losing	himself.	He
cannot	lose	himself	without	giving	up	intellection	and	thought,	because	he	is	no
more	 than	 the	 shadow	of	 his	 thoughts.	He	 has	 no	 existence	 of	 his	 own.	He	 is
only	 an	 assemblage	 of	 thoughts.	Hence,	 far	 from	 losing	 himself,	 he	wishes	 to
save	 himself.	 This	 he	 can	 do	 only	 by	 diving	 into	 further	 thoughts	 and
discussions.	Thus	by	deliberating	on	Truth	he	is	farther	removed	from	it.	Truth	is
near,	 but	 only	 in	 being	 free	 from	 thoughts.	 But	 in	 intellection,	 the	 mind	 gets
away	 from	Truth.	Discussion	and	deliberation	 separate	Truth	 from	 the	Self.	 In
that	 perception,	 devoid	 of	 thought	 there	 is	 neither	 soul	 nor	 body,	 neither	God,
nor	nature.	But	there	is	something	which	cannot	be	assigned	a	name.	I	call	it	the
Supreme	 Soul.	 That	 .	 unknown,	 nameless,	 unsplit	 entity	 is	 Truth.	 When
deliberated	upon,	 it	appears	 in	pieces.	But	when	freed	of	 thoughts,	 it	manifests
itself	in	its	unsplit	form.
That	is	its	original	real	form.	Deliberation	breaks	it,	for	deliberation	is	a	process
of	analysis,	and	analysis	cannot	see	anything	before	breaking	it	into	pieces.	The
synthetic	 process	 looks	 at	 it	 as	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 but	 a	 mirror,	 and	 "what	 exists"	 is
reflected	in	it	exactly	as	it	is.	In	the	mirror	of	synthetic	consciousness	there	is	not
even	a	line	of	duality.	That	unknown	entity	of	life	is	body,	soul,	nature	and	God.
All	these	are	the	notes	of	that	single	melody.	All	is	life.	There	is	nothing	dead	or
insentient.	All	 is	 nectar	 and	 life,	 far	 removed	 from	death.	Waves	 come	 rolling
and	surging	in	life's	ocean	and	eventually	merge	therein.
They	are	there	both	when	they	rise	as	well	as	when	they	disappear.	They	exist	in
both	these	conditions	because	the	ocean	exists.	Individuals	perish	because	they
do	not	 really	exist.	Theistic	beliefs	perish	because	 they	have	no	real	existence.
That	which	has	no	real	existence	perishes.	What	exists,	exists	always.	But	this	is
not	my	tenet.	This	is	not	my	thought.	This	is	how	I	look	at	things.	Anybody	who
remains	neutral	in	regard	to	opinions,	thoughts	and	parties	and	keeps	silent	and
calm,	void	and	alert	will	have	the	same	attitude.
If	we	view	the	world	with	deliberation	it	would	appear	to	be	dual.	But	if	we	view
it	synthetically,	it	would	be	non-dual.	Consciousness	devoid	of	thought	is	trance
which	is	 the	gateway	to	Truth.	Friends,	shall	I	 invite	you	all	 to	experience	this
blessed	 trance-state	 in	which	 there	 is	no	duality,	no	sense	of	 time,	and	no	self-
consciousness?
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	#1
Chapter	#2
Chapter	#3
Chapter	#4
Chapter	#5
